5391ac7b7fd3626d5b3eba5a94b8ee869f4ea181
Moderated ePosters Session 11 Trauma, Upper Tract, Fistula and Genital Reconstruction Sunday
Abstract  Book Siu 2017 Lisbon   Portugal  Book Siu 2017 Lisbon  Portugal Featuring Siu-Icud  Joint 


Introduction and Objective: Current research emphasizes the relationship between benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) with/without lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) and metabolic syndrome (MS), with a focus on the worsening of LUTS caused by MS. Therefore, we investigated the effect of MS on patient outcomes who underwent holmium laser enucleation of the prostate (HoLEP) for benign prostatic obstruction. Materials and Methods: Data from 151 patients who underwent HoLEP by a single surgeon between March 2012 and March 2016 were retrospectively analyzed. Patients with MS were assigned to group 1 (n=33) and patients without MS in group 2 (n=118). Clinical characteristics and the International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS), including quality of life (QoL), peak urinary flow rate (Qmax), and postvoid residual urine (PVR), before surgery and 3 months afterwards were compared between groups. Additionally, predictors of total IPSS improvement after HoLEP were assessed. Results: Compared with group 2 patients, group 1 patients were older (70.3 vs 65.2 years old, p=0.001). Preoperative data, which included prostate volume, QoL, Qmax, and PVR, were not different between groups. For all patients, both the storage subscore and voiding subscore significantly decreased after surgery (p < 0.001). Postoperative total IPSS and voiding subscore improvement in group 1 were lower than in group 2 (total IPSS improvement 9.2 vs 12.5, p=0. 042; voiding subscore improvement 6.6 vs 8.8, p=0.048). Multivariate analysis showed preoperative total IPSS (β=0.79, CI 0.71-0.94, p < 0.001) and number of MS components (β=−0.15, CI −2.04 to −0.29, p=0.009) were independently associated with total IPSS improvement. Conclusions: We found that MS was associated with decreased postoperative symptom improvement. Thus, lower urinary tract symptoms after surgery may be a systemic disorder due multiple metabolic risk factors. Introduction and Objective: Adrenergic α-blocker is widely used as a primary therapy in BPH. We aimed to retrospectively investigate the effect of α-blocker on serum PSA changes. Clinical data including serum PSA changes, IPSS, and TRUS of 51 male BPH patients with α-blocker more than 6 months were retrospectively analyzed. Subject patients were aged more than 50 years old. Presence or history of prostate cancer, acute urinary retention, chronic prostatitis, and patients under androgen replacement therapy were excluded in this study. To determine the differences in functional outcomes of males with lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) with or without detrusor underactivity (DU) who underwent photoselective vaporization of the prostate (PVP) with Green-Light™180W XPS. We conducted a retrospective observational study. Patients were categorized into two groups: A. LUTS without DU and B. LUTS with DU. Patients were assessed preoperatively with urodynamic studies (UDS) and pre and postoperatively with the International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS). A bivariate analysis using X2 and Mann-Whitney U test was conducted. A univariate logistic regression analysis was also performed. All analyses were conducted using STATA 14. Results: A total of 354 patients were included: 196 (55.4%) had LUTS without DU (Group A) and 158 (44.6%) LUTS with DU (Group B). Baseline characteristics are summarized in Table 1 . Median follow-up was 22 (IQR 9.0-33.5) and 30 (IQR 12.0-37.0) months in groups A and B, respectively. A comparison of postoperative outcomes is summarized in Table 2 . The logistic regression analysis found that postoperative urinary retention was more likely to occur in patients with DU (OR=2.8, p=0 .01). Conclusions: Although patients with DU were more likely to present with urinary retention in the early postoperative period, in the long-term, there were no statistically significant differences among patients with DU compared to patients with normal detrusor contractility regarding their IPSS, satisfaction and success rates. There is a slight statistically significant difference in the postoperative quality of life favoring patients without DU. Introduction and Objective: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of Prostatic artery embolization (PAE) for benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) with or without acute urinary retention (AUR). This is a prospective cohort study approved by the institutional review board. 58 consecutive men of age 50-80 with prostates 40g or above were recruited for PAE, among them 22 had AUR who failed to wean off catheter. All patients had urodynamic confirmation of obstruction. Bilateral PAE was performed with microspheres of size 100 microns under local anaesthesia. Results: Mean prostate size was 85.0ml. Embolization of prostatic arteries was successful on both sides in 52 (89.7%), on one side only in 4 (6.9%), and none in 2 (3.4%). The mean procedure time was 116 minutes. Weaning off of the bladder catheter in the AUR group was successful in 54.5% (12/22) in first 7 days, and in 86.4% (19/22) of patients within 18 days. Mean IPSS improved from 20.5 at baseline to 5.0 at 3 months, 3.7 at 6 months, and 2.4 at 12 months (all p<0.001, paired sample T-test). Mean QOL reduced from 4.8 at baseline to 1.6 at 3 months, 1.1 at 6 months, and 0.6 at 12 months (all p<0.001). Mean peak flow rate (Qmax, ml/s) improved from 5.4 at baseline to 11.5 at 3 months, 10.3 at 6 months, and 10.1 at 12 months (all p<0.001). Mean post-void residual urine reduced from 180ml at baseline to 86ml at 3 months (p<0.001), 32ml at 6 months (p<0.001), and 93ml (p=0.014). Pre and post-PAE Urodynamic studies were performed in 20 patients, and the mean bladder outlet obstruction index reduced from 91 to 51 (p<0.001). Prostate volume reduced by 18.9% at 2 weeks (p<0.001) and 25.8% at 6 months (p<0.001). There was no worsening of ejaculatory or erectile function. In terms of complications, 2 had groin puncture site hematoma which resolved within a few days, 1 had mild intermittent claudication of the right calf for 6 weeks. Four (6.9%) eventually required TURP. Introduction and Objective: The use of photovaporization of the prostate (PVP) in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is associated with less hospital stay and complications, which might imply fewer costs for the health system. However, this hasn't been proved in Colombia. We aimed to assess the cost-effectiveness of the PVP compared to the monopolar transurethral resection of the prostate (RTUP-M) for the treatment of lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) due to BPH from the perspective of a third-party payer in Colombia in 2016. We used the 24-month results of a randomized clinical trial comparing PVP versus RTUP-M to estimate surgical outcomes, complications, re-operation and re-intervention rates. We designed a Markov model comprising four health states following treatment with either PVP or RT-UP-M to estimate expected costs and outcomes: asymptomatic, pharmacologic treatment, re-operation and re-intervention. Time horizon was defined at 2 years with four 6-month cycles. Transition probabilities were drawn. Resource use estimation involved a random selection of clinical records from a local institution, which were validated by four urology experts. Unit costs were obtained from official Colombian charges (January, 2017) . A 5% discount rate was applied to all parameters and threshold was defined at 3-times Colombian GDP per capita. Uncertainty was analyzed with deterministic and probabilistic models using a Montecarlo simulation. Introduction and Objective: Despite being frequently described as the gold standard treatment of benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH), transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) has been recently challenged by other techniques as endoscopic enucleation, vaporization and incision of the prostate. Furthermore, TURP itself has been evolved by introduction of TURP in saline. The aim of our study was to determine independent predictors for procedure-related readmission (PRR) following transurethral interventions for BPH in a contemporary series. The electronic files of our PIS were reviewed for all transurethral BPH interventions that were performed between 2005 and 2014. Patients with at least one depictable follow up were included. Files were reviewed for all perioperative and follow up data. PRR was reviewed for cause, management and time to primary intervention with assessment of readmission free survival (RFS) among different groups. Introduction and Objectives: Holmium laser enucleation of the prostate (HoLEP) has been cited as a size independent surgical technique. Few clinical studies had already reported results with large prostates; however the samples were usually small. Our objective was to report the efficacy and safety of HoLEP in large prostates (≥80cc) in a highvolume referral center. From April 2014 to April 2016, 563 patients with lower urinary tract symptoms suggestive of benign prostatic obstruction underwent HoLEP in a highvolume referral center. Clinical data were prospectively collected before and after procedure with followup visits scheduled at 1, 3, 6 and 12 months (M). Retrospective analysis of the collected data was performed with the aim of comparing the results of patients with prostatic size <80 cc and ≥80cc. Results: A total of 234 patients (41.6%) had prostate volume ≥80cc. Preoperative characteristics of the patients (<80cc vs ≥80cc) did not differ in terms of age (69.2 vs 70.8 Years, p=0.39) and BMI (25.9 vs 26.9 Kg/ m2, p=0.13). The mean prostate volume was 53.6 vs. 113.6cc, but the mean IPSS initial score was similar in both groups (19.4 vs 18.4) with 85.5% vs 88.2% referring high impact in their quality of life (QoL). The mean initial Qmax and the Post Void Residual (PVR) were not statistically different between two groups (Qmax = 10.5 vs 9.3 mL/s; PVR= 125.1 vs 170.8cc). The mean operative time was less in the group of small prostates (78.3 vs 106.9 minutes, p<0.0001) but the rate of intraoperative complications was similar in both groups (4.5% vs 4.9%). Conversion to open surgery was needed just in 1 case because of important bleeding and to remove big prostatic lobes in the group of patients with prostate ≥80cc. The mean of hospital stay (2.1 vs 1.7 days p=0.289) and the mean catheterization time (35.3 vs. 33.2 hours, p=0,286) were similar. According to the ClavienDindo classification, postoperative complications were 19.7% in the group of prostates <80cc: Grade II 11.9%, Grade IIIa 0.9% (3 cases of bladder clots removal under gen-eral anesthesia). Postoperative complications were 20.3% in the group of prostates ≥80cc: Grade II 9.7% and Grade IIIa 0.4% (1 case of bladder clots removal under general anesthesia). There was a major improvement of urinary symptoms at followup in both groups, with a tendency towards better improvement of the IPSS score in the group of patients with ≥80cc (table 1) . At followup, 2 patients with prostate <80cc and 3 patients with prostate ≥80cc were operated for bladder neck contracture. Urinary artificial sphincter was placed in 1 patient with prostate ≥80cc because of persistent urinary incontinence. Conclusions: In this large retrospective study, HoLEP proved to be a safe surgical procedure independent of prostatic size. In patients with large prostates, we observed low rate of major complications and good objective and subjective functional outcomes with a tendency towards better improvement of IPSS. These results are confirming HoLEP is a valid surgical option for patients with large prostates. There is conflicting evidence on the role of raised inflammatory markers in acute ureteric colic and spontaneous stone passage, particularly in patients managed conservatively and whether White Cell Count (WBC) on admission can predict stone passage. If so, it could be used to guide management in these patients. MIMIC aims to assess whether (WBC) at acute ureteric colic presentation is associated with likelihood of spontaneous stone passage. Introduction and Objectives: Significant advances in ureteroscopy and stone fragmentation energy sources have resulted in a paradigm shift in urolithiasis management. We aimed to assess the current state MP-02.07, Figure 1 . Patients with complicated urosepsis associated with urinary tract calculi commonly require ureteric stent placement to restore and drain the infected urinary tract. Earlier placement may lead to a lower incidence of serious morbidity. It also leads to a shorter length of hospital stay, although this issue has not yet been well evaluated in the literature. Retrospective review of patients admitted to our institution between 2011 and 2015 with the diagnosis of urosepsis associated with urinary tract calculi, having ureteral stent placement. Early and delayed stenting groups were defined by the median waiting for ureteral stent placement. The primary outcomes were length of hospital stay (LOS) and spontaneous stone passage (SSP) after stent placement. Statistical analysis included chi-square test, linear regression and Spearman correlation. Results: A total of 42 patients (mean age: 58; 32 females) had a mean number of 3.38 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) days since emergency room admission to ureteral stenting. The median wait to ureter stenting was 2.5 days. The overall mean length of hospital stay was 12.2 (5-36) days. The early stenting group (mean LOS 5.6 days) had a significantly shorter LOS than the delayed stenting group (mean LOS 18.8 days). The adjusted beta coefficient was -13 days (95% confidence interval: -17, -9). The early stenting group had predominantly lumbar calculi compared to the delayed stenting group (76.2% vs 42.8%; p=0.029). The early stenting group had improved SSP compared to the delayed group (61.9% vs 47.6, %; p=0.268). If we consider the lumbar calculi only, there is a relation in SSP between early and delayed stenting groups (p=0.027). Conclusions: There is a significant reduction of LOS in patients with urosepsis associated with urinary tract lithiasis when early ureteral stenting is performed (<2.5 days). We observed a trend of improved stone passage in the early stenting group with significance in lumbar calculi between the two groups. Outcomes of Ureterorenoscopic Stone Treatment in 301 Patients with A Solitary Kidney Introduction and Objectives: Impacted ureteral stones are stones that remain at the same location for a prolonged time period causing local inflammation. The impeded stone exposure and lack of expansion space around the stone can make disintegration more difficult. The objective of this study was to describe stone-free rates (SFR) and complications of ureteroscopic treatment for impacted compared with non-impacted ureteral stones and to evaluate predictive variables for impaction. The Clinical Research Office of the Endourological Society prospectively collected 1 year of consecutive data from 114 centers worldwide. Patients eligible for inclusion in this analysis were patients treated with ureteroscopy for ureteral stones. The presence of stone impaction was assessed endoscopically. Primary outcomes were SFRs and complication rates. Logistic regression analyses were conducted to explore predictive variables for stone impaction and to analyse the effect of impaction on outcomes. Introduction and Objective: Treatment and prognosis in urinary bladder cancer is determined by histopathological analysis of TUR-BT specimen. TUR-BT is invasive and understages a significant percentage of cases. We aimed at establishing the role of Diffusion Weighted Imaging (DWI) over T2WI in predicting tumor stage (muscle invasion) and tumor grade. Between Jan 2014 and Oct 2015, 40 patients diagnosed as having a bladder tumor based on USG, CT or cystoscopy was recruited. They were imaged on a 3 Tesla MRI. The protocol included T1W, T2W and DWI at four b values (0, 500, 1000&1500). The patients then underwent surgery (TUR-BT or Radical Cystectomy) within 20 days of the imaging. MRIs were analyzed by two experienced radiologists both blinded to histopathology. The following factors were recorded as indicators of muscle invasive disease: Non-papillary morphology on T2WI, Perivesical fat infiltration on T2WI, Restricted distension of underlying bladder-wall on T2WI, Perivesical fat infiltration on DWI, absent tumoral stalk on DWI and Distorted tumoral stalk on DWI. The last two criteria are being described by our group for the first time. All the criteria were analyzed as predictors of muscle invasive disease using chi-square test. For predicting the tumor grade a freehand ROIs were drawn from the darkest areas on ADC maps and mean taken. To obtain a cut-off ADC for predicting a high grade tumor an ROC curve analysis was done. Results: Mean age 56.25+11.11 years, M: F: 37:3. There were 90 evaluable tumors in 40 patients. Twenty three had single tumor. Mean tumor size 2.9+1.9 cc. On uni-variate analysis each of the seven listed features showed significant association with muscle invasive disease on histopathology. The strength of association, sensitivity and diagnostic accuracy were highest for the finding of absent stalk or distorted stalk on DWI with a high b value (0.87, 87.5% and 94.8% respectively) and weakest for that of restricted wall distension on T2WI (0.38). The former showed excellent specificity (97.6%) and PPV (93.3%). The least sensitive (25%) but most specific (100%) finding was fat infiltration on DWI. A cut-off ADC of 0.841X10-3 mm2/s could differentiate high grade tumors from low grade tumors with a sensitivity of 82.8% and specificity of 81.8%. Conclusions: Diffusion weighted MRI with a high b value on a 3 Tesla machine is a highly accurate imaging modality in predicting muscle invasive and also high grade disease. It should become the imaging modality of choice in carcinoma of urinary bladder. MR images, cystoscopic images and histopathologic slides of representative cases can be shown in the presentation. Introduction and Objectives: Transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBt) remains the main management of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer, but there is evidence of a high rate of understaging for T1 tumor after primary resection. Muscle in the specimen is important for the accurate bladder staging. However, nearly 40% resected bladder specimens were failed to be found muscle after the initial TURBt even done by the sophistic urologists. Therefore a second TURBt was justified for correcting the staging error and re-moving the residual tumors. The frozen section examination can provide a rapid microscopic analysis of a specimen. In this study, we prospectively investigated the tumor base and whether muscle was present in the specimen using frozen section examination, and discussed its value in the initial TURBt. From June 2011 to Oct 2016, a total of 95 consecutive patients with T1 bladder cancer were included in this study. A standard TURBt was performed. Once the tumor was removed, the tumor base was either biopsied using cold-cup biopsy forceps or resected. An aliquot of resected tumor as well as the tumor base were both sent for pathological frozen section examination in a separate labeled pot. Then a repeat resection was performed based on the pathological findings either if cancer cells were present in the tumor base or the muscle was present in the specimen. The results, including positive tumor base, presence of muscle in the specimen, tumor stage, residual tumor and concordance between frozen section and paraffin embedded section were compared. Introduction and Objective: We review the safety and efficacy of neoadjuvant Hyperthermic Intra-VEsical Chemotherapy (HIVEC™), delivered with the COM-BAT system in a group of patients with intermediate or high risk NMIBC. A total of 8 weekly instillations of 80 mgs of Mitomycin-c (MMC) diluted in 50ml of distilled water, recirculated through the blad-der during one hour at a 43°C (±0.5°C). A complete TURB was then performed and pathologic findings were registered. A total of 37 patients were treated in the Monforte Comarcal Hospital (Spain) between December 2010 and December 2016. Tolerance data were recorded and quality of life FACT-BI and IPSS questionnaires completed. Follow up of patients varied from 6 to 78 months to detect any tumoral recidive or long term complications. We previously reported that elevated pre-cystectomy serum levels of epithelial tumor markers predict worse oncological outcome in patients with invasive bladder cancer (BC). Herein, we evaluated the effect of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) on elevated tumor marker levels and their association with oncological outcomes. Under IRB approval, serum levels of Carbohydrate Antigen 125 (CA-125), Carbohydrate Antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) and Carcinoembryonic Antigen (CEA) were prospectively measured in 480 patients with invasive BC from August 2011 through December 2016. In the subgroup undergoing NAC, markers were measured prior to the first and after the last cycle of chemotherapy (prior to cystectomy). Results: Three hundred and thirty seven patients were eligible for the study, with a median age was 71 years (range 34-93) and 81% (272) male. Elevated pre-cystectomy level of any tumor markers (31% of patients) was independently associated with worse RFS (HR=2.81; p<0.001) and OS (HR=3.97; p<0.001). 125 (37%) patients underwent NAC, of whom 59 had a complete tumor marker profile before and after therapy and 30 (51%) had one or more elevated pre-NAC tumor markers. Following completion of chemotherapy, 10/30 (33%) patients normalized their tumor markers, while 20/30 (67%) had one or more persistently elevated markers. There was no difference in clinical or pathological stage between groups (p=0.54 and p=0.09, respectively). Further analysis showed a significantly lower rate and longer median time to recurrence/progression in the responder group (50% in responders vs 90% in non-responders at a median time of 22 vs 4.8 months respectively; p=0.015). There was also significant difference in mortality rates and median overall survival between the study groups (30% in responders vs 70% in non-responders at a median time of 27.3 vs 11.6 months respectively; p=0.037). Kaplan Meier curves are shown in Figure 1 . Two of the three patients that died in the normalized tumor marker group had tumor marker relapse at recurrence prior to their death. Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the first study showing tumor marker response to NAC. Patients with persistently elevated markers following NAC have a very poor prognosis following cystectomy, which may help in identifying chemotherapy-resistant tumors. A larger, controlled study with longer follow up is needed to determine the role of these markers in predicting survival. Table 3 . Introduction and Objective: Despite the popularity of continent urinary diversion and neobladder recostruction, radical cistectomy with ileal conduit urinary diversion remains the most commonly performed curative surgical treatment option for invasive bladder cancer. Commonly, the ileal conduit is created using a 15-20 cm ileum length. The distal left ureter passage under mesosigmoid previous its extensive dissection, in order to allow a tension-free ureteroileal anastomosis, often leads to a compromised blood supply to the left ureter, resulting in a higher incidence of delayed ischemic damage of the distal ureter, wich is the most common cause of ureteroenteric stricture. In literature, ileoureteral stricture rate reported is 1.7-14%, being more common on the left side. Of some interest is the fact that no significant diferrence is been reported in strictures occurrance rate between Bricker anastomosis type and Wallace type. The strictures resulting from urinary diversion are difficult to treat, have a high risk of recurrence and may lead to renal function deterioration. We presented our results with a modified ileal conduit tecnique (MICT) and left ileoureteral anastomosis aimed to prevent uretero-ileal anastomosis stricture. With innovations in the treatment of DM has increased life expectancy and late complications began to be seen more often. Erectile dysfunction (ED) is one of the important late complications of DM. There are common factors in the pathogenesis of both diseases. We aimed to investigate the role of serum total testosterone levels and androgen receptors (AR) in diabetic rats with ED based on common pathogenesis. Introduction and Objective: Although laparoscopic radical prostatectomy is a standard procedure, rectal injury is always a potential complication with an incidence of 0.51 to 9% according to the literature. We review the incidence of rectal injuries at our institution in the first 650 consecutive laparoscopic radical prostatectomies, pointing on how to notice and how to manage them. Thirteen (2%) out of the 650 laparoscopic radical prostatectomies performed between March 2002 -May 2016, were complicated by rectal injury. Mean patient age was 63.3 years (range 51 to 71) and mean prostate specific antigen was 6.67 ng/mL (range 1.5 to 12.4). Median preoperative Gleason score was 6 (range 5 to 7) and pathological extracapsular extension (T3a) was present in 2 patients, being the remaining tumors organ-confined. Mean prostate volume was 41.5cc (25-66cc). Results: In 8 patients (61.5%), rectal injury was recognized intraoperatively and primarily repaired, and 5 postoperatively (rectal integrity was not checked during prostatectomy).The integrity of the rectum was controlled intraoperatively by rectal insufflation of air in the saline filled pelvic cavity. If rectal injury was recognized intraoperatively, 2-layer closure and forced anal dilatation were performed; antibiotic treatment with gentamicine and metronidazol were administrated and clear liquid diet for 7 days. No gross fecal contamination was identified at the time of the injury at any case, probably due to the bowel preparation before radical prostatectomy with enema. Among the 8 cases of primarily repaired, 7 patients (87.5%) healed without need of colostomy while one developed a recto urinary fistula, and required colostomy at the tenth day. Recto-urinary fistula was evidenced by pneumaturia and faecaluria in the remaining five patients. These patients were successfully managed conservatively with diverting colostomy and urethral catheterization at least during 30 days. One patient required secondary fistula repair by transphincteric transanal surgical approach (York Mason). Primary closure does not appear to affect continence recovery. cause of this is vascular and smooth muscle dysfunction, as well as nerve atrophy. Stem cells are characterized by anti-inflammatory activities, as well as possibility of differentiating into tissue relevant to the penile architecture, and stimulation of angiogenesis. We report the effects of intracavernosal application of adipose stem cells (ASC) on diabetic erectile dysfunction. Introduction and Objectives: Primary outcome of the study is the evaluation of the efficacy and tolerability of Avanafil 200 mg three times a week in patients with good preoperative sexual performance. Secondary outcomes are the evaluation of the number of preoperative sexual intercourses versus postoperative sexual intercourses and preoperative versus post operative sexual quality of life. Preoperatively we enrolled 45 patients on the list for unilateral nerve sparing robotic prostatectomy under 75 years (mean 65.3) with preoperative Charlson Comorbidity index <1, preoperative ECOG performance status <1, Preoperative International index of erectile function (IIEF) 15 > 17, preoperative rigidometry> 2, preoperative positive answer to Sexual Encounter Profile (Sep) q2 and Sepq3, preoperative quality of Life >3. The physical examination was performed on the tenth day after surgery when patients remove the bladder catheter and begin rehabilitation with Avanafil 200 mg three times a week. Other medical examinations were established in the third and sixth month after surgery in which the tests were administered. Results: In the third month IIEF 15 diminished from an average preoperative 18.16 to 13.12 in the third month and 15.24 in the sixth month. The average number of weekly sexual intercourse increases from 0.90 to 2.18 and remained the same in the Introduction and Objective: We present our experience in the post-operative pain management of male to female gender re-assignment patients. Our objective is evaluating optimal post-operative pain management in gender reassignment surgery. The prospective measurement of post-operative pain scores, as determined by a 4 point visual analogue scale, and intravenous (iv) opiate patient controlled analgesia (PCA) usage was recorded. Procedures were undertaken under general anaesthetic with pre-operative caudal epidural with 20-30ml of 0.375% bupivacaine and intraoperative local anaesthetic spermatic cord block. Post-operatively, patients received iv morphine PCA with regular paracetamol and ibuprofen. Results: Fifty one patients who had male to female gender reassignment with penile inversion surgery, over a 9 month period were included in the study. The mean patient age was 48.3 ± 12.2 (SD). 49 patients received caudal epidural and 2 did not. Pain was extremely well controlled; 84.6% and 93.3% of pain responses, during the first and second operative days respectively, indicated no pain. Patients who had epidural had lower pain scores 2 days beyond the effective action of the epidural suggesting a pre-emptive analgesic effect. Age was inversely associated with post-operative pain scores (p=0.03) and PCA usage (P=0.03). Conclusion: Balanced analgesia with caudal epidural provided extremely good pain relief. Post-operative PCA was most warranted, in the younger age groups. caused by Peyronie's disease and erectile dysfunction. Surgical technique: following subcoronal incision penis was degloved and dorsal neurvascular bundle was dissected from tunica albuginea. Inflatable penile prosthesis (AMS 700 CXR) was placed in a standard way via penoscrotal incision with cylinders oversized of 1-2 cm. Prosthesis was activated and penile deformity elicited. On the convex side of the tunical albuginea on demand incisions (reaching without breaching cavernous tissue) were performed to achieve a complete correction of the curvature. Patients were discharged with prosthesis inflated for 3 weeks and thereafter instructed to daily activation. We compared erected penile length with hydraulic erection before surgery and with fully activated penile prosthesis immediately after surgery and 6 months later. EDITS was recorded before and 6 months after surgery. Introduction and Objective: Erectile dysfunction (ED) is a common and multidimensional male sexual disorder, which affects physically and psychosocially the patient. These symptoms, in turn, affect his partner's sexual experience and the couple's quality of life. The approach of ED must include a holistic evaluation and a tailored treatment. Surgical therapies are reserved for the subset of patients who experience adverse effects from (or are refractory to) medical therapy and those who also have penile fibrosis or penile vascular insufficiency. Our objective is the evaluation of the impact of penile prostheses on anxiety and depressive symptoms as well as the global satisfaction of the patients. Interview with patients who underwent penile prosthesis implantation between January of 2011 and December 2015 at Centro Hospitalar do Porto, using the Hamilton Anxiety and Depression Rating Scales (HAM-A, HAM-D). Exclusion criteria comprise previous psychiatric disorders, major life events and starting anxiolytics/antidepressants after surgery. Statistical analysis was performed on STATATM13.1, through paired t-tests and Wilcoxon tests. Results: During this period, 17 penile prostheses were implanted (two semi-rigid) and three revisions were undertaken due to mechanical failure. Due to the exclusion criteria, only 14 patients enrolled the study with 60±7 years old and 32±18 months of follow-up. Regarding the HAM-A score, there were a 53.5% reduction from baseline (p=0.01) and on the HAM-D score, a 54.3% decrease (p=0.01) was detected. At baseline, owing to ED, 36.7% had moderate-severe anxiety, whereas 81.8% had mild-moderate depression. After the procedure, at the interview, 100% had only mild anxiety and 72.7% had no depression. Global satisfaction was 91.7%. There were no significant differences adjusting for age, comorbidities and follow-up time. Conclusion: In selected patients, penile prostheses prompt high satisfaction levels and greatly contribute to lessen ED-related anxiety and depressive symptoms. Sexual Function, Quality of Life, and Bladder Diary Assessment after Sacral Neuromodulation for Voiding Dysfunctions Introduction and Objective: Sacral neuromodulation (SNM) constitutes a treatment option for refractory voiding dysfunctions, such as over-active bladder syndrome (OAB) and non-obstructive chronic urinary retention (CUR), with consistent results. However, there are few studies on the impact of SNM of patients' quality of life (QoL), including sexual function. This project aims to assess the impact of SNM on the symptoms and QoL through the analysis of bladder diary (BD) and questionnaires, before and after SNM. Conclusion: SNM is an effective treatment option in refractory voiding dysfunctions, as it improves to only BD items, but also patients' QoL, including their sexual function. Introduction and Objective: The newly-developed SIMULATE curriculum for ureterorenoscopy (URS) employs the most evidence-based validated training models. The aim of this study is to assess the face, content, construct and transfer validity of the SIMULATE URS training curriculum. Junior residents with less than 10 URS experience (n=35) were invited for training using the curriculum on three separate occasions in Manchester (n=15), Salzburg (n=15) and Hokkaido (n=5). The Manchester cohort was also given the opportunity to use fresh frozen cadavers with fluoroscopy. Participants were taught and assessed, using OSATS, by endourology and education specialists, all of whom were also invited for an evaluation survey following the training programme. Construct validity was assessed using a One-way ANOVA test to evaluate the level of progress throughout the training. Residents were followed up at their institutions and assessed for technical skills, using OSATS, and non-technical skills, using a modified NOTSS score for URS on their first (n=13) and fourth (n=13) cases to evaluate transfer validity. Results: Participants rated that the training significantly improved their skills (mean: 4.2/5) and that they gained transferrable skills (mean: 4.2/5). A One-way ANOVA test revealed significant improvement in both semi-rigid (p=0.0032) and flexible URS (p=0.0003) skills, with consecutive cases throughout the curriculum and the first OR performance (n=13). Statistically significant improvement was also observed in non-technical skills from the training and first OR performance (p<0.0001). Of the used modalities, flexible URS (mean: 4.3/5) and stone fragmentation (mean: 4.3/5) were rated to be the strongest aspects of the UroMentor VR simulator. In contrast, both the dry-lab models scored the highest with re-gards to instrument handling, laser stone fragmentation and stone extraction. C-arm control was the most highly rated aspect of fresh frozen cadavers (mean: 4.7/5). Furthermore, there was no difference in OR performance between the cadaveric (n=9) and non-cadaveric groups (n=4; p=0.2500). With increasing numbers of training models being developed and utilised, the aim of this study was to investigate the difference in acquiring technical skills for flexible ureterorenoscopy between the Key Box (K-Box; Coloplast, France), and the Advanced Scope Trainer (AST; Northampton, UK). This randomised controlled trial recruited 30 novices (medical students) with no prior experience in performing ureteroscopy. Participants were randomised into 2 cohorts using a blocked randomisation process. Each cohort received a didactic 30-minute lecture and tutorial followed by a baseline assessment on the Endoscopic Urinary Tract Model (SimPORTAL, USA), then 4 subsequent training sessions on either the K-box or the AST, in which 2 standardised tasks were undertaken, concluding with a final assessment on the Endoscopic Urinary Tract model. Average time taken to complete the baseline assessment tasks and final assessment tasks for participants using the K-box as a training tool was 641 seconds and 310.4 seconds respectively, thus a reduction of 330.6 seconds (52%). Average time taken to complete the baseline assessment tasks and final assessment tasks using the Advanced Scope Trainer was 694.8 seconds and 338.4 seconds respectively, resulting in a reduction of 356.4 seconds (51%). Task checklist score increase in baseline and final assess-ment after using Advanced Scope trainer showed an average 54% increase, from an average score of 20.6 to 31.6. Task checklist score increase in baseline and final assessment after using K-box showed an average 57% increase with an average score of 20.3 during baseline assessment to 31.9 in final assessment. Conclusion: Flexible ureteroscopy is an important procedure in urolithiasis, with the training received by trainees limited by technical difficulty. The bench models evaluated; K-box and Advanced Scope Trainer, were both effective in increasing the acquisition of technical skills, with the K-box slightly outperforming the Advanced Scope Trainer. Role of Simulation in Urolithiasis Intervention (URS and PCNL) as Reflected by the Publication Trend Over the Last 2 Decades Introduction and Objective: Simulation training for stone surgery is now increasingly used as part of training curricula worldwide. Simulation for Endourologists focuses on ureteroscopy (URS) and percutaneous stone surgery (PCNL) with a continued quest for providing 'realism' to trainees. We wanted to see whether this is reflected in the publication trend and did a comprehensive PubMed database search over the last 16-years. All published papers on 'simulation' , 'stone' , 'Urolithiasis' , 'kidney stones' , 'renal stones' , 'ureteric stones' , 'percutaneous nephrolithotomy' , 'percutaneous stone surgery' , 'PCNL' and 'PNL' , 'ureteroscopy' , 'URS' and'training' were searched on PubMed over the last 16-years from 2000-2015. There were no language restrictions and all non-English language papers with published English abstracts were also included in our review. While review articles were included, case reports and those papers that did not have a published abstract were excluded from our analysis. Data was divided into two 8-year periods, period -1 (2000-2007) and period-2 (2008-2015) . Figure 1 ). There seems to have been a steady rise in simulation based papers over the last 16-years. When comparing the two time periods, there were 23 papers published in period-1, which had more than doubled (increase of 159%) to 59 papers in period-2. While URS based simulation papers had increased from 18 to 30 during this period (67% rise, p=0.007), PCNL based simulation papers had increased from 5 to 29 (a rise of 480%, p<0.001). There was only 1 simulation based PCNL paper published in the first 6-years of the study period (2000) (2001) (2002) (2003) (2004) (2005) , with a linear increase since then, potentially showing a renewed interest in this technique with minimally invasive PCNL techniques. Conclusions: Published papers on simulation has increased over the last 2-decades showing not only a renewed interest but a realization that simulators have a huge role in the modern day Endourology training and a new generation of simulators that provide 'realism' in training. Renal School: Pre-Operative Patient Education Prior to Elective Renal Surgery Improves Post-Operative Outcome and Achieves High Patient Satisfaction Introduction and Objectives: ERP have been proven to improve patient outcomes and reduce length of hospital stay (LOHS). There is limited evidence regarding the role of pre-operative patient education. BAUS ERP guidelines specifies that a well-informed and motivated patient is integral to successful implementation of ERP. A pioneering pre-operative Renal School has been introduced from May 2016 at Whiston Hospital. We have assessed outcomes of this novel service. Materials and Methods: Two hundred and sixty one patients undergoing elective renal surgery over a 5year period were grouped into those attending pre-operative renal school (RS n=61) and those who did not (Non-RS n=201). LOHS and patient satisfaction were primary outcomes. Type of surgery and surgical approach were sub-analysed, p values=<0.005 were deemed statistically significant. Patient satisfaction following renal school was assessed using patient diaries, and standardised questionnaire telephone follow up at 24hrs and 7 days post-discharge. Results: RS-patients had a statistically significant reduction in mean LOHS compared to Non-RS, 4.4 vs. 6.8 days respectively (p=<0.001), producing a potential cost saving of £58,560 over the 8 months since introduction. There was a consistent reduction in LOHS for RS-patients across all surgical approach sub-groups (see table 1 , over page). For laparoscopic procedures the reduction in LOHS was 5.9 vs 3.7 days (p=<0.005). Mean patient satisfaction score was: 8.5/10, 81%-rated the service as very informative/ helpful, 13%-good/useful, 6%-brilliant. Zero perent-as average or unhelpful. Introduction and Objective: Vesicourethral anastomosis (VUA) represents a challenging step of Radical Prostatectomy (RP) because of limitation of space in the depth of men's pelvis, lack of control on knots during tightening and subsequent inadequate coupling of VUA or breakdown of knots and extremely difficult reapplication of sutures. To facilitate this step of RP we have developed a simple and reproducible technique and report our 8 years experience. We used two extra long De-Bakey tissue forceps to approximate the bladder neck to the urethral stump. We found it more beneficial than Babcock clamp especially in obese patients with excess fatty tissue in pelvic area. Using this technique surgeon's assistant can sweep the fatty tissue posteriorly away from anastomotic area and make more space for surgeon's hand and push the reconstructed bladder neck down while the sutures are being tied. We perform VUA using six 3-0 vicryl sutures starting by tightening of the anterior one then move on to the 2-, 10-, 4-, 8-and 6-o' clock positions. Results: We analyzed data from 100 patients with prostatic cancer who underwent RP performed by one surgeon from 2009 to 2016. There were only 2 sutures disrupted while tying. In two cases (2%) we encountered drain output more than 30 mL/day on postoperative day 2 and drainage was left in place longer. The goal of urinary full continence has been achieved in 52%, 79% and 81% of patients immediately after catheter removal, 3 months and 6 months after surgery, respectively. Continence (full continence +continence by timed voiding plus medication) has been achieved in 84%, 98% and 100% of the patients immediately after catheter removal, 3 months and 6 months after surgery, respectively. We introduce a new simple modification of VUA during RP. The surgical technique has been shown as independent predictors of urinary continence. Using this technique; in addition to decrease in anastomotic disruption rate and increasing knot tying control, may affect postoperative urinary continence after RP. Learning from Urological Complications in the UK: The Past, the Present and the Future Introduction and Objective: Historically, the medical profession has been notoriously bad at discussing adverse events. A defensive, closed culture existed for many years, culminating in wide scale loss of public trust. In recent years we have made great strides in the way we discuss and learn from complications, but room for improvement remains. We provide a commentary on the past, present and future of dealing with complications in the UK, using available public information. Results: Numerous NHS scandals have recently emerged, uncovering a culture with little transparency, and where stories of potential whistleblowers turning a blind eye were all too familiar. Thankfully, via lessons from the aviation industry, things are changing. Classification of complications via the Clavien-Dindo system has allowed surgeons to compare themselves more accurately. Public reporting of surgical outcomes via BAUS can only improve results ("the more we are watched, the better we behave"). Complication sessions at urological meetings are commonplace, and video recording of minimally-invasive surgery has allowed us to capture surgical complications like never before. Clearly though, there is a long way to go. Public reporting certainly has its faults. Patient outcomes are related to the wider multidisciplinary team rather than surgical proficiency alone, and debate regarding which outcomes to measure, and issues of case mix, continue to rage on. In an era of social media, we must also learn to keep apace with new ways of sharing information. Conclusion: Discussion of complications is not easy; the negative effects of complications on surgeons are well documented. We have been historically poor at discussing adverse events as a result. Great improvements have been made by national reporting and routine open discussion. However we must continue to develop in the modern era for the safety of our patients. Introduction and Objective: Suprapubic cystostomy remains a common surgical procedure done for urinary retention especially where urethral catheterization fails. In low resource economies, this procedure is still widely done through the open approach unlike in more developed economies where the percutaneous approach using commercial kits is common. In the absence of commercial suprapubic cystostomy kitsa simplified suprapubic cystostomy approach using specially selected surgical blades was introduced in our hospital in 2013. The aim of this study is to report on the skill acquisition of this technique by surgical residents in the department of surgery. Fifty seven male patients with urinary retention were treated between January 2015 and December 2016 -all using a new simplified suprapubic cystostomy approach. The simplified suprapubic cystostomy approach consisted of puncture of the palpably distended bladder with a large size surgical blade (size 20, 22 or approximate size) along the mid abdominal line 2 finger breaths above the superior margin of pubic symphysis. Prior to the puncture, application of local anesthesia and successful aspiration of urine at same level was done. Subsequently a size 18 or 20 Foley catheter is then passed into the bladder. Results: The mean age of the patients was 58.6 (range of 24 to 100 years). The causes of urinary retention were: urethral stricture -26 patients, benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) -30 patients, cancer of the Introduction and Objective: The practice of day care surgery has gained widespread acceptance in many surgical specialties and its popularity is increasing. One of the problems with day care surgery is unplanned readmission. It has a negative impact on healthcare system and patients. The objective is to determine the frequency of unplanned readmissions and to identify subgroups of patients with highest unplanned readmission rate after daycare urological surgery in a tertiary care hospital. We conducted a prospective case control study to identify patients who required unplanned readmission within 30 days of daycare procedure. All daycare surgeries performed between 1st Jan to 15th March 2016 at Section of Urology were included. Data analysis was done through SPSS version 20. Patients who were readmitted were compared with those who did not require readmission. Chisquare/ Fischer exact test was applied for comparison of categorical variables where appropriate. Independent sample t-test was used for comparison of continuous variables. Logistic regression analysis was done to identify factors predicting readmission. A p-value of ≤0.05 was taken as statistically significant. Results: Out of 256 patients who fulfilled inclusion criteria, 247 were available for data analysis. Nine patients were readmitted within 30 days of daycare procedure. Age, gender, BMI, Financial class and comorbidities were not significantly different between the two groups. Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that ASA class III patients and patients with ECOG performance status II and III are more likely Closed culture -no reporting system, lacklustre morbidity and mortality meetings Open Reporting BAUS Database (5) Dr Foster analytics provider (6) Better stratified open reporting taking into account the unit, the multi-disciplinary team, the case mix This document is essential for the immediate and long term care of the patient. However, apart from the medical implications, the quality of surgical operation notes also has economic and medico-legal ramifications1. Well kept records can also be used for audit and research thus helping further improve the delivery of care to patients2. We thus embarked on an audit to assess the quality of surgical operation notes written by junior doctors and trainees against a set standard (the Royal College of Surgeons of England guidelines)3,4 Materials and Methods: We undertook a retrospective audit of 164 Urology and General Surgery operation notes handwritten by junior doctors and surgical trainees in a tertiary teaching hospital in Melbourne over a similar month period in 2014 and 2015 was assessed for quality based on parameters described by the Royal College of Surgeons of England (RCSE) guidelines3,4 . Results: A significant proportion of surgical operative notes were incomplete, with information pertaining to the time of surgery and DVT prophylaxis in particular being recorded less than 51% of the time (22.42% and 36.36% respectively). Conclusions: Trainees need to be aware of the expected standards to help improve compliance to reach 100% in all standards. Given the recurring theme of incomplete surgical operation notes as documented in the literature5,6, this illustrates the need for ongoing teaching in this regard, supervision from consultants and the potential need for a shift to electronic operation notes to improve the legibility, completeness of notes aiding future audits and research, more legible documentation that can be used for medic-legal reasons (e.g. as defense in court cases) and also to improve funding for hospitals by automatic coding for example7,8. Measuring Competence Progression during Simulation Training in Urology Introduction and Objectives: The Urology Simulation Boot Camp (USBC) is a novel five-day course intended to provide urology trainees in the United Kingdom, with 30hrs of 1:1 training from consultants (experts) on a variety of high and low fidelity simulators. We evaluated the effect of an intensive simulation training course on trainees' competence levels and demonstrate a model of evaluating competence progression. In this single-group cohort study, 33 trainees rotated through modules based on aspects of the U.K residency urology curriculum (I.S.C.P 2012). Trainees undertook a pre-and postcourse MCQ to test knowledge. Competency was evaluated by an expert using a global-assessment score. Competence of a procedure was scored as: "A" -Good (≥4 on a 5-point Likert Scale) and "B" -Poor (Likert scale of [1] [2] [3] was calculated as the change in score between baseline and final assessments. At the end of the course trainees received a "Summary sheet" comprising their scores and qualitative feedback based on expert observation. We describe the strategies and results of starting a centre for reconstructive urology focused in urethral surgery. In early 2015 was established by our Department the mission of creating a centre for reconstructive urology focused in urethral surgery. As no one of the staff had any experience in the area, we design a strategy in four steps to develop our centre. First, was created an ambulatory to support patients. Second, we invited two skilled surgeons in reconstructive urology to perform three levels of surgeries: level 1 (terminal-terminal urethroplasty and perineal urethrostomy); level 2 (anterior urethroplasty with graft or flap); level 3 (posterior urethroplasty; stricture greater than 10 cm; complex fistulas). Third step, our surgeon was sent to a referral centre abroad as an observer. Fourth step was the establishment of electronic mentoring (by email or cell phone messengers programs) was difficult cases could be discussed. All data were collected prospectively and a single surgeon performed all surgeries. Results: From February 2015 until December 2016, two hundred and one patients were attended at ambulatory level and performed 57 procedures. Fifty-five were men (96.5%) and two women (3.5%). Mean age was 49 years (range 16 to 84). The creation of specific ambulatory increased the number of attended patients from 4 in 2013 to 67 in 2015 and 134 in 2016. After two skilled surgeons have performed seven procedures, we did 15 surgeries in 2015 and 42 in 2016. Of all surgeries, twenty-four (42.1%) were level 1; twenty-seven (47.4%) level 2; four (7.0%) level 3, and two uretroplasties were converted to urinary diversion (3.5%). After the surgeon had visited a high volume centre the number of level 2 or 3 surgeries increased from 14 in 2015 to 23 in 2016. The electronic mentoring was a subjective variable and it was demanded in 9 of 15 (60%) procedures in 2015. In 2016 we asked for orientation 14 of 42 (33%) surgeries, but only for level 2 or 3. We applied four steps to start developing our centre and each step proved to be helpful for the process. Introduction and Objective: For the informed consent mainly oral and written delivered information are used. We investigated in the differences in understanding and anxiety between oral informed consent and interactive audio-visual informed consent (IPAD APP-ANIMEDES) in patients with an intended ureterorenoscopy for stone disease. Before elective ureterorenoscopy 31 patients were randomly assigned in two different groups for informed consent. A positive ethic vote was present. Group A (16 patients) was informed written and oral with the standard Perimed informed consent sheet. Group B (14 patients) received information for informed consent by a 3D-audio-visual animation by AniMedical without further explanations by the surgeon. Before the informed consent was conducted a questionnaire to the patient's education and computer literacy was completed. To assess the understanding of the procedure a pretested questionnaire with 10 questions was handed out. Anxiety was evaluated using the standardized questionnaire KASA. Results: Although the patient's education at baseline did not differ, Group B with the 3D-audio-visual informed consent had significant better understanding. 76% of the questions were answered correct compared to 59% in the Perimed group. Anxiety levels did not significantly differ between the two groups. The interactive audio visual informed consent is of easy handling independent of the patient's computer literacy. Urologists and patients can benefit from the 3D-audio-visual informed consent process as the understanding of the presented information significantly improved. Furthermore the education is homogeneous. Nevertheless it remains essential that the surgeon contacts the patient individually. 3D-audio-visual informed consent seems not adequately to detract patient anxiety therefore personal contact cannot be omitted Introduction and Objective: Live surgery broadcast (LSB) is a popular tool for teaching essential surgical steps to a broad audience during conferences. The concerns are ethical considerations and impact for education of the audience. The impact of the LSB on the safety of patients has been weakly reported. Here we present our LSB experience over 6 years. We included 129 consecutive patients who underwent surgery during LSB between June 2011 and May 2016. We categorized the procedures into six different issues: flexible/rigid uret-erorenoscopy for urinary stones (URS), percutaneous approaches (PCNL), transurethral prostate and bladder interventions, reconstructive procedures and conservative treatment of upper urinary tract tumours (UUTT). Primary outcomes were intra and postoperative complications within a 3 months follow-up period categorized according to the ClavienDindo classification. Secondary outcomes were operative time, time between anaesthesia and beginning of the procedure, length of stay and retreatment rate (RR). Results: Median age was 63. 1 years (23.3-93) . Total intraoperative and postoperative complications rates were 4.6% (6/129) and 11.6% (15/129), respectively. The distribution of intraoperative complications was 2.3% (3/129), 1.5% (2/129) and 0.75% (1/129) in the PCNL, transurethral bladder procedure, and trans-urethral prostate procedure groups, respectively. The distribution of postoperative complications was 6.9% (9/129) in the PCNL group, 2.3% (3/129) in the transurethral prostate procedure group, and 0.75% (1/129) for each of the following groups: URS, transurethral bladder procedure and UUTT treatment groups. There were 1 Clavien I, 7 Clavien II and 7 Clavien IIIb postoperative complications (Table) . Secondary outcomes are summarized in the table. Conclusion: LSB appears to be as safe as routine surgical procedures in terms of intra and postoperative complications rates Smile, You're on Camera: Assessing the Prevalence of Taking Photos at Medical Conferences Introduction and Objective: Disruptive behavior by health care workers may impact team based patient care. Prior research suggests that disruption can reduce psychological safety, hinder teamwork and communication, and increase turnover, but much of this research focused on the perspectives of nurses. We sought to explore the experiences of medical students regarding intraoperative disruptions as well as their view of an ideal intraoperative working environment. Medical students interviewing for urology residency placement were asked to recall an incidence of disruptive behavior during surgery and describe the situation, including inciting factors and performance impact. They also were asked how they imagine their own future operating room. Using grounded theory methodology, field notes from 42 interviews were coded to identify themes and key insights. Results: Interviewees were 57% male with an average age of 26 years (range 23-34). The vast majority of students (98%) had witnessed intraoperative disruptive behavior (usually by surgeons) such as yelling, throwing instruments, as well as belittling and blaming others. Frustration with missing instruments/equipment or the incompetence of assistants were the most common instigators of disruptive behavior mentioned by students. Students noted undesirable effects of disruptive behavior, including decreased communication/teamwork, lack of learning, contagious negativity, poor morale, and decreased quality of their psychomotor performance. Students recalled feeling afraid, on edge, and stressed by these situations. Some rationalized the surgeons' behavior based on concern for the patient, personality factors, lack of flexibility, fatigue, production pressure, or the stress of the clinical situation. Students prefer a calm surgeon who know the names of their team members and foster an efficient, collaborative environment where questioning and learning is encouraged. Conclusions: Students provide a valuable perspective on the causes and consequences of disruptive behavior during surgery and suggest potential pathways to improvement. Future quantitative work should explore whether frustration is a significant predictor of disruptive behavior. If so, identification of the intraoperative events that precipitate frustration (e.g., missing instruments) as well as any factors that might moderate that relationship (e.g., fatigue) could provide future intervention targets aimed at preventing frustration and its negative impact on surgical teams. Postoperative complications during hospitalisation n (%) 1 (12,5) 1 (5,5) 0 3 (9,3) 9 (39,1) 1 (0,7) Clavien The study sought to compare the procedural and clinical results of SMP with the use of the first-and new-generation devices. A prospective, comparative cohort study was performed from February 2013 to January 2017. A total of 156 consecutive patients undergoing SMP were enrolled in the study. Of 156 patients, the first 85 consecutive patients underwent SMP with the first-generation system, and the other 71 consecutive patients were treated with the new-generation SMP system.The first-generation SMP system consists of a 7 F miniaturized nephroscope and a modified 10 -14 F plastic sheath with a suction-evacuation function. The new-generation SMP system consists of an 8 F miniaturized nephroscope and a newly designed irrigation-suction sheath. The primary outcome of the present study was the operating time, which was calculated from the starting of percutaneous puncture to the wound closure. Secondary outcomes were the stone-free rate (SFR), blood loss (haemoglobin decrease), hospital stay, and postoperative complications. Results: The two groups had comparable demographic data such as age, BMI, stone size, stone location, comorbidities, grade of hydronephrosis, and positive preoperative urine culture. The new-generation SMP had a shorter operation time (39.3 vs 50.5 min, p=0.016), and shorter postoperative hospitalization time (2.1 vs 3.0 days, p<0.001) than the first-generation SMP. No significant difference existed between the two groups for SFR, haemoglobin decrease, and tubeless rate. The overall operative complication rates using the Clavien-Dindo grading system were similar between the groups. The clinical outcomes of SMP with the new-generation system were favorable. The new-generation SMP system was associated with shorter operation time and postoperative hospitalization time than the first-generation system. External Validation of Triple D Score and Its Modification to Triple D-Sscore for Better Prediction of Stone Free Rates after Extracorporeal Shock Wave Lithotripsy Introduction and Objective: We wanted to externally validate three D score in our center using third generation Electromagnetic lithotripter. Secondly we wanted to apply it on relatively larger stone volume. It was a retrospective study that included 150 adult patients having mean age of 38.1±15years.Out of them 120 (80%) were males and 30 (20%) females.Exclusion criteria included age less than 18 years, coagulation disorders, skeletal deformity, positive urine cultures and abnormal renal anatomy.All of thepatients had CT scan films which were assessed for Stone volume (SV), skin-to-stone distance (SSD), and stone density.Stone free rates and complications were assessed for each category of the score to see their correlation. Introduction and Objective: To compare balloon with one-shot Amplatz technique for tract dilatation in totally-ultrasonographically guided PCNL (UPCN). We randomized 66 patients candidate for sonographically guided PCNL in two study groups based on their tract dilatation technique. In the first group, one-shot Amplatz dilatation (AG) was performed whereas in the other group, balloon dilator was used (BG). Procedure time and success rate of dilatation as well as postoperative clinical outcomes were compared between two groups. There is no guide on the management protocol for how to leave the first access tract in percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) of staghorn stones. We evaluated the stone free rate of multiple tract PCNL for large staghorn stones and its complications when a large bore drainage tube was inserted in the first access tract while continuing lithotripsy through next access tracts and compared the results with when no tube was inserted through the first access tract. Patients with staghorn stones who underwent multi-tract PCNL from January to September 2014 were included. In group A, after completion of lithotripsy through the first access tract, a 24F chest tube was inserted and PCNL was continued through next access tracts. During the same period 15 patients who underwent multitract PCNL of staghorn stones by our usual method without inserting chest tube into the first access tract (group B) were used as the control group. KUB and renal ultrasonography were requested 2 weeks after the operation. Stone clearance percent was calculated by dividing the surface of residual stones to the surface of original stones. Complications were extracted from patients' records. Results: The mean±SD of patients age in groups A and B were 48.2±10.9 versus 48.3±14.5 years (p=0.98). The number of males and females in groups A and B were 14/6 versus 11/4. The difference in preoperative stone surface area in groups A and B was not statistically significant. The mean±SD of stone clearance percent two weeks after the operation was 88.3±4.6 in group 37th CONGRESS OF THE SOCIÉTÉ INTERNATIONALE D'UROLOGIE -SIU 2017 ABSTRACT BOOK A versus 82.3±8.3 in group B (P=0.02). Hospitalization duration was 3.6±0.8 in group A versus 3.8±1.8 in group B (p=69). Fever was observed in 6 patients in group A versus 3 patients in group B (p=0.7) Introduction and Objectives: Pyeloplasty is the gold standard treatment for ureteropelvic junction obstruction (UPJO). Secondary UPJO is ideally treated with less invasive method rather than re-do open surgery. Here in this study we report our experience in treatment of cases with failed pyeloplasty with Holmium laser endopyelotomy. Patients were referred for loin pain recurrence after open pyeloplasty. Subsequent to ureteropelvic junction stenosis confirmation with CTU and dynamic isotope renal scan, the patients underwent ureteroscopic laser endopyelotomy. Ureteric stents (7F) were placed for 6 weeks postoperatively when ureteroscopy was repeated and stents removed. All patients had CTU and isotope renal scan at 3 months postoperatively. Results: Seventeen patients presented at a median of 2.8 years (range, 10 months to 5 years) after pyeloplasty (ten open dismembered & seven non-dismembered). Thirteen patients showed symptomatic and radiologic improvement after a mean follow up of 24 months. Four patients required a second laser endopyelotomy after a median of 10 months (5 months to 2 years). All patients were done as day surgery. Symptomatic improvement was documented in all of the patients, and improved drainage was recorded in the 3-month nuclear scans. Conclusion: Laser endopyelotomy is an effective minimally invasive procedure for secondary pelviureteric junction obstruction. Super-Mini Percutaneous Nephrolithotomy (SMP) versus Retrograde Intrarenal Surgery for the Treatment of 1 to 2 cm Lower Pole Renal Calculi: A Multinational Multicenter Randomized Controlled Trial Zhang T 1 , Zeng G 1 , Fan J 1 , Zhu W 1 , Zhang W 2 , Yang S 3 , Xiao K 4 , Li X 5 , Li H 6 , He X 7 , Xu C 8 , Sarica K 9 , Agrawal M 10 Introduction and Objective: The treatment of Lower pole (LP) calculi is controversial, especially 1-2 cm stones, with competing interventions possessing advantages and disadvantages.A multinational multicenter prospective randomized comparison of super-mini percutaneous nephrolithotomy (SMP) and retrograde intrarenal surgery (RIRS) for the treatment of 1 to 2 cm LP renal calculi was done to evaluate the safety and efficacy of these procedures. One hundred and fifty three patients with 1 to 2 cm LP renal calculi who underwent treatment between August 2015 and January 2017 were included in this study at 9 Asian centers and one European center. These patients were randomized to SMP and RIRS groups. One-step stonefree rate (SFR) and SFR at 1-month postoperatively were the primary outcomes. The secondary outcomes included blood loss, operation duration, pain visual analogue score (VAS) score at 24h postoperatively, auxiliary procedures, complications and hospital stay. The study was registered at http://clinicaltrials.gov / (NCT02519634). The revolution in endoscopic urology was accompanied by a wide variety of sterilization techniques with challenge to determine the effective method that provides long-term durability. We compared the effects of chemical sterilization (CIDEX) and low-temperature hydrogen peroxide gas plasma (STERRAD) on two brand new digital flexible ureteroscope (DFU) (Flex-Xc) using subjective and objective parameters. Over 12-month period, all flexible ureteroscopic procedures performed by two flexible ureteroscopes (Flex-Xc) were prospectively evaluated. The ureteroscopes were assessed for the lower pole access measuring the deflection of the ureteroscope with the working channel empty, accessibility to the kidney and the entire collecting system with ureteral access sheath of different sizes and irrigation flow. Intraoperative data included total operative time, laser power and duration, stone criteria and subjective evaluation of the procedure as well as visibility and maneuverability scores were reported. The end point was when one of the flexible ureteroscopes deemed damaged beyond repair when the endoscope fails the leak test. Results: A total of 88 patients were randomized either for the 1st flexible ureteroscope (SN# 27403) sterilized with Cidex®OPA (n= 59, 67%) or 2nd ureteroscope (SN # 33027) sterilized with Sterrad (n= 29, 33%). Intraoperative, the 1st DFU was significantly used with a total operative time of approximately 49 hours and laser compared to the 2nd one (p<0.001). In the same context, laser power parameters were significantly different among the two groups (p= 0.003). The irrigation flow rate, subjective evaluation of the procedure, maneuverability, visibility scores and pain score at 6-hours and 1 day postoperatively were relatively similar for both utereroscopes. At the end point of the study, the deflection in up and downward directions for both DFU were measured. The mean deflection loss (up/down) was 11.1/22.2% (30o/60 o) for the 1st DFU and 3.7/11.1% (10 o/30 o) for the 2nd one (p= 0.9). Neither stone burden nor laser duration had a significant impact over the results. The durability and longevity of the DFU is strongly related to the method of sterilization. Our findings suggest that CIDEX should prioritize Sterrad in sterilization of DFU. Effect of Practical Coin Based Demonstration for Patient Education and Use of Headphones on Patient Anxiety Undergoing Extracorporeal Shock Wave Lithotripsy Introduction and Objective: We wanted to see the effect of Coin based demonstration for patient education and headphones on patient anxiety during extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (SWL).We compared anxiety levels in three patients groups. It was a prospective study in which 105 Patients with renal and ureteric stones were included.All patients included were adults between age of 18 years and 60 years. SWL was done by using using Modulith SL X lithotripter 3rd generation Storz medical equipment (Electromagnetic lithotriptor). Mean age was 38.43±12.42 years. Hemodynamic and respiratory parameters were recorded before and just after the SWL session. All patient State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) scores were recorded after completion of SWL procedure. In group1, Coin demonstration was used before the procedure for patient education and then headphones were used to cancel noise effects during the SWL. While in second group only head phones were used and in third group neither headphones nor Coin based education was done. In coin based education, a coin was placed on the SWL machine that jumped up when shock waves were delivered to it. Visual analog scale (VAS) was also used in these groups to assess pain scores during SWL procedure. Results: There was significant difference in the groups in VAS score (4.25±0.61, 5.24±1.23 and 5.61±0.72) .Those who had coin based education and headphones had a STAI-S score of 27.3±6.5, while in patients with only head phones and no coin based education the STAI-S score was 34.34±7.63.In the third group without coin based education and headphones STAI-S score was 49.55±8.26.There was significant difference of STAI-S score between the groups (0.04). Pre procedure blood pressure (mmHg) was 119/76 vs 131/73vs 124/71 in these groups and post procedure blood pressure (mmHg) 122/75 vs 127/82 vs 132/85. Postprocedure pulse rate was 88.9±2.9/minute vs 89.2±3.5/minute. There was much better effect of coin based education on patients resulting in decreased STAI-S score. Conclusion: Use of coin based practical demonstration for patient education before undergoing SWL procedure results in relieving anxiety of patients during the procedure. More studies regarding other better ways of patients' education may also be explored in future. Introduction and Objective: Nonpalpable testes account for approximately 20% of all undescended testes. (1) In this study we review our laparoscopic findings. We performed a retrospective review of all our laparoscopic explorations or nonpalpable testis from September 2012 to September 2016 and focused on testicular position and aspect of the inguinal canal.  Efficacy of Sacral Roots Neuromodulation in the Treatment of Bladder Pain Syndrome/Interstitial Cystitis in Both Men and Women Introduction and Objective: The Boari flap remains a good surgical technique in the management of ureteral strictures that are not amenable to ureteroneocystostomy or ureteroureterostomy. We present our experience with the robotic Boari flap technique from 2011 to 2017. A retrospective review was performed at a single institution. Patient demographics and pre-operative information were collected. Key aspects of our robotic technique: Prior to surgery, a 5 Fr ureteral catheter is placed into the bladder alongside the Foley catheter. A wide base for the bladder flap is maintained to maximize the blood supply to the flap. To maintain flap length, it is tubularized over a 22 Fr red rubber catheter with interrupted absorbable sutures. The flap is additionally pexed to the psoas muscle, as needed, to maintain a tension-free anastomosis to the ureter. By advancing the ureteral catheter into the red rubber catheter, a guidewire can be advanced easily into the renal pelvis for subsequent retrograde placement of the ureteral stent. The distal curl of the stent can be visualized in the bladder prior to cystorrhaphy. Results: There were 9 robotic Boari flaps performed between April 2011 and January 2017. Etiologies include post-surgery strictures (n = 4), urolithiasis (n = 2), radiation (n = 1), retroperitoneal fibrosis (n = 1), and idiopathic (n = 1). Three were converted to open surgery because of failure to progress secondary to extensive periureteral fibrosis. These cases occurred during the early part of the robotic learning curve. Mean age was 52.4. Mean BMI was 30.6. Median EBL was 50 mL, median op-time was 479.5 minutes (including cystoscopy portion), and median post-op length of stay was 3 days. There were no post-operative hospital readmissions. One of the patients had previously undergone a Boari flap with another urologist with recurrence of ureteral stricture and underwent redo robotic Boari flap. No recurrences of ureteral stricture were noted in our series to date. Conclusion: Robotic Boari flap is a challenging surgical procedure that, in experienced hands and appropriate patient selection, has good surgical outcomes with low ureteral stricture recurrence. Prior to undergoing such a procedure, patients should be carefully counseled about the risks of conversion to open surgery. Robotic Ureteroneocystostomy: A Minimally Invasive Treatment Option Lai W, Shaw E, Thomas R Introduction and Objective: Lower ureteral injury is a known sequelae of gynecological, colorectal, and urologic procedures. The management of these adverse events is the responsibility of the urologist. Robotic-assisted surgery has allowed urologists to perform reconstruction in a minimally invasive fashion. This abstract delineates our experience with robotic ureteroneocystostomy from 2008 to 2017. A retrospective review of robotic assisted lower ureteral injury was performed at a single institution. Patient demographics and pre-operative information were collected. Our tech-nique includes the following: for patients presenting in a delayed fashion, they underwent nephrostomy tube placement. Prior to surgery, the tubes were exchanged for a nephroureteral catheter to facilitate intraoperative identification of the strictured distal ureter. (For patients presenting in an acute manner within 72 hours after injury, they underwent cystoscopy, retrograde pyelogram, and attempt at ureteral stent placement.) During the ureteroneocystostomy, the bladder was dissected free of lateral attachments. If further length was required, a psoas hitch was performed to ensure tension-free anastomosis. Periureteral tissue was preserved to maintain the blood supply to the ureter. Foley catheter and ureteral stent were left indwelling for 10 days and 6 weeks, respectively. Introduction and Objective: Successful treatment of stress urinary incontinence in men depends on adequate repositioning and compression of the bulbar urethra. Current slings based on suburethral or transobturator suspensions only produce compression under the urethra leaving the rest of the circumference free without any additional pressure. A new 4-arm sling that produces simultaneous suburethral and supraurethral compression by raising it against the lower border of the pubis was placed in five patients since March 2016. Results: The placement did not suppose any problems added to the placement of the standard suburethral MRS sling. The passage and adjustment of the prepubic arms was simple and without complications. All patients are continent and needed only 1.2 readjust (average). One patient had infection of the surgical suprapubic plate but the rest of the system remain in place and patient still continent but loose the possibility of further readjustment. At present there are systems of four arms that are not readjustable and others that maybe readjusted but only have 2 points of anchorage or tension. The development of a sling combining both characteristics could be a significant advance in this field. The postoperative placement and adjustment of the tension of the new sling does not entail any additional complication with respect to the standard MRS. Superior incontinence control is expected for its novel double way of compressing the urethra, the demonstration of which will involve future clinical trials. Prostate Radiofrequency Ablation Focal Treatment (proRAFT): Interim Results of a Prospective Development Study Introduction and Objective: Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) using a bipolar coil design (Encageâ"¢ device) which acts as a Faraday cage offer the versatility needed to perform focal treatment of localised prostate cancer whilst sparing critical anatomical and functional structures. We report preliminary outcomes of our ethics approved prospective development study investigating focal Encageâ"¢ ablation (NCT02294903). Our primary objective was to determine the ablative efficacy 6 months after bipolar RFA. Secondary objectives included the assessment of genito-urinary toxicity. Materials and Methods: Twenty one men who had multi-parametric MR-visible index lesion concordant with transperineal biopsies and absence of clinically significant disease elsewhere with PSA /=5mm using elastic image-fusion (SmartTargetÂ® platform). mp-MRI transperineal targeted biopsies of the ablated zone and any new suspicious areas were carried out at 6 months. Results: Twenty men were treated; none were eligible for active surveillance. Data are available for 15 patients treated and followed up to 6 months. Patient characteristics are presented in Tab1. No significant residual disease was found in 13/15 patients. Two had clinically significant cancer of 6mm Gleason 7 (3+4) and 4mm Gleason 6, with one of these undergoing a retreatment. One harboured insignificant disease (1mm Gleason 6; pre-RFA 8 mm Gleason 7). Medi-an PSA (IQR) at 6 months post RFA was 3.1 (1.2 to 4.8) ng/mL. Two patients showed decrease function in term of leakage (1 patient needed a urethral dilatation for stricture). For pad use, 3/15 patients started to use pad. IPSS changed from 9.2 to 8.9 and IPSS quality-of-life from 1.86 to 1.8 . Across the 11 patients declaring in IIEF questionnaires some sexual stimulation, 2 patients with already poor erectile function had some decrease at the point to not be sufficient for penetrations. Erectile and bowel functions remained stable, as measured by the IIEF-15 and UCLA-EPIC bowel domain, respectively. EQ-5D and the FACT-P remained stable. There were 4 serious adverse events, none related to the procedure. Introduction and Objective: To assess the safety and efficacy of a novel technology referred to as percutaneous ureteroscopy laser unroofing in the management of renal cysts. Under ultrasound guidance, an eighteen-gauge needle was placed inside the cyst cavity, and a guidewire was introduced followed by sequential dilation up to 28F. The extra-parenchymal portion of cyst wall was dissociated and incised using either a Thulium or Holmium laser, and a pathological examination was performed. Renal calculi were treated simultaneously. For parapelvic cysts patients, laser was used to incise cyst wall towards identified pelvis to create a permanent communication between the cyst and adjacent renal collecting system. F6 double-J stent was inserted into the cyst cavity at the end to prevent auto-closure for at most two months. 22F nephrostomy tube was left in renal pelvis for a duration of two weeks. More than 50% reduction in cyst volume was considered a success. The perioperative complications, hospitalization days and the effective rate of surgery were evaluated. Introduction and Objective: Following a similar recommendation by its American counterpart, the Canadian Task Force on the Preventative Health Care (CT-FPHC) produced a guideline recommending against standard screening for prostate cancer (PCa) with prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in 2014. There has been concern that decreased PSA use in primary care might result in higher risk disease and adverse outcomes. Our objective was to determine if there were fewer radical prostatectomies performed at our centre, and if there had been a clinical and pathological upward stage migration after the recommendation. Characteristics of men undergoing radical prostatectomy (RP) by a single surgeon at a large Canadian centre were prospectively collected between 2012 and 2015 in a database. Age, preoperative PSA, and D' Amico classification, prostate mass, Gleason score (GS), pathological stage, margin positivity and tumour volume were recorded. Nominal and ordinal data were compared using Pearson's chi-squared test. Continuous variables were non-parametric and therefore compared with independent-samples Kruskal-Wallis test. Results: Out of 344 prostatectomies performed between 2012 and 2015, D' Amico risk group, GS, pT3 rates, and mean tumour volume were all significantly increased. There were no statistically significant changes in age, PSA values, prostatic volume, SVI rates, or PSM rates. There was a trend toward higher node positivity. There was a year-on-year reduction in total number of RRPs performed (see Table 1 ). Conclusion: Between 2012 and 2015, there was a significant upward stage migration in prostate cancer treated by radical prostatectomy by a single surgeon. The 2012 USPSTF and 2014 CPSTF recommendations might have resulted in referral of fewer screen-detected patients, and fewer with low risk disease. Part of the change may also be related to greater uptake of active surveillance among low risk patients, as well as a greater willingness to offer surgery, as part of multi-modal treatment, to high risk patients. To determine the efficacy of cognitive targeted prostate biopsy using biparametric magnetic resonance imaging (b-MRI) for patients with a PSA level under 10 ng/ml. We reviewed data from 123 consecutive male patients who underwent cognitive targeted prostate biopsy using prostate MRI in 2016. Of these patients, the first 55 underwent prostate biopsy using multiparametric MRI (mp-MRI), and the remaining 68 underwent prostate biopsy using b-MRI. For b-MRI, we only performed T2 weighted axial imaging and diffusion-weighted imaging sequences. We found that 62 of the 123 men had suspicious lesions on MRI (32 of the 55 men in the mp-MRI group and 30 of the 68 men in the b-MRI group). We compared the prostate cancer detection rates and the proportions of clinically significant prostate cancer between the different MRI sequences. The mean PSA level was 6.7 ng/ml in the mp-MRI group and 6.2 ng/ml in the b-MRI group. Between the two MRI groups, there were no statistically significant differences in prostate cancer detection rate or proportion of clinically significant prostate cancer ( Introduction and Objectives: According to the EAU guidelines cT2c stage is classified as high risk prostate cancer; however most patients with presence of only cT2c and no other negative prognostic factors have better outcomes after local therapy. The aim of the study was to assess prognostic factors of biochemical recurrence (BR) in subgroup of prostate cancer (PC) pts with cT2c stage. Materials and Methods: Retrospective analysis of 1864 PC pts undergone radical prostatectomy (RPE) was done. Clinical stage was T1b-T2c in 1457 (78.2%), T3a-T3b -in 407 (21.8%) pts. Stage cT2c was verified in 747 (40.1%) and prognostic factors of disease progression were assessed in this subgroup of patients. Mean PSA level in cT2c group was 17.8±16.9 ng/ml; mean percentage of positive biopsy cores was 55.8±28.4%. Biopsy Gleason score 6 was verified in 398 (53.3%) pts; 7 (3+4) -in 172 (23.0%); 7 (4+3) -in 83 (11.1%) and 8-10 -in 68 (9.1%); not assessed in 26 (3.5%) pts. To stratify patients according risk group in cT2c subgroup standard risk classification was used without cT stage consideration. Intermediate risk PC (PSA 10-20 ng/ml, biopsy Gleason score 7) was verified in 541 (72.4%) pts; high risk PC (PSA >20 ng/ ml, biopsy Gleason score 8-10) -in 206 (27.6%) pts. Low risk PC was not observed among cT2c pts. Biochemical recurrence (BR) was assessed as elevation of PSA>0.2 ng/ml on three consecutive measurements. Results: Morphological stage downgrading to pT2a-T2b was found in 26 (3.5%) pts and stage upgrading to ≥pT3a was observed in 329 (44%) pts. Lymph node (LN) metastases were found in 124 (16.6%) pts. In intermediate risk subgroup LN metastases were observed in 69 of 541 (12.8%) pts and in high riskin 55 of 206 (26.7%) pts (p<0.001). Mean follow up was 35.5±33. 1 months (3-174) . BR was observed in 119 (16%) pts. 5-year and 10-year biochemical progression-free survival (BPFS) were 60±3.5% and 42.4±5.9%, respectively. 10-year overall and cancer-specific survival were 84.3±6.3% and 93.5±8.9%, respectively. In patients with cT2c and absence of any other negative predictors BPFS was almost 2-fold higher. Thus, 5-year BPFS in subgroup of intermediate and high risk PC in patients with cT2c was 68.9±3.1% and 39.1±4.3%, respectively (p=0.002). PSA, biopsy Gleason score and percentage of positive biopsy cores were predictors of outcome in cT2c cohort. In subgroup of pts with PSA ≤10 and >10 ng/ml 5-year BPFS was 73.3±4.5% and 50.7±5.9%, respectively, p=0.001. In pts with PPBC ≤50% and >50%, 5-year BPFS was 70.1±3.9% and 52.2±4.7%, respectively, p=0.002. In pts with biopsy Gleason ≤6, 7 and 8-10 difference in BPFS was also significant (p=0.001). Independent preoperative predictors of BR in multivariate Cox regression analysis in cT2c subgroup of pts were percentage of positive biopsy cores (OR=1.9; 95%CI=1.3-2.8; p=0.002) and biopsy Gleason score (OR=1.29; 95%CI=1.1-1.6; p=0.09). Conclusions: Clinical assessment of high risk PC is important for patient's stratification and should be done using multiple clinical parameters. Using of only cT2c stage without other negative predictors of high risk PC could lead to incorrect stratification. Most important clinical prognostic factors in cT2c cohort of patients were percentage of positive biopsy cores and biopsy Gleason score. Adding these parameters in Introduction and Objective: Prostate cancer (PCa) grade in the diagnostic biopsy is an important determinant of patient management. The Gleason grading groups (GGG) are recently introduced for grading of prostate cancer. This new scoring system is subject to a similar inter-observer agreement as the Gleason score (60%). Computer aided diagnosis systems using convolutional neural networks (CNN) have shown to approach human performance in diagnosing skin disease, while reducing inter-observer variability. A CNN learns to recognize patterns from a gold standard and distinguish preset categories. By using a CNN on digital histology slides, it can learn to detect abnormalities and give an indication of likelihood of tumor presence. The aim of this study is to explore the accuracy of a CNN for grading of prostate biopsies using the recently introduced GGG. Materials and Methods: H&E stained formalin fixed paraffin embedded core biopsies from ten patients were digitized using the Philips UltraFast Scanner at 20x magnification. The gold standard was a set of manual annotations, confirmed by a urinary tract pathologist. The CNN was trained on 150 annotated biopsy fragments to differentiate between the Gleason scores. The GGG were constructed out of the two Gleason grades with highest percentages, dividing grade groups 1, 2 and ≥3, based on the clinical consequence. A test set, which consisted of 15 biopsy fragments that were not used in the training of the CNN, was generated. The accuracy was calculated by dichotomizing the grading of the test set, in order to separate the different treatment groups, and comparing this result to the classification in the pathology report. Results: In distinguishing GGG ≤I from ≥II, the CNN shows a sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of 65%, 93% and 75%, respectively. Distinguishing GGG ≤II from ≥III shows a sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of 100%, 67% and 73% respectively. Introduction and Objective: Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) can be elevated in the presence of prostate cancer or prostatitis, so recently in the case of the decrease of PSA after the administration of antibiotics, the cautious prostate biopsy often raised due the possibility of prostatitisis. The authors tried to evaluate the possibility of deciding the implementation of the biopsy by whether the PSA has been decreased or not after the administration of antibiotics by comparing the biopsy positive rate of the patients with decreased PSA after administrating antibiotics and the patients who underwent the biopsy right after without the administrating antibiotics. This study was conducted for 262 people with PSA more than 2.5 ng/ml and less than 10ng/ml who does not have any unusual remark at the digital rectal examination. Among these, the patients who were able to observe the PSA progress after the administration of antibiotics with their consent were 144, and the patients who underwent the biopsy right after were 118. The subject groups were classified into three groups; Group I who carried out the biopsy right after without the administration of antibiotics, Group II with and Group III without PSA reduction after administrating antibiotics ( Fig.1) . Clinical characteristics and cancer detection rate between group I and group II were compared and analyzed Result: Total patients were 262; 118 in Group I (45%), 84 in Group II (32%), and 60 in Group III (23%). The biopsy positive rate is 30.5% in Group I, 28.6% in Group II, there were no significant difference in biopsy positive rate between Group I and II (Table 1 , 2). Conclusion: From the patients with decreased PSA after the administration of antibiotics, the similar biopsy positive rate was found like the patients who had the biopsy right after, so deciding the biopsy implementation to the patients with PSA more than 2.5 ng/ml and less than 10 ng/ml by whether PSA is decreased or not after the administration of antibiotics should be considered very cautiously. Correlation between Multiparametric MRI PIRADS Scores and Prostate Carcinoma Grade Grouping on Transperineal Template +/-Targeted Biopsy Introduction and Objective: We correlated 3T multiparametric MRI PIRADS results with transperineal template biopsy grade group scores. This data was also used to produce sensitivity and specificity results of 3T multiparametric MRI for the detection of clinically significant prostate cancer (Grade Group 2 or greater). Between January 2013 and March 2017, we stored 1733 PIRADS-scored multiparametric MRI reports from a single radiologist in a prospective database. 762 men subsequently underwent 806 transperineal template biopsies within 12 months of their MRI, with MRI-biopsy targeting performed in 45.3%. Their pathology reports were prospectively stored in the same database and used as the comparator. PIRADS scores of 4 or 5 were considered positive, PIRADS 1 or 2, negative, and 96 PI-RADS 3 scores, representing an equivocal result, were removed to yield 710 data points for sensitivity and specificity analysis. We calculated sensitivity and specificity results of 85.6% (95%CI: 81.80% to 88.94%) and 67.5% Introduction and Objective: Transrectal ultrasound guided biopsy of prostate (TRUS-BP) is the gold standard diagnostic investigation for patients presenting with an abnormal PSA and/or abnormal digital rectal however carries not insignificant risks. Use of multiparametric MRI has been evolving over the past decade with various methods of performing targeted TRUS-BP -the simplest is cognitive MRI targeting with visual registration of regions of interest. We performed a retrospective analysis of cognitive MRI guided TRUS biopsies at a single centre. Materials and Methods: One hundred and fifty two patients underwent cognitive MRI guided TRUS-BP between 18/6/14 and 4/9/15 performed by a single experienced consultant. Median age was 66.9. Thirteen patients were biopsied as part of active surveillance; 139 patients after presentation with a raised PSA and/ or abnormal DRE and had undergone at least one negative TRUS-BP previously. Median PSA in the active surveillance group was 6.2 and 9.6 in the negative biopsy group. Results: Of the 139 patients who had previous negative TRUS-BP 33 had a cancer detected following cognitive MRI guided biopsy (23.7%). Nine patients had low risk prostate cancer detected, 19 intermediate risks and 5 high risks. Eighteen patients proceeded to undergo radical treatment and 1 commenced ADT. Seven patients entered active surveillance and 6 patients opted for a watchful waiting approach. 1 patient was lost to follow-up. Of the 13 patients in the active surveillance group 5 patients had a negative targeted biopsy and continued on the active surveillance pathway. Of the 8 positive biopsies 4 had had an upgrade of their pathology; 3 went on to have radical treatment and 1 declined radical treatment. Conclusion: Patients with a previous negative biopsy but remaining suspicion of prostate cancer are often subjected to multiple biopsies. Uses of cognitive MRI targeted biopsies have been shown to significantly increase the detection of prostate cancer in patients with a previous negative biopsy. In our population cognitive MRI targeted biopsies detected prostate cancer in 23.7% of patients who had previous negative biopsies. Although current literature suggests MRI-TRUS fusion biopsies have higher detection rates than cognitive-guided the equipment is often expensive. Cognitive MRI targeted biopsies are a viable alternative method to increase detection rate. Introduction and Objective: mpMRI offers the possibility to locate cancer in 3-Dimensions and aid surgical planning. We investigated the margin needed around an mpMRI lesion for complete disease control in a prospectively enrolled biopsy naive population who underwent mpMRI followed by Transperineal Prostate Mapping with biopsies taken every 5mm (5TPM). Ninety four patients included in this analysis were part of the pilot phase of Prostate MRI Imaging Study (NCT01292291) investigating accuracy of mpMRI against standard of care with TPM as a reference test. All patients were biopsy-naive with a PSA below 15ng/ml. All patients underwent 1.5T mpMRI with standardized protocol (T2W, Diffusion, DCE), blinded reported using Likert scoring. Each core was separately labelled and oriented in space. Each prostate and MRI lesion was contoured on T2W-imaging, blinded to pathology. A 3D digital map of the TPM was reconstructed using an in-house software. Correlation between mpMRI and biopsy findings was automatically carried out using a platform generating the registration based on landmarks. We report the margin around the MRI lesion as the maximum distance within a set of negative biopsy location surrounding the MRI lesion. Results are also stratified by MRI score, Gleason Score, lesion eligibility to focal therapy and significance. Results: Forty one patients (median PSA 6.5ng/ ml, median age 62) were found to harbour cancer at 5TPM in this cohort, yielding 75 MRI lesions that corresponded to cancer at 5TPM. The median number of MRI lesions per patient was 1.5. As a control of registration, correlation between MRI volume and TPM volume was Ï =0.92 (p<0.001). Lesion characteristics are summarized in Table 1 . The mean margin (enclosing a perimeter of negative cores) for MRI lesions corresponding the cancer at 5TPM was 7.0 mm (SD 4.6mm) . For lesion eligible for focal therapy (n= 35), the mean margin was 7.3 (SD 4.3mm). The mean Gleason score of biopsy core outside the MRI lesion was 6.7 (+/-0.5). Conclusion: Our study is the first to report a margin around a mpMRI lesion when based on prostates that have not been removed using surgery and evaluated against a very accurate 3-dimensional 5mm mapping biopsy. These findings have implications for focal therapy and nerve-sparing surgery. Combined MP-07.11, Table 1 . Introduction and Objective: Rising PSA after initial negative prostate biopsy is a dilemma in daily urological practice. In the past years multiparametric MRI (mpMRI) has been used to stratify patient risk of having clinically significant prostate cancer (PCa) and is helpful in omitting unnecessary prostate biopsy. The aim of this analysis was to evaluate the significance of mpMRI on detecting prostate cancer on repeat biopsy if transperineal prostate mapping (TPM) technique is applied. Prospective clinical data of 72 patients with prior negative prostate biopsy and rising PSA level were collected. Patients underwent 1.5T mpMRI with subsequent 20 core transperineal prostate biopsy. Radiological examination was performed according PIRADS 2.0 version. Radiologist scores and location were matched with TPM histopathology of the prostate. The positive (PPV) and negative (NPV) predictive values of mpMRI for ruling out any PCa and clinical significant PCa were calculated. Results: PCa was detected in 37 (51.4%) and clinically significant PCa in 24 (33.3%) patients. Patient's median age at the time of TPM biopsy was (62.3±6.3), PSA (8.41±4.2) PSA density (0.203±0.18). Almost two thirds of patients underwent first repeat biopsy, 30.4% and 5.7% second and third repeat biopsy, respectively. Calculated PPV and NPV of mpMRI to detect PCa were 45.45% and 39.29% with specificity and sensitivity of 54.05% and 31.43% respectively. For clinically significant PCa PPV and NPV of mpMRI were smaller and reached 27.08% and 57.14% respectively, with sensitivity of 59.09% and specificity of 25.53%. Conclusion: TPM biopsies detect prostate cancer in over half of the patients with one or more initially negative prostate biopsies and mpMRI is helpful in identifying prostate lesions suggestive of cancer. and fusion biopsy consecutively (01/2015-01/2017). Only Patientis with a PIRADS-score (Version 1.0 + 2.0) III -V were included in this study. The fusion biopsy was used to obtain targeted cores from the region of interest (ROI) (mean 6.7 Biopsies) followed by a systematic biopsy (mean 8,6 biopsy). Biopsy cores were sent to the pathologist without specification of the PIRADS score and no information was given of where the cores were taken from. Clinical significant prostate cancer was defined by the Epstein criteria. Results: Among the 210 men 59 (28%) underwent first biopsy whereas 151 Patients (72%) underwent repeated biopsy. The median PSA level was 10.2 ng/ ml. The median prostate volume was 58 ml. The mean overall number of biopsies taken was 15.3. The median volume of the ROI was 2.9 ml. The overall cancer detection Rate was 52.9 % (111 pat). When stratified according to PI-RADS score V, IV and III detection rate was 86.4%, 51.6% and 18.9% respectively. Combing target and systemic biopsy resulted in a higher detection of Pca than one method alone. (Targeted-91% vs systematic 41%) 9% of cancers would have been missed by using the target biopsy only. Significant prostate cancer was found in 81% of the positive targeted biopsies and 30% of the positive systematic biopsies. Conclusions: The Real Time Trus/MRI Fusion Biopsy system -Biojet showed a reliable and reproducible higher detection rate than the systematic prostate biopsy alone while taking fewer cores. Targeted and systematic biopsy in combination detected more Pca than either modality alone. Insignificant prostate cancer was found only in 19% of the fusion biopsies. Due to the additional detection of Pca in the systemic biopsy it should be performed with a target biopsy. Introduction and Objective: Guideline recommendation for atypical small acinar proliferation (ASAP) diagnosed on prostate biopsy recommends repeat biopsy within 3-6 months after initial diagnosis. We wanted to discern the rate of detecting clinically significant prostate cancer (Gleason grade group ≥2) on subsequent biopsy as well as any predictors associated with progression using the 5 tier Gleason grade grouping system (GGGS). We performed a retrospective chart review of patients who underwent prostate biopsy at the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston from 2008 to 2015. GGGS and D' Amico risk stratification were used to report pathology and prostate cancer risk stratification, respectively. Regression analyses and mean comparisons were performed. Results: A total of 593 patients who underwent prostate needle biopsy were identified, of which 27 (4.6%) had the diagnosis of ASAP. Of these, 11 (41%) had a repeat biopsy. Median time from initial ASAP diag-37th CONGRESS OF THE SOCIÉTÉ INTERNATIONALE D'UROLOGIE -SIU 2017 ABSTRACT BOOK nosis to repeat biopsy was 147 days (IQR: 83.5-247.0). Of the 11 patients diagnosed with ASAP, distribution across the GGGS on follow-up biopsy is as follows: 7 (63.6%) benign, 3 (27.3%) GG1 prostate cancer and one (9.1%) GG2 prostate cancer. In a logistic regression analysis, ASAP was not associated with subsequent diagnosis of prostate cancer (OR=0.46, 95% CI: 0.064 to 3.247, p=0.432). In a linear regression analysis, there was no association between ASAP and classification of cancer risk (ASAP: β = -0.12; p=0.204). Conclusion: Patients diagnosed with ASAP on index biopsy managed according to NCCN recommendations are more likely diagnosed with benign pathology and clinically insignificant prostate cancer upon repeat biopsy. These findings support further external validation of the results in a large cohort of patients in order to discern the appropriateness and timeliness of repeat biopsy among patients diagnosed with ASAP. Economic Effectiveness of Urinary PCA3 Test in Cases of Serum PSA Level 4-10 Ng/Ml Introduction and Objective: PCA3 outperforms serum PSA in prostate cancer (PCa) detection. Biopsy decision in patients with serum PSA levels in the «grey zone» seems to be a difficult task. PCA3 can help in PCa diagnosis, but detection of urinary PCA3 expression is more expensive, than PSA test, and its use remains controversial. Previously we estimated the diagnostic performance of urinary PCA3 for patients with total PSA levels of 4-10 ng/ml. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the economic expediency of the real-time RT-PCRbased urinary PCA3 detection method used for PCa diagnosis in relation to its diagnostic efficacy in patients with serum PSA level between 4 and 10 ng/ml. An economic modeling was performed to compare 2 diagnostic strategies for prostate cancer detection in patients with serum PSA 4-10 ng/ml. The first strategy (I) was based on serum PSA, and implicated the rise of PSA level > 4 ng/ml as an indication for prostate biopsy. The second strategy (II) included an additional evaluation of PCA3 urine expression level in patients with elevated PSA > 4 ng/ml, and implicated PCA3 over expression as an indication for prostate biopsy. Model included 10000 patients with serum PSA level 4-10 ng/ml. In order to model biopsy outcomes in a simulated population, we used the data from 20984 biopsy specimens (from patients with serum PSA levels between 4 and 10 ng/ ml) study [Gilbert S.M. et al., 2005] . To simulate an amount of PCA3 true and false positive/negative cases, we used the values for urinary PCA3 sensitivity (73.5 %) and specificity (90.6 %), which we observed in a real sample of 66 patients with total PSA levels in the «grey zone», and a simulated data on biopsy outcomes. To calculate costs for prostate biopsy and PSA testing, we used prices of medical services contained in Russian mandatory health Insurance system tariffs. Costs were calculated in Russian currency. We also used the prime cost for PCA3 urine test, which was calculated in our previous study. The aim of this study is to show potential benefits of multiparametric MRI as a triage test in the diagnostic of prostate cancer. Materials and Methods: An mpMRI/TRUS fusion guided biopsy followed by systematic biopsy (12 cores) was performed in 132 biopsy naïve patients (age≤75 years, normal DRE). The mpMRI was performed on a 1.5T machine using surface and endorectal coil. The mean age of patients was 62 years. The mean PSA was 7.15 ng/ml. Overall detection rates and detection rates of clinically significant prostate cancer (CSPCA) were stratified according to PIRADS version 1 into 5 groups: MRI negative (PIRADS <3), PIRADS 3, 4, 5 and NA (MRI positive, no specific PI-RADS). CSPC was defined as: Gleason score> 6 or 3 and more positive biopsy cores or > 50% of cancer in a biopsy core. The number of avoidable biopsies and of missed prostate cancers was counted for significant and insignificant prostate cancer. A summary of detection rates is in the  Introduction and Objective: We assessed the association between metabolic health status and incidence of prostate cancer with the analysis using nationally representative data of the Korean population from the National Health Insurance System (NHIS) and national health screening examination (NHSE) database. : Of the 13 576 768 participants who underwent health examinations in 2009-2012, 139 519 men ≥40 years old and without prostate cancer were followed from the beginning of 2009 to the end of 2012. People with metabolically obese, normal-weight (MONW) individuals were defined as subjects with BMI <25 kg/m2 and developed ≥3 components of metabolic syndrome. Multivariate adjusted Cox regression analysis was conducted to examine the hazard ratio (HR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) for the association between metabolic health status and incidence of prostate cancer. Introduction and Objective: The role of adjuvant radiation therapy (ART) for patients with adverse pathologic features after radical prostatectomy (RP) has been demonstrated, but over-or undertreatment remains a significant concern. We aimed to identify optimal patients for ART in pT3 prostate cancer (PCa). Two hundred five patients with pT3N0M0 who underwent robot-assisted RP without ART were analyzed. Multivariate Cox proportional regression analyses were used to identify predictors of biochemical recurrence (BCR) and clinical progression (CP). Of these, one did not attend the follow up clinic and one died. Out of the remaining 61 patients, 13%, 10% and 77% patients were stratified into low, intermediate and high risk prostate cancer respectively. Of these 18% patients received standard treatment. Treatment options within this group included brachytherapy and active surveillance. The majority of patients underwent watchful waiting or received treatment with hormones and radiotherapy in the event of disease progression. However, a small proportion underwent active surveillance or active treatment, which may represent longer life expectancy or improved performance status but can also contribute to increase morbidity and healthcare costs. Introduction and Objective: Testosterone is known to have key involvement in urethral development. Although there are accepted risk factors for stricture formation, the true biological processes leading to stricture formation in some, while sparing others remain unclear. We aimed to evaluate a hypothesis previously put forth by McCullough and colleagues regarding an increased prevalence of low testosterone found in men with anterior urethral strictures, which could help explain stricture formation mechanisms. Using a prospectively maintained male urethral stricture database from February 2014 to March 2017, we identified all men treated for anterior urethral stricture. All men were offered serum total testosterone level check prior to urethral reconstruction by a single surgeon (DN). Patients with radiation-induced stricture, prior prostatectomy, prior urethroplasty or pelvic fracture urethral distraction injuries were excluded. A serum testosterone level of less than 300ng/dL was used to define low serum testosterone. An age-matched cohort from a national database (NHANES), were used as a reference. Results: Of the 104 men with anterior urethral strictures that met inclusion criteria, 78 (75%) agreed for pre-operative testosterone levels measured. Overall, low testosterone was found in 41/78 (53 %) men with anterior urethral strictures group and 27.5% of patients in the national database. Figure 1 describes the prevalence of low testosterone in our cohort and the NHANES database stratified by age group. Conclusions: Low serum testosterone is more common in patients with anterior urethral strictures than can be expected in the general population based on a national database. This difference is more striking with younger patients in the stricture cohort with unexpected high rates of low testosterone. Further investigation is warranted into the relationship between serum testosterone and anterior stricture formation. Introduction and Objectives: Despite its popularity, internal urethrotomy shows relatively high failure rates and can be challenging and frustrating for the surgeon. Tamoxifen is known to have anti-fibrinoplastic activity and has been used as off-label usage to treat other urologic disorders associated with fibrosis as Peyronies disease and retroperitoneal fibrosis. Tamoxifen was not used before to decrease urethral re-stricture rate after internal urethrotomy. Here in this study we firstly report use of Tamoxifen to decreses the re-fibrosis and stricture recurrence after internal urethrotomy. Between January 2015 to August 2017, 60 male patients between 18 to 67 years old (mean 43) underwent internal urethrotomy for post traumatic bulbar urethral stricture ≤1 cm. Cases were evaluated using uroflowmetry, ascending urethrogram and perineal ultrasonography preoperatively and at 3 and 6 months. They were divided into 2 equal groups (30 patients each). Tamoxifen group cases received tamoxifen 10 mg twice daily for 6 months after optical urethrotomy. The control group did not receive any medications after optical urethrotomy. Results: Stricture length was 10.3±6.5 and 9.75±4.12 mm for control and Tamoxifen group respectively. (P=0.495). Perineal ultrasonography revealed statistically significant differences in length and depth of spongiofibrosis between tamoxifen and control groups in 3 and 6 months intervals. During postoperative follow up, urethral stricture recurrence evident by ascending urethrography occurred after 3 months in 14 cases: 10 cases (33.3%) of control group and 4 cases (13.3%) in Tamoxifen group. The difference was statistically significant (P = 0.001). The re-stricture rate increased after 6 months to 19 patients: 13 patients (21.6%) in the control group and 6 patients (20%) in the Tamoxifen group. The difference was statistically significant (P = 0.001). There were no significant side effects associated with Tamoxifen therapy in this study. The use of Tamoxifen after internal urethrotomy seems to decrease the re-fibrosis and the stricture recurrence rate. Further larger well designed studies are needed to draw firm conclusions. MP-08.02, Figure 1 . Urethroplasty is undoubtedly the goldstandard curative treatment of bulbar urethral strictures. Nevertheless, endoscopic management is still widely practiced for new and recurrent strictures despite low rates of success in the longer term. We have looked at our practice to indentify those select patients who might benefit from endoscopic stricture management and the outcome of this treatment strategy. Materials and Methods: All cases of bulbar strictures managed endoscopically over a 12 month period in 2013 in a tertiary referral reconstructive urology unit were evaluated. Those with a minimum follow-up of 2 years were included. Results: Eighty endoscopic interventions for bulbar strictures (of varying etiology) were performed throughout this period during which 57 bulbar urethroplasties were also carried out. All were urethral dilatations using serial dilators over a nitinol-core floppy tipped guidewire. In 19 patients (24%) this was a primary treatment while the rest had undergone between 1 and 15 previous endoscopic interventions. Thirty five of them (44.9%) had undergone at least one intervention in the preceding 12 month. Dilatation was performed most commonly as a temporising measure to control symptoms while waiting for their urethroplasty, in 21 patients (26.3%). Other indications were: patient choice (n=17; 21.3%), patient unfit for urethroplasty (n=14; 17.5%), as part of an interval dilatation regime (n=15; 18.8%), as an emergency with patient in urinary retention (n=4; 5%) and for a recurrent stricture post-urethroplasty (n=5; 6.3%). Four cases (5%) were deemed unreconstructable.Two patients experienced complications (2.5%). Only 6 patients (7.5%) having their first dilatation required no further intervention. Of the whole cohort, 16 patients (20%) required no further intervention, 21 (26%) went on to have an urethroplasty, 25 (31%) required further dilatations and 18 (23%) started/continued self-dilatation. Conclusion: Even in a high-volume urethroplasty centre, urethral dilatation is still performed fairly regularly albeit in a select patient population, well in the knowledge that more often than not this will need to be repeated at varying intervals in future. The Positive Impact of Subspecialist and January 2016 has been analysed. Hypospadias related strictures were excluded as these are a complex, heterogenous group but all other patients were included in an intention to treat manner. Patient characteristics, stricture related information and outcomes were recorded and analysed. The primary outcome was success rates before and after subspecialist training in urethral reconstruction. Success was defined as uroflowmetry more than 15mls/s and no surgical intervention. Subspecialist training in urethral reconstruction at a high volume centre of excellence was undertaken in January 2013, constituting a significant intervention with changes in pre, peri and post-operative patient management. Result: Data from all 267 patients treated with open urethral reconstruction during this period were included in this study with 85 patients in period before training (Group I) and 182 in period after training (Group II). Both groups were uniform with respect to age, co-morbidities and aetiology of urethral stricture. There was significant difference in success between the groups I and II (62.3% % (53/85) Vs 85.2% (155/182)). Conclusions: Subspecialist training in urethral reconstruction at a high volume centre of excellence has a significant positive impact on outcomes. Introduction Results: All patients underwent clinical assessment, flow rate studies and urethrograms prospectively. Clinically, 116 patients were happy with the result of their surgery, 2 were unhappy (but had normal flow rates) and there were 4 failures, all of whom underwent revisional surgery. Three patients were lost to follow-up. The mean postoperative peak flow rate was 34.9mls per second, in 102 patients; 7 patients had flow rates of less than 15mls per second, including the 4 failures; 3 patients voided less than 100mls and were therefore not assessable and 13 patients refused a flow rate study or were lost to follow-up (n=3). On retrograde urethrogram, 120 were normal; 1 had a slightly reduced calibre but had a normal flow rate; there were 4 recurrent strictures; and 9 refused or were lost to follow-up (n=3). Overall 118 of 122 patients (96%) were a success by all criteria: clinically, by flow rate study and objectively. The non-transecting approach to bulbar urethroplasty gives results that are at least as good as previously reported for excision and primary anastomosis or augmented anastomotic urethroplasty or dorsal patch urethroplasty. The increasingly widespread use of this procedure is therefore entirely justified. Introduction between 2012 and 2016. Thirteen patients were identified. All patients had severe urethral strictures that were solved with an OMG to rebuild the dorsal plate, and a FTPSG that was placed lateral to the oral graft in a first stage. In the next surgical step, a flap with the FTPSG was tailored and rotated above the OMG to reconstruct the urethral lumen. The stricture etiology was iatrogenic in 7 cases (53.8%), Idiopatic in 3 (23%) cases and traumatic in 3 cases (23%). Multiple previous urethral manipulations were indentified in 12 patients: dilatations (9), endoscopic treatments (6) and previous urethroplasty (5). One patient developed a perineal abscess after the urethral instrumentation. The mean stricture length was 7.9 cm (5 -15 cm). The patients remained with a 14Fr urethral catheter and cystostomy for 21 days after the second surgery. Four patients presented postoperatory complication, one of them was graded IIIa (Clavien-Dindo). Urethral reconstruction was completed and successful in 10 cases (91%) with a mean of 15.9 months (7-60) of follow-up. Two patients remained with a perineal urethrostomy and refused to perform the second stage surgery. In one patient the stricture recurred and a primary anastomosis was performed (24 months of followup).  The recurrence was noted as either proximal anastomotic stricture or disruption of the BMG. Overall 66 patients (30%) showed recurrence needing some form of intervention. These patients were further stratified to see the possible reasons for the failure. They were smoking/tobacco use in 33 (50%), proximal location of stricture (proximal bulb or bulbomembranous) in 11 (17%) and postoperative wound infection and/or significant pyrexia in 7 (11%). Exact cause could not be identified in 15 (22%). These factors were compared with control group (patients without any of these factors). The results showed that recurrence was noted in 53% of smokers/tobacco users compared to only 4% of nonsmokers, in 57% with proximal (bulbomembranous) location compared to 2.5% with distal location and in 63% with postoperative infection/pyrexia compared to 2% patients without postoperative sepsis. Conclusion: BMG is currently the best material available in substitution urethroplasty; however a careful attention is required to address the causes leading to failure, in order to improve outcome. In this observational study we found smoking/tobacco use, location of stricture and postoperative infection to be the possible significant factors. The Results: Seventy patients with an average age of 54.5 years (22-84) were evaluated. Median follow up length was 48.5 months (2.8-120.5). The most frequent cause of stricture was previous instrumentation (54.3%) and the location was penile urethra (64.3%). Urethral stricture average length was 4 cm (0.5-12). The graft most used was oral mucosa with 51.4%, followed by the preputial graft in 48.6%. At moment of phone call, 75.7% are very satisfied, 11.4% are satisfied, 10% unsatisfied and 1.4% very unsatisfied. They were unsatisfied or very unsatisfied with the outcome of their operation because the urinary condition did not improve in 5.9%, the urinary condition improved but there was some other problem in 2.9% and the urinary condition did not improve and there was some other problem as well in 2.9%. 84.2% qualified their health status greater than or equal to 70/100 points. The urethral reconstruction performed in reference centers with trained specialists, shows a high positive impact on the quality of life in patients, with good results in short, medium and long term monitoring. Prospective Patient-Centred Evaluation of Urethroplasty The objective is to evaluate urethral reconstruction from the patient's perspective using PROM and to assess the responsiveness of erectile function following surgery. Currently only one validated PROM exists following male anterior urethroplasty evaluating voiding symptoms and HRQoL. The men who undergo urethroplasty for urethral stricture (USS) have great concern for erectile function also. Other than USS-PROM, we also assess the erectile function in the background of USS. Results: Thirty nine studies, a total of 4559 urethral stricture patients, were included. Most studies were retrospective case series but small parts were prospective. The study qualities were not high based on the JBI's instrument. The pooled analysis suggested: (1) Urethral strictures were common in PFUDD or iatrogenic injury. (2)The urethral stricture locations and lengths were diagnosed through objective urethrography in 16 studies. (3)The incidence of ED after anterior and posterior urethral reconstructions was 4% MP-08.19, Figure 1 . LUTS Median with Interquartile Difference at Baseline, 6 Month and 1 Year and 21.3%, respectively. The improvement of ejaculatory function in posterior urethral stricture was more significant. The post-operation EF decreased in pos-terior urethral stricture significantly. (4) The end to end anastomosis and graft replacement were the most commonly used, and the incidence of postoperative ED was 20% and 13.4%, respectively. (5)The effects of preoperative complications and sexual function, surgical experience and surgical technique quality could not be evaluated due to insufficient data. (7) Most postoperative sexual outcomes were evaluated by IIEF-5 and SHIM. 16 studies were followed up for more than 12 months. The sexual outcomes of urethral reconstruction patients were multifactorial and exact weights were unclear. The sexual dysfunction may be correlated with the location of stricture and operation mode of choice. More rigorousclinical studies included case series are needed, and the outcomes and study papers should be reported standardly according to the SCARE Statement. Non-Urethral Complications following Hypospadias Repair (46) and trapped penis (31). Some of the patients had two or more complications at the same time. Radical approach was used to correct all deformities and to achieve satisfactory outcome. Glans deformity was repaired in 28 patients by creation of conically shaped glans after making of wide glans wings, while in 6 cases "double face" skin flap was used to enlarge small and deformed glans. Residual curvature was repaired by tunical plication in all cases, while in 24 cases additional urethral reconstruction was needed. Trapped penis was a result of penile skin deficiency due to inappropriate surgical treatment. Quality and elasticity of remaining penile skin was reevaluated before reconstruction, with special attention to impaired blood supply. Vascularized genital skin flaps or free skin grafts were applied for complete covering of erected penile body. Results: Follow up was 6 to 171 months (mean 63). Seventy six patients were successfully solved in one stage while fifteen patients (16%) required additional surgical treatment for successful repair of non-urethral complications. Nine patients underwent repeated penile skin reconstruction due to severe scar formation and six patients underwent repeated correction of the penile curvature due to its late onset. Results: A total of 265 patients (group 1: 88, group 2: 88, group 3:89) were eligible for final analysis. Baseline characteristics were similar between three groups. SIRS was recorded in 8 (9.1%), 3 (3.4%) and 1(1.2%) patients in group 1, 2, 3, respectively. In subgroup analysis, SIRS occurred respectively in 5.0%, 5.1% and 0% of patients with stones ≤ 200mm2 (P=0.257); for stones> 200mm2, low rates of SIRS were still observed in group 2 (0%) and group 3 (2.7%), however, 17.9% were developed in group 1 (P=0.011). No urosepsis were developed in any groups. Conclusions: RIRS without antibiotic prophylaxis is safe for low-risk patients with stones ≤200mm2, and prophylactic antibiotics are not recommended for those patients. However, single dose prophylaxis seems necessary and sufficient for patients with stones>200mm2. Worldwide Use of Anti-Retropulsive Techniques: Observations from the CROES Ureteroscopy Global Study Saussine C 1 , Andonian S 2 , Pacik D 3 , Popiolek M 4 , Celia A 5 , Buchholz N 6 , Sountoulides P 7 , Petrut B 8 , de la Rosette J 9 1 Introduction and Objective: Retropulsion, defined as the intended or unintended migration of a stone under the influence of the fragmentation device in URS procedures, occurs in 2-60% of the cases. Anti-retropulsive devices have been studied in experimental and small clinical studies. Current study aims to describe the worldwide use and consequences of anti-retropulsive devices usage. The CROES URS Global study examined 11885 patients whom underwent a URS procedure for ureteral and renal stones. Out of the 11885 treated patients, 9877 were treated for ureteral stones, and had known information on migration and anti-retropulsive device use. Results: 14.5% of the URS procedures is performed with the use of an anti-retropulsive device. Less migration (-1.7%), higher stone free rates (2.6%), more complications (1.6%), and shorter length of stay (-3.0%) are observed in patients treated with the use of an anti-retropulsive device, compared to those not treated with an anti-retropulsive device. Conclusion: When an anti-retropulsive device is used, less migration, higher stone free rates, more complications, and shorter length of hospital stay are observed, compared to those not treated with an anti-retropulsive device. This effect is independent from baseline differences and corrected for other treatment characteristics. Complications and Learning Curve of Flexible Ureteroscopic Lithotripsy in 1000 Consecutive Cases Introduction and Objective: The flexible ureterorenoscope (URS) and associated devices have developed rapidly. However, despite its therapeutic benefits, it may be associated with serious complications. The aims of this study are to assess learning curve effect of the complications and inaccessible ureter of the flexible ureterorenoscope. A retrospective review of the records of 1000 cases that underwent flexURS from April 2010 to August 2016 was performed. To compare the complications and inaccessible ureter after introduction of flexURS, the patients were divided into five groups (First 200 to Fifth 200, respectively) . The complications were classified using the Clavien system (1 to 5). Statistical analysis was performed using the X2 test (SPSS Statistics 20). If the stone at a distal ureteral lesion was inaccessible with the ureteroscope, the ureteral stent was left in place without active dilation. URS lithotripsy was then attempted again about 2 weeks later. The mean operation time, stone-free rate were significantly different (p<0.001, p=0.013, respectively). The total Clavien grade 3-5 complication rates were 8%, 4.5%, 3%, 3% and 2%, respectively (p=0.005). The complication rate tended to decrease gradually with increasing surgeon's experience. Despite our best efforts, the incidence of urosepsis was not reduced (p=0.451). The rates of inaccessible ureter were 3.5%, 1.5%, 1%, 1% and 0.5%. All affected ureters were then sufficiently dilated to pass the ureteroscope by stenting, and the second URS lithotripsy was successfully completed in all patients. Results: The mean Guys score was 1.92±0.6, and mean STONE score was 6.38±1.07.There was strong correlation between Guys stone score and stone free rate (p 0.02).However operative time was not significantly different between the Guys score groups (p 0.55).Similarly Guys score was not strongly related to hospital stay differences (p 0.09).However the difference of complications between Guys stone score groups were significant (p 0.023). On the contrary STONE score was not significantly different between stone free and stone failure groups. Similarly perioperative outcomes, operative time, hospital stay and complication rates were not significantly different between the STONE score groups (p 0.07, 0.42, 0.07). Conclusion: It was found that Guys stone score was strongly correlated with stone free rates and complications. Interestingly there was very weak correlation between STONE nephrolithometry scoring system and stone free rates and complications.Further studies are needed for efffectiveness of these scores. Concordance between Preoperative and Intraoperative Urine Culture in PCNL  ing positions was observed in group G and group C, with significant difference in intra-group (P<0.05). Postoperative nausea and vomiting was observed in 8 and 2 patients of group G and group P, respectively (P<0.05). Postoperative pain was observed in 2 and 7 patients of group C and group P, respectively (P>0.05). In addition, group P had with the early eating time post operation, shorter hospitalized day and lower hospitalized expense compared with other groups(P<0.05). Introduction and Objective: Two in the European Association of Urology (EAU) Guidelines on Urolithiasis, SWL and RIRS are suggested equally as treatment methods for renal stones less than 2 cm diameter, but for stones larger than 2 cm, PCNL is recommended as the first-line treatment. Based on these results, in 2014, Zheng et al. published a meta-analysis comparing the effects of RIRS and PCNL for renal stones larger than 2 cm. This study includes additional articles published since 2014 and a re-analysis of stone-free rates, with statistical verification. Randomized controlled trials comparing RIRS and PCNL for >2 cm stones were identified from electronic databases. Once the final group of articles was agreed upon, two researchers independently examined the quality of each article using the Downs and Black checklist. Stone-free rates for the procedures were compared by qualitative and quantitative syntheses (meta-analyses). Outcome variables are shown as risk ratios (RRs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Results: Eleven articles were included in this study. Most recently published studies exhibited relatively low quality during quality assessment. For the meta-analysis comparing success (stone-free) rates between PCNL and RIRS, the forest plot using the random-effects model showed an RR of 1.11 (95% CI, 1.02-1.21; P<0.014) favoring PCNL (Fig 1) . After determining the among-study heterogeneity, subgroup analysis was performed of nine studies with less heterogeneity: the stone-free rate of PCNL was superior to that of RIRS using a fixed-effect model (RR, 1.07; 95% CI, 1.01-1.14; P<0.019) for these studies. Conclusions: RIRS can be a safe and effective procedure for selected patients with large renal stones. However, in this meta-analysis, the postoperative stone-free rate of PCNL was higher than that of RIRS in patients with >2 cm renal stones. The  Effect of Body Mass Index on Outcome of Percutaneous Nephrolithotomy: Single Center Study Introduction and Objective: Several studies have indicated that obesity is an independent risk factor for surgical and anesthetic complications. Our objective in this study was to compare outcomes and complications of PCNL in patients of various body mass indices (BMI). All patients included were of age more than 18 years old. They were divided into three groups of BMI. There were 91 patients in normal weight (18.5 to 24.9 kg/m2), 146 overweight (24.9-29.9 kg/m2) and 82 patients in obese group (more than 30 kg/m2). All patients had to undergo preoperative evaluation with X-Ray KUB, Non contrast CT scan and Ultrasound KUB, complete blood picture, serum biochemistry, renal function tests, and PT /APTT and urine culture tests. Consent was taken from them and PCNL was done by standard technique. Patient's records were checked from charts and they were analyzed for mean age, mean operative time, mean hospital stay, stone clearance rates and post operative complications. SPSS 16 was used for data analysis. Frequency was used for qualitative variables while mean ± SD was calculated for quantitative variables like age, mean operative time etc.  Analysis of Outcomes of Surgical Intervention and Metabolic Evaluation in Pediatric Renal Stone Disease Introduction and Objective: The incidence of nephrolithiasis is known to be high in the Saurashtra and Kutch region of Gujarat in India. PCNL has been accepted as a well-established, minimally invasive procedure in children.The metabolic evaluation for urolithiasis helps us to identify children who are at increased risk for recurrent stone disease and also to diagnose specific treatable metabolic derangements. Objective of study to assess the outcomes of surgical intervention in pediatric renal stone diseases & to assess the metabolic abnormalities in pediatric renal stone diseases. Between April 2014 and April 2016, total 50 patients (below 18 yrs of age) were enrolled in study. All preoperative workup was done. PCNL procedure was done and stones were sent for analysis. Patients follow up after one month of Double J stent removal was done for 24 hours/ Spot urine analysis. Results: Most common intra operative complications was bleeding in 5 patients (10%). Mean operative time was 51.6 minutes. Most common post operative complication was haematuria in 9 patients (18%). Complete stone clearance was achieved in 47 patients (94%). Mixed stones containing Calcium Oxalate Monohydrate and Calcium Oxalate Dihydrate are most common stones on analysis. On 24 hours/spot urine analysis, 27 patients (54%) were found to have hypercalciuria as a most common and 12 patients (24%) had hypocitrateuria as least common metabolic abnormality in urine. Conclusion: Percutaneous nephrolithotomy is safe procedure for pediatric renal stone diseases. Calcium oxalate monohydrate and dihydrate are most common stone composition. Hypercalciuria and hyperoxaluria were the most common metabolic abnormalities for renal calculus formation in our pediatric patients. Introduction and Objective: Urolithiasis in transplanted kidneys (UTK) is a rare condition, usually incidentally diagnosed, that can lead to urinary tract infections (UTI), obstruction and graft loss, ultimately. This project aims to assess the efficacy and safety of graft percutaneous nephrolithotomy (G-PCNL). . Median follow-up time is 3.2 years (range 1.0-14.9 years): UTK recurred in 2 patients but did not meet surgical criteria. Conclusion: UTK can lead to substantial morbidity, albeit a rare condition. In most patients, it is a silent problem that must be promptly and properly managed, as for solitary kidneys in general. G-PCNL is a safe and effective method associated with a high overall stone-free rate in one procedure in most instances. This approach should be considered in proficient centres. Visualization of a fiducial gold marker is critical for registration on computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for imaging-guided radiotherapy. While bigger markers have better visualization on MRI, they tend to generate artifacts on CT. Moreover, they are associated with more pain at insertion. In this study, we compared the use of a new iron-containing marker with that of a non-iron-containing marker. Twenty-one patients underwent CT/MRI fusion-based intensity modulated radiotherapy. Markers were placed by urologists and they evaluated pain and bleeding. Gold Anchor™ (GA; diameter: 0.28 mm; length: 10 mm), an iron-containing marker, was placed on the right side of the prostate using a 22-G needle. VISICOIL™ (VIS) (diameter: 0.35 mm; length: 10 mm) was placed on the left side of the prostate using a 19-G needle under local anesthesia. T2*-weighted images MRI sequences were used. One radiation oncologist and one radiation technologist evaluated and assigned five points (1 is poor to 5 is best visible) scores for visual quality. Results: Artifact generation on CT was slightly increased with GA compared with that with VIS. Visualization of GA marker on MRI imaging of prostate was superior to that of VIS (mean score: GA; 4.5 and VIS; 2.3 by observer 1, and GA;4.5 and VIS 2.6 by observer 2) significantly. .The actual size of spherical GA was 2 mm in diameter, but the signal void on MRI was about 5 mm. No severe pain and bleeding were found without astriction after insertion. The iron-containing marker was strongly visualized in terms of signal void on MRI by both observers, and using 22G caused no severe pain or bleeding. We recommend using the iron-containing marker, which helps in the detection of markers in the prostate. Development Conclusion: Men between 45-54 years undergoing RP had better overall survival compared to men between 55 and 74 but these effects were not seen in men between the ages of 35-44 years. There were no differences in prostate cancer specific survival in these groups. Oncologic year is 6.7%. Those who reach the 2nd year of surgery without recurrence have a relapse probability of 4%, (cumulative probability of 9.8%) That probability falls to 3.5% after the 3rd year (cumulative probability 13%), 2% after the 4th year (cumulative probability of 15%) and is 2.1% after the 5th year (cumulative probability 17%). After 10 years of follow-up without recurrence, the subsequent probability of relapse is 0.8%, (cumulative probability 21%). A total of 92 (1.48%) patients (80 LARP and 12 RARP) died of disease. Among patients with BCR, those who recur within the first three years of follow-up had higher CSM (9% vs 4% for BCR after 3 years; p 0.04). We found a 50% decrease in BCR probability in patients who had not recurred with the first 3 years. Similar drop was identified for CSM. This is not only useful for patients counseling but also to optimize postoperative follow-up strategies. Prospective and 298 men undergoing LBND with TPWR and Ven velthoven continuous suturing (group 2). Preand postoperative urinary function and continence recovery were evaluated and compared between the two groups. The overall positive margin rate was lower in group 2 with 11.2% and 15.6% for group 1 (p=0.045). Early removal of Foley catheter less than at POD 7th was seen in 73.8% in group 2 whereas only 16.2 % was seen in group 1. Postoperative continence was evaluated by EPIC short form questionnaire. At POD 1 and 6 months, the mean urinary function scores were higher in group 2 compared to group 1 with statistical significance (p=0.031 at 1month, p=0.043 at 6 months). Group 2 showed significantly higher continence rates at 1 and 6 months post-RALP than group 1. In group 2, the recovery of continence approached to 87.2% at postoperative 6 months showing early return of continence. IRE was significantly superior to RARP at 1.5, 3, 6 months in preserving UC and ESI. The absolute differences were 44%, 22%, 11% and 14% for UC and 34%, 46%, 27% and 25% for ESI at 1.5, 3, 6 and 12 months, respectively. At 12 months the absolute difference for UC and ESI was not significant due to the low response rate. All EPIC summary scores did not show any statistically significant difference at 1.5, 3, 6 and 12 months, except for sexual summary score at 6 months. IRE patients had a higher AUA symptom score at 1.5, 3 and 6 months. At 12 months this improved to a lower score than pre-IRE. RARP patients showed more physical complaints after surgery at 6 weeks on the SF-12 survey. Conclusions: Short-term preservation of urinary continence and erectile function is superior with IRE compared to RARP. International registries may provide longer follow-up to establish the oncological outcomes following IRE versus RARP. Introduction and Objective: In recent years, the comparative studies for low risk prostate cancer patients with delayed radical prostatectomy after active surveillance (DRPAS) or immediate radical prostatectomy (IRP) has been reported, but it has been reported rarely in Korea. Therefore, we compared the unfavorable disease risk following DRPAS and IRP. Conclusions: Presence of hypoechoic lesion on preoperative ultrasonography warrants higher likelihood of disease reclassification in patients on AS. However, presence of chronic inflammation at initial biopsy is associated with a significant decrease in the risk of disease reclassification. These factors might be of value in determining follow up strategy in patients on AS. Introduction and Objective: Recently, a new prostate cancer (PC) grading system has been introduced, where Gleason score (GS) 7(3+4) and GS 7(4+3) are categorized into grade group (GG) 2 and 3, respectively. However, whether downgrading and upgrading from needle biopsy (NB) to radical prostatectomy (RP) affects oncologic outcomes is currently unknown. Here, we investigated the prognostic impact of downgrading and upgrading from biopsy to radical prostatectomy in the new classification. We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of 3253 patients with localized (pT2−3N0M0) PC who underwent RP at our institution between 1995 and 2014. We identified 739 patients with GS 7 PC on both NB and RP specimens. After exclusion of patients who had received neoadjuvant or adjuvant treatment (i.e., radiation, androgen deprivation therapy, or both) and those with incomplete pathological or follow-up data, 692 men were included in the final analysis. We analyzed data using Kaplan-Meier methods with log-rank tests and multivariate Cox regression models.  Introduction and Objective: Urethral injury in girls accompanying fracture of the pelvis is rare and difficulty for treatment. We present our experience with 20 complex cases and to determine appropriate management. Between Janury 2009 and December 2015, a total of 20 girls, mean age 9.5 years (range 3~14 years), of posttraumatic urethral stricture associated with urethrovaginal fistula were treated using a variety of procedures. A large hydrocolpos of proximal vagina because of severe stenosis of the distant vagina was in 6 girls. Results: Of the 20 girls, 16 had undergone suprapubic cystostomy as initial treatment, whereas in 6 primary repairs had failed. Urethral reconstruction using a bladder flap tube was performed in 5 girls with total urethral loss, labial pedicle flap or vulvar flap urethroplasty in 11, vaginal flap urethroplasty in 4. Supplementary procedures were performed in 6 patients with severe stricture of distant vagina during urethroplasty, including colpoplasty using island vulvar skin flaps in 3 patients, enlargement of the distant vagina using severe hydrocolpos in proximal vagina in 3 patients. The overall anatomical success rate was 90% (18 of 20 cases). The functional success rate was 75% (15 of 20). The treatment of posttraumatic urethral injury accompanying pelvic fracture in girls is difficulty. Surgical procedures for treating urethral strictures or loss with urethrovaginal fistulas in girls should be based on fistula location, stricture length and vaginal anatomy. Pelvic Fracture Urethral Injury - Of the work/recreational group, 23 were LC, 11 were OB and 4 were VS. The remaining 4 patients were unclassifiable in this simple way. Of the 69 lateral compression fractures, 34 followed non-crush while 22 followed crush-type injuries. The other 13 were not easily classifiable. Of the 34 non-crush injuries: 30 were car injuries, 2 were pedestrians and 2 were work injuries. Of the 22 crush injuries: 1 was a car injury, 18 were pedestrian injuries and 3 were work injuries. The surgery in these patients was step 1 -mobilisation and anastomosis -in 7%, step 2 -crural separation -in 52.5%, step 3 -inferior pubectomy -in 15%; and step 4 -supra-crural re-routing -in 17.5%. Other procedures were used in 8%. The success rate of surgery deteriorated from 95% for step 1 to 84% for Step 4 with each successive step. Sixty percent of the step 3 cases and 67% of the step 4 patients were crush injuries. Conclusion: Car drivers and passengers tended to have less serious injuries and better outcome mainly because LC fractures seemed to cause less local pelvic trauma and were associated with shorter defects to bridge. Specifically there was an 88% chance that the injury would be a non-crush LC injury causing an incomplete rupture with a 92% chance that it can be treated by a step 1 or step 2 BPA. Introduction and Objectives: Posterior urethral distraction defects are severe injuries and associated with 10% of pelvic fractures. Primary repair of pelvic fracture urethral injuries (PFUI) has a high success rate in hands of experienced surgeons. While redo anastomotic urethroplasty after failed primary repair is usually surgically feasible with still high success rate, a second or more failure of posterior urethroplasty for PFUI is expected to be difficult and technically demanding. Findings, treatment options and outcomes for those cases are discussed in this study. We have retrospectively reviewed all patients with PFUI and failed 2 or more urethroplasties referred to our center from 2012 to 2016. Preoperative work up included retrograde urethrography, micturiting cystourethrography, penile Doppler, urine analysis and culture. 3-D computed tomography for the bony pelvis and magnetic resonance urethrography were done in selected cases. Failure of surgery was considered with decreased urine flow, radiological evidence of recurrent stricture and/or need for further surgery or instrumentation Results: Out of 61 patients with 2 or more failed urethroplasties included in our study, 56 patients had complete follow up regarding urinary flow and urethral patency. They had age range from 12 to 61 years with a mean of 30.5 years and stricture/gap length from 1 to 10 cm with a mean of 4.85 cm. Fol-37th CONGRESS OF THE SOCIÉTÉ INTERNATIONALE D'UROLOGIE -SIU 2017 ABSTRACT BOOK low up period extended from 6 to 48 months. Three main findings were found: inadequate mobilization of bulbar urethra, incomplete scar excision and need for inferior pubecomy. In addition, bulbar shortening including bulbar necrosis was found in 23.2% of the cases, a percentage higher than that found in primary or one redo cases. Operative procedures done included 4 different procedures; anastomotic urethroplasty (n=37), substitution urethroplasty (n=13), diverticulectomy (n=4) and LASER urethrotomy (n=2). The overall success rate was 79 %, similar to our success rates of primary and one redo cases. Conclusions: PFUI with failed 2 or more urethroplasties are more commonly associated with bulbar shortening that requires circumferential urethral substitution. Redo posterior urethroplasty should be always done by expert reconstructive urologists in tertiary centers to achieve high success rates for such complicated cases. Introduction and Objective: Incorrect Open or endoscopic surgeries for pelvic fracture urethral injuries (PFUI) can lead to false pathway away from the normal semen and urine passages. It can result in urinary incontinence and/or ejaculatory disorder. Herein, we report four referred cases of operated PFUI in whom previous surgery created abnormal track for urine, away from prostatic urethra. We discussed the diagnosis, scheme of management and value of restoring the normal anatomy. This report included 4 patients who suffered PFUI. They had previous attempts of perineal urethroplasty in 2 cases and multiple endoscopic treatments in the other 2 cases. All patients presented with urinary incontinence, pain on ejaculation and poor urine flow. Preoperative evaluation included retrograde urethrography, micturiting urethrogarphy, urethrocystoscopy and magnetic resonance urethrography to identify the false pathway and plan curative urethroplasty to attain normal voiding tract. Postoperative follow up included uroflow, semen analysis and retrograde urethrography. Results: Pre and intraoperative evaluation revealed that those patients were voiding through abnormal tract bypassing the posterior urethra and sphincter mechanism. In 2 patients, the bulbar urethra was anastomosed to bladder directly away from bladder neckand prostate. In the other 2 patients, a false passage was created endoscopically between the bulbar urethra and bladder through prostatic tissue. In all patients, posterior urethroplasty was achieved properly through perineal incision anastomosing bulbar urethra to prostatic urethra. False passages were excised and closed in layers. All patients achieved good urine flow and were continent on catheter removal. Semen ejaculation was normal. Postoperative urethrogram showed normal urethrographic picture. Conclusions: Redo posterior urethroplasty should be always attempted to restore the normal anatomical course of urethra in patients with abnormally created urinary pathway. Suprapubic cystourethroscopy should be performed to identify the false passage from the true prostatic urethra. Restoring the normal urine pathway regains continence, ejaculatory function and good urine flow. Voiding Dysfunction after Successful Anastomotic Urethroplasty for Pelvic Fracture Urethral Injury Desai D, Joshi P, Surana S, Orabi H, Kulkarni S Introduction and Objective: Anastomotic urethroplasty is the standard of care for Pelvic fracture urethral injuries (PFUI) undergoing definitive surgical management. There are a select group of patients who despite having a successful anastomotic urethroplasty have postoperative voiding dysfunction due to unrecognized neurogenic bladder injury. Our study aims to evaluate these patients and identify clinical signs to predict these injuries. Our institute is a tertiary referral center for reconstructive urology cases. We have performed 1064 anastomotic urethroplasty in the last two decades. We retrospectively evaluated our prospectively maintained database. Inclusion criteria were patients with PFUI who underwent a successful anastomotic urethroplasty with postoperative voiding dysfunction. Success of anastomotic urethroplasty was determined by a retrograde urethrogram (RGU) and endoscopic evaluation. Voiding dysfunction was defined as patients with poor urine flow. We performed urodynamics (UDS) on each of these patients. Results: Our series included 6 male patients (average age 27 years) who had PFUI secondary to road traffic accident. All patients underwent progressive perineal anastomotic urethroplasty for PFUI (all required step 3 anastomotic urethroplasty). Postoperatively these patients had poor flow after catheter removal. A RGU and endoscopy revealed a patent anastomosis. UDS showed neurogenic detrusor underactivity. There were variable occurrences of other lower motor neuron findings such as muscle atrophy, fasciculations, sensory loss, areflexia and fecal incontinence. The common factor was that all patients had a foot drop on preoperative clinical examination. S2.3 nerve roots supply both the foot and bladder. Neurogenic damage to bladder is not evidenced till the urethral anastomosis is performed as all these patients have a suprapubic catheter draining their bladder. Foot drop is a simple clinical sign to predict the possibility of neurogenic bladder dysfunction. Conclusions: Coexistent neurogenic bladder injury with PFUI is rare but is of paramount importance predicting outcome. Our study highlights that the presence of foot drop and other lower motor neuron signs in patients with PFUI is a predictor for voiding dysfunction due to coexistent neurogenic bladder. We recommend that these patients should have urodynamics prior to surgical repair and must be counselled accordingly. Outcomes of Perineal Anastomotic Urethroplasty for Posterior Urethral Distraction Injuries Seen at the Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital, Kumasi Introduction and Objective: In a developing country such as Ghana, pelvic fractures from motor vehicular accidents with its attendant posterior urethral distraction injuries are common and management of these injuries poses a great challenge to the urologist. The objective is to evaluate the long-term outcomes of perineal anastomotic urethroplasty for posterior urethral distraction injuries at Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital (Kath), Kumasi. Between January 2012 and October 2016, a total of 29 perineal anastomotic urethroplasties were done for posterior urethral distraction injuries at the Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital by one urologist. A database which included patient's age, aetiology, time interval between injury and last surgery, previous urethral manipulations, length of defect and operation time, was kept prospectively for all 29 patients. Results: The mean age was 45.3 years with a range of 9-49. Motor vehicular accidents accounted for 65.5% of the injuries while 20.7% were as a result of falls from heights and 13.8% had objects falling on them with associated pelvic fractures. The percentage of patients who had previous urethral manipulations (secondary cases) were 48.3% as against 51.7% of new cases without prior manipulations. Urethral manipulation consisted of urethroplasty and DVIU following a failed urethroplasty. Fourteen patients had failed perineal anastomotic urethroplasty prior to entry into this series. Of these patients, seven had 1, five had 2 and two had 3 previous failed attempts at anastomotic perineal urethroplasty before referral to Kath. The length of distraction defects ranged from 1.0cm to 5.9cm with a mean of 2.5cm. The mean duration of symptoms from injury to the last repair was 16 months (range 1-99). The mean operation time was 144.6 minutes. The overall success rate in this series was 93.1% with a mean follow up of 33.5 months (range 6-58). Conclusion: Perineal anastomotic urethroplasty for post-traumatic posterior urethral distraction defects has a high long-term success rate even in a developing country. There was no significant difference in terms of outcome between primary and secondary cases. Indications (1-2cm) , the suture was placed on the line of the incision. This suture devided the orifice into two parts. In addition to antireflux protection, in 18 (10.3 %) patients, we used plication stitches on contra mesenteric margin of the intestinal segment. This technique straightens the graft and prevents reflux development. Long-term complications included: stenosis of uretero-ileal anastomosis in 3 (1.7%) patients, stenosis of ileo-vesical anastomosis -6 (3.5%), loss of kidney function -4 (2.3%), metabolic acidosis -4 (2.3%). Vesico-ureteral reflux with intravesical cuff was seen in 41 (36.6%) patients, with intravesical cuff and divided orifice -8 (13.3%) (X2 = 13; p<0.01). Intestinal plastics of the ureter with antireflux protection are effective method of urinary tract recovery in patients with extended ureteral lesions. The cuff and suture dividing the intestinal orifice into two parts acts as a valve to eliminate vesico-intestinal reflux. Ileal Neoureter: A Urinary Tract Reconstruction Alternative Surgical Technique Gonzalez M, Nolazco J, Zubieta ME, Favre G, Tejerizo JC Introduction and Objective: Urinary tract reconstruction surgery in patients with medial ureter injury can be a challenge for the urologist.The ileal interposition is a valid option for ureteral reconstruction, when it is not possible to perform another technique. In the last decades, endoscopic procedures have led to iatrogenic ureteral lesions, which are, together with retroperitoneal fibrosis and tumor involvement, the main indications for ureteral reconstruction. Our aim is to present the ileal neureter technique as an alternative for reconstruction and replacement of extensive lesions of the middle ureter. We present a 37-year-old female patient who underwent a rectal resection, left ureter partial resection and terminoterminal ureteroureteral anastomosis. The pathology report informed ureteral infiltration by adenocarcinoma of the rectum, with positive margins. A segmental resection of the middle portion of the left ureter was performed and reconstruction of the urinary tract with ileal interposition Results: Technique: 1) Measurement of the length of the ureteral defect. 2) Section of a segment of ileum distal 20 cm from the ileocecal valve. Entero-entero-anastomosis with prolene surget 4-0. 3) Section of the left ureter at the proximal level. 4) Refinement of the ileum with mechanical suture Gia 60mm. 5) Neouretero-ureteral isoperistaltic anastomosis with separate vicryl 4-0 sutures. 6) Placement of a K30 catheter into the neoureter. 7) Neureteral implantation into the bladder. Left ureteral reconstruction was performed with satisfactory ileal interposition. The patient presented improvement of renal function without complications. Conclusion: Ureteral reconstruction with ileum is a valid and feasible alternative in patients with extensive lesion of the middle ureter when other types of procedures are non viable, allowing kidney preservation. Urosymphyseal Fistulation -What's in a Name? Introduction and Objective: Urosymphyseal fistulation is a recently described condition which is also referred to in the literature as osteitis pubis or osteomyelitis. The name of the condition reflects our understanding of the nature and cause of the problem and in view of the discrepancy in terminology we have assessed the clinical, radiological, biochemical, microbiological and histological evidence in our own group of patients to determine the true nature of the condition. We have complete data in 27 of 37 patients treated in the last five years. Blood, imaging and microbiological investigations were performed preoperatively; microbiology and histology specimens were taken intraoperatively; there was further imaging and blood studies postoperatively. The only imaging investigation that was 100% reliable, showing the fistula and inflammatory changes in the surrounding bone and soft tissues in all patients and radiotherapy-related changes in 11 patients was MRI scanning. The white blood cell count was normal in 6 patients and the average elevation was to 12.3 x103/ μL when raised. The CRP was elevated in every patient up to a mean level of 26.5mg/L. There appeared to be no specific correlation between the CRP and the symptoms. Urine culture was positive in only 12 patients with an even spread between coliforms, pseudomonas spp. and candida spp. did not necessarily match the urine culture. Histological assessment showed chronic inflammation in both the symphysis and the adjacent bone, in 9 patients. There were radiotherapy-related changes in all of these. There were chronic inflammatory changes in the symphysis alone, directly related to the fistulous track and cavity, in 18 patients. There was no evidence of osteomyelitis in any patient. Conclusions: Correlating the symptoms, clinical findings, surgical findings and the haematological and microbiological findings suggest that the fundamental problem is the urine leak and direct fistulation into (and sometimes through) the pubic symphysis. The more extensive the leak, the worse the pain. The urinary and tissue microbiology did not correlate with each other or with the symptoms. The correct terminology for this condition, we believe, is Urosymphyseal Fistulae. Management of Iatrogenic Urorectal Fistulae in Men with Pelvic Cancer E Martins F 1 , Simões de Oliveira P 1 , Martins N 2 , Campos Pinheiro L 3 , Falcão G 3 , Ferraz L 4 , Oliveira V 4 , Lopes T 1 Introduction and Objective: Urorectal fistula (URF) is a devastating complication of pelvic cancer treatments and a surgical challenge for the reconstructive surgeon. We report a series of male patients with URF resulting from pelvic cancer treatments, specifically prostate (PCa), bladder (BCa) and rectal cancer (RCa), and explore the differences and impact on outcomes between purely surgical and non-surgical treatment modalities. Between October 2008 and June 2015, 15 male patients, aged 59-78 years (mean 67), with URF induced by pelvic cancer treatments were identified in our institutions. Patients with a history of diverticulitis, inflammatory bowel disease, or other benign conditions were excluded. We reviewed the patients' medical records for symptoms, diagnostic tests performed, type and etiology of the fistula, type of surgical reconstruction, follow-up and outcomes. Patients were divided into 2 groups: 8 received non-surgical/energy ablation treatments (G1) while 6 had surgery (G2). Results: Fourteen patients underwent surgical reconstruction. One patient developed metastatic disease before URF repair and, therefore, was excluded from this study. Mean follow-up (FU) was 32.7 months (14-79). All patients received diverting colostomy and temporary urinary diversion. An exclusively transperineal approach was used in 9 (64.3%) patients and a combined abdominoperineal in 5 (35.7%). Overall successful URF closure was achieved in 12 (85.7%) patients, 9 (64.3%) of whom at the 1st reconstructive attempt, 2 (14.3%) after 2 attempts (in our institution), and 1 (7.1%) after 3 attempts (2 of which elsewhere). 83% of G2 patients needed 1 surgical attempt only, compared to 50% in G1. The failures were in G1. An interposition flap was used in 7 (50%) patients. Surgical reconstruction failed ultimately in 2 (14.3%) patients who still have a colostomy, and do not wish any further reconstruction. Conclusion: Although surgical reconstruction may be extremely difficult and complex in the non-surgical/ energy ablation patients, its successful reconstruction is possible in most through a transperineal, or a more aggressive abdominoperineal, approach with tissue interposition in selected patients. Surgical Management of Genitoperineal . The most common comorbidities included tobacco use (68%), obesity (59%), HTN (41%) and DM (23%). Prior to definitive excision, 16 patients (73%) had at least one incision and drainage. STSG was required in 27% of patients, and the rest were covered with local thigh, scrotal or perineal flaps. Average length of hospital stay was 2.7 days (0-22 days). The 30-day complication rate was 50% for minor complications (Grade 1-2) which included wound infection and dehiscence. 2 patients (9%) had a Grade 3B complication with no grade 4 or 5 complications. Recurrence of HS occurred outside of the resection bed 1-42 months after surgery in 7 (32%) patients, 6 (86%) of these patients requiring limited re-excision. Conclusions: Conservative medical treatments, or incision and drainage of lesions are ineffective in curing the root cause of the problem, and persistence or worsening is the rule over time. Complete surgical resection followed by local flap or skin graft closure is possible, curative and most often successful, at the cost of an unsurprisingly high number of self limited wound complications. Urologists should endeavor to fix instead of merely manage this difficult problem. Disorders of Sex Development: Further Experience Managing Adults and Adolescents in Nigeria Introduction and Objective: Each individual presenting with Disorders of Sexual Development (DSD) creates special challenge especially when sex and gender are discordant. This paper reviews management of adolescents and adults with DSD and highlights challenges of managing such cases in an African setting. In a combined prospective and retrospective study, we reviewed 29 consecutive adults and adolescents surgically managed for DSD between January 2005 and December 2016 in three Centres in North Western Nigeria with DSD. Result: The mean age of the patients was 21.7 years (range 14 to 39). The diagnosis was Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia in 10 (34.5%), Male Pseudo-hermaphrodite in 6 (20.7%), true Hermaphrodites in 2 (6.9%) and Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser Syndrome (MRKH) in 11 patents. Twelve patients had discordance between genetic sex and gender. Six of them were females with CAH raised as males (Male Assigned Genetic Female, MAGF) while another 6 were males with genital ambiguity raised as females (Female Assigned Genetic Male, FAGM). All the 12 patients with discordance at Sex and gender rejected reassignment to the appropriate sex and insisted on remaining as raised and named at birth. FAGM were reassigned female sex by gonadectomy, Colovaginoplasty, phallic reduction, vulvoplasty and hormonal therapy for breast development. Vaginoplasty is more difficult in these patients and two of them required dilation and revision of the vaginoplasty. MAGF, were reassigned by ovariectomy, hysterosalphingectomy, colpectomy and reduction mammoplasty were performed on 4 in one stage with a plan to metoidioplasty in the second stage, while on testosterone. Only two patients returned for metoidioplasty. Eleven Patients with MRKH were offered Colovaginal reconstruction and 8 of the MRKH patients are known to be sexually active. Patient with CAH in appropriate gender underwent feminizing genitoplasty with or without nerve preserving clitoral reduction. Hormonal therapy could be afforded and sustained in only three patients. Conclusion: When sex and gender are discordant in societies and cultures that prohibit gender change in adult, patients will insist on maintaining sex of rearing. Sex reassignment establishes self-esteem, societal integration and marital harmony at the expense of fertility and prolonged hormonal therapy. Feminizing vaginoplasty for CAH and colovaginoplasty for MRKH Syndrome are very satisfying. Introduction and Objectives: Most re-operative surgery after failed previous reconstruction is transperineal (TP) with a high success rate and low complication rate. In recent years there has been an increasing incidence of patients with complications of surgery or radiotherapy (DXT) particularly, but not exclusively for pelvic cancer, requiring re-operative surgery abdomino-perineally (AP). we performed 104 AP procedures in 91 patients. In most cases surgery was for uro-intestinal fistulation or other iatrogenic injury. Fifty nine procedures were for failed surgery to treat complications of treating pelvic cancer; the other 45 for benign pelvic pathology. Six procedures were in patients who had no surgery or DXT other than their previous last failed attempt at reconstruction (PLFAAR); 15 procedures in patients who had no surgery other than their PLFAAR but had DXT; 51 procedures in patients who had previous surgery other than their PLFAAR but no DXT; 32 procedures in patients who had both previous AP surgery other than their PLFAAR and DXT. In all, 83 procedures were performed in 68 patients who had previous surgery and between them they had had 164 previous laparotomies (1-7) other than their PLFAAR. Results: Fifty nine procedures (57%) in 54 patients (60%) were uneventful and all had a satisfactory outcome. Forty five procedures (43%) in 37 patients (40%) had 57 complications. Three patients died, 6 underwent early re-operation for operative complications and 6 needed further surgery to get a satisfactory result, in 3 of whom this was not achieved, giving an overall failure of 3. DXT produced a 47% complication rate due to incomplete healing or infective complications. Repeated previous surgery produced a 35% incidence of surgical complications such as bowel leaks; indeed 4 previous laparotomies virtually guarantee a significant postoperative complication. The combination of surgery and DXT carried a 65% complication rate. All the early returns to surgery were in the latter two groups. Conclusions: Given that half of these patients have survived their treatment for pelvic cancer but are left with serious complications, they pay a significant price for their survivorship. They must therefore be counselled appropriately before embarking on the treatment of their primary malignancy and its subsequent complications. Impact of Sexual Function after Surgical Treatment of Penile Fracture Introduction and Objective: Penile fracture (PF) is a rare urological emergency. Surgical treatment is the preferred approach in the PF and aims to restore the anatomical and functional integrity of the penis, in order to avoid complications and sexual dysfunctions. The aim of this study was to conduct a comprehensive assessment of sexual function of patients undergoing surgical treatment of PF, covering psychological aspects related to trauma. Patients undergoing surgical treatment of PF from January 2014 to July 2016 were followed in our department for at least 6 months. Those patients answered the International Index of Erectile Function (IIEF-5) and our sexual questionnaire assessing sexual drive and ejaculatory function. Moreover, patients were asked about the fear of having a new episode of FP and if it disturbed their sex life, leading to performance anxiety or some change in sexual habits, such as avoiding certain sexual positions. Finally, we searched the penis and interviewed the patients about any evidence of pain in erection, penile nodules or curvature acquired after surgery. Conclusion: Surgical treatment of PF has satisfactory results, providing adequate recovery of sexual function, even in the long term follow-up. Most patients preserve erectile function without development of penile curvature or deformity. However, erectile dysfunction could occur in the late postoperative period and must be treated. Psychological sequelae are common, causing fear of recurrence and resulting negative impact on the sexual life of these patients, which must be closely monitored. Introduction and Objective: Adherence to overactive bladder (OAB) medications is reported to be lower than that of other drugs such as cardiovascular, antidiabetic and osteoporosis. Recent clinical trials have proven the efficacy and safety of combination of mirabegron and solifenacin on overactive bladder (OAB) symptoms. In this study we retrospectively reviewed the long term adherence to the combination treatment of mirabegron and antimuscarinic drugs by comparing the monotherapy of OAB drugs. August 2016, 442 patients who initiated a prescription of OAB medications were enrolled in this study. We evaluated the persistence rates of each drugs in all patients and urodynamic findings in the patients who underwent cystometry among these patients. Results: Mean age at the initial prescription was 64.4 years. Mean follow-up period was 12 months. Among them 64 patients underwent urodynamic study. Of them 321 patients were treated with antimuscarinic drugs (solifenacin, propiverine, fesoterodine and imidafenacin), while 121 patients were treated with mirabegron. 258 (58.4%) patients switched the medication or made a cessation of the drug due to the small efficacy, adverse events and so on. Mean persistence rate of all OAB drugs alone was 45% at 12 months and 32% at 24 months. Of them 24 patients received the combination treatment of antimuscarinic drugs and mirabegron because of the dissatisfaction of monotherapy. The persistence rate of combination treatment is significantly higher (80% at 24 months) compared to the monotherapy (P= 0.0022). Urodynamic studies showed that patients treated with the combination treatment have significantly higher incidence of urge incontinence followed by detrusor overactivity than that of patients treated with monotherapy. Conclusion: OAB drug monotherapy shows the poor persistence rates, while combination use shows long term persistence rates without adverse events. Especially the patients with wet OAB may benefit from the combination treatment. The Temporary Implantable Nitinol Device ) device, comprised of 3 nitinol struts and an anchoring leaflet, is deployed in the prostatic urethra where it expands, resulting in ischemic incisions and a re-shaping of the bladder neck and prostate. The device is implanted in 5 minutes using a rigid cystoscope. After 5 days it is removed through a 22F catheter. The device is Health Canada approved. Three-year clinical outcomes and economic comparisons are made to the prostatic urethral lift (PUL) system (Uro-Lift -NeoTract Inc.). A one-arm single-centre, prospective study of the iTind in 32 men was conducted (1 yr results) . Similarly, the L.I.F.T. study, a multicentre, sham-controlled prospective study with similar inclusion criteria and outcomes examining the PUL has published its 3yr results. Results: At baseline patient's mean (SD) total prostate volume (TPV), IPSS score, QoL and Qmax were 29.5 (+7.4), 19 (14-23), 3 (3-4), and 7.6 (2.2) ml/sec. After 36mos IPSS score, QoL and Qmax were 12 (6-24), 2 (1-4) and 13 ml/sec. Only 1 patient (3.1%) required TURP. By comparison, the PUL study baseline patient's mean (SD) TPV, IPSS score, QoL, and Qmax were 44.5 (+12.47), 22.3 (13-35), 4.6 (4.4-4.8), 7.9 (3-13) ml/sec. After 36mos IPSS score, QoL, and Qmax were 12.7 (11-14), 2.2 (1.9-2.6), and 11.8 (10.6-13) ml/ sec. The iTind resulted in superior Qmax (p=0.033) and similar IPSS (p=0.098) and QoL (p=0.192) improvements compared to PUL implant at 3 years. In Canada, the iTind device cost is approx. $2500 CAD and 1 device is used per case. The approx. cost of a PUL implant is $800 CAD/implant and the mean number of PUL implants used in the L.I.F.T. study was 5.2. Thus in Canada the approx. cost per PUL procedure will be $4160 CAD. Conclusions: The iTind demonstrates equivalent or superior 3-year outcomes compared to the UroLift and is a lower cost option in Canada. Female In 2000, we devised the short autologous pubovaginal sling (PVS) as a less invasive and safer procedure than conventional autologous PVS. This procedure provides a surgical option for women with stress urinary incontinence (SUI) who do not want to or cannot undergo synthetic mesh surgeries because of mesh-related complications. We investigated the relationship between perioperative urodynamic results and early surgical outcomes to identify the appropriate candidates for this procedure. From 2001 to 2016, 104 women with SUI underwent the short autologous PVS in our institution, and urodynamic studies (UDS) were performed preoperatively and within three-month postoperatively. We collated the following information from medical records: patient characteristics, early surgical outcomes based on a one-hour pad test, and early postoperative complications. The relationships between urodynamic parameters and early surgical outcomes were then evaluated. Results: Mean age at surgery was 64 years (19-82). Three-month postoperative objective outcome was as follows: 90 women (86%) were cured, 7 (7%) improved, and 7 (7%) had failure. Early postoperative complications were transient urinary retentions in 11 (10%) women urinary infections in 2 (2%), and pulmonary embolism in 1 (1%). Of the 104 women, 73 underwent UDS preoperatively and 27 underwent UDS again postoperatively. Twenty-two (30%) women were diagnosed with intrinsic sphincter deficiency, which was defined as a preoperative abdominal leak point pressure (ALPP) less than 60 mmHg. Detrusor overactivity was seen in 6 (8%) women. Comparisons between pre-and postoperative urodynamic parameters showed significant improvement in mean ALPP from 74.9 to 90.0 cmH2O (p=0.042). Logistic regression analysis showed that preoperative low detrusor pressure at maximum urinary flow (Pdet Qmax) was the only factor among the urodynamic variables to predict both non-curative treatments (odds ratio 1.11, 95% confidence interval 1. Week-End Clinic Introduction and Objective: Thirty five percent of women of childbearing age suffer from the urinary incontinence. Around half of them have stress incontinence. Many therapy modalities have been used to cure stress incontinence, and among the most popular are tension-free vaginal tape (TVT) and rectus fascia sling (RFS). The purpose of the trial is to estimate the impact of the autologous fascial sling (RFS) and (TVT) therapy on quality-of-life of women in the underdeveloped countries. Materials and Methods: Forty one women who suffered from the urinary incontinence were randomly distributed into two groups. Group G1 (n = 34), went through RFS therapy and group G2 (n = 29) had TVT implant. The clinical follow-up was conducted at 6, 12 and 36 months. Results: TVT operative time was substantially shorter than RFS. In the G1 group, treatment rates were 71% at one month, 57% at six and 12 months. In G2, cure rates were 73% at 6 months, 65% at 12 months, and 59% after 36 months; there was no significant difference between those two groups. As to the satisfaction rate, there was no statistical difference between groups of patients. Patients' life quality analysis performed in 36 months showed that there was no significant difference between women groups. We came to a conclusion that fascial sling therapy takes more time if compared to TVT method, but this treatment method turned out to be very cost-effective. Without no doubt, RFS treatment is a proper solution for the urine incontinence treatment of the patients from the underdeveloped countries. Long-lasting clinical follow-up sessions are vital before rigorous conclusions can be drawn. Similar re-sults are revealed between RFS and TVT methods, except the fact that TVT operative time was shorter. (Fig-ure1 ). The role of IOM functions in urinary incontinence is not fully understood, although the physical mechanisms have been identified. This study reports on the relationship between urinary incontinence and the IOM volume. Materials and Methods: RARP cases were analyzed retrospectively. The urinary incontinence volumes were measured at 5 days after the removal of the balloon catheter. The urinary incontinence was defined as 100ml/day or more of leakage of urine. The IOM volume of preoperative CT was measured using Im-ageJ (National Institutes of Health). Preoperative factor and surgery factor were examined using a cox proportional hazards regression analysis to predict the urinary incontinence. Results: Preliminary findings are presented on the first seven patients completing 12 weeks of treatment. SUI decreased 80.9% ( Figure 1 ). All patients saw at least a 65% reduction in leaking episodes. Improvement is durable post treatment demonstrating con-tinued improvement up to 5 months. Pad weights decreased from a mean of 29.6 g at baseline, to 13.9 g at 12 weeks. FSFI scores increased from a mean of 16.8 at baseline, to 20.3 at 12 weeks, with 5/7 patients showing improvement. PGI-I scores were improved at 12 weeks. Adverse events were minimal with none above a Grade I. Introduction and Objectives: Implantation of the artificial urinary sphincter (AUS) around the bladder neck (or prostate in men) remains the goldstandard treatment for women with refractory sphincter weakness incontinence (SWI) or patients with neuropathic pathology. This study evaluates long-term outcomes of the AMS800TM device in this patient population. Conclusion: Apart from being more surgically challenging, implantation of a bladder neck AUS is associated with excellent functional outcomes albeit with a significantly higher explantation rate when compared to bulbar AUS. We have hereby shown no difference in explantation rate between primary and non-primary bladder neck AUS. The overall explantation rate is no different whether a cystoplasty is present or not or whether patients performing ISC. Introduction and Objective: Long-term indwelling catheters are used commonly in people with lower urinary tract problems. There are many potential complications and adverse effects associated with long-term catheter use. This systematic review was conducted to determine the effectiveness of different policies for replacing long-term indwelling urinary catheters in adults. Introduction and Objective: Radical cystectomy remains the gold standard for the management of persistent high grade or muscle invasive bladder cancer. The two standard urinary diversion methods are formation of ileal conduit (IC) and orthotopic neobladder (ONB). Pelvic floor strengthening exercises (Kegel) have long been recognised as useful in the reduction of urinary incontinence symptoms especially in women post pelvic surgery. There is new evidence emerging in its use for prevention of similar symptoms in men. As a result, Kegel exercises are often recommended post cystectomy for patients who undergo ONB. To date little evidence exists regarding compliance and continued engagement with these. We sought to assess initial and continued engagement with these exercises in a cohort of Australian patients to draw correlation with continence satisfaction post cystectomy and ONB. Australia's patient-led online survey, a range of quality of life (QOL) questions were asked regarding urinary continence, satisfaction post surgery and symptoms. Additionally, initial engagement and ongoing compliance with Pelvic floor exercises post surgery was queried. Results were then tabulated and comparative analysis was performed. Results: One hundred and fifty five patients who underwent ONB responded to the survey. Initial Kegel exercise engagement was excellent with 84% of patients completing them as suggested post surgery. Continued engagement was less satisfactory. Thirty seven patients (24%) stated that they continued to complete the exercises regularly. A large proportion (59%) completed the exercises for a few months and then ceased completely or attempts them only occasionally. Regarding day-time continence, 32% were completely dry, 36% had very mild symptoms (occasional drips), and 22% had significant symptoms. Fourteen patients (9%) were completely incontinent. Conclusion: Although initial uptake of Pelvic floor exercises is admirable, continued commitment is poor. Patient education regarding the ongoing usefulness of these strengthening regimes is required to ensure continued engagement and current methods require modification. New patient education organizations such as www.bladdercancer.org.au can help by providing contemporary information sources and support networks for patients. Additionally, ongoing long-term follow up and comparative analysis of urinary continence rates between patients who continue to engage and those that don't may help encourage more robust uptake. (1). There was no correlation between the complications and PSA level (all patients PSA <10ng/ml). Mean length of admission was 8.71 days (standard deviation 8.11), with a median of 8. For patients who had cancer, mean length of admission was 10 days (standard deviation 7.7), with a median of 10; for patients without cancer, mean length of admission was 7.42 days (standard deviation 8.63), with a median of 5. Our study concluded that oral Ciprofloxacin, despite other reports, can still be used effectively as prophylaxis against TRUS and prostate biopsy infective complications. Due to the limitations of this retrospective study, we are currently carrying out a prospective study to further document the safety of quinolone use in the same procedure. Introduction and Objective: Pre-existed urinary tract infection (UTI) is often associated with large nephrolithiasis. This is the first study to evaluate the predictors of recurrent UTIs in patient's status post percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL). We retrospectively analyzed the medical records of patients with renal stones and pre-operative UTIs who underwent PCNL in one tertiary hospital from January 2010 to June 2015. Patient's demographics as well as stone composition, infected organism and post-operative recurrent UTIs within 12 months were reviewed. Fisher's exact test and logistic regression were applied for univariate analysis and multivariate analysis respectively in order to determine the predictors of post-operative UTIs.  Introduction and Objective: The presence of bacteriuria in patients undergoing transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) significantly increases morbidity and mortality. This study aims to establish the prevalence of bacteriuria in patients undergoing TURP, to identify the bacteriology of their urine, and determine the best antibiotics to administer perioperatively based on sensitivity patterns. and 30 days post-TURP was determined. Susceptibility and resistance patterns of isolated bacteria were then evaluated against most commonly available antibiotics.  The prospective study included 26 patients (M:F = 24:2) who received underwent 3 times quadrivalent HPV vaccine between January 2015 and June 2016. Patients were evaluated before injection by medical history, physical examination, urine analysis, syphilis, HIV, and cystourethroscopy (if needed). After explanation of surgical excision and HPV vaccine, 16 patients underwent surgical excision and the others were quadrialent HPV vaccine injections. Based on gross findings of genital warts, treatment outcomes in vaccine injected patients were evaluated as follows: complete response (no wart), partial response, and failed treatment (no change or worsening of warts). Results: Among enrolled patients, 42% (11/26) patients had recurrent genital warts history (HPV injection patients over 2 times, 6/10). At a mean follow up period of 8.42±3.27 months, 10 patients (100%) who received HPV vaccine did not show recurrence. Complete response rates of genital wart were 60% following 3 times HPV vaccine injection. Partial response (3 patients) wanted to excise the genital lesions before the 3 times injection, because they worried about sexual transmission of disease to their sexual partners. One patient underwent surgical excision after 3 times injection. Excision sites were the suprapubic site, but other sites including mid-urethra and glans were complete response after injection. The response rate after 3 times quadrivalent HPV vaccine injection were 90% (complete and partial). Our results suggested that HPV vaccines could be effective in management of genital warts in both sex. However, further studies are needed to elucidate the real treatment effect of HPV vaccine in genital warts. The Introduction and Objective: Emphysematous pyelonephritis (EPN) is a severe, rare, gas-forming infection of the kidney and its surroundings. The radiological classification and proper therapeutic regimens are still controversial, and the prognostic factors for poor outcome remain uncertain. Aim of work To follow-up the cases of emphysematous pyelonephritis (EPN) presented between December 2014 and April 2016 as regard the risk factors and prognosis after the different modalities of treatment and to identify statistical risk factors for poor outcome associated with EPN. Clinical features, laboratory variables, imaging studies, management strategies and the final outcomes were analyzed in 31 consecutive EPN patients. We also divided our cases into "good" and "poor"outcome groups to elucidate the risk factors. The patients who were successfully treated with antibiotics alone or using percutanous drainage combined with antibiotics were assigned to the "good" outcome group which include (23 patients), While the patients who had nephrectomy or died were assigned to the "poor" outcome group which include (8 patients). Results: The mean (SD) age was 50 (10.2) years and the male to female ratio was 4:27. Twenty five patients (81%) were diabetics. The right kidney (51.6%) was relatively more involved than the left one (41.9%). Escherichia Coli was the most common organism (54.8%) cultured, followed by Klebsiella (9.7%). There was no significant difference in final outcome based on radiological classification (Huang and Tseng). The overall survival rate was 87% (27/31) and the kidney was salvaged in 77% (24) topenia, and acute renal failure at presentation were not associated with higher mortality rate. There was one case of mortality in selected patients who received antibiotics alone (1/9). Of 18 patients who had minimally invasive treatment combined with antibiotics, two (2/18) died. Only one patient died after nephrectomy (1/4). Conservative management resulted in high renal salvage (89%) compared to nephrectomy (75%). The proposed risk factors for poor outcome as shock, thrombocytopenia, and renal failure at presentation are NOT associated with higher mortality rates. Also, radiological classification has no impact on the final outcome. Conservative treatment provides the gold standard for initial management of EPN. Antibiotic  The department of infection collected results of organisms from urine culture (data collated and provided by Public Health England) over this 10-year period. Trends were obtained between urine culture positive samples for period -1 (5-year period, 2007-2011) and period-2 (3-year period, 2014-2016). Resistance for E.coli infections to commonly prescribed antibiotics including trimethoprim, amoxicillin, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin and nitrofurantoin was collated. Results: A total of 104,750 hospital urine specimens were culture positive across the two time periods over these 10-years. Although the total number of E.Coli positive urine culture results was 57061(54%), there was a significant increase in the number of coliform infections over these two time periods (3000/year in period-1 increasing to 14,000/year in period-2). The overall antibiotic resistance for E.Coli infections is as shown in the table below, with lowest resistance with Nitrofurantoin (mean of 2%) and an increasing resistance (in this order) with Gentamicin, Ciprofloxacin, Trimethoprim and Amoxicillin at 3-6%, 12-16%, 35-40% and 52-60% respectively. Conclusions: Nitrofurantoin resistance remains low and should be considered the mainstay treatment for uncomplicated UTIs in females. Although the Gentamicin resistance has increased marginally over time, the overall resistance is still low and should be considered for prophylaxis for uro-endoscopic procedures and as a part of treatment for management of sepsis. Neuromodulation for Chronic Materials and Methods: Adults in our prospective database with primary/secondary diagnosis of pelvic pain (excluding interstitial cystitis) and quadripolar lead placed at the pudendal or sacral nerve were reviewed. History, pain scores (0-10; none to severe), Global Response Assessment (GRA), Interstitial Cystitis Symptom/Problem Index (ICSIPI) and Overactive Bladder symptom severity (OABq ss)/health related quality of life (HRQOL) collected at baseline, 3 and 6 months, and 1 and 2 years were analyzed with descriptive statistics and repeated measures over 1 year. Results: 87 had a lead placed, 72 (83%) had generator implantation and 65 had complete baseline data. 37/65 had a pudendal (12/37 had failed sacral stimulation) and 28 had a sacral lead. Characteristics were similar except for pudendal had lower body mass index (median 24.8 vs. 28.6; p=0.009) and fewer primary urinary urgency/frequency (8.1% vs. 39.3%; p=0.003). Pudendal patients more commonly had a primary diagnosis of pelvic pain that approached but was not statistically significantly (62.2% vs. 38.5%; p=0.06). Median follow up was 1.2 vs. 2.6 years in the pudendal and sacral groups respectively (p=0.0011). Median pelvic pain scores were similar between pudendal and sacral groups at baseline and each follow up, and both improved significantly over 1 year (p=0.0003 and p<0.0001). The pudendal group had lower ISCIPI and OABq/ss scores at baseline (p=0.007 and p=0.035, respectively), but both groups improved over 1 year on the ICSIPI (p<0.0001 for both groups), OABq/ss (p=0.005 and p=0.0002 respectively), and OABq HRQOL (p=0.027 and p<0.0001, respectively). Conclusion: Both groups experienced significant improvement in pain. Pudendal was effective in those who failed sacral neuromodulation and was used preferentially in patients with a primary diagnosis of pain. Neuromodulation should be considered in the management of chronic pelvic pain. Extracorporeal Shock Wave Therapy for Chronic Prostatitis III-A-B Introduction and Objective: Chronic pelvic pain syndrome (CPPS) with or without signs of inflammation (chronic prostatitis category III-a-b) is one of the most common diagnosis in urology. Insufficient results of the therapy with α-blockers, non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs etc compel to look for alternative approach to the management of patients with CPPS. Materials and Methods: Twenty seven patients with CPPS were enrolled in the pilot open-label non-comparative prospective study. Inclusion criteria -NIH-CPSI (National Institute of Health Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index) score ≥15. CPPS III-a was in 7, and CPPS III-b was in 20 patients. All were treated with extracorporeal shock-wave therapy (ESWT) with Dornier Aries® (Dornier MedTech GmbH, Germany) using the smart focus technology as monotherapy by the following protocol: two procedures per week, three weeks for a complete course of total 6 procedures. Parameters of ESWT were as followed: energy level 5-7 (according to individual sensitivity), energy density 0. sensitivity). Results were estimated by NIH-CPSI on the base-line, after the last 6th procedure, and in one month follow up after finishing the therapy. Also laser Doppler flowmetry (LDF) was performed before, after finish and in one month after finish the therapy. Results: Directly after finishing the course of ESWT all domains of NIH-CPSI decreased insignificantly: CPSI pain score from 9.1 to 7.9, CPSI voiding symptoms from 4.2 to 4.1, CPSI quality of life (QoL) score from 7.2 to 6.0, and total CPSI score from 20.5 to 18.0. Perfusion units in a zone of a prostate evaluated by LDF also remained stable. Fortunately in 1 month after finishing ESWT, we found statistically significant (p<0.05) values improvement in all symptoms but the urinary one, as well as evident microvascular response. In one month CPSI pain score on average was 3.2, CPSI urinary domain was 2.7, QoL -3.9 and total CPSI score became 9.8 -twice lower; perfusion units increased to 58%. Conclusion: Extracorporeal shock-wave therapy with Aries (Dornier) is effective for chronic prostatitis category III-a-b both by subjective (NIH-CPSI) and objective (LDF) criteria; final efficacy may be estimated at follow up not earlier than one month after finishing the treatment. Chronic Constipation Exacerbates the Quality of Life Impairment Suffered by Pre-Menopausal Women with Uncomplicated Recurrent Urinary Tract Infections Tay M 1 , Tiong HY 1 , Guo H 2 , Tai BC 2 , Tambyah P 1 , Chen S 1 Introduction and Objective: At least half of all women will experience a UTI at some point in their lifetime. Despite appropriate antibiotic therapy, up to 30-50% of women suffer a relapse or recurrence of UTI (RUTI) within 6-12 months. Although widely believed to cause significant morbidity, few studies have measured QOL in patients with RUTI using generic preference based measures of health. This study aims to investigate the impact on QOL of pre-menopausal women with RUTI (defined as >2 episodes /year) using the SF-36 questionnaire. Between May 2013 and October 2016, RUTI patients, referred to the Urology department at the National University Hospital, Singapore, were prospectively recruited to fill up a SF-36 health-related quality of life questionnaire. The SF36 measures perceived health in the areas of physical function (PF), role-physical (RP), bodily pain (BP), general health (GH), vitality (VT), social functioning (SF), role emotional (RE) and mental health (MH). Patients were included if they were female, age between 21 and 60, pre-menopausal and had a symptomatic infection. Exclusion criteria included pregnancy, any urological abnormalities, systemic sepsis, or any immune-compromised state. In addition, demographic and clinical details including symptomology, bacteriology data were analyzed for factors impacting QOL. A total of 85 women of different ethnicities (Mean age 31.8 ± 6.8 (SD), 59% Chinese) were recruited into the study. There were no significant co-morbidities in these patients. With an average of 3 episodes of UTI/year, at least 50 % of patients suffered from E.Coli UTI. Table 1 shows that the mean SF-36 scores of RUTI patients were lower in all domains except PF when compared with local published population reference values, adjusted for age and gender. Amongst RUTI women, symptomatology of UTI episodes except fever, obesity (BMI>28), smoking, alcohol intake, previous pregnancies, and sexual activity did not significantly negatively impact on their QOl. However, RUTI women who also reported chronic constipation (CC) had significantly lower mean scores than those without in all domains except MH, RE and VT (Table 1 ). There was no association between constipation and number of UTI episodes per year. Conclusion: RUTI has a negative impact on the QOL of pre-menopausal otherwise healthy women with RUTI and this is exacerbated by chronic constipation. More studies are needed to understand the relationship between these two common problems. Sodium Hyaluronate Reduces Severity and Improves Quality of Life in Bladder Pain Syndrome and Recurrent UTI Introduction and Objective: Bladder Pain Syndrome (BPS) is a chronic disease with persistent bladder irritation and pain. Urinary Tract Infections (UTI) will occur in nearly half of all women at least once with around 35% experiencing recurrences. Bladder mucosal glycosaminoglycan (GAG) layer damage is postulated to contribute to both conditions. Sodium hyaluronate (SH) replenishes the GAG layer and is believed to be protective. However, there is limited literature referencing patient reported outcomes and quality of life (QoL) after treatment. Our objective was to observe changes in BPS and UTI severity and QoL after treatment with intravesical SH. In this retrospective, observational patient-reported outcome study we divided patients into either UTI or BPS (negative urine culture with BPS symptoms). 40mg/50ml of SH were instilled weekly for six weeks. If symptoms persisted, patients were administered 120mg/50ml on demand. Questionnaires were sent to score symptoms, UTI occurrences and antibiotic usage before and after treatment. Results: We surveyed 52 patients; 25 BPS and 27 UTI. Valid responses were 13(52%), and 15(55.5%) respectively. Mean ages were 55.9 and 68.5, In BPS, improvements occurred in 'QoL' and 'nocturia' (37%) (1.7, SD 1.8 and 1.5, SD 1.6 respectively) 'Frequency' (38%) (1.8, SD 1.5), 'urgency' (40%) (1.7, SD 1.9), 'sick time' (41%) (1.8, SD 1.7) and 'pain' (45%) (2.1, SD 1.8) The greatest improvements (51%) were in 'loss of sleep' and 'interference with life' scores (2.0, SD 2.2 and 3.0, SD 1.9 respectively). In the UTI group, improvements in pain-related 'QoL' were 23% (2.0, SD 3.2), 'urgency' 25% (2.2, SD 3.7), 'nocturia' 26% (2.3, SD 3.8), 'frequency' 29% (2.7, SD 3.6), 'loss of work' 33% (1.9, SD 3.6), 'pain' and 'loss of sleep' by 35% (2.8, SD 3.9, and 2.9, SD 3.9 respectively). Patients experienced a 44% decrease in 'patient reported UTI occurrences' from 5.8 to 3.3 (SD 3.3), a 54% reduction in 'antibiotic treatments' (3.8, SD 3.8) and a 35% improvement in 'UTI related QoL' (1.9, SD 2.8). No adverse events occurred. Conclusion: Intravesical SH is efficacious in BPS and UTI patients, with improvements in symptoms scores, pain, QoL and antibiotics use. Predictive Introduction and Objective: Acute obstructive pyelonephritis is a life-threatening infection, may lead to septic shock, renal damage and multi-organ system failure. The ureter stone is the common cause of urinary tract obstruction. Immediate empiric antibiotic and urinary drainage are the primary treatment, even percutaneous nephrostomy (PCN) tube or ureteral catheter. However, the timing or necessity of PCN insertion is not clear, and there's no relative literature in our article review. We try to figure out the predictive parameters for evaluation the necessity of PCN tube insertion amount the stones related acute obstructive pyelonephritis patients during initial analysis. We prospectively collect the 75 patients who were diagnosed with stone obstructed acute pyelonephritis from January to December 2016 in our hospital. Thirteen patients received immediately PCN tube inserting at emergency room and they were not enrolled to our analysis because we want to figure out which factors of acute pyelonephritis patients may lead to uncontrollable or progressed disease that the further PCN tube insertion is necessary. Twenty six patients (Group 1) received PCN tube insertion later due to persistent spike fever, progressed infection or uncontrollable sepsis; 36 patients (Group 2) had no PCN drainage intervention, received only antibiotic and fluid resuscitation. Definitely treatment for the ureter stone was done after infection under controlled. Patient demographic include age, gender and comorbidities like diabetes mellitus (DM), hypertension (HTN), coronary artery disease (CAD) and cerebrovascular accident (CVA). The disease patterns were stone size, stone location and the severity of hydronephrosis. The initially analyzed data were initial blood WBC count, CRP and creatinine. Analyzed the parameters to predict PCN insertion initially or unnecessary. SPSS 17 is used for statistically method. Results: There's statistical significant higher initial WBC in group 1 (p = 0.48) in T test. The stone size also showed significant higher in group 1 (p = 0.002). The age, CRP and creatinine showed no difference. The gender, DM, CAD, CVA, stone location and severity of hydronephrosis showed no difference between the two groups under Chi-square test, but the HTN showed statistical significant (p = 0.014). The initial WBC above 13x10^3/ul and the stone size more than 9.5mm were elective predictive value from ROC curve. The Chi-square test showed statistical significant (p = 0.038), present that the patients with CRP ≥10 had more incidence to receive PCN insertion. We found that the initial WBC, stone size and CRP ≥10 are potential predictable parameters to decide the necessity of PCN insertion while the initial evaluation of the stones related acute obstructive pyelonephritis patients. We suggest that if the patients have clinical sepsis signs with more than two of these parameters (WBC ≥13x10^3/ul; stone size ≥9.5mm and CRP ≥10), urgent PCN insertion is considered. The Results: Mucosal gene expression profiles differ significantly between controls and IC/BPS patients ( Figure 1A ). Key differences in the Epithelial Adherens Junction Signaling pathway were apparent (p = 5.14E-05) between these two groups. Among only IC/ BPS patients, gene expression profiles were also significantly different between those with a low capacity compared to those with BC > 400 ( Figure 1B ). One striking pathway impacted in this comparison was the EIF2 Signaling (eukaryotic translation initiation factor) pathway (p = 8.2E-26). Finally, gene expression profiles in the low BC group with Hunner's lesions were significantly different from those without lesions ( Figure 1C ). Not surprisingly, differential expression analysis produced inflammatory disease (p = 1.46E-9) as a top classifier in this group comparison. Conclusions: Mucosal gene expression in low anesthetized bladder capacity patients is distinct from gene expression profiles in higher capacity samples and from controls. These findings suggest low BC patients, with or without Hunner's lesions, represent a sub-phenotype of IC/BPS and these gene expression differences, if confirmed, may yield additional therapeutic targets for this bladder-centric phenotype. . The mean inflammation grading score for Group A was 1.54 (range: 1-3) at first biopsy and decreased to 0.6 (range: 0-2) after therapy with Serenoa Repens. The mean aggressiveness grading score was 1.56 (range: 0-3) and 0.89 (range: 0-2) after the first and second biopsy, respectively. The decrease in both scores was statistically significant (p<0.001 and p=0.001, respectively). In Group B, the mean inflammation grading score was 1.43 (range: 1-3) at first biopsy, and 1.1 (range: 0-2) at the second biopsy. The mean aggressiveness grading score for this Group was 1.08 (range 0-3) and 0.9 (range 0-2) at first and second biopsy, respectively. No statistically significant difference was found between those scores (p=0.08 and p=0.7 respectively). Conclusion: Treatment with Serenoa Repens seems to reduce prostatic inflammation. The clinical implication of this finding needs to be investigated.  Analyses of Inflammatory Urine Markers in Patients with Interstitial Cystitis and Overactive Bladder Furuta A 1 , Igarashi T 1 , Yamamoto T 2 , Gotoh M 2 , Egawa S 1 Introduction and Objective: Chronic inflammatory condition seems to be a shared characteristic in patients with interstitial cystitis (IC) and overactive bladder (OAB). Thus, we measured forty inflammatory urine markers in IC patients with or without Hunner lesions (HIC and NHIC, respectively) and OAB patients. Urine was collected from 30 HIC consecutive patients, 30 NHIC patients and 28 age and gender-matched OAB patients with no history of IC, recurrent urinary tract infection or bladder cancer. The diagnosis of IC was based on the Asian IC guideline criteria. Representative forty inflammatory growth factors, cytokines and chemokines in urine were measured by MILLIPLEX immunoassay kit. Statistical differences in these markers among the groups were determined by non-parametric ANOVA followed by multiple comparison tests. The diagnostic efficiency of these markers was measured using receiver operating characteristic analysis. Results: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), interleukin-1α (IL-1α), IL-6 and chemokines including CCL2, CCL5, CXCL1/2/3, CXCL8 and CXCL10 were significantly increased in HIC and NHIC patients compared with OAB patients. The significant increases in CXCL8 and CXCL10 were also found in HIC patients compared with NHIC patients. However, there were no significant differences in the other urine markers among the groups. Area under the curves (AUCs) for VEGF, CXCL10, CXCL8, IL-1α, CCL5, CCL2, IL-6 and CXCL1/2/3 to detect IC in these patients were 0.87, 0.86, 0.81, 0.80, 0.80, 0.71, 0.66 and 0.50, respectively (Table 1) . Our results have shown that IL-1α, IL-6, CCL2, CCL5, CXCL1/2/3, CXCL8 and CXCL10 were significantly increased in IC patients compared with OAB patients, suggesting that chronic inflammatory changes in IC patients are more severe than those in OAB patients. In addition, the increases in angiogenesis-associated proteins such as VEGF and CXCL10 may pathophysiologically be important for the development of IC. Differential  COL23A1 Plays an Oncogenic Role in the Clear-Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma Chang K, Gu C Introduction and Objective: Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most common adult renal neoplasm and its incidence is still rising steadily. Collagens shift is a fundamental element contributing to MP-14.01, Figure 1 . MP-14.02, Figure 1 . 99 the development and progression of ccRCC. We aim to examine the expression of COL23A1 in ccRCC and the relationship betweenCOL23A1 levels and patient survival. We detected the mRNA expression of COL23A1 in tumorous pairs and adjacent normal tissues (ANTs) of 19 ccRCC patients by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and subsequently validated by TCGA database. The protein level of COL23A1 expression in 151 cases of ccRCC was evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC). We analyzed the correlation between COL23A1levels and clinical outcomes. Finally, CCK-8 cell counting assay, flow cytometry analysis of cell cycle and migration assay were analyzed in ccRCC cell lines. Results: COL23A1 mRNA expression was significantly greater in tumor tissues than in ANT which was further validated by TCGA database analysis. IHC results suggested that high COL23A1 expression was correlated with larger tumor size (P = 0.017) and advanced T stage (P =0.011). The overall survival was shorter for patients who had tumors with high CO-L23A1 expression than for those with low COL23A1 expression (P =0.002). In the multivariate analysis, high COL23A1 expression was an independent prognostic factor of OS (HR: 3.024, P = 0.017). In vitro experiments showed that COL23A1 knockdown could repress proliferation by blocking cell cycle progression. The migration ability was also down regulated by knocking down of COL23A1. Our data indicate that COL23A1 may be a novel prognostic indicator in ccRCC and may be a specific and accessible biomarker as well as a potential new target for ccRCC clinical diagnosis. Renal Conclusion: Differences between cT1a and ≥cT1b tumors were found for ethnicity, 'other' comorbidities, and pre-operative Creatinine values. Both clinical and pathological differences were found between T1a and ≥T1b tumors for risk factors, advanced CKD, incidental finding and solitary kidney. RCC patients in the pT1a cohort were younger than in the ≥pT1b cohort. The increased use of renal mass biopsy (RMB) which can avoid unnecessary surgical intervention. Few studies report long-term outcomes of renal cell carcinoma treated by radioFrequency ablation (RFA). We reviewed our experience with cT1a renal masses treated with laparoscopic RFA. A total of 62 patients with cT1a renal masses treated between January 2005 and October 2014 were identified from a retrospective review. Patients with biopsy confirmed T1a renal cell cancer and a follow up period > 48 months were included in our analysis. Local recurrence, metastasis, survival rate and change in glomerular filtration rate (GFR) were analyzed. The definition of early follow up for GFR is that after surgery. The mean (range) follow-up for the laparoscopic RFA was 54.2 (26-97) months. The respective mean tumor size was 2.14 (± 0.66). The GFR was not significantly different at early follow up, but there was significantly different at last follow up. There were not local recurrences, metastasis and disease-specific deaths. The 5-year overall survival was 98%, cancer-specific survival was 100%, and recurrence-free survival was 100%. Conclusion: This data showed that laparoscopic RFA for cT1a renal masses has comparable oncological and functional outcomes. The There are some recent researches that suggest De-ritis (AST/ALT ratio) ratio, which had been performed before the surgery of renal cell carcinoma (RCC), could affect the prognosis but it is still controversial. Through the research, we analyzed the value of preoperative De-ritis ratio as a predictive factor in RCC. From 1988 to 2015, we retrospectively collected data from 7271 patients surgically treated for non-metastatic RCC from 8 centers. ROC curve was analyzed to calculate the cut-off value of AST/ALT as a predictive factor of RCC. The highest Youden index was shown in 1.21 and the patients were divided into two groups. After calculating the propensity score, it was matched to 966 and 966 patients respectively. Kaplan Meyer analysis, Multivariative Cox analysis were performed to identify overall survival (OS), cancer specific survival (CSS), Recurrence free survival (RFS). Conclusion: Our data suggest overweight and obesity defined as increasing BMI are generally related to favorable survival outcomes after nephrectomy for non-metastatic RCC. Further basic research will be required to discover the biological mechanisms explaining the positive correlation between high BMI and improved RCC survival. The log-rank p <0.001) rates. These survival differences were also similar in association with preoperative NLR. When stratifying the patients into three groups (continuous normal, vice versa, and continuous elevated) by pre-and postoperative NLR changes, the OS and CSS rates were discriminated well among groups (all log-rank p <0.001). When performing survival analysis in subgroups, the significant survival differences according to postoperative NLR was found only in patients with high grade tumor and negative surgical margin (all log-rank p<0.05). On multivariable analysis adjusting other well-known prognostic factors, such as stage, grade, lymphovascaulr invasion, and surgical margin, increased postoperative NLR was significantly associated with worse OS (hazard ratio [HR] 1.15; 95% confidence interval 1.04-1.27, p=0.007) and CSS (HR 1.13; 95% CI 1.01-1.27, p=0.045). The NLR in postoperative setting as well as in preoperative status may be used as an inexpensive prognostic biomarker predicting survival outcomes in UTUC patients treated with RNU.  Robotic Partial Nephrectomy for Complex Renal Lesions: Strategies for Success. A Multi-Institutional Study Introduction and Objective: Some complex renal tumours due to their size, location and proximity to the hilum may preclude a minimally invasive approach to nephron sparing surgery. We describe our technique, illustrated with images and videos, of robotic partial nephrectomy for challenging renal tumours. A study of 249 patients who underwent robotic partial nephrectomy (RPN) in multiple institutions was performed. Patients were identified using a prospective RPN databases. A complex renal lesion was defined as a RENAL nephrometry score ≥10. Data was presented as median (interquartile range) and difference between groups was examined. Results: Thirty-one (12.4%) of RPN were for complex renal. Median age was 57 (50.5 -70.5) years. Twenty-one (67.7%) were male, 10 (32.3%) were female. American Society of Anesthesiologists score was 2 (2 -3). Median operative time was 200 (50 -265) min, median warm ischaemia time was 23 (18.5 -29) min, and median blood loss was 200 (50 -265) ml. There were no intraoperative complications, 2 (6.4%) of patients had a post-operative complications. 1 (3.2%) patient had a positive margin. Length of stay was 3.5 (3 -5) days. Median follow up was 12.5 (7 -24) months, there were no recurrences. RPN did result in statistical significant changes in renal function 3 months post RPN compared to preoperative renal function, p=0.0001. Conclusion: RCC patients up-staged from clinical T1 to pathologic T3a showed worse postoperative outcomes than those without up-staging. However, partial nephrectomy, compared with radical nephrectomy, resulted in comparable outcomes in patients who were up-staged. Local Ischemia as an Alternative to Thermal in Kidney Resection Introduction and Objective: Kidney resection in renal cell carcinoma provides a good overall survival, but the use of central ischemia that promotes radical removal of the tumor and adequate hemostasis often leads to irreversible changes in the kidneys from further deterioration or even loss of function to development of chronic renal failure. The objective is to evaluate the effectiveness of local ischemia during resection and its impact on kidney function. (44%). Tumor size ranged from 10 to 208mm (55.3 ± 26.4). The impact of the ischemia type on the amount of bleeding and kidney functional status was assessed by comparing two groups of patients: the first group included 107 (46.7%) patients in whom surgery was performed with the central ischemia lasting from 5 to 21hv (9.9 ± 3.3), the second group -122 (53.3%) patients where local ischemia was used (Fig 1. ). Before resection two sutures are passed under the tumor base (1a). Than the ends of the sutures are tied, creating the zone of local ischemia (1b and 1c). After the resection is done and the defect is closed the sutures are removed. Results: Surgery was performed both open and laparoscopically. There was found no statistically significant difference in tumor size (46.7 ± 22.9 and 46.9 ± 25.6mm) and intraoperative blood loss (340.4 ± 129.2 and 353.4 ± 235.2ml) between the two groups (p> 0.2), confirming the adequacy and implementation of the method. There were found no differences in the number of intra-and postoperative complications such as bleeding, hyperthermia or urinary fistula according to Clavien-Dindo (9 (8.4%) and 10 (8.2%) cases, respectively) (P> 0.9). After comparing GFR on the affected side, it was found that despite no significant difference in the preoperative period indicators (44.4 ± 11.5 and 45.2 ± 13.1ml / min / 1.73m2 respectively), central ischemia significantly reduced its function in the postoperative period: during 3 months -by 25.9% to a value 33,8 ± 10.7, 1 year -by 28.5% to a value 32.6 ± 11.9 (p < 0.05). Although local ischemia group also had a 11.5% decline to 39.1 ± 10.9 (p <0.05) during 3 months, but after 1 year, kidney function did not differ significantly (p> 0.05) and was close to initial -42.3 ± 9.8ml / min / 1.73m2. Conclusion: Local ischemia during kidney resection despite the type of surgical approach makes it possible to improve hemostasis, duration and volume of ischemic kidney, which reduces the risk of deterioration of renal function in the future. Conclusions: Radical nephrectomy and thrombectomy is currently known to be the most effective therapeutic option in patients with RCC and VTT. Despite the low number of patients treated, the data are consistent with those reported in the literature. Neoadjuvant Targeted Therapy in Treatment of Localized RCC Introduction and Objective: The use of targeted therapy (TT) significantly increased survival of the patients with metastatic renal cell cancer (RCC), decreasing the size of the primary foci as well. Therefore, the use of TT, in neoadjuvant setting, maybe thr right way of research. The objective of the study: to assess the efficacy of the neoadjuvant TT in kidney tumor size reduction with further nephron-sparing approach in treatment of localized RCC. In 2008-2016, 1727 RCC patients aged from 24 to 81 (54.5 ± 8.8) were operated in the Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Oncourology of the National Cancer Institute. Fifty one patients received 2 months of neoadjuvant TT with Pazopanib (n = 37) or Sunitinib (n = 14). In all cases, the complex clinical examination was provided including CT, the assessment of the size of cancer, its localization and the volume of the functional parenchyma according to the NCIU classification. 6 (11%) patients had bilateral RCC, in 4 (7.8%) patients cancer affected the solitary kidney, one patient (2.0%) has cancer of the horseshoe kidney, and the rest of 40 patients (78.4%) have unilateral RCC. In general, 57 RCC cases were clinically assessed. The size of the RCC ranged from 15 mm to 170 mm (68.9 ± 26.5 mm). The rate and extent of the RCC regression caused by neoadjuvant TT and the improvement in the setting of the organ-sparing surgery have been analyzed in the study. The two-month TT course resulted in regression of tumor in 51 (89.5%) cases. In 4 (7.0%) -the tumor size was stabilized. In 2 (3.5%) patients, the tumor progressed by 10 % and 15 %, respectively. We did not find the influence of tumor size on its regression. The overall average regression rate was (20.6 ± 15.1%). In the patients stratified according to the size of the tumor, the following average regression rates were achieved: 25.6% ± 20.5% -in the group with tumors of less than 4 cm (n = 10); 17.3% ± 12.1%in the group with the tumor size ranged from 4 to 7 cm (n = 22); 21.5% ± 15% -in the group with the tumors exceeding 7 cm (n = 25) (t-test; p = 0.29). The decrease in the size of primary RCC due to the neoadjuvant TT was a prerequisite for the organ-sparing treatment (partial nephrectomy) in 41 (71.9 %) patients including those with bilateral RCC and RCC of solitary kidney. Nevertheless, the cases of progression and stabilization of the tumor growth in the setting of central localization of cancer and small percentage of functional parenchyma in 16 (28.1 %) patients required nephrectomy.  MP-14.09, Figure 3 . Comparison of Overall Survival (A) and Cancer Specific Survival (B) Rates According to Preoperative NLR in the Study Cohort er 2 (9.5%) M0 patients died 18 and 21 months after surgery respectively. In 14 (51.9%) cases disease progression affected visceral organs during 3 -32 month period, among which 11 (78.6%) during the first year of observation. In one (3.7%) patient 20 months after resection a local recurrence was diagnosed, which led to further nephrectomy. Average progression free survival was 21.7 months. Median overall survival has not yet been reached. Conclusion: Tubular carcinoma of the kidney in 55.5% of cases debuts with pain, in 48.1% -paraneoplastic syndrome, in 29.6% -hematuria and in 77.7% -centrally located. Disease often (59.3%) spreads to regional lymph nodes. Type of surgery does not affect survival. Accounting all the features a better post-operative monitoring should be conducted in order to diagnose early progression. Efficiency In the UK, all cancer cases must be reviewed at multidisciplinary team (MDT) meetings. We report on the efficiency of the renal cancer specialist MDT (sMDT) meeting at our high-volume specialist centre. We conducted descriptive analysis of 1500 cases discussed from 02/09/2015 onwards at the renal cancer sMDT meeting, a weekly meeting with 15 core and 18 extended members where cases from 11 referring hospital trusts are discussed. The estimated average cost of the meeting was calculated as the number of hours members required to prepare and attend the meeting, using the mid-point of pay band attributable to the attendees (NHS pay scales 2015). The cost per meeting, per case, and per patient was calculated. The annual cost extrapolated. Results: One thousand five hundred discussions took place over 34 meetings (02/09/2015 to 20/04/2016) and represented a cohort of 933 patients: 61.7% male (n=576); mean age 63.8 (IQR 24; range 14-96). One hospital trust referred the majority of patients (n=538, 57.7%). Most patients were referred by urology (n=720, 77.3%). Just above a quarter of discussions (n=399, 26.6%) represented new referrals. Each patient had their case discussed a mean of 1.6 times (range 1-7), with a majority of patients being discussed once (n=563, 60.3%). Only 100 discussions (6.7%) were deferred to subsequent meetings due to incomplete clinical details or unavailability of imaging scans or path reports. 11.1% (n=166) of cases were discharged from care. The estimated average cost of the meeting was: £130,875 per year, £2,517 per meeting, £57 per case discussed, and £92 per patient. Conclusion: An average of 44 cases was discussed per meeting. One discussion was usually sufficient to decide management, deferral of cases was uncommon and, given the low discharge rate, one can infer that referrals to the meeting were appropriate. In a high volume centre, the cost per case was modest and represented good value in providing a focused decision making structure for renal cancer patients. Kidney Resection in Patients with Urotelial Cancer Introduction and Objective: Kidney resection in patients with urotelial tumors is a rare type of surgery and can be performed only in cases of localized small tumors of the calyx when renal function is preserved. The aim of our study was to evaluate short and long term functional and oncological outcomes of patients that underwent kidney resection due to urotelial tumors. Retrospective analysis of 87 patients with upper urinary tract cancer that were treated in our department from 2008 to 2017. Average age was 66.3 + 5.4 years. Men\women ratio is 68 (78 %) / 19 (22 %). Conservative surgery was conducted in 24 (27.5%) cases, among which 6 (6.8%) underwent kidney resection and became the object of our study. Results: Average observation period was 28.4 + 18.2 months. All patients had localized ureteral tumors with lesion area that did not exceed 50% of palvicalyceal system. The preoperative planning included CT imaging analysis with measurement of expected remain parenchyma volume. Tumors located in the lower segment calyces in 3 patients, in middle segmen -in 1 case and in upper segment -in 2. According to dynamic renal scintigraphy average unilateral kidney GFR prior to surgery was 19.6 + 5.2 ml/min, serum creatinine level -1.16 + 0.26 mg\dl. All patients underwent resection of the affected calyx with the segment were it was located. Perioperative flexible pyeloscopy was conducted through the incision hole in the pyeloureteral segment MP-14.12, Figure 1 . MP-14.13, Figure 1 . that additionally helped to margin the lesion. In cases of upper pole resection renal cavities were sutured, but when tumor located in the middle or lower segment a reconstruction of pelvicalyceal system was used. All surgical procedures were conducted without ischemia. Average blood loss was 564 + 178 ml. There were no early surgical complications. According to dynamic renal scintigraphy average unilateral kidney GFR 3 months after surgery was 15.8 + 4.8ml\min (p = 0.68), serum creatinine level -1.21 + 0.21 mg\dl (p = 0.43). There were no local relapse cases. In 1 patient there was diagnosed a decrease of unilateral GFR below 10 ml\min. Conclusion: Although kidney resection in patients with pelvicalyceal urotelial tumors is a complex surgical procedure it preserves unilateral and total glomerular filtration rate. Early diagnosed ureteral tumors of the renal cavities can lead to conservative surgery and affect functional outcomes of the treatment. Lymphovascular The involvement of growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) and its receptors in several relevant processes that contribute to prostate cancer progression has been previously described. However, the role of such a neuropeptide on cell transformation through epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is still unknown. The aim of this work was to compare the expression of GHRH receptors (pGHRH-R) and their splice variants (SVs) as well as to study the carcinogenic potential of GHRH on human prostate cells. We used the non-malignant human prostate epithelial cell line RWPE-1. The expression of GHRH receptors (GHRH-R) and their splice variants (SVs) was evaluated by means Western blot analysis and Immunocytochemistry. In order to assess the effect of the neuropeptide on tumorigenic capability, we exposed non-tumour cells in the absence or presence of 0.1 mM GHRH for 24 h. Then, 1 x 107 cells were injected subcutaneously into the flank of nude mice. Animals were divided into two groups: control group (ten mice) and GHRH group (eight mice Results: Higher expression levels of pGHRH were detected in RWPE-1 as compared with levels of SVs. Tumour masses were evident in seven of the eight mice injected with RWPE-1 cells exposed to GHRH. Conclusion: GHRH acts as a proliferative agent in RWPE-1 cell transformation conceivably through epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), reinforcing GHRH role in prostate tumorigenesis. Demystifying The recently identified phenomenon of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-mediated gene activation (RNAa) has been studied extensively, as it is present in human, mouse, and Caenorhabditis elegans, suggesting that dsRNA-mediated RNAa is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism. Previous study showed that dsP21-322 has the capacity to induce tumor suppressor gene p21 expression in human prostate cancer cells. Nonetheless, the role of dsRNAs in the activation of gene expression, including their target molecules and associated key factors, remains poorly understood. In this study, human prostate cancer cell lines PC-3 and DU-145 as our research object. Oligonucleotides were used to overexpress dsRNAs and dsControl. Real-time PCR and western blot were used to detect genes' mRNA and protein expression, respectively. Using fluorescence microscopy and examined the kinetics of dsRNA subcellular distribution. Using a well-characterized antibody that recognizes biotin protein, we performed Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) to detect the molecular target for dsP21-322. Luciferase reporter assay were further performed to verify dsRNAs target molecules. Furthermore, Co-immunoprecipitation, sliver-staining, Tandem mass spectrometry and ChIP assay were carried out to identify unknown proteins and whether histone modification are involved in saRNA-mediated p21 expression. We demonstrated that dsRNA-mediated p21 induction in human cell lines is a common phenomenon. This process occurs at the transcriptional level and that the complementary p21 promoter is the intended dsRNA target. Additionally, we recognize that several heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs) associate with the dsP21-322. Further study identify that hnRNPA2/B1 interact with the saRNA in vivo and in vitro and depletion of hnRNPA2/B1 abrogates the dsP21-322 activity. Importantly, ChIP assay indicated that p21 activation was accompanied by an increased enrichment of AGO and trimethylation of histoneH3K4 at dsRNAs-targeted genomic sites. Conclusion: These data systematically reveal the mechanistic and functional aspects of ncRNA-mediated p21 activation in human prostate cancer cells, which might be a useful tool to analyze gene function and aid in the development of novel drug targets for prostate cancer therapeutics. EMT In 4 open-labels, single-arm, fixed dose, pivotal studies, male prostate cancer patients (age 40-86) was treated with 1, 3, 4, or 6-month SC-LA formulation. Blood was sampled at screening, baseline, 2, 4, 8 hours post dosing, days 1, 2, 3, 7, and every other week until end of each study. Serum T levels were measured by radioimmunoassay (limit of quantitation is 3 ng/dL). Data were pooled across 4 studies and descriptive statistics were used to summarize concentrations at each time point and to determine time to T suppression. Results: The mean weight or age of patients was similar across the four studies. When patients were pooled by weight or age, the median serum T levels for all weight subgroups or all age subgroups achieved and maintained castration level (T≤20 ng/dL) by week 4 ( Table 1 ) until end of the study. These results demonstrate that all SC-LA dose formulations consistently achieve and maintain T suppression below 20 ng/dL across all weight and age subgroups, including those with the highest BW (>90 kg) and age (>80 years). This suggests that SC-LA may not require dose adjustments due to weight or age factors. Cytoreductive We aim to show the role of radical prostatectomy, lymphadenectomy and bilateral orchiectomy instead of androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) as an alternative treatment in patients with advanced prostate cancer with oligo-and polymetastases in their bones. Radical prostatectomy, extended lymphadenectomy and bilateral orchiectomy was done in 24 patients with advanced prostate cancer with bone metastases (group 1). The number of 23 patients with similar characteristics received ADT without local therapy as control group (group 2). The patients have been followed with prostate specific antigen (PSA), whole body bone scan and other imaging and laboratory tests if necessary. The mean age in patients group 1 was 61 and in group 2 was 67 years old. Mean follow up was 12 months. Biochemical relapse occurred in 4 patients in group 1 and in 16 patients in group 2 (p=0.001). Bone metastasis decreased in 5 patients in group 1 and only in 2 patients in group 2 while it was increased in 3 patients in group 1 and in 5 patients in group 2. All patients in group 1 are voiding continent except one patient needed cutaneous ureterostomy because of contracted bladder, while in group 2 trans-urethral resection of prostate was done in 1 patient, permanent Foley catheter was needed in 4 and bilateral percutaneous nephrostomy was done in one patient. Recto-vesical fistula occurred in one patient during surgery and he is waiting for repair. DVT occurred in two after surgery and they are under medical treatment. Biochemical failure was more prevalent in patients with poly metastases in comparison to oligometstases in both groups. Two patients died in each group because of metastatic prostate cancer. Conclusion: Cytoreductive and palliative radical prostatectomy, extended lymphadenectomy and bilateral orchiectomy is feasible in metastatic advanced prostate cancer and seems to improve quality of life comparing ADT and might decrease biochemical relapse. Further studies and more follow up is necessary. Introduction and Objectives: Variation in the histopathological morphology of prostate cancer has been shown to be associated with heterogeneous clinical outcomes relating to disease progression. The recent utilisation of Prostate specific membrane antigen (PSMA) positron emission tomography (PET) to investigate biochemical recurrence (BCR) has increased our ability to map out metastatic disease to lymph nodes. We aim to analyse PSMA-PET positive lymph nodes to characterise their morphological subtype and relationship to PSMA-PET avidity. Patients included were those having undergone salvage pelvic lymph node dissection for PSMA-PET avid pelvic metastatic disease, performed for BCR following definitive treatment of prostate cancer. Pathology examined for lymph node yield, presence of prostate cancer and morphological subtype. Results: Fourteen patients with BCR and positive PS-MA-PET scans post definitive treatment of prostate cancer underwent pelvic lymph node dissection and formal histopathological examination. Metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma was identified in 13 cases (93%). Nine of the 13 cases with metastatic disease (70%) exhibited prominent cribriform architecture, with six of these also displaying features of ductal adenocarcinoma. One case with a yield of thirty-eight lymph nodes showed no evidence of metastatic disease. In the setting of BCR, these findings provide supportive evidence that PSMA-PET scanning can identify metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma in the pelvic nodes. Importantly, this study shows that PSMA-PET will identify a specific morpho-type of prostatic adenocarcinoma, namely adenocarcinoma with a cribriform architecture, which in this series was most commonly seen with ductal adenocarcinoma and also acinar adenocarcinoma. However, a positive PSMA-PET scan may also occur in patients without nodal metastatic disease, as seen here in one case. Further examination of PSMA-PET positive nodal pathology is required to fully characterise this developing technology. MP-15.03, Figure 1 . MP-15.03, Figure 2 . To assess the effect of salvage partial brachytherapy after primary 125-iodine low-dose rate brachytherapy with or without external beam radiotherapy. Between 2003 and 2010, a total of 616 patients underwent low-dose rate brachytherapy-based therapy for clinically localized prostate cancer at Jikei University Hospital in Tokyo, Japan. Eight patients had underdosed areas identified at initial low-dose rate brachytherapy corresponding to the positive biopsy sites after biochemical recurrence. All were confirmed to have only localized recurrence, and seven patients were treated with salvage partial low-dose rate brachytherapy for local recurrence. Results: Median follow up after initial low-dose rate brachytherapy for these seven patients with isolated local recurrence was 139 months (range 106-147 months). The seven retreated patients tolerated the salvage partial low-dose rate brachytherapy well, and showed a decrease in prostate-specific antigen level at follow up. However, four patients later developed biochemical progression. The median time to biochemical recurrence was 54.7 months (17 to 81 months) in all patients. One patient died of prostate cancer at 74 months after salvage partial brachytherapy. In addition, one case is under follow-up observation with additional cryotherapy. Conclusion: Salvage partial low-dose rate brachytherapy for biopsy-proven localized prostate cancer recurrence appears rational, technically feasible and safe. However, four of seven patients had biochemical progression after salvage partial low-dose rate brachytherapy. Optimal patient selection is of utmost importance for long-term success. Larger studies with longer follow up are warranted. Robot Assisted Radical Prostatectomy in Patients with Oligometastatic Prostate Cancer Baldev Singh Aulakh Jang WS 1 , Koh DH 2 Introduction and Objectives: There is growing interest in the role of local treatment in metastatic prostate cancer. However, there is a lack of data for robot assisted radical prostatectomy as therapy in this setting. Thus, we investigated perioperative and oncologic outcomes of robot assisted radical prostatectomy in patients with oligometastatic prostate cancer. We retrospectively evaluated 38 patients with oligometastatic prostate cancer treated with robot assisted radical prostatectomy between 2007 and 2014 at a single high-volume tertiary care center. Oligometastatic disease was defined as five or fewer hot spots on bone scan with or without suspicious pelvic or retroperitoneal nodal involvement at preoperative imaging studies. Perioperative outcomes, radiographic progression-free, cancer-specific, and overall survival were evaluated. Results: Median follow up duration was 44.5 months. Median patient age at surgery was 65 years. Median PSA at diagnosis was 39.0 ng/ml. Median operation time and console time were 147 and 90 minutes, respectively. Median estimated blood loss was 300 ml. Length of hospitalization and catheterization were 5 days and 10 days, respectively. Three patients (7.9%) received blood transfusions and 2 patients (5.3%) experienced grade 3 postoperative complications. Overall, 37 (97.4%) and 11 (28.9%) patients had T3-4 disease and lymph node metastasis. Five year radiographic progression-free, cancer-specific, and overall survival rates were 54.5%, 78.3, and 63.8%, respectively. Our findings support the feasibility and effectiveness of robot assisted radical prostatectomy in a highly selected cohort of prostate cancer patients with bone metastases. Salvage With a dearth of data on long-term outcomes of salvage cryotherapy (SC) for locally recurrent prostate cancer following RT, a combined analysis of SC patient data from two centers on their long-term outcomes was performed. Patients undergoing SC for biopsy-proven, localized radiorecurrent prostate cancer (RRPCa) from 1990 to 2004 were prospectively accrued. Preoperative characteristics, perioperative morbidity, and postoperative data were reviewed from two prospectively maintained databases. The primary outcomes were overall survival (OS) and disease-specific survival (DSS). Secondary outcomes were metastasis-free survival (MFS), freedom from castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), and freedom from androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). Results: Two hundred and sixty eight patients were identified, with a median follow-up of 10.3 years. One hundred and ninety nine (74.3%) experienced complications, including 381 Clavien I-II events and 55 Clavien III events. At 10 years, 69% had freedom from ADT, 76% had freedom from CRPC, and the MFS rate was 76%. The 10-year DSS rate was 81%, and the 10year OS rate was 77%. Pre-salvage prostate-specific antigen level of >5 ng/mL was associated with an increased risk of developing CRPC but was not associated with MFS, DSS, or OS (see figures 1 &2). The use of neoadjuvant ADT was associated with decreased MFS and improved OS and DSS but did not affect freedom from CRPC (p<0.05). Conclusions: Salvage cryotherapy for RRPCa appears to provide long-term freedom from ADT and CRPC, as well as MFS, DSS and OS in the majority of patients, with acceptable morbidity. Salvage cryotherapy is therefore a viable treatment option for localized RRPCa. Improved Survival of Men with M1 Prostate Cancer Treated with Androgen Deprivation Therapy and Prostatic Radiotherapy Introduction and Objective: There is growing interest in the possible prognostic impact of adding local therapies to androgen deprivation (ADT) for men with M1 prostate cancer (mPca). We evaluated the overall survival (OS) of men with mPca treated with ADT with and without prostatic external beam radiotherapy (RT) using our single institution database. The Saitama Medical Center Prostate Cancer Database was queried for men with newly diagnosed mPca, all treated with ADT, with complete datasets for RT, surgery, chemotherapy, prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level, Gleason score, and metastatic sites. OS was analyzed using the Kaplan-Meier method, log-rank test, Cox proportional hazards models, and propensity score-matched analyses. Results: From 1999 to 2016, 234 men with mPca were identified, including 56 (24%) receiving prostatic RT. At a median follow-up of 3.2 years, the addition of prostatic RT to ADT was associated with improved OS on univariate (p < 0.001) and multivariate analysis (hazard ratio, 0.335; 95% CI, 0.114 to 0.860; p = 0.022) adjusted for age, year of diagnosis, PSA, hemoglobin, alkaline phosphatase, lactate dehydrogenase, presence of Gleason pattern 5, T stage (1-2/3/4), N stage (0/1), M stage (presence of visceral metastasis), chemotherapy administration, ECOG performance status (0-1/2-4), and history of prostatic RT. Propensity score analysis with matched baseline characteristics (n = 66) demonstrated that patients treated with prostatic RT plus ADT had better OS (p = 0.007) and cancer-specific survival (p = 0.026) when compared to those treated with ADT alone. In this single institution contemporary analysis, Japanese men with mPca receiving prostatic RT and ADT lived substantially longer than men treated with ADT alone. Prospective trials evaluating local therapies for mPca are warranted. The Introduction and Objective: Individuals with prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels of ≥20 ng/mL, Gleason scores of ≥8, or clinical stage T2c/T3 tumors are defined as high-risk prostate cancer (PC) patients. Treatment options for high-risk PC include external beam-radiation therapy (RT) with androgen-deprivation hormonal therapy; trimodal therapy with a combination of brachytherapy, RT, and hormonal therapy; and radical prostatectomy (RP) with neoadjuvant or adjuvant therapy. To date, no sufficiently large-scale, prospective, randomized clinical trials have compared the abovementioned treatment options. Thus, optimal management strategies for high-risk PCa patients have not been established. Therefore, this study was aimed to compare the prognoses between patients with high risk localized or locally advanced prostate cancer (PCa) treated with either radiotherapy (RT) or radical prostatectomy (RP) after a median 3.6-month neoadjuvant hormonal therapy (NHT). Between 2003 and 2014, a total of 255 patients including 83 RT and 172 RP were enrolled to retrospectively analyze their clinical data after NHT in single institution. The definitions of BCR in each group were that PSA increase > 2 ng/ mL higher than the PSA nadir value, regardless of the blood concentration of the nadir in RT group, is defined, whereas a PSA level 0.2 ng/ml following RP after a PSA "free" interval is defined in RP group. The comparison of time to biochemical recurrence (BCR), local recurrence at pelvis (LC), metastasis, clinical painful symptom progression (CPSP), castration-resistant PC (CRPC) and overall survival (OS) were statistically assessed between RT and RP using Kaplan-Meier method and log rank test with a significant p-value<0.05.  Clinical Activity of Abiraterone Acetate in Docetaxel-Naïve and Docetaxel- The confirmed PSA response rate in docetaxel-naïve patients was 54.4% (56/103), which was significantly higher than that of docetaxel-pretreated patients 34.9% (15/43) (p = 0.047). In the Kaplan-Meier analyses, the median PSA progression-free survival, clinical or radiographic progression-free survival, and OS among docetaxel-pretreated patients was significantly different than docetaxel-naïve patients respectively (7.7 vs 14.0 months, p = 0.005), (12.5 vs 17.0 months, p = 0.003) and (18.0 vs 27.0 months, p = 0.016). A multivariate analysis indicated that only lower ALB and without confirmed PSA response were independent significant predictors for shorter OS. Conclusion: As a result, this analysis indicated that the efficacy of abiraterone is quite good in both docetaxelnaïve and docetaxel-pretreated Asian mCRPC patients. Moreover, higher PSA response rate and longer median OS were observed in the docetaxel-naïve subgroup. We assessed the use of palliative medications before death from prostate cancer. We included all Swedish men who died between 2009 and 2012 with prostate cancer as the main cause of death in the Swedish Cause of Death Register, totally 8516 men. The Prostate Cancer data Base Sweden (PCBaSe) was used to measure the proportion who received a prescription of androgen deprivation therapy, NSAID, paracetamol, opioids, glucocorticoids, antidepressants, anxiolytics, and sedative-hypnotics and the differences in treatment related to age, time since diagnosis, educational level, presence of close relatives, and comorbidities. We collected data from three years prior to death from prostate cancer, or from the date of diagnosis if time between diagnosis and death was shorter than three years. The proportion receiving opioids increased from 30 to 72% during the last year of life, and 68% received a strong opioid at time of death. Antidepressants, anxiolytics and sedative-hypnotics increased in proportions from 13 to 22%, 9 to 27%, and 21 to 33%, respectively. Older men had lower probability of receiving ADT (adjusted odds ratio (OR) 0.78; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.61 to 0.99 for men > 85 years), opioids (OR 0.56; 95% CI 0.47 to 0.66 for men > 85 years), and anxiolytics (OR 0.74; 95% CI 0.63 to 0.88 for men > 85 years). Men without close relatives had lower probability to receive ADT (OR 0.64; 95% CI 0.52 to 0.80 for unmarried men without children) and opioids (OR 0.77; 95% CI 0.66 to 0.90 for unmarried men without children). The probability of receiving opioids was increased for men with low education (OR 1.43; 95% CI 1.25 to 1.64 for low education). Our results indicate that older men and men without close relatives are disadvantaged with respect to treatment of cancer pain and need closer attention from health care providers. The psychological stress patients perceive in late stage disease is reflected in the increased use of pharmacological treatment of mood disorders. Early identification and better counselling may help to reduce this distress. Health Figure 1 . lation. HRQoL was compared among 3 UC survivors and between each type of cancer and general population with the EORTC QLQ-C30, Patient Health Questionniare-9 and Duke-UNC Functional Social Support Questionnaire. Results: PC, KC, and BC survivors were not different with all domains of functioning and symptom scales, except for slight but significant difference in social functioning between KC and BC survivors (89.5 vs. 80.6, P=0.021). Three groups were neither different for depression nor functional social support. When compared to matched general population, PC and BC survivors showed lower social functioning and lower appetite problem than control, while KC survivors showed lower physical functioning as well as higher pain and dyspnea symptom. All three UC survivors reported higher financial difficulties, but also higher perceived social support than control. When examined by time elapsed from curative surgery, some different patterns were observed by cancer type (Figure 1 ). Conclusion: While HRQoL issues were generally similar among disease-free UC survivors, different patterns were noted according to UC type, compared with general population. Our results will be valuable to both urologists and patients by providing HRQoL information following surgery, and planning future supportive care needs.  Introduction and Objective: Flexible cystoscopy is one of the most commonly performed procedures in the urology office setting. Pain, hematuria, lower urinary tract symptoms and urinary tract infection are the main adverse effects present during or after cystoscopy. While it has become a standard urology procedure, it is important to acknowledge patients feeling about it. The aim of this study is to evaluate patient's anxiety, tolerability, discomfort and perception when they go under procedure. An observational, prospective, nonrandomized study was conducted on 251 patients subjected to a flexible cystoscopy from June 2015 to May 2016. All patients were allowed to watch the video screen together with the urologist, receive the same real-time explanation during the procedure and receive the same intraurethral anesthesic with lidocain 2%. A selfmade questionary was filled up by all the patients. The questionary includes: First or consecutive procedure; patients perception about: waiting time, medical and nursing attendance before and along procedure; feeling about the procedure (bothering, uncomfortable, painful) and symptoms after cystoscopy that includes: Pain score on an analog scale, as well as stinging, pollakiuria, fever and hematuria. Results: Almost half (40%) of patients were the first cystoscopy to be submitted. Most (84%) did not seek prior information, and among those seeking information, 56% did not serve to reassure them. Satisfaction for the care received got a positive rating at 86%. The degree of discomfort during the test was low. After cystoscopy, most of the patients were asymptomatic. Most common discomfort were dysuria and pollakiuria. Conclusion: Cystoscopy is a well-tolerated test with few side effects. A careful personal attention and prior information can help minimize discomfort during the procedure. Does Introduction and Objective: Urethral catheterization is one of the most common and painful invasive procedures performed in an outpatient or emergency setting. Topical anesthetic gel is applied to reduce discomfort. However, evidence is insufficient and the results from studies contradictory. We performed a meta-analysis of prospective, randomized, controlled trials on the efficacy of topical anesthetic gel (TAG) versus plain lubricant (PL) in reducing pain during urethral catheterization among adult male and female patients.  The moderate quality evidence from meta-analysis of 7 randomized controlled trials showed that topical anesthetic gel reduces urethral catheterization pain intensity in adults of both sexes. Evaluating the Validity of Laparoscopic and Flexible Ureteroscopy Tasks Using Inanimate Simulation Training Models Introduction and Objective: Simulation based training is being increasingly used as a tool to help trainees mount the learning curve for new surgical skills. In light of restricted training hours and concerns of patient safety, there is a need for the development and use of simulation models to train residents. Seventy-six urology trainees from various Asian countries were assessed on their laparoscopic and flexible ureteroscopy skills using inanimate simulation models. The laparoscopic peg transfer task was chosen from the validated Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS) program. An endourological skills-training model was used to assess the trainees' skill with a flexible ureteroscope in complete inspection of calyces and retrieval of stones using a nitinol basket. Demographic information of the trainees' experience (no experience, 1 -10 or >10 procedures) in laparoscopy, rigid ureteroscopy and flexible ureteroscopy were self-reported. Kruskal-Wallis test was used for comparisons between the demographic skill groups. Results: Time required to complete the FLS task decreased with increasing laparoscopic experience (220 vs 197 vs 139 seconds, p=0.008) confirming the construct validity of the task. Using the endourological trainer, total time required for inspection of calyces and retrieval of stones reduced with increasing trainee experience with flexible ureteroscopy (389 vs 306 vs 230 seconds, p=0.003) but not with rigid ureteroscopy experience (370 vs 389 vs 314 seconds, p=0.1432). Age, year of training or years after graduation did not correlate with performance in both tasks. To evaluate the efficacy of antibiotic prophylaxis as well as the cleaning/disinfection procedure to prevent urinary tract infection in patients who undergo flexible cystoscopy at office. A prospective, randomized, aleatory study was performed between June 2015 and May 2016 in every patient who underwent flexible cystoscope at urology office. Patients with temporally or permanent urinary stents were excluded from the study as well as procedures that involves bladder biopsies. A total of 251 patients were recruiting. Urinary culture was collected in all of the patients before and after procedure. Patients were aleatoryzaded in two groups: Antibiotic prophylaxis Vs nothing. Antibiotic prophylaxis consists in 4 doses of norfloxacin (400mg) twice a day during two days. Type of cleaning/disinfection includes: manual adasport, manual oxide, washing machine. Demographics characteristics such as gender and age were also collected. Relation between antibiotic prophylaxis, type of cleaning/ disinfection procedure, demographic characteristics and positive urinary culture after procedure were analysed. Measures to avoid BIAS: Randomization, aleatorization. Results: Urinary culture before cystoscope was: Negative in 231 patients (92.4%) and positive in 19 (7.6%); and not valuable in 1. After aleatorization, 129 patients were included in Group 1 (no antibiotic treatment) and 117 in Group 2 (antibiotic prophylaxis), the rest 6 patients were autoexcluded. After procedure culture was negative in 224 patients (91.1%) and positive in 22 (8.9%). There were no statistical significances between urine culture results pre and post cistoscopy and demographics characteristics. Furthermore, no statistical differences were seen between urine culture post cystoscopy and type of cleaning cystoscope procedure (p=0.7), or between urine culture and type of cleaning with or without antibiotic profilaxis (p=0.5, p=0.9). Conclusions: None of the analysed variables influence on the positivity of the urine culture after cystoscope. Routine antibiotic prophylaxis should not be further recommended. Menstrual  These results suggest that the maximum risk factor for adverse course of AUP in reproductive age women at onset of the disease occurs in the period from 20th to 5th day of the MC, indicating a need for in-patient treatment. The development of the AUP from the 6th to the 19th day of the MC reduces the risk of unfavorable course of the disease, the treatment of which can be performed on an outpatient basis under dynamic control urologist or general practitioner / family. These data substantiate indica-tions for hospitalization and to re-evaluate prevention principles AUP in reproductive age women. Analysis presentation, systemic factors, local factors, management and outcome of patients were recorded. The systemic factors included were serum albumin, sodium, platelet count total leukocyte count, random blood sugars, hemodynamic status, need for respiratory support and duration of hospital stay. Local factors like obstructive uropathy and the extent of gas (Huang and Tseng classification) in the kidney were evaluated by Computed Tomography. The patients were divided in to two groups: Group 1, Patients managed conservatively; Group 2, Patients with intervention. The mean age of the patients in our study was 56.5 years and the Male to Female ratio was 1:6. The urine culture was positive in 39 patients, with E. coli being the most common organism (25 patients). In our study patients with hemodynamic instability, thrombocytopenia, hypoalbuminemia, hyponatremia at presentation were associated with increased morbidity in terms of increased duration of hospital stay and the need for ventilation. However, no significant difference in age, male/female ratio, poor glycemic status, renal failure, leukocytosis, among the two groups. Local factors: Associated obstructive uropathy (n=12) in patients with EPN resulted in need for intervention and the need for increased hospital stay. However, CT grade did not correlate with the disease outcome. Four mortalities (8.8%) were noted in the study group.  The 'Prototype 3/5 mm' needle holder comprises of a 3mm tip housing the jaws of the needle holder which is welded with rest of the shaft of 5 mm diameter. Fifteen expert laparoscopic surgeons and twenty-four novice surgeons were given a set of five fixed tasks to be performed on laparoscopic box trainer. Prototype 3/5 mm needle holder was compared with conventional 5 mm needle holder. The first task was to grasp the needle and position it in an angle deemed ideal for suturing. The second task was to pass suture through two fixed points and make a single square knot. Task 3 was to perform two forward throws over the needle holder. Task 4 was to perform two backward throws over the needle holder. Task 5 was to perform two throws using the Maryland forceps. Individual time needed to complete each task Results: In both, expert group and novice group, the mean time (in seconds) to complete all five tasks were shorter with prototype 3/5 needle holder which was statistically significant in 4 out of 5 tasks (Table) . On subjective scale too the prototype 3/5 mm needle holder fared better than conventional needle holder in terms of handling and suturing in both the groups (Table) . The expert laparoscopic surgeons as well as the novice laparoscopic surgeons performed each step of laparoscopic suturing faster and with more ease while using the prototype 3/5 mm laparoscopic needle holder. Neoadjuvant Sunitinib Treatment Prior to Planned Nephrectomy in Patients with Advanced Renal Cell Carcinoma: A Meta-analysis and Systemic Review Introduction and Objective: We conducted a meta-analysis to assess the efficacy and safeness of neoadjuvant sunitinib treatment in patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma. A comprehensive search for articles of PUBMED, MEDLINE and EMBASE databases and bibliographies of retrieved articles published up to March 1, 2017 was conducted. Meta-analysis was performed using STATA 14.0. We included 10 studies in the meta-analysis (5 retrospective studies and 5 prospective studies), and found the proportion of primary tumors which decreased in size was 69% (95% CI: 57% -82%) overall with 11% (95% CI: 8% -15%) of ones reached partial response according to RECIST criteria. Nephrectomy was finally performed in 46% (95% CI: 25% -66%) of patients receiving neoadjuvant sunitinib treatment overall. The pooled overall surgical complication rate was 29.6% (95% CI: 22.3% -36.9%). Our meta-analysis showed that neoadjuvant sunitinib treatment was effective in downsizing of both primary and metastatic tumors, and in converting an otherwise unresectable tumor to a surgically feasible resection. The overall surgical complication rate was consistent with those without neoadjuvant sunitinib treatment. Functional Results: Mean observation period was 60.2 ± 21.3 months. Mean age -67 ± 6.9 years. According to dynamic renal scintigraphy affected kidney function prior to surgery was 20.3 ± 9.2 ml/min, serum creatinine level -1.28 ± 0.42 mg\dl. All patients underwent conservative surgery with upper urinary tract reconstruction that included: ureteroneocystostomy with psoas hitch (48%), modified ureteroureterostomy (13%), in- testinal plasty of the ureter (26%), pyeloplasty (13%). According to dynamic renal scintigraphy affected kidney function 1 year after surgery was 26.2 ± 9.8 ml\ min (p = 0.068), serum creatinine level -1.16 ± 0.28 mg\dl (p = 0.043). One patient developed ureteral stricture after ureteroureterostomy with terminal hydronephrosis 9 months after surgery which required nephroureterectomy. There were no patients with local recurrence. Bladder relapse was diagnosed in 4 (17.3%) patients, progression to metastatic disease in 2 (8.6%) cases. Conservative surgery provides good functional outcomes in selected patients with ureteral tumors. Preserved kidney function in this patient can affect overall survival and possibility to conduct chemotherapy. Endoscopic tract symptoms due to BPH larger than 80cc (measured on transrectal ultrasound). In this operation, we use a transvesical approach. We use three laparoscopic instruments: a bipolar grasper, a harmonic scalpel and a suction device. The adenoma is transected completely and then removed in an endobag through the cystotomy incision. A prospective data-collection was done with regard to pre-, per-and post-operative data. Pre-operative data included: ultrasound estimated prostate volume, PSA, Qmax, and post voidal residue (PVR). Peroperative data included: estimated blood loss, operating time, complications and transfusion rate. Postoperative data included: hospitalization time, catheterization time, resected specimen weight, Qmax, PVR. The International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) was assessed preoperatively and >6 months after surgery. In table 1 the pre-operative characteristics are shown. Results: Average operating time was 102 minutes and estimated blood loss 184 ml. In three cases, an endoscopic coagulation and a blood transfusion were necessary. No Clavien grade V occurred. Postoperatively patients got a bladder catheter for a mean duration of 9.4 days and a mean hospital stay of 5.2 days. The enucleated tissue showed on pathology a mean weight of 85.2 gram. Postoperative IPSS scores improved by average 12.8 points (pre-operative mean IPSS score was 20.6). The Qmax showed a mean improvement from 7.9 ml/sec pre-operatively to 19.4ml/sec post-operatively. In table 2 and 3 the per-and postoperative results are shown. In this study, we show that the ETAP is a feasible, safe and truly minimal invasive procedure. The functional outcomes are promising. We have to take into account that our learning-curve is involved in the development of this new technique. Chemoprophylaxis during Transrectal Prostate Needle Biopsy: Interim Analysis of Randomized Clinical Trial (Clinicaltrial.Gov ID: NCT02423759) Introduction and Objective: Post Transrectal biopsy infectious complications (PTBICs) are increasing due to rising fluoroquinolone resistance (FQ-R). We evaluate whether changing chemoprophylaxis from fluoroquinolones alone to fluoroquinolones plus gentamicin or rectal swab culture-based chemoprophylaxis would influence infectious complications in men undergoing transrectal ultrasound-guided prostate biopsy (TRUSPB). Patients presented for prostate biopsy will be randomized to receive standard ciprofloxacin 500 mg B.I.D for 3 days (group A), augmented prophylaxis using ciprofloxacin and single preprocedure 160mg gentamycin IM (group B) and rectal swab culture based prophylaxis (group C). Primary end point is occurrence of postprocedure sepsis ≥ 2 of SIRS (systemic inflammatory response syndrome criteria). Inflammatory markers are used for postprocedure screening; CRP (C reactive protein), Results: Since April 2015, 258 patients were randomized 89, 94 and 80 patients in groups A, B and C respectively. Prebiopsy urine culture with significant were treated before biopsy. Postprocedure fever occurred in 19 (21.3%), 9 (9.5%) and 8 (10%) in groups A, B and C respectively (P 0.03). Sepsis was reported in 5 (5.6%), 5 (5.3%) and 4 (5%) in groups A, B and C respectively (P 0.9) and 2 (2.2%) patients in group A required hospitalization. Urine culture 2 weeks after biopsy showed significant growth in 23 (25.8%), 5 (5.3%) and 11 (13.7%) in groups A, B and C respectively (P 0.002). Among cultures of rectal swab, significant bacterial growth was noted in 62/80 (77.5%), FQ-R was reported in 55/62 (88.2%). Conclusion: With increasing FQ-R, ciprofloxacin alone is not an optimal prophylaxis. Augmented prophylaxis is an effective and practical approach. Targeted prophylaxis is reserved for cases with contraindication to gentamycin. The Diagnostic Outcomes of Men with a Negative Mpmri for the Diagnosis of Prostate Cancer, in Low-Risk Biopsy Naive Men Introduction and Objectives: The routine use of pre-biopsy multiparametric MRI (mpMRI) for the early diagnosis of prostate cancer (CaP) is controversial. A consensus on the optimal management algorithm of a low risk man with a negative mpMRI is unclear. Current guidelines suggest prostate specific antigen (PSA), digital rectal examination (DRE) and shared decision making should be used to determine if a biopsy should be done. mpMRI has the potential to be used as an additional screening tool to select some men to avoid biopsy, potentially lowering the associated harms and over diagnosis. This study evaluated the outcomes of low risk, mpMRI negative men at our institution. and August 2016 206 men with a PSA <10 ug/L underwent mpMRI for suspected CaP. Twenty-two men were excluded for: previous TURP, previous MRI, prior biopsy or known CaP. One hundred and eightyfour men were evaluated for PSA, MRI findings, Prostate Imaging Reporting and Data System (PI-RADS) score, transrectal ultrasound guided (TRUS) biopsy findings and Gleason scores. Results: Fifty-seven out of one hundred and eightyfour (31%) of mpMRIs done were thought to have no evidence of CaP (PI-RADS<3). 24/57(42%) of men with a negative MRI went on to have a TRUS biopsy. Of those biopsied, 9/24 (37.5%) were positive and 15/24 (62.5%) were negative for CaP. 6/9 (66.7%) positive biopsies were Gleason 3+3 (clinically insignificant CaP). 3/24 (12.5%) of men with a negative MRI had clinically significant CaP, as high as Gleason 4+5. Conclusion: Less than half of the men at low risk of prostate cancer (PSA <10 ug/L) that had a negative MRI went on to have a biopsy done. Of those biopsied, 12.5% of men with a negative mpMRI had clinically significant CaP. These results indicate that until the performance of mpMRI is improved and definitive surveillance protocols are devised TRUS biopsy continues to play a role in men with negative mpMRIs. Quality Results: All quality of life domains were affected by prostate cancer treatment. The mean follow-up time after surgery was 41 months. Urinary incontinence worsened significantly in the RALP and brachytherapy groups (p < 0.001). The cryotherapy group achieved a return to baseline urinary continence at 6 months and had significantly better continence QOL than the brachytherapy group at 30 months (p = 0.021). Brachytherapy patients had significantly worse irritative/obstructive voiding symptoms compared to RALP patients at 30 months (p < 0.001), and also experienced a 55% slower rate of return to baseline. Bowel function was significantly worse in brachytherapy patients compared to RALP patients at 30 months (p = 0.037). The cryotherapy and brachytherapy groups had a 36% slower recovery of bowel function. Cryotherapy was associated with the worse sexual function than brachytherapy at 30 months (p = 0.012), although all three groups were affected. Minimal impact on hormonal function was observed long-term. Conclusion: Due to the high survival of patients who receive treatment for prostate cancer, quality of life is a major concern when choosing therapy. Each prostate cancer treatment studied above has a unique recovery profile. Long term, RALP is associated with the least urinary irritative and obstructive symptoms, whereas cryotherapy is associated with the least impact on urinary incontinence but the greatest impact on sexual function. Brachytherapy was correlated with the greatest decline in bowel function. All three modalities have minimal effect on hormonal function. The Post-Operative Decline in Factor XIII is a Predictor of Vesicourethral Anastomotic Leakage and Lymphorrhea after Robot-Assisted Radical Prostatectomy. The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan; 2 Tokyo Metropolitan Tama Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan; 3 Teikyo University, Tokyo, Japan Introduction and Objective: Factor XIII (F13) plays an important role in blood coagulation by stabilizing fibrin and has recently been recognized to accelerate the wound healing process. However, little study has been done to explore the association between F13 levels and postoperative complications after surgery, especially in terms of urological operation. We aimed to determine if the F13 levels during perioperative periods were associated with the postoperative complications after prostatectomy. RF-02.04, Table 1 . Materials and Methods: A prospective study has been conducted for patients with prostate cancer at our institution. Preoperative and postoperative (1st, 3rd, 5th, and 7th postoperative days) F13 and other coagulation factors, such as PT and aPTT, levels were examined in 119 patients with prostate cancer who underwent robot-assisted radical prostatectomy (RARP). Anastomotic leakage was routinely checked with instillation of 150ml normal saline during the operation, and if leakage was detected, additional suturing was performed to assure water-tightness. At post-operative day7, anastomotic leakage was investigated by cystography before indwelling catheter was removed. We investigated the association of F13 levels with clinical background factors and the postoperative complications after RARP. Results: The average age of the patients who underwent prostatectomy was 67.4 years. Major postoperative complications included anastomotic leakage (10.08%), and lymphorrhea (7.56%) and postoperative bleeding (9.24%). During the operation, all the patients underwent leakage check-up by instilling 150ml normal saline after anastomosis maneuver and if there is leakage, additional suturing of urethra and bladder is performed. The preoperative F13 ranged from 64 to 143% (average 92%). The F13 levels significantly decreased after prostatectomy and it did not recover until the 7th postoperative day. (POD0:71%, POD1:69%, POD3:65%, POD7:63%, POD30:87%). Univariate analysis showed initial PSA, BMI, PT(-POD7), F13 (pre-operation, POD0, POD3) was associated with lymphorrhea, but multivariate analysis showed F13 levels at POD3 was only correlated with total volume of discharge from the drain (p=0.012) . In terms of anastomotic leakage at POD7, F13 at POD3 also showed significant association (p=0.035). Conclusion: This study revealed that perioperative decrease of Factor XIII may be a predictor of lymphorrhea and anastomotic leakage after RARP. Quality  Introduction and Objective: Brachytherapy is a valid treatment option for localized prostate cancer, frequently associated with low morbidity and good health related quality of life (HR-QoL) levels. There are few randomized studies relating late sexual morbidity and HR-QoL in patients submitted to prostatic brachytherapy. The aims of this study are: assess and characterize late sexual morbidity and HR-QoL in patients submitted to prostatic brachytherapy with 125I; assess the impact of pre-treatment factors in the development of sexual morbidity; determine the impact of sexual satisfaction in HR-QoL and patients 'global satisfaction. All patients submitted to prostatic brachytherapy in a single urology department between October 2003 and October 2016, were asked to answer the EPIC, IIEF and BSFI questionnaires. The results were treated in function of patient age and time since brachytherapy. Associations were tested according pre-treatment sexual function and patient's morbidities (diabetes mellitus, smoking habits and hypertension). Results: From 536 patients, 27 died and 203 (37.9%) validly answered to the questionnaires. The median follow-up was 6.42 years (SD=2.6 years). There was a significant decline in all sexual domains with the exception of sexual desire. Erectile dysfunction was the main developed symptom, followed by ejaculatory dysfunction and orgasmic deterioration. 67.4% of patients suffer from some degree of sexual bother, but only 14.5% patients said it was a severe problem. 52.8% of patients were satisfied with their sexual performance. The development of sexual dysfunction has an important impact on global satisfaction. Pre-treatment erectile function, diabetes mellitus and patient age has a significant influence in the development of sexual dysfunction and impact in global sexual morbidity development. Conclusion: Erectile dysfunction following prostate brachytherapy has an important impact in patients 'satisfaction and HR-QoL, but the majority of patients are able to have adequate erections for sexual activity. A significant correlation was found between pre-implant potency, patient age and diabetes mellitus, and the development of sexual morbidity; Patients satisfaction and HR-QoL after brachytherapy are high and it is a well-accepted treatment. Low Intensity Extracorporeal Shockwave Therapy: First Results from a Prospective Study on Erectile Dysfunction Costa P, Dias J, Espirididião P, Rodrigues R, Pereira D Ferraz L Introduction and Objective: Erectile dysfunction (ED) is a common problem in our society. Its' prevalence is higher amongst the elderly and patients with cardiovascular risk. Oral 5-phosphodiesterase inhibitors (5PDE-I) and intracavernous/intra-urethral alprostadil are the therapeutical options for these patients. Although the good results shown by these approaches, non-responders lack other effective options. In the last years, some innovative options appeared in order to face this problem, and some studies have shown good results with the use of low-intensity extracorporeal shockwave therapy (Li-ESWT) in the corpora cavernosa. This article presents the first results from a prospective study in our centre, with the aim to evaluate clinical efficacy of Li-ESWT. Eighteen patients with vasculogenic or diabetogenic ED have been submitted to 4 sessions of Li-ESWT (3000 pulses/session, distributed in 6 points (4 in the penile shaft + 2 in the crura) once a week). Every patient has been re-evaluated 4 weeks after the last session. Pre-and post-procedure International Index of Erectile Function -Short Form (IIEF-SF) scores and Global Assessment Questionnaire (GAQ) answers were obtained. Results: These patients were 61.1±7.2 years old, 55% with diabetes and 61% with hypertension; 38.9% were smokers. They scored an average 11.6±4.8 points in the IIEF-SF. Half of these patients were 5PDE-I non-responders, 22% had a medical contraindication for its use and 11% did not respond to alprostadil intracavernous injections. During treatment, 55% developed de novo spontaneous erections, and 44% referred a global improvement in their sexual capacities. After treatment, IIEF-SF scored 12.3±4.2 points (p=0.36), with just 16.7% answering positively to GAQ. No complications have been registered. The present study failed to show a sustained improvement in erectile function of our patients after treatment with Li-ESWT. However, we found an improvement during the treatment. Larger studies to confirm Li-EWST efficacy shown by some groups are lacking. In the future, a different setting with the same technology (with changes in frequency or number of pulses) or a more refined selection of patients might improve the outcomes. Gender-Related Differences in Diagnosis, Treatment and Survival of Patients with T1 Urothelial Carcinoma of the Bladder Sjöström C 1 , Thorstenson A 1 , Hagberg O 2 , Sherif A 3 , Liedberg F 4 , Aljabery F 5 , Ströck V 6 , Malmström PU 7 , Hosseni A 8 , Gårdmark T 9 , Jahnson S 5 Introduction and Objective: Previous studies based on the Swedish National Registry of Urinary Bladder Cancer (SNRUBC) have shown gender differences in the use of intravesical treatment. The aim of this investigation was to further describe possible differences between men and women with T1 urinary bladder cancer (UBC) regarding diagnosis, intravesical treatment, re-resection and survival. All patients in Sweden with T1 UBC without metastatic disease reported to the SNRUBC from 1997 to 2014 were included in the study. Patients who had undergone radical cystectomy or radiotherapy were excluded. Differences between genders where studied by chi-squared test and regression analysis. Cancer-specific survival was studied with Kaplan-Meier method, log-rank test and cox analysis. The cohort was stratified into patients 74 years or younger and 75 years and older. Only primary treatment was considered as follow-up is not available. Information about death from bladder cancer was extracted from the National Cause of Death Registry. (p<0.001). A larger proportion of men underwent multiple intravesical instillations as primary treatment, 38% vs 33% (p<0.001). The difference in treatment was consistent during time and found in both age groups, but not in all grades. Women with T1G3, but not T1G1-G2, underwent less treatment than men (p=0.001). Similar proportions of men and women underwent re-resection as primary treatment, 23% vs 21% (p=0.73). The cancer-specific survival in patients ≥75 years was inferior for women (76%) compared to men (80%; p=0.022), however equal between genders in patients 74 years or younger. When women 75 years and older underwent re-resection followed by multiple intravesical instillations the cancer-specific survival was comparable to the cancer-specific survival of men. In this population-based study of patients with T1 UBC we found that women underwent less intravesical instillations. Female gender was associated with inferior cancer-specific survival in patients older than 75 years. However, when women underwent optimal treatment the cancer-specific survival was comparable between genders. Comparative Study of Success in B.M.G Urethroplasty for Tobacco Chewing and Non-Tobacco Chewing Patients Introduction and Objective: The success rates of BMG urethroplasty operations are claimed to be high (>90%) in various series. Success of BMG urethroplasty not only depends upon the recipient site characteristics but also depends upon the health of buccal mucosa. To assess the impact of oral betel cum tobacco quid (BT Quid) chewing over the success of single stage transperineal dorsal BMG urethroplasty in the treatment of long anterior urethral stricture. This is a retrospective study carried out on 64 patients, operated in a period from January 2014 to Jan 2016, who underwent one stage transperineal dorsal BMG urethroplasty. The patients were grouped into two groups Betel cum Tobacco (BT) Quid users and BT Quid non-users. The type of tobacco consumed and duration of consumption were noted. Successful outcome was defined as normal voiding with no need of any interventional during the follow up period. Results: A total of 64 patients were studied with mean age of 40 years and mean stricture length 5.3 cm. the mean follow up was 18 months. Out of total 64 patients 24 were chewing BT Quid and 40 patients were not. Length of stricture was almost similar in BT quid chewers and non-chewers. Mean age is also more or less same. Out of these 17 patients (10 in BT quid chewers and 7 in non-users) developed stricture at anastomotic site, these patients required urethral dilatation or VIU at various stages of follow up and were considered as failures. Four failure patients even required re do open surgery. Success rate among tobacco chewers is 58.33% which is significantly lower than success rate among tobacco non-chewers (82.5%) (p value significant). The health of oral mucosa is very important factor and patients who have good oral hygiene have a much better outcome in comparison to those who have poor oral health. The Conclusion: Our study represents the first multi-institutional report on the severity and management of post-TURP urethral strictures. Our data shows that the majority of post-TURP strictures are successfully managed with urethroplasty, with 85% success. Better success rates are seen in patients with no prior endoscopic intervention, suggesting early urethroplasty or referral to a reconstructive urology center is warranted. Very Unusual Case of Retro Vesical Teratoma in Infant Shah P Introduction and Objective: Teratoma, arise from totipotent germ cells and made up of well differentiated parenchymal tissues that derived from all three germ cell layers. Teratomas are gonadal or extragonadal. Extragonadal teratomas are very rare. Among extragonadal teratoma retro vesical teratoma is very unusual. No case report is found in literature so far for retrovesical teratoma in infant. A 4 months old infant presented with palpable lower abdominal mass noticed by parents. No significant birth and past history. On palpation firm, non-tender mobile well defined mass present in hypogastric region reaching up to umbilical region. Hemoglobin was 9.2 g/dL, Leucocyte count was 9,800, Serum creatinine 0.59 mg/dl. All other laboratory investigations were normal. Ultra sonography of abdomen revealed both kidney show moderate hydroureteronephrosis with collection at right lower pole of kidney. CT urography suggested, well-defined 52*52mm collection on lateral side of right kidney communicating with middle calyx on delayed film. A well-defined soft tissue lesion with fluid density, foci of fat and calcification of 70*40mm in pelvis causing anterior displacement of bladder, may be teratoma. Results: On cystoscopy bladder was pushed anteriorly and bilateral ureteric orifice were normal. Bilateral double J stent was kept. On exploration, we found large 6*7 cm tense cystic mass, arising from retrovesical pouch in midline, pushing bladder anteriorly. We completely excised the mass and drained the collection. Drain kept and closure done in layers. Microscopy: specimen show all three germ cell derivatives with good differentiated suggestive of mature mixed extragonadal teratoma. Follow up: after two years of follow up patient is asymptomatic. Introduction and Objective: It is estimated that 5-10% of the world population would suffer from renal stones during their lifetime, among them children account for only 2-3% of the cases. The incidence of pediatric renal stones is higher in certain developing countries such as Turkey, Iran and India. In the present study, we aimed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the PCNL procedure in pediatric cases performed with adult instruments. We retrospectively evaluated the efficacy and safety of eighty-two PCNL procedures performed in 82 pediatric patients, aged from 9 months to 15 years old, with staghorn calculi. All procedures were performed between September 2001 and December 2016 in Labbafinejad Hospital Tehran, Iran. The following were collected and analyzed: history of previous stone surgery, stone burden and stone location. Stone-free was defined as complete clearance of the stones or the presence of insignificant residual stones of <3 mm in diameter. Results: The patients' mean age was 108±53 months (range: 14-180 months). Thirty-nine patients (47.6%) suffered from complete staghorn stones whereas it was of the partial type in 43. The stone free rate was 86.6% after one PCNL session. In total, seven patients referred for shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) and four cases were scheduled for the second PCNL session. Conclusion: As in adults, PCNL can be used as a safe and effective treatment modality in children with staghorn stones. The complications and stone free rate of PCNL with adult-size instruments in pediatric patients are acceptable. Introduction and Objective: Laparoscopic ureteroneocystostomy for congenital megaureter is technically challenging, because intracorporeal ureter tailoring is complex and time-consuming. We demonstrated modified extracorporeal ureter tailoring of megaureter with laparoscopic ureteroneoystostomy. A 21-year-old female visited the outpatient clinic complaining of left flank pain. CT scan showed 7cm dilated ureter and hydronephrosis. MAG3 showed partial obstruction on left side. There was no reflux on voiding cystourethrogram. Patient under general anesthesia were placed in a supine position and we used four laparoscopic ports. The dilated ureter was dissected down to the bladder and cut at the distal point of stricture. The divided ureter was pulled out through a lateral port and tailored over 8Fr nelaton catheter. Tailored ureter with D-J stent was replaced into the abdomen. And finally we performed laparoscopic extravesical submucosal tunneling ureteroneocystostomy. Results: Operation time was 210 minutes. There was no significant perioperative complication. Flank pain was relieved. CT and MAG3 scan showed improvement of the dilatation of the ureters and partial obstruction was regressed. Laparoscopic ureteroneocystostomy with extracorporeal ureter tailoring is easy and straightforward technique for congenital megaureter. Krebs R, Souza V, Girardi F, Frehse JM Introduction and Objective: We present a video showing the technique of using buccal graft to repair a ureteral stenosis. Forty-six years-old male with right solitary kidney and a contralateral agenesia who had underwent a flexible ureteroscopy to remove an impacted 7 mm stone at upper ureter. After this procedure the patient stayed with double J stent for 30 days and one day after removal developed acute renal insufficiency. He had an attempt of laser ureterotomy but on the procedure it was identified by pyelography that the stenosis was 4.5 cm and the patient was re-ferred to our centre. We performed a magnetic resonance that confirmed the stenosis. The patient was positioned in left lateral decubitus and we place two 10 mm and two 5 mm trocars as described for pyeloplasty. We accessed the retroperitoneal and found the upper ureter and dissected from the inflammatory tissue surround it. The ureter was open with a 11 scalpel blade and approximately 6 cm of the stenosis area was exposed until found normal tissue. The buccal graft was removed as the same technique used for urethroplasty and inserted by the trocar without any trauma for it. There was performed a continuous suture on the posterior and anterior face of the ureter to attach the buccal graft with PDS (polydioxanone) 5-0. Then the omentum was mobilized and wrapped the ureter to ensure the blood supply to the buccal graft. A Penrose drain was left for three days and removed. Forty-five days after surgery the double J was removed and patient is still under observation. Laparoscopic ureteral reconstruction is a feasible surgery; it has the advantage of not opening the small intestine or other viscera. But it may have the risk of buccal mucosa retraction or ischemia if not secured attached. This is our first case and we will need a longer follow up to ensure the safety of the procedure. Posterior Retroperitoneoscopic Bilateral Adrenalectomy in Ectopic Cushing's Syndrome García Marchiñena P, Nolazco JI, Jaunarena J, Gueglio G, Jurado A Introduction and Objective: Over the years, a number of different surgical approaches to the adrenal glands have been devised. Minimally invasive adrenalectomy has become the procedure of choice for benign adrenal pathology. Although the adrenal glands are located in the retroperitoneum, most surgeons prefer the transperitoneal laparoscopic approach to adrenal tumors. The purpose of this video is to show the feasibility of performing a posterior retroperitoneoscopic bilateral adrenalectomy in a woman with ectopic Cushing's syndrome. A 23-year-old woman presented with past medical history of metastatic Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumor with ectopic production of Gastrin and ACTH-treated with Lanreotide since 2004. The patient was referred to the department of urology with Cushing's disease, refractory to medical treatment. The CT scan showed multiple liver metastases that collapsed the right adrenal space. The patient was placed in prone position and a posterior retroperitoneoscopic bilateral adrenalectomy was performed using 3 trocars per side. Results: Three trocars were placed 2 centimeters under the 12th rib, between sacrospinalis muscle and posterior axillary line. A small cavity in the retroperitoneum was made with blunt finger dissection. Once the right adrenal space was created, we could identify the anatomic landmarks (psoas, diaphragm, liver). Dissection of the gland was begun with lower margin detachment from the upper kidney pole in a lateral to medial direction using 5 mm ultrasonic dissector. After exposing adrenal gland from surrounding tissue and medial isolation of the main adrenal vein, the vessel was clipped and divided with scissors. We repeated the same steps for the left side. The operation time was 103 minutes, with no postoperative complications. The patient had a fast recovery and was discharged on the third postoperative day. Cushing's syndrome symptoms resolved completely. The posterior retroperitoneoscopic bilateral adrenalectomy appears to be a safe and effective technique, with short operative time and fast recovery, but a thorough knowledge of retroperitoneal anatomy is required. Introduction and Objective: Laparoscopic bilateral adrenalectomy is a challenging procedure that usually requires patient repositioning and long operative time. Posterior retroperitoneoscopic adrenalectomy, by providing direct access to the gland, allowing two surgical teams working together and avoiding patient repositioning, is an interesting approach in patients with bilateral affection. We describe the technique of synchronous and simultaneous posterior retroperitoneoscopic bilateral adrenalectomy in a patient with neurofibromatosis syndrome type 1 and bilateral pheochromocytomas. A 25-year-old man with neurofibromatosis syndrome type 1 and past medical history of a kidney transplant was referred for 1-year severe refractory hypertension. A thorough evaluation was performed for possible secondary causes of hypertension. Clinical suspicion of pheochromocytoma was confirmed by 24-hour urinary catecholamine level and CT scan of the abdomen. The CT scan showed the right-sided adrenal mass of 45 mm and a left adrenal mass of 43 mm. With patient placed in prone position, using 3 trocars per side and with two surgical teams working simultaneously a posterior retroperitoneoscopic bilateral total adrenalectomy was performed. Results: The operation time was 120 minutes and intraoperative blood loss was 300 ml. With no postoperative complications, the patient had a fast postoperative recovery and was discharged on the third postoperative day. Blood pressure becomes normal from 1st postoperative day without any drug. Histopathology report further confirmed the adrenal tumors were pheochromocytomas. There was no clinical or biochemical relapse during a follow-up period of 6 months. Conclusions: Synchronous and Simultaneous Posterior Reroperitoneoscopic Bilateral Adrenalectomy is a safe and feasible technique in patients with bilateral pheochromocytomas. Introduction and Objectives: Radical nephroureterectomy (RNU) with bladder cuff excision is the standard treatment for high risk upper tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC). Resection of the distal ureter and meatus is important given the significant risk of recurrence at this location. We describe the management of a UTUC recurrence in a remnant ureteral meatus, following incomplete RNU. We present a case of a 75-year-old woman with a past history of right RNU for a pT3 high grade UTUC of the renal pelvis 17 months earlier, that presented with a recurrence in the right ureteral meatus. The intramural ureter and meatus had not been resected in the RNU. A TURB 2 months earlier for a previous recurrence on the same site revealed a low grade pTa transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) and this time she presented with a 5mm papillary lesion protruding from the meatus. A MRI was made, showing the remnant ureter confined to its intravesical segment. Results: The patient was managed by TURB assisted laparoscopic partial cystectomy. The polyp was resect-ed and the meatus fulgurated by TURB. The resection fragments were evacuated and the bladder was washed with distilled water to prevent tumor seeding. 4 laparoscopy trocars were placed: a 12mm trocar at the umbilicus for the camera, a 10mm suprapubic trocar in midline and two 5mm trocars 2cm medial to the anterior superior iliac spine bilaterally. The partial cystectomy was delimited and guided by TURB since there was no extravesical ureteral segment present to guide the cystotomy. The surgical specimen was extracted with a laparoscopy retrieval bag and the bladder was closed by a two-layer running suture. The blood loss was less than 100mL and the patient was discharged on the second postoperative day. The pathological analysis revealed a low grade pTa TCC with negative surgical margins. The chosen surgical approach proved a good minimally invasive option for the management of this case. The TURB allowed the resection of the tumor and helped guide the laparoscopic dissection and the partial cystectomy. The resectoscope's light, and the bladder wall deformation caused by its tip were particularly useful. Chen GH, Tsai LH, Chang CH Introduction and Objective: To describe pure laparoscopic distal ureterectomy and psoas hitch ureter reimplantation in the highly select patients with distal urinary tract urothelial carcinoma (UC). Between January 2011 to December 2016, 62 patients underwent distal ureterectomy and psoas hitch ureter reimplantation. 5 patients received the operation due to distal ureter UC, others due to the benign condition, colon or ovarian cancer. All 5 patients received the renal-spare operation were solitary kidney or chronic kidney disease with solitary tumor status. Two patients received laparoscopic method, 2 received robotic method and 1 received open operation. We first took down bladder and identified the ureter. Then ureter was dissected down to the vesicoureteral junction. The intramural part of the ureter was dissected under the vision and sharply freed from the surrounding detrusor muscle of the bladder until the level of the ureteric orifice. Then distal ureter was early ligated. The detrusor muscle was further dissected away from the underneath bladder mucosa. Thus, a bladder cuff of mucosa-only could be excised. A continuous laparoscopic suture was taken at the edge of the dissected mucosa and the cuff which was excised. The ureter segment contained UC was also resected and removed early. Then we further took down the bladder for sufficient space to perform psoas hitch. Unilateral pelvic lymph node dissection was also done. Lich-Gregoir method was used for ureteral reimplantation. Results: All the procedures were completed by laparoscopy. The operative time was 162 min. The mean blood loss was minimal. Preserved renal function was confirmed by renal function study done at postoperative 3 months. In our series, the median follow-up was 22 months. No major complications were noted. There was also no pelvic or bladder recurrences Conclusions: The pure laparoscopic technique enabled complete removal of involved ureter and reimplantation of remain part. The operation time was shorter compared to the robotic method while offered compatible outcome. Short-term follow-up showed the oncological safety of the procedure in highly select patients. The New Generation Super-Mini Percutaneous Nephrolithotomy (SMP) System: A Step-by-Step Guide Introduction and Objective: To present our novel miniaturized endoscopic system and describe a stepby-step guide for successful implementation of the super-mini percutaneous nephrolithotomy (SMP). The new generation SMP endoscopic system consists of (i) a 40,000-pixel super-mini nephroscope with an 8.0 F outer diameter and 7.5 F inner diameter dismountable sheath (ii) and a newly designed irrigation-suction sheath available in either 12 F or 14 F. The irrigation-suction sheath is a two-layered metal structure. The key feature of the irrigation-suction sheath is to allow irrigation and suction respectively (the inflow through the space between the two layers of the sheath, the outflow through the central lumen of the sheath). This property could improve irrigation and stone clearance despite extremely reduced instrument dimension. A total of 59 patients with renal stones underwent new generation SMP between April 2016 and December 2016. The percutaneous tract dilatation was carried out to 14 F. Cutting lithotripsy was performed using either holmium laser or pneumatic lithotripter. Stone fragments were sucked out by vacuum suctioning through the sheath. A nephrostomy tube or Double-J stent was placed only if clinically indicated. Low-dose CT was performed to assess the stone-free status on the morning after the procedure. Results: The mean stone burden was 2.4 cm. Nine of the 59 patients had diabetes, and 5 had hypertension. SMP was completed successfully in all patients with a mean operative duration of 32.9 min and a mean 1.3 gm/dL hemoglobin decrease. The stone-free rate was 91.5%. Complications occurred in 5.1% of the patients, all of them were Clavien I (minor fever managed by antipyretic therapy), no transfusions were needed. The new generation SMP system is safe, feasible, and efficient for managing moderate-size renal calculi with advantages of a small percutaneous tract, minimal risk of bleeding, high efficacy in stone clearance, improved visual field, short operative time and easiness to operate. We present a video of the feasibility study of a new fluoroscopic endoscopic technique for the recanalization of the complete obstruction of the Uretero-pelvic junction (UPJ), using a puncture of the proximal ureter through the renal-pelvic wall, via the Amplatz sheath. Three patients (36 to 62 years-old) with a history of open pyelolithotomy, presented large hydronephrosis. Retrograde uretero-pyelography showed a complete obstruction of the UPJ. Contrast media cannot pass into the pelvis. In 2 patients the stenosis was about 2 cm, and 1 patient had a stenosis of few millimeters. Under general anesthesia, the patients are placed in the split-leg modified lateral position. An attempt to force the obstruction with a stiff guidewire is not successful, even with a flexible ureteroscope. After, calyx puncture and dilation, a 24 F Amplatz sheath is placed. The inspection of the pelvic wall does not find the UPJ or its scar. A ureteral catheter is placed in the ureter and contrast media is injected. Under fluoroscopy, the Amplatz sheath is placed in front of the tip of the ureter and the ureteral catheter tip. The 18-Gauge needle is introduced in the Amplatz sheath, and the proximal urteral tip is punctured through the renal pelvis wall. A hydrophilic guidewire is advanced down the ureter. The nephroscope is introduced and the tract is dilated to 12 Fr and a safety guidewire is inserted. Endopyelotomy is performed with an electrode through the nephroscope. The pelvic wall, the tract and then the ureteral wall are incised with an electrode with the guidance of the guidewires. In the long strictures, A 3.5 needle-holder is inserted in the nephroscope and using a 13 mm needle suture, a suture is placed between the pelvic and the ureteral wall. Then, 1 or 2 double-J-stents are placed. The puncture of the ureteral end through the renal-pelvic wall or bladder was rapidly and easily performed, like calyx puncture. It had allowed guidewire insertion into the ureter, and had oriented the endopyelotomy and recanalization. The suturing was difficult due to fibrosis and the tissue edges were fixed far apart. The mean operative time was 154 minutes for the 2 cases in which the UPJ was sutured, and 35 minutes for the other. The mean postoperative hospital stay was 3 days. For both patients with the long stenosis, retrograde pyelography showed a medium passage of contrast media through the UPJ, and a new JJ-stent was placed, with a follow up of respectively 15 and 13 months. For the patient with the short stenosis, 3 months retrograde pyelography showed an acceptable patent UPJ and the JJ-sent was removed. At 3 months ultrasound, the kidney is not dilated. We present a video of our experience of retrograde endopyelotomy using a guidewire as cutting electrode through the flexible uretero-renoscope. A 40-years-old male patient had a recanalization of the left uretero-pelvic junction obstruction is programmed for control of UPJ patency with retrograde flexible ureteroscopy. Under general anesthesia, the patient is placed in the standard ureteroscopy position. Retrograde flexible ureteroscopy found a patent UPJ but with a mucosal diaphragm. Although, the flexible scope passes easily into the renal pelvis, Endopyelotomy is decided to have a wider UPJ. However, laser or a proper endoscopic flexible electrode, which can be used through the 3.6 Fr flexible uretero-renoscope working channel, is not available. What instrument can be used, which has a metallic core and less than 3 Fr diameter? Solution: A hydrophilic guidewire is used. Few millimeters of the rigid tip coating are removed to expose the tip of the metallic core. Then 5 to 10 cm of the metallic core floppy tip is exposed. The current is passed in this improvised electrode by connecting the exposed floppy tip with the electrode of the pencil handle of the electro-cautery unit. With its rigid tip first, the transformed guidewire is introduced through the flexible uretero-renoscope. Incision of the UPJ diaphragm is performed with cutting current. Double J stent is placed. Results: retrograde endopyelotomy was possible using a hydrophilic guidewire as cutting electrode through the flexible uretero-renoscope. The UPJ diaphragm was incised. UPJ became wide open. Even little coagulation was possible with this electrode. Conclusion: the hydrophilic guidewire was successfully transformed into a cutting electrode that was used through the 3.6 Fr working channel of the flexible uretero-renoscope. It was effective, and had allowed performing endopyelotomy incision and few bleeding cauterizations. An Alternative to an Endoscopic Electrode Lezrek M 1,2 , Tazi H 2 , El Baghouli M 2 , El Yazami O 2 , Daoudi A 2 , Slimani A 1 , Beddouch A 1 , Alami M 1 , Ammani A 1 Introduction and Objectives: We present a video of our experience of the use of a ureteral catheter with its metallic stylet as an alternative to a proper endoscopic electrode. The use of this electrode is demonstrated in different endourologic situations all along the urinary tract. Materials and Methods: Sometimes during endourology, there is a need to perform an endoscopic incision or electro cauterization. If a proper endoscopic electrode is not available, a ureteral catheter with its steel mandarin stylet can be used as an electrode. Few millimeters of the ureteral catheter are cut to expose the tip of the stylet. The current is passed in the electrode by connecting the stylet with the electrode of the pencil handle of the electro-cautery unit. Otherwise, a mosquito clamp is used to maintain the connection between both electrodes. Endoscopic incision is performed with the tip of the stylet which can be straight or curved. If the ureteral catheter has a metallic stylet with a large brass tip, this tip is used for cauterization. However, both tips can be used for coagulation. The ureteral catheter can be used through different scopes rigid or flexible, cystoscope, ureteroscope, ureterorenoscope, nephroscope. The ureteral catheter with its metallic stylet is an effective cutting electrode. It was used with cutting current for endoscopic incisions. In addition, it was successfully used with coagulation current for cauterization. Its use was illustrated for a bladder neck incision, retrograde ureterotomy and endopyelotomy, anterograde endopyelotomy, and UPJ and upper pole infundibulum recanalization. In all these locations, the incision electrode was effective and the incisions and hemostasis successful. The ureteral catheter with its metallic stylet can be used as alternative to a proper endoscopic electrode. It was successfully used with different scopes and in different urinary tract locations. scans demonstrated declining renal function and increased drainage time. Preoperative imaging demonstrated a long segment right ureteral stricture starting from the level of S1 to the level of the ureterovesical junction. He elected to undergo a repeat robotic Boari flap creation. For technical modifications during the robotic procedure, the adequate measurement of the length and width of the Boari flap is crucial for adequate ureterolysis. Other modifications for the creation of the Boari flap to prevent shortening of the flap include interrupted sutures to maintain its length, a tension-free anastomosis and innovations in easeof-stent placement. These modifications will be highlighted in the video. The procedure was safely performed with a minimal blood loss. This patient with a recurrent ureteral stricture has done exceedingly well and continues to be symptom-free. Respecting traditional principles of reconstructive surgery including maintaining adequate vascular supply and a tension-free anastomosis is paramount. Utilization of appropriate technical modifications can increase the use of minimally invasive techniques, such as robotic surgery, in managing the unusual and difficult patient with newly diagnosed or recurrent ureteral strictures. Combined Robot Assisted Laparoscopic Nephrectomy and Ureterocystoplasty Introduction and Objective: We present the case of a 21 year old patient with severe neurogenic bladder dysfunction secondary to a menigomyelocele with Arnold-Chiari-malformation typ II. Urodynamic studies revealed sphincter-detrusor-dyssynergia in combination with increasing detrusor muscle overactivity and poor bladder compliance Bladder capacity was limited to 300ml. Treatments in the form of anticholinergic therapy and Botolinum Toxin injections were unsuccessful in reducing intravesicular pressure. Cystography revealed left-sided grade V vesicoureteral reflux and subsequent nuclear scintigraphy showed a non-functioning left kidney. In June 2016, we performed combined robot assisted laparoscopic nephrectomy and ureterocystoplasty. We initially performed a left nephrectomy utilizing cephalic side-docking of the Robot from the left side of the patient. The robot was re-docked in a more caudal direction to facilitate further mobilization of the ureter to the level of the bladder. The spatulated ureter was looped to the shape of the letter U and the medial sides were sutured together creating a broad and long ureteral patch for the subsequent bladder augmentation. We performed a cystoplasty by suturing the ureteral patch to the open bladder wall. Results: The patient's postoperative course was completely uneventful. The patient was discharged on the fifth postoperative day. Cystography performed 14 day post surgery showed no signs of urinary leakage and a nicely augmented bladder. Urodynamic studies 3-month post surgery demonstrated a drastic de-crease in bladder pressure and marked improvement in bladder compliance. After a follow-up period of one year, follow-up investigations were excellent. The patient is still performing CIC without any complications. Bladder capacity improved up to 650ml. Conclusion: Combined robot assisted laparoscopic nephrectomy and ureterocystoplasty is a feasible and safe minimally invasive technique and shows excellent results post operatively. Visual Dilatation Technique in Percutaneous Nephrolithotomy: An Initial Clinical Experience Shah AK, Shrestha A, Basnet R, Acharya G, KC H Introduction and Objectives: Tract dilatation is a crucial step in percutaneous nephrolithotomy which can be guided under fluoroscopy, ultrasound or combination of both techniques. It can still be difficult to ascertain the optimal depth to prevent over-dilation causing collecting system perforation and vascular injury or under-dilation making the establishment of access tract in a single attempt strenuous. Here, we present our initial clinical experience in using the novel technique of visual dilator system to obtain real-time visual confirmation of accuracy during percutaneous tract dilation. Materials and Methods: The visual dilator system consisted of a transparent hollow dilator made of Polyvenyl chloride (PVC) and a 12F Mini Nephroscope inserted within its lumen. The nephroscope was connected to standard endoscopic camera system. The dilator system backloaded with access sheath was passed over guidewire to dilate percutaneous tract and position the access sheath under visual guidance. Saline was irrigated to maintain clarity during dilation. Between December 2015 and December 2016, the visual dilator system was used during percutaneous tract dilation in 13 PCNL cases with mild or above hydronephrosis. Results: All tracts were successfully dilated in a single attempt. The intervening tissue layers, approach into target calyx as well as the access sheath placement could be visually monitored through the dilator wall to confirm accuracy in dilatation. Mean dilatation time was 3.4 ± 0.9 mins, hemoglobin drop was 1.4 ± 0.8 g/dL, primary stone-free rate and that after auxiliary treatment were 11/13 (84.6%) and 13/13 (100%) respectively. We experienced over dilatation in one of the initial cases. No complications like collecting system perforation, loss of access, transfusion and surrounding organ injury was experienced in rest of the cases. The X-ray exposure time during dilatation was significantly low. Larger number of cases and comparison with other dilatation technique are needed to further prove the efficacy of the technique which is under study. Conclusion: PCNL access tract dilation using the visual dilatation technique is clinically feasible. It provides a real-time visual monitoring and confirmation of accuracy in dilation and lower x-ray exposure time during tract creation. It may improve the overall safety and efficacy of the PCNL procedure. Introduction and Objective: Level I evidence from now three clinical trials (SPCG4, PIVOT and PRO-TECT) has shown equivalency in cancer control outcomes between surveillance, surgery and radiation. However, there is a detrimental effect in quality of life outcomes associated with treatment arms. The introduction of fusion imaging -MRI/US -has led to incremental precision in the diagnosis of Prostate Cancer opening the door to potential targeted approaches aimed to cancer destruction while preserving normal tissue function. We began our MRI/US Fusion Targeted Prostate Cancer Cryoablation Program in 2013. Here we present our technique and results. Materials and Methods: NCT02381990-clintrials. gov contemplates the thorough evaluation of Office based prostate cryoablation. Prospective collection of diagnostic information (age, PSA, DRE findings, clinical stage, WHO Modified Gleason scores). We used fusion software to characterize the lesion, the prostate, urethra, and seminal vesicles on multiparametric MP-MRI findings and then to co-register MRI/ US Fusion Treatment execution. Cryoablation was performed following co-registration fusion of MRI/ US with 2 freezing/thawing cycles. Treatments were performed in Miami and Madrid. Clinical information was digitized into the Focalyx app (Apple IOS). Patient reported quality of life measures are directly recorded into the app. The video shows our fusion cryoablation technique -FocalyxTxCryo. The video shows our technique that has been employed in 361 MRI/US fusion cryoablation procedures successfully performed among 317 patients between 2013 and March 2017. With a median follow up of 2 years, 44 required re-treatment and 12 were converted to surgery(n=6) or radiation (n=6). A median PSA decrease of 50% was observed. In men with SHIM scores 5 or better, by 3 and 6 months, 61% and 72%, respectively had recovered erections to their baseline. Ejaculation was preserved in 69% of these men. Average urinary function flow rates were improved by 71% in 234 men with 3 months' post cryo flow data. Conclusion: This is currently an early experience of a novel series of men managed with MRI/US Office based targeted cryoablation. Importantly the procedure is amenable to local anesthesia or monitored sedation without significant morbidity. Early data shows promising results and an alternative to surveillance. Introduction and Objective: Prostate cancer is the most common solid malignancy, with one out of six men being diagnosed during their lifetime, in western Europe and the United States (US). In the US alone, over 1.3 million men undergo a prostate biopsy procedure -the clear majority is performed transrectally (TR). The approach is common because the alternative transperineal (TP) approach is perceived to require general anaesthesia, requires longer time and is economically disadvantageous. However, there are major drawbacks to TR prostate biopsies. Urosepsis is certainly the most devastating one. Such terrible outcome is too common, as 4% of patients require hospital admission post TR prostate biopsy. Multiparametric MRI has enhanced accuracy and significance of prostate cancer detection. Herein we present our MRI/US Fusion of TP Prostate Biopsy technique under local anaesthesia with results from 3 institutions in Europe and the US Materials and Methods: We prospectively collected the information of eligible men -Elevated PSA, Abnormal DRE, an abnormal MRI or a diagnosis of prostate cancer) at the time of TP MRI/US Fusion prostate biopsy, performed under local anaesthesia or mild sedation. We used MIM Software-FocalyxBx planning to characterize the lesion, the prostate, urethra, and seminal vesicles on multiparametric MRI. The procedure and pathological information was digitalized into the Focalyx app (Apple IOS). The video shows our surgical technique. Results: Since 2014 a total of 507 TP MRI/US Fusion Prostate Biopsies at 3 separate centres (URN n=211 and Andros n=124) under local anaesthesia and 172 under mild sedation at Lyx Spain were performed. The Sensitivities based on modified Pi-RADS Vesion2 system were: Yellow Signal "Equivalent to Pi-RADS 3" -63%; -Pink Signal "Equivalent to Pi-RADS4" -79%; Red lesion < 1.5cm "Somewhat pi-RADS 5 but shall be 4" -90%; Red lesion > 1.5cm "Somewhat pi-RADS 5" -99%. No Color 12%. No Urosepsis episodes were recorded. Urinary retention was observed in 3 patients. The field of Urology continues to challenge us to be better and there are new avenues. Fusion transperineal prostate biopsy under local anaesthesia is a reproducible, accurate and preventing urosepsis reality. Introduction and Objective: Level I evidence from now three clinical trials (SPCG4, PIVOT and PRO-TECT) has shown equivalency in cancer control outcomes between surveillance, surgery and radiation. However, there is a detrimental effect in quality of life outcomes associated with treatment arms. The introduction of fusion imaging -MRI/US -has led to incremental precision in the diagnosis of Prostate Cancer opening the door to potential targeted approaches aimed to cancer destruction while preserving normal tissue function. Here we present a case report using Irreversible electroporation (IRE) and targeted MRI/ US Fusion. We present the case of a 57 y/o spanish male with a PSA of 8 mg/ml and a left sided latero-anterior lesion (pi-RADS4 on MRI). Biopsy proven Gleason 3+4 (WHO 2/5). The diagnosis was a T1c prostate cancer with a SHIM score of 22 and IPSS of 8. We elected Targeted IRE as means of treatment. We characterized the lesion, the prostate, urethra, and seminal vesicles on multiparametric MRI. Realtime co-registration between MRI findings and ultrasound was performed via the transperineal approach. IRE was performed using NanoKnife System (Angiodynamics). Treatment were performed in Madrid. Clinical information was digitized into the Focalyx app (Apple IOS). Patient reported quality of life measures are directly recorded into the app. The video shows our fusion IRE technique -FocalyxTxNanoKnife. Results: Treatment was accomplished as planned. It was performed in hospital operating room. OR time was 63 minutes. A total of 90 pulses with 1,500 to 3,000 volts were applied in 6 directions -as shown and explained in the video. The patient was discharged without a Foley catheter in the first 24 hours. Conclusion: This case shows the feasibility of MRI/US Fusion targeted treatment of prostate cancer. In this video, we explain our technique that shows added layers or certainty in reaching and treating the targeted lesions. Further investigations are imperative to define the role of this technique in men with clinically localized prostate cancer.  Preoperatively, all patients were evaluated with radiographic imaging and endoscopy, and demonstrated urethral strictures with membranous involvement. Dorsal buccal mucosal onlay urethroplasty performed via a one-sided dissection as described by Kulkarni and Barbagli was performed in all patients. This technique was modified by carrying the dorsal urethrotomy proximally through the membranous urethra and sharply excising a wedge of scarred intracrural tissue to create adequate bed for grafting. Patients were seen at 3 weeks for catheter removal, and at 4, 8, 12 months, then yearly for assessment of surgical and patient-reported outcomes. Results: Nineteen consecutive men with a mean age 66 years (47-72) underwent membranous urethral stricture repair and were included in the study. Nine patients had prior TURP, 6 had prior radiation therapy with prostate in situ, and 4 patients had radical prostatectomy follow by radiation therapy. All patients returned home within 23 hours after operation. At a mean follow up of 18 months (4-37), one patient required an additional procedure for stricture recurrence. Improvement was observed with respect to mean maximum flow rate (4.5 to 21 cc/sec), PVR (121 to 53 cc), and International Prostate Symptom Score (22 to 8). Fourteen of the 19 patients (74%) were continent pre-operatively. None of the patient developed de novo urinary incontinence. Conclusions: Membranous urethral strictures can be effectively treated using this dorsal BMG onlay technique which avoids circumferential urethral mobilization, urethral transection, or perirectal dissection. Urethral Reconstruction Using Tissue Engineered Oral Mucosa Graft (Mukocell ® ) in Onlay Technique Introduction and Objective: An open reconstruction of the urethra in recurrent long-range urethral strictures with an oral mucosa grafting is the method of choice and achieves good results up to 75-80% with long-term follow up. Disadvantages of using of native oral mucosa are complications in the mouth area such as swelling and scarring, injuries of the salivary gland opening, and problems with the intake of food and restriction of the opening of the mouth. There is currently an alternative to the removal of the larger areas of oral mucosa: urethroplasty with MukoCell® which is available in our Department since 05/2016. Between 05/2016 and 03/2017, a total of 15 patients with recurrent urethral strictures underwent urethroplasty with MukoCell. Mean patient age was 69.5 years (range 39 to 87). Mean hospital stay was 5 days. There were 10 and 5 patients with bulbar and penile strictures respectively. 4 patients have both stricture localizations. Three weeks prior to the operation we removed a very small piece (3x3 mm) of the oral mucosa in local anesthesia. Cells were isolated therefrom and cultivated in 37th CONGRESS OF THE SOCIÉTÉ INTERNATIONALE D'UROLOGIE -SIU 2017 ABSTRACT BOOK an external laboratory (Urotiss Europe GmbH, Dortmund) through tissue engineering within three weeks to a 3x4 cm large mucous membrane for the grafting. The operative technique was performed in onlay technique. Results: Mean operative time was 80 minutes (range 70 to 150). Mean stricture length was 4 cm (range 2-7). None perioperative hemorrhage occurred in all patients. The mean post-operative uroflow rate was 27 ml/s. The mean follow up was 10 months (3-11). Two patients had developed a recurrence of the stricture (with penile localization and mean 5 previous endoscopic operations. Conclusion: The effectiveness of urethroplasty using MukoCell was 86% and was not inferior to the conventional method with native oral mucosa with advantages of avoiding excision of larger segments of the patient's oral mucosa and preventing associated complications, shortening the operating time, and simplifying the surgical technique. Larger patient series are planned. Penile Revascularisation for Vasculogenic Impotence after Pelvic Fracture Urethral Injury Introduction and Objectives: Patients with pelvic fracture urethral injuries (PFUI) may have Vasculogenic impotence. Also the success of anastomotic urethroplasty for PFUI depends on the vascularity of the urethra. Urethral blood supply is dependent on antegrade supply via the cavernosal and bulbar vessels and retrograde via the dorsal arteries. Bulbar urethral arteries are surgically divided during anastomotic urethroplasty. Traumatic vascular injuries to internal pudendal or dorsal penile artery may compromise the blood supply to the urethra resulting in bulbar urethral ischemia or necrosis. Patients with bilateral injury to vessels have Vasculogenic impotence. The aim of our study was to evaluate improvement in erectile function after penile revascularization. We included all patients with PFUI who underwent penile revascularization at our institute. The procedural steps were a pre-operative penile Doppler, midline abdominal incision, dissection of inferior epigastric arteries, exposure of dorsal penile vessels and vascular anastomosis using loupes and fine sutures to perform anastomosis between inferior epigastric artery and dorsal penile artery or vein. Post operatively patients are put on clopidogrel 75 mg daily for 6 months. Low dose tadalafil is started early in postoperative period. Sildenafil is started after 3 months. Success was determined as per the IIEF score postoperative. Color Doppler of penile vessels was done at 3 and 6 months. Results: Nine patients underwent penile revascularization. Median follow up was 59 months. Seven patients achieved good erections post operatively supported with sildenafil.1 patients had partial erections while in 1 patient there was no improvement. Conclusion: Patients with PFUI with Vasculogenic impotence are usually treated with sildenafil and intracavernosal injections. In case of no satisfactory improvement permanent penile prosthesis insertion is recommended. We suggest Penile revascularization to improve blood flow in dorsal penile vessels .Jordan et al have reported improved success rates of anastomotic urethroplasty in patients with PFUI and concomitant vascular injury with pre-operative penile revascularization. Penile revascularization can be considered in select group of patients with Vasculogenic impotence. Anastomotic Urethroplasty without Transection and Placement of Graft for Short Non Traumatic Bulbar Urethral Strictures Chawla A, Hegde P Introduction and Objective: To report our experience with anastomotic urethroplasty without placement of graft and transection in patients with non-traumatic short bulbar urethral strictures. A total of 21 patients of short bulbar non-traumatic underwent this procedure from 2102-2016. This involved opening urethra dorsally at stricture site, partial excision of scar with superficial spongiofibrosis and transverse closure of dorsal urethrotomy. The range of follow-up was 4-33 months and for 17 patients the follow up of more than 1 year. Stricture length was mean 1 cm (mean 8mm-14mm). Results: Patients were followed by voiding symptoms, urinary flow rates and postvoid residue. Out of 17, two patients underwent intervention (VIU-1, Dilatation-1). Other (n-4) patients are voiding well with normal flow rates on follow-up. Conclusions: This non-transecting anastomotic bulbar urethroplasty technique avoids transection of urethra and placement of graft and is effective for the management of non-traumatic short bulbar urethral strictures. Cecil's Two Stage Procedure for Sclerofibromatosis of the Penis Introduction and Objective: Sclerofibromatosis of the penis is also known as paraffinoma of the penis, siliconoma of the penis, cicatrix of the penis. Many of the case are attempts to make the penis bigger, by injecting various type or oil to the penis skin, or more recently by wrapping inflamation inducer leafs. The underlying problem is the misconception of patients that larger penis size results in better sexual performance and satisfaction. In many cases, the injection occurs in a group event where several men are injected together in the same setting by traditional shamans or their peers. Various substances have been encountered in practice, among others hair oil, paraffin, and silicone. Initially a bulking effect of the penis is observed, but over longer time of this painless mass evolves into devastating complications. Patients present with acute complaints of acute pain, genital skin irritation, abscess formation, and in some cases Fournier gangrene. Chronic complaints of this condition are suffered both by the patient and his partner, painful erection, dyspareunia, reduced sexual image leading to rejection of sexual activity by the partner. Complete surgical excision of foreign body and affected skin is the best option to resolve this condition and return to sexual activity. Coverage of the tissue defect has been described in literature using skin grafts and flaps. In our center we have experience of treating 328 patients in the period of 2008-2016. The patients work as sailors, soldiers, mine workers, and in rare case high school students. Age range is 19-66 years old. Injections are commonly performed by lay person, and rarely by medical personnel and associated professions.  Introduction and Objective: Despite being associated with a high stone free rate, laparoscopic ureterolithotomy is not considered a first-line therapy, and is often reserved for cases of large impacted ureteral stones and when the less invasive approaches have failed. We present step by step a retroperitoneoscopic ureterolithotomy for a large impacted proximal ureteric stone and report our initial series in this approach. The video concerns a 28-yearold female with previous history of kidney stones who required placement of a right double pigtail ureteral stent during the 32nd gestational week due to persistent pain secondary to a 30x15mm impacted proximal ureteral stone. After labour and following failure of ESWL, retroperitoneoscopic ureterolithotomy was proposed. The patient was administered general anesthesia and positioned in left flank position. A 12-mm skin incision was made distal and anterior to the tip of the 12th rib, muscles were split and dorsolumbar fascia opened. Blunt dissection of the retroperitoneal space was achieved with the tip of the index, and peritoneum gently pushed anteriorly. A 12-mm port was placed and CO2 pressure mantained at 12mm Hg. Two additional ports were placed above the iliac crest: a 10-mm port on posterior axillary line for the camera and a 5-mm working port on the anterior axillary line. Following identification of quadratus lumborum and psoas muscle, dissection of lumbar ureter was facilitated by the lithiasic protrusion. Longitudinal ureterotomy was performed over the impacted stone, which was extracted and placed inside a specimen retrieval system (Endobag ™ , Covidien, Dublin, Ireland). The ureteral stent was identified and the ureteral incision closed with 4-0 polyglactin interrupted suture (Vicryl ® , Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH, USA). A Jackson-Pratt drain was left in place through the 5-mm port and port site closure was completed. Results: During the last four years, four patients were submitted to retroperitoneoscopic ureterolithotomy. Three females and one male with a mean age of 43-year-old (28-59) were treated. Two of the patients received previous ESWL without fragmentation. Litiasis was located in upper and middle ureteral in half of the cases each, being right sided in three of the patients. Mean stone size was 28mm (20-33) and operative time 98 minutes (90-110), with negligible blood losses. All patients presented uneventful postoperative period, with urethral catheter and drain tube being removed at 48 and 72h, respectively. Hospital discharge was at 72h and ureteral stent removal at week 6 in the outpatient clinic. All cases were stone free and 6 month follow up intravenous urography revealed no residual ureteral calculi and ruled out the presence of stenosis or fistula. Infrared spectroscopy indicated stones were composed of struvite and carbonate apatite and of calcium oxalate in two cases each. Despite not being a first-line treatment for ureteral stones due to its increased invasiveness and hospital stay when compared to ESWL and ureteroscopy, laparoscopic ureterolithotomy is a feasible and reproducible approach, presenting high stone free rate and low incidence of complications. It is particularly useful in the management of large sized middle and upper ureteral calculi. Randomized studies comparing the different approaches on these calculi are needed. Introduction and Objective: Paediatric urinary lithiasis is a rather uncommon condition, with the vast majority of the cases being successfully managed with shock wave lithotripsy (SWL). Endourology is then indicated after SWL failure or, as a first indication, for highly complex situations. A paediatric patient with complex lithiasis is presented, who was managed with a rational combination of endourological approaches as first indication. : 2 year-old child, with recurrent urinary tract infections. Multiple radiopaque calyceal stones in the right kidney (aggregate surface 350 mm2), ipsilateral ureteral calculus (8x6mm) and 2 bladder calculi (8x7mm, each). This renal unit has a normal function, assessed by DMSA-scan. Results: Percutaneous approach through the middle calyx under ultrasound control. Tract dilation up to 16Ch with minipercutaneous set. Flexible ureteroscopy (FlexURS) and in situ lasertripsy of the ureter-al stone. The renal stone burden made it impossible to grasp and pull out the calculi with the FlexURS. Hence, the tract was dilated up to 24Ch to perform standard percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL), and all the calculi were entirely removed with flexible nephroscopy. Percutaneous cystolithotomy under endoscopic and ultrasound control in order to remove the bladder calculi. An 8Ch bladder catheter and a 16cm/4.8Ch double J stent were left in place, without nephrostomy tube or suprapubic catheter. Operating and fluoroscopy times, 181 and 0.5 minutes, respectively. Hospital stay 7 days, without perioperative complications. After 3 months, the patient is asymptomatic without evidence of stones in the ultrasound scan. Conclusion: SWL is the main indication for paediatric urinary lithiasis treatment. However, in highly complex cases (whether due to the stone burden or its distribution in the urinary tract), a rational use of endourology allows for a successful outcome with minimal morbidity. Previous expertise in adults is of utmost importance before carrying out these approaches in children. Introduction and Objective: Accurate risk stratification of upper tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC) is essential for the selection between radical nephroureterectomy and endoscopic treatment. The main tumour-specific characteristics for the risk stratification are size, grade and stage. However, the current diagnostic approach has limitations. Up-staging or up-grading of histopathology from endoscopic biopsies is observed regularly and ~20% of biopsies are non-diagnostic. Moreover, this approach lacks real-time histopathologic information. The potential of Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) and Confocal Laser Endomicroscopy (CLE) for intraoperative diagnosis of UTUC is investigated. These probe-based imaging techniques may allow for real-time 'optical biopsies' during ureterorenoscopy. The aim of this video presentation is to demonstrate the application of these novel techniques for UTUC diagnosis. We performed OCT and CLE imaging during ureterorenoscopy in 27 patients with a suspicious lesion in the upper tract. The OCT Dragonfly 2.7Fr sideward-looking probe (St Jude Medical) was introduced via the ureteroscope. OCT yielded cross-sectional images of the upper tract with a resolution of 10 µm and an image depth of ~2 mm. After OCT imaging, 0.3-1.0 mL of 2.5% fluorescein was flushed into the upper tract for CLE imaging. The CLE UroFlex 2.6Fr forward-looking probe (Mauna Kea) was introduced via the working channel and placed into contact with the lesion for imaging. The CLE image resolution was 3.5 μm with an imaging-depth of 40-70 μm. After optical imaging, endoscopic biopsies were taken for histopathology. Results: Correct positioning of the probes with respect to the lesion yielded high quality images. The evaluation of microarchitectural features on CLE images allowed for judgement of tumour grade. Tissue layer delineation enabled tumour staging on OCT images. Quantitative analysis of the attenuation coefficient on OCT images facilitated tumour grading. In this cohort, no complications related to OCT or CLE imaging occurred. Conclusions: OCT and CLE can be applied safely during ureterorenoscopy for 'optical biopsies' of UTUC. The qualitative and quantitative histopathologic information of these 'optical biopsies' may enable intraoperative risk-stratification for optimal treatment selection. The diagnostic value of OCT and CLE in comparison to histopathology will be analysed in near future for this cohort. Novel Retrograde Percutaneous Technique of Lead Placement for Chronic Tibial Nerve Stimulation Introduction and Objective: This video demonstrates the retrograde approach for percutaneous lead placement for chronic tibial nerve stimulation. This technique can be done under local anesthesia in the office setting. This video reviews the cadaver anatomy of the tibial nerve at the ankle then demonstrates the retrograde percutaneous approach for a tibial nerve lead in a patient in the office setting. The lead is placed percutaneously with the guidance of a combination of 1) bony landmarks 2) ultrasound and 3) fluoroscopic imaging. This video reviews our cadaver studies that showed leads placed retrograde (distal to proximal) was more reliably predicted using bony landmarks, was easily observed with ultrasound, and resulted in consistently more parallel lead placement. Results: The retrograde approach, starting at the level of the medial malleolus, about 1 finger breadth behind (in general about 1/3 the distance from the medial malleolus to Achilles tendon) penetrates the fascia of the lower leg to enter the space adjacent to the tibial nerve. Testing of the finder needle for motor and sensory response guides lead placement. Wireless lead stimulation is demonstrated. We report a novel, safe retrograde method of percutaneous tibial nerve lead placement. The retrograde approach, starting posterior to the medial malleolus, was easier and reproducibly placed a more parallel lead that may optimize tibial nerve stimulation. Ultrasound was effective in localizing the tibial artery to aid orientation and depth of placement of the stimulation lead and maximizes safety. We are optimistic that this minimally invasive retrograde percutaneous approach can be done in the physician's office under local anesthesia.  Zero Ischaemia ICG Assisted Laparoscopic Partial Nephrectomy Lim HCC 1 , Chen K 2 , Sim A 2 1 Singapore General Hospital, Singapore; 2 Dept. of Urology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore Introduction and Objective: Perinephric "toxic fat" has always been a challenge during partial nephrectomy. The lack of clear margin for dissection and increased bleeding encountered makes it particularly difficult to excise the tumour in its entirelity whilst ensuring adequate repair of parenchymal defect. Indocyanine green (ICG) allows excellent delineation of renal vasculature and emboldens our attempts in super-selective clamping thereby reducing warm ischemia during partial nephrectomy. We explore the use of ICG combined with technique of enucleation in a case of laparoscopic partial nephrectomy where toxic fat was encountered. Transperitoneal laparoscopic left partial nephrectomy was performed for a case of a 3.4cm tumour (nephrometry score 8A). Near-infrared fluorescence imaging with intra-operative administration of ICG was employed to aid in super-selective clamping of the renal artery. Perinephric toxic fat was encountered precluding clear margin for dissection and enucleation of the renal tumour was performed laparoscopically with satisfactory results. Results: Operation lasted 170mins; blood loss of 100ml, operatoin was operated entirely with zero ischaemia to left kidney. On day 8 post surgery, patient was discharged, stable and well. Histology showed papillary renal cell carcinoma, pT1a, Mostly grade 2, with focal grade 3 features. Tumour is confined to kidney, pseudocapsule of tumour was intact On follow up, patient has been well, experienced no surgical complication and follow up scans have shown no recurrence of diases. Conclusion: Enucleation is a safe and feasible technique for partial nephrectomy in cases of perinephric "toxic" fat. Coupled with ICG-assisted super selective clamping zero ischaemia partial nephrectomy can be achieved. Optimizing Results: BLC with Cysview® is demonstrated in several challenging cases for the detection of NMIBC as shown in Figure 1 . Possible FP scenarios include: tangential views of the bladder neck or side walls (a), trigone, trabeculations or diverticula (b); In setting of inflammation like Cystitis (c), post intravesical therapy, i.e. less than 6-weeks interval from prior BCG (d), prior resection within 6 weeks (e), very bright tiny spots (f), site of ureterectomy/bladder cuff resection; Early-fading lesions (following irrigation). Unnecessary biopsy of these lesions can be avoided through simple techniques such changing the angle of the cystoscopic view, several rounds of irrigation, and avoiding blue light cystoscopy too early after BCG instillation or prior resection. Conclusions: Use of blue light cystoscopy with Cys-view® can help with the detection of NMIBC as well as CIS in patients undergoing TURBT for bladder cancer. The reported false-positive rates of BLC will decrease with experience and recognition of the above-mentioned scenarios. Videolaparoscopic Correction of Uterine Prolapse in a Virgin Patient Santana A, Tagliari T, Orikasa G, Alves E, Fernandes R, Cortez Neto D, Pires S, Toledo LG Introduction and Objectives: Pelvic organ prolapse is a prevalent disease in women of advanced age. In this case, however, we are faced with a young patient (23 years old) with grade III uterine prolapse, due to Joint Hypermobility Syndrome, a congenital collagen disease that predisposes women to the development of pelvic organ prolapse. The patient had urinary difficulty requiring standing, curving to reduce prolapse and then start urination. The objective is to demonstrate that videolaparoscopic technique is feasible and a good alternative for the treatment of uterine prolapse in young and sexually virgin women. In this technique, after introducing the trocars, we started to separate the bladder and vagina and opene the peritoneum anterior to the uterus. Next, we perform a maneuver by attaching the sigmoid colon to the left abdominal wall, in order to better expose the promontory, so that we can open the peritoneum posterior to the uterus and medially tunnel the right uterosacral ligament, transfix the broad ligament of the uterus and pass the end of a polypropylene mesh through this tunnel to the posterior region of the uterus. Next, we repeat the same maneuver on the other side so that the mesh surrounds the anterior portion of the cervix while its two extremities are posterior to the uterus. The mesh is fixed with two to three points on the anterior surface of the uterine cervix and its two extremities are fixed to the promontory in the anterior longitudinal ligament of the spine, in the projection of the vertebral body, at S2 level, escaping from the intervertebral disc. At this point it is important for the helper surgeon to push the uterus with an uterine manipulator to remove tension from the mesh as the surgeon tightens the knot. Finally, we close the peritoneum with continuous suture. Results: As we can see in the post-surgical physical examination video, uterine prolapse was successfully corrected, with good recovery and without postoperative complications. The videolaparoscopic technique is feasible for correction of uterine prolapse, being effective and safe and is especially indicated in the case of virgin women. VID.28, Figure 1 . False-Positive Scenarios in Patients with Bluelight Cystoscopy Introduction and Objective: We reviewed a clinical case of Robotic redo Pyeloplasty for a right upper ureteric stricture. A 30-year-old female presented to the Urology Outpatient Clinic (Hamad General Hospital) complaining of right loin pain for the past 10 years.The pain was on & off, Mild in severity, responding to analgesics, non-radiating, no exacerbating or alleviating factors, not associated with LUTS, no hematuria, nor she gave any past history of urinary tract infections. The patient is known hypothyroid and gave history for a previous DJ insertion 9 years in the same side and was removed 3 months after insertion as her symptoms did not improve. She had a normal abdominal examination & normal blood labs including her renal functions. A preoperative renogram showed evidence of ureteric obstruction, so cystoscopy & retrograde pyelography was done, showed a stricture near the right Pelvi-ureteric Junction. The Patient underwent Robotic exploration showing 1.5 cm right upper ureteric small stricture, were resection and anastomosis was done with DJ insertion. The operation went smoothly, so did the postoperative period, DJ stent was removed after 6 weeks and the patient presented to the Emergency Department within 24 hours of the DJ removal with same complaint. She had a CT KUB with contrast showing the upper ureteric stricture again, she underwent Cystoscopy, right RGP and DJ stent insertion as an Emergency in December 2015. Available options are A) Endoscopic Antegrade and Retrograde: Balloon Dilatation, Cold Knife Resection, Laser Resection, Cutting Balloon Catheter, B) Open Pyeloplasty, C) Laparoscopic Pyeloplasty D) Robotic Assisted Redo Pyeloplasty. Results: Patient had a smooth postoperative course, discharged without Foley's on her third postoperative day, DJ stent was removed 4 weeks after and has been following in the clinic since then with no new complaints. Her postoperative Renogram showed the relive of obstruction. Conclusion: Robotic assisted "Davinci" Redo Pyeloplasty is a safe procedure for recurrent upper ureteric strictures requiring treatment, the insertion of DJ stent facilitated the surgery. Simultaneous Bilateral Laparoscopic Adrenalectomy for a Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type IIB Syndrome with Bilateral Pheochromocytoma Ribeiro de Oliveira T 1 , Leitão T 1 , Oliveira P 1 , Alfarelos J 2 , Felício J 1 , Pereira S 1 , Lopes T 1 Introduction and Objective: Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia (MEN) is a rare group of conditions affecting several endocrine glands. MEN type IIB is characterized by the presence of medullary thyroid cancer, neuromas, Marfanoid body habitus and pheocromocytomas. As for other types of pheochromocytomas, complete surgical resection is indicated. Over the past decades, the use of minimally invasive approaches in adrenal surgery has become widespread and, for most indications, there has been as paradigm shift from open to laparoscopic surgery. Management of bilateral pheochromocytoma is challenging, due to the risk of severe hemodynamic instability and the presence of hormonal imbalance. The authors present a video of simultaneous bilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy for bilateral pheochromocytoma. Results: A 23 years-old male with Marfanoid body habitus and mucocutaneous neuromas was diagnosed with MEN type IIB syndrome following the identification of medullary thyroid cancer. Genetic testing confirmed the presence of RET gene heterozygotic mutation. No clinical, laboratorial or radiologic evidence of pheochromocytoma was present. The patient remained under regular endocrine surveillance. At the age of 29, an asymptomatic elevation of plasmatic metanephrines led to a repeat radiologic evaluation. Abdominopelvic computed tomography identified bilateral adrenal nodules (30 and 16mm in diameter, at the left and right adrenals, respectively), with heterogeneous enhancement and unspecific washout. MIBG (Metaiodobenzylguanidine) scintigraphy was compatible with bilateral pheocromocytoma. The patient was admitted for preoperative hemodynamic and hormonal optimization. A simultaneous bilateral adrenalectomy was performed, via transperitoneal laparoscopic approach in sequential lateral decubitus, with operative time of 130min and <50ml of blood loss. During the procedure, the expected severe hemodynamic variation due to adrenal manipulation and removal was managed accordingly. The procedure was otherwise uneventful. Postoperative period was without incidents and predefined progressive hormonal replacement was performed. Pathology of the specimen confirmed the diagnosis of bilateral pheochromocytoma. Conclusion: Simultaneous bilateral laparoscopic transperitoneal adrenalectomy is a safe and effective tool in the management of bilateral pheochromocytoma in MEN type IIB cases. Optimal treatment outcomes require a multidisciplinary approach, with thorough preoperative preparation, close cooperation between the surgical and anesthesiology teams during surgery and a close postoperative follow-up. Laparoscopic Management of a Paravesicoprostatic Solid Lesion of Undetermined Etiology Ribeiro de Oliveira T, Leitão T, Oliveira P, Almeida J, Pé-Leve P, Pereira S, Lopes T Introduction and Objective: Over the past years, the use of minimally invasive procedures in Urology has become widespread. In fact, minimally invasive pro-cedures are nowadays considered the standard of care for many urologic diseases. However, due to its rarity and complexity, pelvic lesions of undetermined etiology constitute a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge, usually managed with more traditional approaches. The authors present a video of the laparoscopic management of a paravesicoprostatic solid lesion of undetermined etiology. Results: A 74 years-old male patient was under regular follow-up for lower urinary tract symptoms due to benign prostatic hyperplasia, treated with dutasteride. Previous medical history included only a bilateral hydrocele repair. Due to progressive worsening of the voiding symptoms, the patient underwent a reevaluation with transrectal prostate ultrasound, revealing a 7cm solid lesion on the pelvic cavity, lateral to the prostate, without apparent contact with the bladder, prostate or seminal vesicles. Further characterization with computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the presence of a heterogenous 7cm left laterovesicoprostatic solid lesion, with regular contour and well-defined limits, without communication with the surrounding structures. Ultrasound-guided transrectal biopsy of the lesion was inconclusive, revealing fragments of fibro-adipose tissue with areas of unspecific inflammatory infiltration. Considering the probable role of the pelvic lesion on the worsening of voiding symptoms, as well as its undetermined malignant potential, the patient opted for surgical treatment. A transperitoneal laparoscopic excision of the mass was performed, with operative time of 120 minutes, <150ml of blood loss and without immediate complications. Postoperative period was uneventful and the patient was discharged 3 days after the procedure. Pathology and imunohystochemistry of the specimen were compatible with a benign inflammatory miofibroblastic tumor. The patient is asymptomatic at one year of follow-up. In selected cases, laparoscopy can be a safe and effective tool in the management of pelvic lesions of undetermined etiology. Simplified Percutaneous Large Bore Suprapubic Cystostomy for Acute Urinary Retention Introduction and Objective: Commercial suprapubic cystostomy trocars are not widely available across low resource economies and as such many suprapubic cystostomy procedures for acute urinary retention that cannot be relieved via urethral catheterization are still done through a formal or a modified open procedure. The vast majority of these patients will carry these catheters for long before definitive surgery hence necessitating large bore catheter insertion. This video shows a simplified large bore puncture suprapubic cystostomy technique that utilizes selected surgical blades in the place of commercial trocars. The simplified suprapubic cystostomy approach consisted of puncturing the palpably distended bladder with Surgical blade size 20 (7mm diameter) or sizes 21 and 22 (9mm diameter) to allow resistance free insertion of Foley catheter size 18Fr (maximum diameter of 6mm) or size 20 (maximum diameter of 6.7 mm) respectively. Prior to the puncture, application of local anesthesia and successful aspiration of urine was done at a point along the mid abdominal line -2 finger breadths above the pubic symphysis. Results: The index patient was a 60 year old male that presented in acute urinary retention and failed urethral catheterization. The percutaneous access into the bladder was achieved used a mounted size 20 surgical blade with subsequent insertion of size 18Fr Foley catheter. The duration of surgery from the time of application of the local anesthesia to insertion and inflation of the balloon of Foley catheter was less than 2min. Suture fixation of the Foley catheter is not required. In the absence of commercial suprapubic cystotomy trocars, large-bore emergent access to the bladder can be safely achieved through direct puncture of the palpably distended bladder with appropriately selected surgical blades (sizes 20, 21 or 22) that will subsequently allow resistance-free placement of the selected Foley catheters (sizes 18 or 20Fr). Pelvic (Paravesical) Paraganglioma: Technique of Robot Assisted Excision Ganpule A, Tak G, Deshmukh C, Singh A, Sabnis R, Desai M Introduction and Objective: Paraganglioma (Paraside by side, ganglioma-benign neoplasm composed of nerve fibers and mature ganglion cells) are the rare tumors arising from peripheral nervous system (i.e. outside brain and spinal cord) also called as extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma. Tumors, arising from chromaffin cells of adrenal gland called pheochromocytoma. Paraganglioma may be functional or non-functional depending upon whether it produces either of adrenalin, nor adrenalin, both or none. Forty four years old hypertensive male, presented with history of poor urinary flow, hesitancy for 2 months. On investigation found to have pelvic mass, abutting left postero lateral wall of Urinary Bladder on left side, no intra luminal component, compressing left lobe of prostate, no invasion seen. Cystoscopy was normal except bulge on the left lateral wall of bladder, Intra cavity ultrasound (ICUSG) confirmed the left paravesical location of tumor, TRUS revealed round mass separate from bladder, prostate and seminal vesicles. He underwent USG guided biopsy of paravesical mass made the diagnosis of Paraganglioma with immunohistochemical markers Chromogranin, Synaptophysin positive. Serum markers of Paraganglioma were normal suggesting its non-functional nature. We describe technique of robot assisted excision of paravesical Paraganglioma Conclusion: Location wise, Paragangliomas arise mostly in abdomen, near the aorta or kidney pa-ra-vertebrally. Occurrence of tumor at various locations was described as in bladder, pelvis, prostate, ovary and thorax. Symptoms may arise due to its biochemical secretions or due to shear mass effect. Excision of these masses using Robotic platform is feasible and the advantages (high magnification, 3D vision, minimal complications and post op hospital stay) of using robotic platform for operating in deep pelvic cavity can be best utilized in such cases. Laparoscopic Pyelolithotomy in Pelvic Renal Ectopia Lopez Fontana G, Lopez-Fontana R, Lopez Laur JD Introduction and Objective: Renal pelvic ectopia is a rare upper urinary tract anomaly (1/2.100-3.000) being the left side slightly more common than the right side. Most cases are asymptomatic and incidentally diagnosed; however, vague abdominal complaints or ureteral colic secondary to an obstructing stone are the most frequent symptoms leading to the diagnosis. Due to their location and either position, pathologies have different approaches to conventional treatment and are challenges. The aim of this video is to demostrate a laparoscopic pyelolithotomy in ectopic pelvic kidney. A 37 years old man diagnosed with a 3 x 3 cm lithiasis in ectopic pelvic kidney underwent laparoscopic pyelolithotomy. Under lithotomy 4 laparoscopic ports were placed as a standard transperitoneal pelvic access being 5 cm more cephalic. Sigmoid colon was medially movilized until renal pelvis was identified to be incised for stone extraction. Double J stent ureteral was percutaneously placed and renal pelvis closed with 4-0 Vicryl. Results: Surgical time was 60 minutes without perioperatory complicationes. The patient was discharged 36 hs after bladder catheter was removed. Finally, ureteral stent was removed 4 weeks after surgery. Conclusion: Pathologies in upper urinary tract anomalies are rare and, therefore, challenging. For ectopic pelvic kidney stones laparoscopic pyelolithotomy is feasible with low morbidity compared to open surgery. Ports placement must be adapted to each particular case.  In the beginning of a percutaneous renal surgery, the nephroscope light port adaptor was missing. We tried the adaptors of all the other scopes available but they were not from the same brand. Thus, no adaptor worked. What is the solu-tion? The light cable do not adapt to the nephroscope. It was not fixed so it slips with every moves of the nephroscope. It is impossible to work like this. The solution: A small piece, which has the length of the light port, is severed from the funnel shaped end of a Foley catheter. Then, it is adapted to the light port. Introduction and Objective: Radical cystectomy is the standard of care for bladder cancer patients. As robotic experience and technique advances, Robotic Assisted Radical Cystectomy (RARC) is being applied. We report the first series of RARC with Intracorporeal Neobladder (INB) in the Middle East using a simplified technique. Using the Da Vinci Si robot in supine position and steep trendelenbourg, a 12mm camera trocar, 3 robotic 8mm and two 12mm left sided assistant ports are placed. The robot is side docked to the patient and a robotic radical cystectomy with extended lymph node dissection is performed. A 40 cm ileal loop is identified 15 cm from the ileocecal valve. Urethro-ileal anastomosis is performed with Vanvelthoven technique. Using Endo GIA 60mm Bowel resection and anastomosis are done after measuring 20 cm of bowel in each limb. The bowel segments are divided leaving 4 cms chimneys on each side. The posterior then anterior neobladder walls are sutured. Uretero ileal anastomosis is performed using 5-0 PDS sutures over DJ stents. A 24 Fr foley and a 18 Fr suprapubic catheters are placed. Results: From January 2014 till February 2017, 6 RARC+INB cases (5 males, 1 female) were performed. Mean age was 62 years (51-70). Indications were MIBC in 3 patients and T1 High grade with aggressive features in 3 patients. There was no conversion to open surgery. Mean operative time was 488 min (390-720). Mean EBL was 620 mL with one patient requiring transfusion. Mean hospital stay was 9 days (6-12). All pathologies reported negative margins, negative lymph nodes with on average 21 nodes. There were no major complications; two patients had UTI requiring antibiotic treatment (Clavien I). Ureteral stents were removed 2 weeks postoperatively. With a median follow up of 15.4 months, 3 patients (50%) regained continence and 2 patients reported erections with PDE5i. All patients were disease free. In the first reported case series in the Middle east of RARC with simplified INB, this approach was found to be safe and feasible. This minimally invasive technique allows fast recovery with low complications rates and good oncological and functional outcomes in selected cases. Introduction and Objectives: We have described economic tricks to adapt the ureteral catheter to a drainage bag, the technique of the ureteral catheter introduction in the funnel shaped Foley catheter distal end, and the technique of the serum bag injection port. We present a video of another economic trick to adapt the ureteral catheter to a drainage bag using the Foley valve. In the end of a PCNL procedure, the colored sleeve around the Foley valve is removed. Then, the soft rubber valve of the Foley nephrostomy catheter is extracted. The ureteral catheter is introduced into the large part of the valve. Thus, the tapered part of the valve is distal. The tubing of the drainage bag is adapted over the tapered rubber valve in a tight junction. The soft rubber valve of the Foley catheter has adapted, tightly and quickly, the ureteral catheter to the drainage bag. The junction is watertight. Moreover, there is economy of the adaptor. The use of the soft Foley valve is another trick that eliminates time-consuming and expensive steps in adapting the ureteral catheters to a drainage bag. Robotic Assisted Ureteric Reinforcement with Inlay Plus Onlay Buccal Mucosal Graft for Short Fibrotic Ureteric Stricture: A Point of Technique Ganpule A, Shah J, Deshmukh C, Mohankumar V, Singh A, Sabnis R, Desai M Introduction and Objective: Long segment or short fibrotic strictures in upper or middle 3rd of ureter, not amenable for end-to-end ureterostomy are difficult to manage. Management options like renal auto transplantation or bowel interposition are morbid. In 1999, Naude described buccal mucosal graft wrapped in omentum for ureteric stricture. Subsequently many articles were published using buccal mucosa as patch graft or tubularized graft for ureteric reconstruction. Here we present a video as point of technique for ureteric reinforcement with Buccal mucosal graft (BMG) inlay plus onlay patch for short dense ureteric stricture. Sixty year diabetic female with inflammatory right midureteric stricture had failed endoscopic management with S.creatinine of 1.84 mg%. Antegrade-retrograde dye study was suggestive of 2.5-3 cm stricture at upper SI joint. Intraoperatively strictured ureter was found densely adhered to iliac artery. Stricture was incised, part of harvested BMG was kept as inlay graft over posterior strictured ureteric wall and rest was sutured with vicryl 4.0 with the margin of ureterotomy as onlay graft over 6/26 DJ stent with omental wrapping. Results: Total operative time was 4 hours. Creatinine decreased down to 1.6 mg% with only 1 gm% drop of Haemoglobin. PUC and PCN were removed on 2nd POD and drain was removed on 3rd POD. Pt was discharged on 4th POD. Long term follow up is awaited. Conclusion: Inlay + onlay grafting has theoretical advantage over tubularized graft or patch graft that almost entire strictured ureter is replaced with buccal mucosa without risk of compromised vascularity. Laparoscopic Transmesocolic Pyelolithotomy for a Child with Horseshoe Kidney Introduction and Objectives: Laparoscopic pyelolithotomy has been introduced for horseshoe kidney; however, we did not find any report for transmesocolic approach in this anomaly. An 8-year-old boy referred to our clinic with a 22 mm renal pelvic stone. The patient was not suitable for PCNL because the spleen and the colon were overlying the upper and lower pole of the horseshoe kidney. Therefore, we decided to perform laparoscopic pyelolithotomy. The operation was performed in the flank position with three working ports; two in the lower and upper midline and one in the lateral. The stone was removed completely and the postoperative period was uneventful. Conclusion: Transmesocolic approach is safe for the horseshoe kidney and is associated with lesser tissue dissection and faster operation. Surgical Technique for Penile Prosthesis Implantation (PPI) plus Corporeal Reconstruction with Collagen-Fleece Grafting in the Treatment of Peyronie's Disease (PD) with or without Erectile Dysfunction (ED) Introduction and Objective: Our objective is to present our initial experience and preliminary results of partial plaque incision and grafting with self-adhesive film containing collagen combined with PPI (inflatable or malleable) in the treatment of Peyronie's disease. We present in video the technique for the implantation of inflatable and malleable prosthesis. February 2017, we operated 19 patients using this technique, ten by implantation of a malleable prosthesis and the other nine with inflatable. Nine of them kept proper erectile function and six had significant shortening of the penis without curvature. Six of them had been previously operated: one inflatable prosthesis + modeling; and other with sequelae after simple plication. The mean presurgical PDQ bother score was 9.4 (6-12). As we explain in this video, surgery was performed in the case of malleable through a single incision (with penile degloving) while IPP was performed either by 2 incisions (scrotal + penile degloving) or through a single incision (Kulkarni approach). Curvature correction was made by partial plaque incision with an H modified technique in the area of maximum curvature (or corporeal relaxing incisions) and placing a patch without suturing, covering prosthetic material. Results: The mean operative time was 74 (55-92) min. The mean postsurgical penile lengthening was 4.3 (2-6) cm. There was an improvement in PDQ PD bother score of 4.3 (2-5) points. No patients had glans ischemia or any infectious complications, but we observed hematoma in 37% (7/19) with no need of surgical drainage. All patients showed good capability of penetration and correction of the penile curvature (<15º of residual curvature) 3 months after surgery. Ten patients had glans hypoestesia at this time, while after the first three months, only four of them remains symptomatic. The overall satisfaction rate was of 90%. Conclusion: In our experience, plaque incision and collagen fleece grafting during penile prosthesis implantation seems to be a safe and reproducible technique that yields higher satisfaction rates and greater penile lengthening than prosthesis implantation alone. Also, this technique could be consider in the management of sequalae after PD surgery. Introduction and Objectives: Utethral stricture on the membranous portion of the urethra is usually treated with excision and primary anastomotic urethroplasty. We evaluate the feasibility to perform membranous urethrolysis and dorsal buccal mucosal graft urethroplasty in patients with membranous stricture with severe fibrosis after transurethral resection of the prostate and repeated endoscopic procedures. We present the case of a 65 male treated with multiple transurethral resection of bladder papillary tumor and prostate who developed a 2-3 centimeter stricture on membranous urethra with extensive fibrosis and severe oclusion of the lu-VIDEO ePOSTERS 142 37th CONGRESS OF THE SOCIÉTÉ INTERNATIONALE D'UROLOGIE -SIU 2017 ABSTRACT BOOK men making urethroscopy impossible. We perform membranous urethrolysis and dorsal onlay urethroplasty, thus preventing external sphincter damage and avoiding urethral shortening. Results: Bulbo-spongiosus muscle is separated and displaced laterally in a Spanish hand fan-like fashion that allows a direct access to the intercrural and pre-sphincteric space. Double traction of bulbar urethra and bulb of penis facilitates dissection of the membranous urethra and preservation of the sphincter. Once peripheral fibrosis is disected and the membranous portion of the urethra is adecuately exposed, the bulbomembranous junction is cut opened dorsaly and a Beniqué sound inserted in the lumen. This maneuver facilitates completion of the urethrolysis and better exposure of the membranous pre-sphincteric area. An 18F silicon Foley catheter is placed and the total length of the urethrotomy is measured to fit a bucal mucosa graft that has been simultaneously harvested and prepared. Dorsal onlay is completed and the grafted area is attached to the crus of penis and trapezoid space of the prostate. Surgery ends with re-aproximation of bulbospongiosus muscles. Continence and potency are preserved, and ejaculation is restored. Cystography 4 weeks after surgery revealed absence of stricture and cystoscopy performed some months later shows a healed normal membranous urethra without stricture and with a normal sphincter. The repair of membranous urethral stricture using urethrolysis and dorsal onlay buccal mucosal graft urethroplasty represents a viable alternative for patients with nontraumatic membranous stricture due to repeated endoscopic procedures. Urethral shortening is avoided with this approach and continence is less menaced than with membranous urethral excision and primary anastomotic urethroplasty. Buccal Introduction and Objective: Buccal mucosa is readily available and easy to harvest and can be used in complex urethral reconstruction. This video demonstrates the repair of a complicated post traumatic female urethra stricture with recurrent proximal urethral fistula. This video is a case report of the use of a buccal mucosal graft for complicated urethral reconstruction. A 15 year old female suffered blunt trauma from brick wall falling on her with pelvic fracture and vaginal fistula. She had the fistula repaired and then returned 5 years later with urethral stenosis and recurrent proximal urethral fistula. We demonstrate our surgical technique of buccal mucosal graft ventral onlay repair of this difficult problem. Conclusion: Buccal mucosa is readily available, easy to harvest with a concealed donor site, and should be considered an important tool for complex urethral reconstructive procedures. Ex Vivo Repair and Autotransplantation for Complex Renal Artery Aneurysms Bouye S, Rizk J, Azzaoui R, Flamand V Introduction and Objective: We present the surgical approach for the treatment of complex renal artery aneurysms. A vascular expert formally excludes the possibility of an endovascular treatment. The surgical approach is validated after multidisciplinary consensus due to the complexity of the intra-hilar morphology and the risk of spontaneous rupture. Both vascular and urologic surgeons perform the renal autotransplantation after ex vivo repair. Four patients between the ages of 52 and 65 were included in the study during the inclusion period from June 2015 to June 2016. The surgical approach consisted of 4 steps: 1-Removal of the kidney (by lumbotomy for the right one and laparoscopy for the left one) following the same protocol of a live donor. 2-Removal of the saphenous vein graft. 3-Preparation of the kidney on the back table; the aneurysm and its arterial branches were dissected and resected, then the distal intra-hilar branches were implanted on the saphenous graft (1 to 3 grafts). 4-Renal transplantation was performed under intravenous heparin on the homolateral external or common iliac vessels. Results: All transplantations could be performed. Mean surgery time was 420 minutes (390 -450), and no complication was noted during the procedure. Doppler ultrasound control at the first day after surgery showed good result. One patient had, on an injected CT scan performed at day 7 after the procedure, an ischemia of 60% of the grafted kidney, due to thrombosis of arterial branches implanted on a single saphenous vein graft, and managed by a medical treatment only. The other patients did not show any abnormality of the kidney perfusion or function on an initial CT scan and on an MRI performed at 3 months after the surgery. No other complications were noted. There was no change in the post-operative kidney function after 3 months of follow up. Conclusion: Renal auto-transplantation after ex vivo treatment is a surgical option for complex renal artery aneurysms. The double team approach and the good experience in renal transplantation from a live donor are fundamental to the success of this rare and complex surgical procedure. Futuroplasty: Endoscopic Liquid BMG Insertion for Urethral Strictures Joshi P 1 , Nikalovski D 2 , Desai D 1 , Surana S 1 , Orabi H 1 , Kulkarni S 1 Introduction and Objectives: A minimally-invasive endoscopic approach, using a liquid buccal mucosal graft (LBMG), for management of urethral stricture has recently been published as a proof-of-concept in an animal model (PMID 27177425). We present for the first time our experience of using a LBMG technique in human patients with bulbar urethral stricture. A prospective clinical trial was undertaken after ethics approval and appropriate patient consent. Patients with a single short urethral stricture who failed at least one endoscopic urethrotomy were included. Failure was defined as need for further interventions or recurrence of symptoms. Preoperative workup included history, examination, RGU, VCUG, urine culture and renal function tests. Steps of procedure: the stricture is evaluated endoscopically, a glide wire placed and an urethrotomy performed at 6 o' clock position with cold knife. A 14 Fr urinary catheter is placed for bladder drainage. 2 x 1 cm buccal mucosa graft (BMG) is harvested. The BMG is washed in an antibiotic solution, then sharply minced to <1mm fragments and centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 5 minutes. The resultant pellet is re-suspended in dilute components of fibrin glue and injected via a 10 Fr feeding tube alongside the urinary catheter. The injection of LBMG was performed under direct view through a 6 Fr ureterosope placed alongside the catheter. The urinary catheter is removed 7 days postoperatively. Follow up uroflow and post-void residuals were measured every 3 months. Results: Table 1 . Conclusion: Endoscopic LBMG urethroplasty is a feasible procedure with a promising role in future treatment of short anterior urethral strictures. Larger cohort and longer follow up are planned to determine durability of this procedure.  We present a video of how a difficult situation was resolved by on the spot improvisation of a basket to extract a lateral stone, during percutaneous renal surgery. During percutaneous renal surgery for a complete stag-horn stone through a central calyx access, after pelvis clearance, the nephroscope is advanced into the upper calyx. There is a stone in a lateral calyx, which cannot be reached with rigid forceps. The movements of the nephroscope are limited; it is in its utmost position. It cannot move more laterally to have the stone centered. A Nitinol basket is not available. The stone could have been removed using the flexible nephroscope. Otherwise, it could have been pushed with the needle-PCNL or the rigid ureteroscope, through a new upper percutaneous access. Improvisation of a Nitinol basket: The floppy tip of a standard hydrophilic guidewire is looped twice, forming a 3 cm diameter loop. The proximal end of the loops and the body of the guidewire are tied securely with ligature. The distal ends of the loops are placed crosswise. They are fixed in this position with a first knot. Then, the thread is passed between the loops perpendicular to the first knot then it is tied. This bulky basket will be difficult to pass through the nephroscope operating channel. Thus, the guidewire tail is back-loaded into the operating channel of the nephroscope until the proximal knot is introduced into the operating channel. Since this basket will be difficult to move through the nephroscope, the whole complex nephroscope-basket is moved as one in order to maneuver and catch the stone. After introduction through the Amplatz sheath, and into the calyx, the basket is moved around until the stone is caught and attracted through the Amplatz sheath. Results: This on the spot improvised Nitinol basket was easy and quick to make. It was effective to mobilize and extract the stone. Conclusion: This trick or idea to improvise an on the spot handmade basket had allowed to solve an intraoperative problem or complication. To overcome different situations during percutaneous renal surgery a spirit of innovation can be helpful. Percutaneous Tract Dilation beside the Guidewire Introduction and Objectives: There are new ureteral access sheaths that allow transforming the working guidewire into a safety guidewire. The guidewire is passed only in the first 3 or 4 centimeters of the dilator, which has a lateral slit. When the dilator is retrieved, the guidewire is released from the dilator through the lateral slit, and stays outside the access sheath. Thus, there is an economy of a guide wire. We present a video of our experience of percutaneous tract dilation parallel or beside to the guidewire, using the same principle. The working guidewire becomes safety guidewire outside the Amplatz sheath at the end of the dilation. Between February 2016 and February 2017, 27 PCNL have been performed with dilation of the tract beside the guidewire. Operative technique: After calyx puncture, a guidewire is inserted down the ureter or it is coiled in an opposite calyx. A pre-dilation to 12 Fr is performed. A stiff 8 Fr ureteral catheter or Double-J-stent pusher is used. The Amplatz catheter can also be used. Its tip is held with a forceps. With a "lancet" blade scalpel, beginning from the tip, a 4-5 cm longitudinal slit is performed in one side of the catheter. At the end of the slit, the scalpel is turned on its self to perform a small hole to accommodate the guidewire. It will be the egress point of the guidewire. The catheter is bent just after the slit. Thus, the small hole will be in the apex of the bend. The tail of the guidewire is inserted into the slit tip of the catheter. After transiting in the 4 cm of the catheter with the slit, the guidewire will egress through the hole, in the summit of the bend. The catheter is advanced over the guidewire until reaching the calyceal cavity. "One shot" or "one step" dilation is performed over the catheter with a 24 Fr Amplatz dilator and sheath. The long part of the catheter, Amplatz dilator and sheath are beside the working guidewire. When the Amplatz sheath reaches the calyx, the catheter is attracted and the guidwire is released from the first part of the catheter through the slit. Thus, the working guidewire become safety guidewire outside the Amplatz sheath. Results: Twenty seven patients had PCNL with dilation with this technique, 14 males and 13 females. The mean age was 39 (21-56). Thirteen right kidneys and 14 left. The main stone burden was 48 mm (32-56). The dilation beside the guidewire was possible in most cases. In 1 case there was peri-renal fibrosis and it was not possible to introduce the Double-J Pusher, which is not tapered. Operative time was 70 min (45-95). The tract dilation time was 4.5 min (3.5-7). The haemoglobin drop was 0.81 (0.5-1.8). There was no complication noted during this dilation. Introduction and Objectives: During percutaneous renal surgery, large outflow of irrigating fluid, may lead to retraction of the pelvi-calyceal system, reduced visibility, and difficult exploration. We present our solutions to this problem, by using our department's tips and tricks to increase the irrigant flow or to decrease the outflow or both. During percutaneous nephroscopy, irrigation flow can be increased using manual pressure by twisting the irrigant bag. Besides, an extra irrigation may be installed via the nephroscope drainage port. In addition, both techniques might be associated. Otherwise, to block the irrigant outflow, the junction between the Amplatz sheath and nephroscope is closed by a watertight grasp with the left hand. Alternatively, the rubber seal of the nephroscope can be adapted to the 30 Fr sheath. Thus, it is useful with a rigid or flexible nephroscope. If the nephroscope rubber seal is worn-out, with large fluid outflow, and there is no spare change, a piece from the rubber piston head of a 20 ml syringe can be used to patch up the gap in the rubber seal. Otherwise, the whole rubber piston head (10 ml Syring for smaller nephroscope or Amplatz sheath) can be used as the neaphroscope seal. Results: These techniques allow an improved visibility and distension of the pyelo-caliceal system for a better inspection, thus a successful outcome of the percutaneous renal surgery. Techniques to increase the irrigation flow are a low-pressure system with less risk of complications. Techniques blocking the irrigation outflow lead to intra-renal high pressure with risk of large extravasations and fluid absorption. They have to be used for very short periods. The use of the rubber piston head of a 20 ml, to patch or to replace the nephroscope seal, is a cheap and helpful alternative. Conclusion: These techniques are helpful to have a clear visibility in difficult situations. They might be an alternative to pressure bag and automated pressure Introduction and Objectives: Mostly, during fluoroscopic percutaneous calyx puncture, the progression of the needle penetration has to be monitored with 2 planes at 0° and 30°, by rotating the C-arm. We present a video of step-by-step description of our technique of percutaneous fluoroscopic calyx puncture without rotating the C-arm, in the split-leg modified lateral position. In our routine percutaneous renal surgery, fluoroscopic calyx puncture is performed without moving the C-arm. The patients are placed in the split-leg modified lateral position. Percutaneous access is performed under fluoroscopic guidance, with the X-ray beam perpendicular to the tract. The C-arm is placed in a fixed position between 10° to 15°. This position of the C-arm allows monitoring the needle in both the cephalo-caudal and latero-medial movements; the needle has to be aligned with the targeted calyx during the whole puncture. To find the kidney's lateral edge and the calyx, in the antero-posterior plane, the needle is displaced, from posterior to anterior by small increment positions. Meanwhile, a slight jiggle of the needle is performed. To avoid parenchymal injuries, the tip of needle must be outside the renal parenchyma. It stays 1.5 to 2 cm outside the calyx. When the needle pushes the kidney and the calyx is indented, it is the correct anterio-posterior position. Then, the needle is advanced through parenchyma and just few millimeters into the calyx. Results: This technique of calyx puncture without moving the C-arm is feasible. It is the only technique used in our department since 1997, for more than 1000 percutaneous surgeries. We think that it is easy and quick to perform compared to puncture with moving the C-arm. In addition, in our experience this technique is easier to teach and to explain, thus many urologists had mastered the calyx puncture. Therefore, it had helped the spread of percutaneous renal surgery to more than 10 centers. This technique, has been used also in the prone position, the needle is moved from up to down until the kidney moves. We think that it can be used also in the supine or supine modified position. Conclusions: This technique of calyx puncture without moving the C-arm is feasible. We think that it can be easily performed. In addition, in our experience this technique is easier to teach and to explain, thus many urologists had mastered the calyx puncture and percutaneous renal surgery. Lezrek M  High Volume Vesical Lithiasis -Better Treated by Suprapubic Approach? Introduction and Objectives: The classical approach for the treatment of urinary lithiasis is endoscopic. This technique has the advantage of simultaneously allowing the treatment of urinary infravesical obstruction but it is associated with important urethral instrumentation. Percutaneous cystolithotomy has emerged as an alternative treatment of this pathology. This technique allows faster fragmentation and extraction of stones without substantial instrumentation of the urethra. The purpose os this work is to present an illustrative video of a percutaneous cystolithotomy technique and a series of cases of patients undergoing this procedure. We have created an illustrative video of percutaneous cystolithotomy, step by step, and carried out a retrospective analysis of 15 patients who underwent this procedure. We present a series of 15 consecutive cases of patients undergoing percutaneous cystolithotomy. The average size of intravesical stones was 4.5cm and the average time of surgery was 78-minute. There were three cases of post-surgical complications Clavien grade 1. The average duration of hospitalization was 1.5 days. All patients were no residual lithiasis after the procedure. A demonstrative video of the technique used in our institution was presented. Conclusion: Percutaneous cystolithotomy can be used safely and shown to be a good alternative to endoscopic treatment. The potentials advantages of this procedure over the endoscopic procedure are shorter time of surgery and minor instrumentation of the urethra and therefore less urethral injuries. Thus, in our experience, percutaneous cystolithotomy can be considered one of the best forms of treatment of bladder large volume lithiasis. Introduction and Objectives: We present a video of our experience of endoscopic cauterization of the percutaneous parenchyma tunnel using a ureteral catheter with its metallic stylet. A 40-years-old female patient presented a right uretero-pelvic junction obstruction is programmed for percutaneous endopyeloplasty. Under general anesthesia, the patient is placed in our standard position, the Split-leg modified lateral position. A 28 Amplatz sheath percutaneous access is performed through a middle calyx. Endoscopic vision is not perfect secondary to a mild bleeding. Exploration of the parenchyma tunnel finds an active bleeding, which could be tamponed by the Amplatz sheath. However, it was a shallow calyx and when the Amplatz sheath is over advanced, it impede endopyelotomy. Thus, cauterization of the parenchyma is decided. A proper endoscopic electrode is not available. A ureteral catheter with its steel mandarin stylet is used as an electrode. Few millimeters of the ureteral catheter are cut to expose the tip of the stylet. The current is passed in the electrode by connecting the stylet with the electrode of the pencil handle of the electro-cautery unit. Otherwise, the connection can be fixed by a mosquito clamp. A metallic stylet with a large brass tip is used for cauterization. The ureteral catheter is introduced through the nephroscope. The tip of the Amplatz sheath is retracted just outside the parenchyma tunnel. The cauterization current is passed through the stylet and the tunnel is cauterized. The electric cauterization of the percutaneous parenchyma tunnel was possible in few minutes. The endoscopic view has improved and became clear, which had allowed continuing the procedure and endopyeloplasty to be performed. Control of the parenchyma tunnel at the end of the procedure showed a perfect hemostasis. Conclusion: Electric cauterization of the percutaneous parenchyma tunnel was successful using a ureteral catheter with its metallic stylet. It had allowed continuing the procedure. Will it be effective on large bleeding? More experience and studies are needed. Stone Mobilisation from Inaccessible Calyx to the Renal Pelvis with the Nephroscope's Tip Introduction and Objectives: This video illustrates a technique that was used since the first era of PCNL, we present a video of our experience of pulling out calyx stone plugs with the tip of the nephroscope, after clearance of the renal pelvis in complex and staghorn calculi. A 45-years-old male with a history of open surgery for a left renal stone 8 years ago, has a complex stone of the lower pole of the right kidney. Under general anesthesia, the patient is placed in our standard position, the Split-leg modified lateral position. A percutaneous renal tract is performed through the lower calyx with a 24 Fr Amplatz sheath. The procedure is performed using a 21 Fr nephroscope. After clearance, of most of the lower pole, 2 branches of the stone were in lateral calyxes, which cannot be easily reached with the rigid nephroscope. The tip of the nephroscope grips the protruding part of the stone and progressively pushes the stone from the calyx to the renal pelvis, till the whole stone plug is pulled out. Otherwise, a tri-prong forceps might be used to grasp the stone, then the forceps is pushed forward into the renal pelvis pulling out the stone. The technique to pull out the stone plug from the calyx is one of the main techniques, to extract stones, which are plugging unreachable calyxes, using the rigid nephroscope. In this patient, this technique had allowed to remove all the kidney stones with the rigid nephroscope through a single access. There is the concern of mucosal or pelvic wall injury by the tip of the nephroscope. Thus, this maneuver has to be performed with precision and smoothness. However, for this technique to be effective, during fragmentation of the pelvic stone, a protuberance has to be left in continuance of the stone infundibulum prolongation. If there is no stone protuberance the calyx stone plug will retract into the infundibulum, with no griping point for the nephroscope's tip. The tip of the nephroscope can be used to pull out calyx stone plugs allowing to remove all stones or to reduce the number of percutaneous accesses and ancillary procedure in complex and staghorn calculi. Back Loading a Guidewire on a Rapid Release Ureteral Access Sheath without the Back-Loading Clip Lezrek M 1,2 , Tazi H 2 , Slimani A 1 , Alami M 1 , Ammani A 1 The rapid release ureteral access sheath is a good way to transform the working wire to a safety. The guide is passed in a split of the first 3 or 4 centimeters of the dilator. When the dilator is retrieved the guide is outside the sheath. Thus, there is an economy of a guide wire. Sometimes there is difficulty, to backload the guide even with the back-loading clip. We present a video of how to backload the guidewire into the sheath without the clip. To backload the guidewire through the rapid release access sheath without the back-loading clip, the tapered dilator is curved. The egress hole will be in the apex of the curve. Thus, the guidewire exits the dilator by the hole. The trick to bend the dilator such as the egress hole will be in the apex of the bend has allowed to backload the guidewire through the ureteral access sheath and through the egress hole, without the back-loading clip. Always, the guide wire exits the dilator smoothly and quickly, whether it is the stiff or floppy tip of the guide wire, without any difference. Conclusion: This technique has simplified the procedure of the ureteral access sheath insertion. Results: One patient had a prior sigmoid colon augmentation cystoplasty and one patient had a ileal augmentation cystoplasty. The operative times were 360 minutes and 390 minutes respectively. Both patients underwent supratrigonal cystectomy. Estimated blood loss was 350 cc in the first case and 300 cc in the second. The first patient had a return of bowel function in 2 days and a total hospital stay of 2 days. The second patient had return of bowel function in 2 days and a hospital stay of 3 days. There were no post-operative complications in the first patient while the second patient had a persistent fluid collection requiring parenteral antibiotics, percutaneous drainage and readmission. The first patient has no hydronephrosis, stable eGFR (>90) and bilateral reflux on loogram at 1 year follow up. The second patient has no hydronephrosis on CT imaging and stable eGFR (>90) at 6 months follow up. Conclusion: In this initial experience, a segment of bowel harvested from an augmentation cystoplasty was retubularized to create a urinary conduit. This technique allowed keeping GI system in continuity, thus avoiding inherent risks associated with additional bowel harvest and re-anastomosis. A larger series and longer follow up will determine the reliability of this technique.  Introduction and Objective: Laparoscopic adrenalectomy is a standard treatment option for adrenal tumors, but surgical difficulties increases with tumor size. The aim of this study is to evaluate the surgical feasibility of laparoscopic adrenalectomy by lateral retroperitoneal approach for large pheochromocytoma and to identify preoperative risk factors for intraoperative hypertension during surgery. A retrospective review was performed in 51 patients who underwent retroperitoneal laparoscopic adrenalectomy for pheochromocytoma at a single institution between 2005 and 2016. Patients were divided into two groups according to tumor size: Group A (n= 27, < 6cm) and Group B (n= 24, ≥ 6cm). Patient characteristics and perioperative outcomes were analyzed and compared between 2 groups. Univariate and multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed to determine the preoperative risk factors for intraoperative hypertension. Results: There were no significant differences in preoperative patient characteristics between two groups except tumor size (3.9 ± 0.9 vs. 7.4 ± 1.1 cm; p = 0.001) and urinary metanephrine (3.6 ± 2.4 vs. 9.4 ± 11.0 mg/d; p = 0.011). In perioperative analysis, Group B had longer operating time (p = 0.008), larger estimated blood loss (p = 0.000) and hemoglobin change (p = 0.002). But there was no significant perioperative complications and mortality. Intraoperative hypertension was observed in 25 (49.0 %) patients. A multivariate analysis revealed that tumor detection by symptoms from hormonal secretion (p = 0.004) and tumor size (p = 0.007) were significant risk factors of intraoperative hypertension. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy by lateral retroperitoneal approach for pheochromocytoma is safe and effective with proper perioperative hemodynamic control, including tumors larger than 6cm. In present study, tumor detection by symptoms from hormonal secretion and tumor size were risk factors for intraoperative hypertension in patients with phechromocytoma. Rationalising There is a paucity of evidence supporting appropriate follow-up policies for Bosniak IIF cysts. Absence of guidelines mandate repeated imaging leading to considerable resource utilisation, expense and patient anxiety. In our study published in 2016, we aimed to establish how many patients diagnosed with Bosniak IIF cysts progressed into malignant lesions, and thus establish an appropriate follow up policy. We found a malignancy rate of only 0.5% in a 198 patients. Any progression was seen within the first two years. Our recommendation therefore, was that patients could be safely discharged after two years of satisfactory follow up imaging. We have reproduced this data in a new centre to further support our recommendation as part of a multi-centre study. We identified patients diagnosed with Bosniak IIF cyst(s) on CT scanning from 2011-2015 in two separate NHS Trusts. We recorded patient demographics, duration, modality and frequency of follow-up. Any change in size, appearance or complexity of the cyst(s) was documented. Surgical intervention was recorded. Costing estimations of follow up and imaging were also recorded. Results: Two hundred and forty nine patients were identified between the two centres. The majority of cysts were incidental findings (80%) with 49.5% of cysts > 3cm at diagnosis. Median follow up time was 29 months. 76.5% of cysts decreased in size or remained unchanged. Seven patients (2.8%) showed signs of radiological progression so underwent radical intervention. However only two patients (0.8%) demonstrated histological evidence of malignancy. 102 (41%) patients were followed up beyond 24 months, none of which had any radiological progression. Our data supports our original study, observing a low radiological progression rate of Bonsiak IIF cysts (2.8%). Any radiological progression was within the first 24 months. Our confirmed malignancy rate was 0.8%. Our previously published single-centre study demonstrated a 0.5% malignancy rate. This remains significantly lower than rates published in the wider literature. We therefore continue to support our follow up policy that patients can be safely discharged after 2 years of non-progressive surveillance. Rational follow-up for Bosniak IIF cysts may have cost-saving implications and alleviate pressure on radiology and urology services. Results: Forty patients underwent laparoscopic adrenalectomy. There were 29 women and 11 men, with a mean age of 42 years. The most common preoperative diagnosis was Conn's adenoma in 21 cases (52.5%), followed by Cushing's syndrome in 7 cases (17.5%) and pheochromocytoma in 6 cases (15%), while the tumor was accidentally dicovered in 6 cases (15%). The mean size of adrenal tumors was 2 cm. Fourteen patients underwent a transperitoneal surgery. Eleven of them had a right adrenal tumor and 3 had a left adrenal tumor. The mean duration of surgery was 205 minutes. Only one patient had gastric deperitonization. One patient had an intraoperative hemorrhage. The mean length of hospital stay was 3 days. Twenty six patients underwent a retroperitoneal surgery. Twenty two of them had left adrenal tumor. The mean duration of surgery was 171 minutes. In 3 cases, peritoneum was accidentally opened and has been fixed. One patient had a postoperative blood loss requiring transfusion. The mean length of hospital stay was 3 days. Laparoscopic andernalectomy are both safe and effective. The choice between these two approaches depends on the experience and preference of the surgeon. Renal Transplant Survey Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa (17.9%) . The sensitivities of diagnosing oncocytomas were 3.4%, 9.0% and 13.5% in primary radiological reports, second blinded reviews, and third non-blinded reviews, respectively (p=0.055). Even non-blinded third reviews by an experienced radiologist found classic CT findings in only 13.5% of oncocytomas. The sensitivities of diagnosing AMLs were 46.0%, 58.0% and 62.0% in the 3-sets of CT interpretations, respectively (p=0.246). As for renal cysts, the sensitivities were 69.2%, 92.3% and 100% in the 3-sets of CT interpretations, respectively (p=0.051). In primary reports, the positive predictive values were 95.8% in lp-AMLs, 60.0% in oncocytomas, 69.2% in renal cysts, respectively (p<0.05). Conclusions: Current conventional CT imaging still has limitations in differentiating oncocytomas and lp-AMLs from renal cell carcinomas, even when images were re-examined by experienced radiologists. In order to reduce unnecessary surgery, complementary roles of other imaging modalities and percutaneous biopsy may be crucial. Can figure 1 . PN denoted wedge resection of a parenchymal island under warm ischemic conditions. Remote ischemic preconditioning was employed via sequential compression/decompression of the saphenous artery. Right kidneys of the sacrified rats were examined histopathologically. Paraffin-embedded sections were stained with hematoxylin-eosin and periodic acid-schiff stains. Blinded evaluation by conventional light microscopy was carried out by two uropathologists and their agreed consensus was recorded. Results: Histopathological parameters were scored depending on their presence/absence and the number of involved tubular epithelial cells if present: swelling of the tubular epithelium, loss of brush edge and tubular necrosis; 0:absent, 1:1-10 tubule, 2:>10 tubule. Tubular necrosis; 0:absent, 1:1-5 tubule, 2:5-10 tubule, 3:>10 tubule. Medullary cast formation, thyroidisation and inflammation: 0:absent, 1:present. A total score was designated for each rat by the summation of the scores assigned to each tested parameter and then the group's average score was calculated. Mean scores given to tubular necrosis and thyroidisation were 0.2, 0.8, 2.0, 2.5 and 0, 0.2, 1.6, 2.0 in the sham, RIPC, RIPC + PN and PN groups, respectively (p=0.001 and 0.003, respectively). The differences between the groups with regard to other parameters were less remarkable. The average total scores in the sham, RIPC, RIPC + PN and PN groups were 3.0, 5.4, 8.4 and 9.7, respectively (p=0.001). Conclusion: Early histopathological changes consistent with morphological damage were significantly less prevalent in rat kidneys subjected to RIPC. Carcinoma of the Results: Four patients are described, three men and one women, mean age of 72,3 (±14,8) years. One of them (25%) presented disseminated disease upon diagnosis. All patients were treated with radical nephrectomy (one case laparoscopic and three with open surgery). Two patients (50%) developed disseminated disease after surgery. The mean time from surgery to the development of metastases was 5.5 months. Two patients received systemic adjuvant treatment with sunitinib, without obvious response. One of these patients also received, after 3 months of sunitinib, treatment with axinitinib. Two patients had pulmonary metastases. The other patient with disseminated disease developed osseous metastases in the humerus, ribs and femurs. The latter patient was submitted to palliative radiotherapy. All tumours had a high Furhman nuclear grade (two patients with grade 3 and the other two with grade 4). The mean survival was 11.0 months (9.25-13.75). Conclusion: CDC has a poor prognosis compared to non-CDC renal cell carcinoma. Treatment for CDC represents a future challenge and targeted therapies may play a role in selected cases. Ectopic Adrenals with Testicular and Para- (Fig. 1A,C) . To differentiate malignant from benign tumours, OCT shows a sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of 91%, 56%, 91%, and 56%, and respectively. The accuracy of the OCT increases for differentiation between RCC and oncocytoma, with a sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of 92%, 67%, 95% and 55% respectively. RMB has a sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of 100%, 89%, 99% and 100% respectively. Conclusion: OCT accurately distinguish malignant from benign renal tumours, and demonstrates that OCT has a higher diagnostic yield than RMBs. Accuracy of OCT confirmed to be high with a sensitivity and specificity of 92% and 67% respectively. Early Imaging in the Follow-Up after Irreversible Electroporation for the Treatment of Kidney Tumours Introduction and Objective: Irreversible electroporation (IRE) is a new ablation technique for the treatment of kidney tumours. Currently, data is lacking on which imaging modality to use for the visualization of the ablation zone (AZ) after IRE. To detect recurrence and residual disease in the follow-up, it is vital to validate a suitable imaging modality. We aim to report on the evolution of the ablation zone volume (AZV) using MRI, CT, gray-scale ultrasound (US), and contrast enhanced ultrasound (CEUS). Additionally, we quantitatively report on the AZV and the correlation with the needle configuration (NC). Materials and Methods: IRE was performed in consecutive patients that are candidates for ablation and presented with a solid small renal mass. Imaging was performed preoperative, 1 week, 3 months, and 6 months post-IRE and assessed by an interventional radiologist specialized in IRE. The AZV on CT and MRI was determined by adding the areas using the planimetrical analysis of IMPAX-software. Results: From 09-2016 till 03-2017 imaging was acquired from the first five patients within our prospective trial. Follow-up varied from 1 week till 6 months. Qualitative evolution of different imaging modalities showed that CT, MRI, gray-scale US and CEUS were able to visualize the AZ (Fig 1) . At 1 week post-IRE the mean AZV was 2.3 times larger than the NC. At 3 months post-IRE the mean AZV was 1.2 times larger than the NC. At 6 months post-IRE the mean AZV was 0.8 times larger than the NC. There is growing interest in partial adrenalectomy to avoid the side effects of potential adrenal insufficiency and life-long steroid replacement in select cases. Therefore, we intended to evaluate usefulness of laparoscopic partial adrenalectomy (LPA) by comparing the surgical and long-term functional results of LPA to those of laparoscopic total adrenalectomy (LTA). A total of 120 transperitoneal laparoscopic adrenalectomies were performed for adrenal gland masses between May 2004 and December 2016. All surgeries were performed by single surgeon. The data were collected retrospectively through review of the medical charts. We compared the surgical and long-term outcomes between the two surgical methods. Results: Sixty-six LTAs were performed, and 54 tumors were removed by LPA. There were no differences between the two groups with regard to mean age at presentation, mean tumor size, or postoperative stay. The mean operating time was significantly shorter in the LPA group than that of the LTA group. The mean estimated blood loss in the LPA group was significantly higher than that of the LTA group, but none of the patients required blood transfusion. Two cases were converted to open surgery in the LTA group, and no major complications developed. The biochemical markers and laboratory values normalized postoperatively in all patients with functional adrenal masses. There was no local recurrence during the follow-up period. Conclusions: Our data demonstrated that the surgical outcomes were comparable to those of LTA. Especially, all patients of LPA group remained steroid independent, as well as recurrence-free at long-term follow up. Therefore, for patients with adrenal tumor whether it is unilateral or bilateral regardless of hormonal activity, LPA should be recommended as a primary surgical approach whenever possible. Association between Irritable Bowel Syndrome and Overactive Bladder: Research Survey Introduction and Objective: We investigated the relationship between irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and overactive bladder (OAB) in men and women by using questionnaires.  Ambulatory Voiding in the Elderly Based on Functional Assessment by the Expert Team during Hospital Care Takeda H, Koga Y, Okumura K, Nakano Y Introduction and Objective: The aim of this study was to evaluate the difference about 6-month outcomes of expert team-led continence care service for Japanese elderly patients with lower urinary tract symptoms. Most studies evaluating the outcomes of continence care services have had short follow-up durations with limited knowledge on whether benefits are sustained beyond 12 months. Materials and Methods: Two comparison groups were recruited: (1) Patients with lower urinary tract symptoms attending expert team-led community-based continence care programme; (2) hospital care patients with lower urinary tract symptoms identified by screening, receiving usual medical care. Self-reported symptom severity, health-related quality of life, patient enablement, free of catheters was measured at baseline and 6 months. Data collection occurred from March 2016-March 2017. Results: Baseline and 6-month data were available for 170 continence care and 158 usual care subjects. After controlling for baseline characteristics, the continence care group was observed to have greater reductions in symptom severity and larger improvements in disease-specific health-related quality of life, patient enablement and general health perception than the usual care group. Deterioration in the mental components of generic health-related quality of life was observed in the usual care group, but not in the continence care group. Conclusion: Over 12 months, when compared with usual medical care, expert team continence care services were effective in reducing symptom severity and improving health-related quality of life, patient enablement and general health perception and provided protection against deterioration in the mental compo-nents of health-related quality of life in patients with lower urinary tract symptoms. The is the most common urological intervention. Due to its inherent morbidity and cost, it should be rationalized to patients with a true potential of underlying pathology. We aimed to evaluate its use in patients under 40 years old who are often referred with recurrent urinary tract infections (UTIs), haematuria and bladder symptoms. Materials and Methods: Procedure outcomes in our tertiary center over 12 months were reviewed for patients under 40 years old. Patient demographics, referral source, indication and results were recorded. Results: Diagnostic FC was performed in 228 patients under 40 years old. A normal FC was noted in 210 patients (92%), 72 males and138 females, with a median age of 33.5 years (range 18-39). In this group, 57 were performed for UTI+/-haematuria, 52 for bladder symptoms, 52 for non-visible haematuria (NVH) and 49 for visible haematuria (VH). Pathology was identified in only 18 patients (7.9%). Only 6 (2.6%) bladder malignancies were diagnosed, 5 males and 1 female with a median age of 35 years. Four presented with VH and 2 with incidental masses on imaging. Urethral stricture was noted in 7 patients and bladder debris in 5. These 12 patients all presented with lower urinary tract symptoms or UTI. The diagnostic yield of FC in patients under 40 years is very small, especially in females and NVH. No significant pathology, except stricture, was identified in the absence of VH and abnormal imaging. Rationalizing the use of flexible cystoscopy in this age group would significantly reduce cost and workload. Introduction and Objective: Prostatic calculi (PC) are often complication /co-morbidity of chronic prostatitis (CP) and benign prostatic hyperplasia. Seventy-three patients between the ages of 18 and 60, average of 42.7 ± 3.8 years and suffering from CP for 4-16 years at an average of 5.1 ± 3.4 years were studied. The patients of CP category 3-a and comorbidity of PC, were divided into three groups: 1st (22 patients) were treated with phytodrug canephron for one month, 2nd (23 patients) underwent extracorporeal shock-wave therapy (ESWT) with the Dornier Aries ® (Dornier MedTech GmbH, Germany) using smart focus technology by the following protocol: two procedures per week, four weeks for a course of total 8 procedures. Third group (28 patients) received combined therapy by ESWT and canephron. Level of lithogenesis (LOL) was estimated by transrectal ultrasound investigation as followed: 0 -PC not found, 1-solitary calculi in para-urethral zone, 2 -numerous calculi in para-urethral zone, 3 -numerous calculi in para-urethral and distal, peripheral zones. Scores of National Institutes of Health Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index (NIH-CPSI) were estimated too. Efficiency was evaluated in one month and three months after finishing the therapy. Results: Monotherapy with canephron had no lytholitic effect, but decreased inflammation, decreased voiding symptoms, and improved quality of life and pain. Qmax and Qave increased on 29.4% and 22.9%, accordingly. Monotherapy with ESWT was moderately effective. In one month: average score on pain decreased on 11.9%, average score of voiding symptoms improved on 37.2%, LOL decreased on 16.7%. In three months domain "pain" decreased on 69.6%, voiding symptoms improved on 55.8%, and LOL decreased about twice. Combined therapy, group 3, showed the highest results. In three months there were no signs of inflammation in 67.9%; average score of domain "pain" decreased on 86.7%, voiding symptoms improved on 65.2%, and LOL decreased on 60.9%. Conclusions: Most effective in the therapy of Chronic Prostatitis complicated by Prostatic Calculi is combined therapy using phytotherapy and ESWT. Final results should be available in three months. A Multicenter, Observational, Open-Label 4 Week Study of Efficacy and Patient's Satisfaction of Tamsulosin Monotherapy vs Tamsulosin with Solifenacin in Men with Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms (LUTS) Related to Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH) Introduction and Objective: To assess the efficacy and patient's satisfaction in the treatment of lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) related to benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), prospective, randomized, real practice-based application of alpha-blocker monotherapy vs. alpha blocker with antimuscarinic were compared. One hundred and seventy-five male patients with moderate degree of LUTS (both voiding and storage symtoms) from 5 centers were enrolled in randomized pattern. Patients were divided into 2 groups; group 1 included patient treated with tamsulosin 0.2mg monotherapy (15 patients/ center), group 2 was included with tamsulosin 0.2mg combined with solifenacin 5mg (20 patients/center). Inclusion criteria were male patients with no history of LUTS-related medications, aged from 40 to 80 years old, maximal uroflow rate (Qmax)≥10ml/sec, post-void residual urine (PVR)≤100mL, total International prostatic symptom score (IPSS)≥8, OAB symptom score (OABSS)≥3, prostate size on digital rectal exam. was from 20 to 60gm and PSA value≤4ng/mL.. Parameters included 3 days-voiding diary, IPSS/QoL, uroflow/PVR, Patient's perception of bladder condition (PPBC), OABSS and evaluated at 0 and 4 weeks. Statistical analysis was done with Student's t-test. Results: Baseline measurements showed no difference (except PVR) between two groups (Table 1) . After 4 weeks treatment, parametrs such as IPSS/ QoL (P<0.001) , PPBC (P<0.05), OABSS (P<0.001) improved significantly in both groups. Nocturia (P<0.05) and No. of urgency (P<0.05) were significantly improved in group 2 ( Table 1) . No incidence of acute urinary retention was reported and a case of moderate degree dry mouth was reported. Conclusions: After 4 weeks treatment of tamsulosin monotherapy and combination of tamsulosin with solifenacin showed improvement of important LUTS parameters, satisfaction and combination groups showed better results in number of urgency and nocturia compared with monotherapy group. No urinary retention case was reported. Padilla-Fernández B 1 , Siesto-López GM 2 , Antúnez-Plaza P 3 , Hernández-Hernández D 1 , Cabral-Fernández AV 1 , García-Cenador MB 2 , Castro-Díaz DM 1 , Lorenzo-Gómez MF 2 1 University Hospital of the Canary Islands, Tenerife, Spain; 2 University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain; Introduction and Objective: Urinary cytology is a test to look for abnormal cells in the urine, and it is mainly used for the evaluation of inflamatory or neoplastic disorders affecting the urethra, the bladder, the ureters and renal pelvis. For high-grade urothelial tumors and in-situ carinoma, its specificity raises up to 90% with few false positives. Sensitivity may be improved by collecting three urine samples. The aim of the study is to evaluate the role of urinary cytology in a sample of women with storage symptoms. Multicentric study with a sample of 264 women complaining of storage symptoms. Variables investigated: Age, cause of referral, main diagnosis, secondary diagnoses, medical and surgical background, drugs, toxics, urinary pH, urine analysis (nitrites, esterases, leucocytes, erytrocytes, squamous cells, cylindres, bacteria, cristals), urine culture, imaging studies, urinary cytology (no cells, cells (malignant, epithelial, squamous) leucocytes, erytrocytes, bacteria, Candida). Statistical analysis: descriptive statistics, ANOVA, Student's t-test, Fisher's exact test. p<0.05 was considered statistically significative. Results: Average age 52.42 years (range 16-91). The 92.80% of the women complained of urinary frequency and urgency. One patient without any risk factors, negative urine culture and showing squamous cells in her cytology was diagnosed with a high-grade bladder carcinoma in-situ. Candida was identified in 4.66% of the cytologies (not shown in the urine culture). Most frequent cytological findings were: epithelial cells (17.33%), no findings (9.33%), leucocytes (8.66%), leucocytes + bacteria (8%). Conclusions: Storage symptoms may be present in a high variety of urological and gynecological disorders, and it is usually included in the definitions related to voiding and storage symptoms that obvious local pathologies should be excluded. Given that urinary cytology can be clinically significant in women with storage symptoms and without risk factors for bladder cancer, it might be useful to include it in their study protocol. Efficacy and Safety of Onabotulinumtoxina in Patients with Overactive Bladder According to Site of Injection: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Jo JK, Kim YT, Park SY, Choi HY, Moon HS, Lee SW, Park HY Introduction and Objective: We conducted this study to assess the efficacy and safety of Onabotulinumtox-inA according to site of injection for treating overactive bladder. A systematic literature review was performed to locate randomized controlled trials of OnabotulinumtoxinA for treatment of neurogenic detrusor overactive bladder and idiopathic overactive bladder in adults. We searched databases such as MEDLINE, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Controlled Trials Register using the Ovid platform. This meta-analysis was based on Cochrane Review Methods. Results: Seven studies (339 participants) were included. Trigone-including intradetrusor injection gave rise to a lower detrusor pressure (WMD = -2.55cn-H2O, 95% CI = -4.16 to -0.95, P = 0.002, I2 = 0%) and higher volume at first desire to void (WMD = 17.54 ml, 95% CI = 1.00 to 34.07, P = 0.04, I2 = 0%) than trigone-sparing intradetrusor injection. Incontinence episodes were also significantly less frequent after trigone-including intradetrusor injection (WMD = -1.01 numbers per day, 95% CI = -1.96 to -0.07, P = 0.04, I2 = 87%). There were no differences in efficacy according to injection site between intradetrusor and suburothelial injection, or in safety in terms of the incidence of vesico-ureteral reflux, hematuria, general weakness, bladder discomfort, large postvoid residual, and urinary tract infection. Conclusion: Trigone-including Onabotulinumtoxi-nA injection is superior to trigone-sparing injection in terms of efficacy, as measured by detrusor presser, higher volume at first desire to voidand episodes of incontinence, without any difference in complications. However, the depth of injection does not influence the efficacy or safety of OnabotulinumtoxinA injections. Hanyang University Hospital, Ansan, South Korea Introduction and Objective: Ureteral stent discomfort is a significant postoperative complication for many patients with ureter stones. Combined use of narcotics, alpha blockers and anticholinergic medications did not yield consistent satisfactory outcomes. We investigated the effect of highly concentrated hyaluronic acid (HA) and chondroitin sulphate (CS) to relieve ureteral stent discomfort. A total of 100 patients underwent ureteroscopic lithotripsy for ureter stone. Recruited patients were randomly divided into two groups: Group I (46 patients, experimental group) and to the group II (46 patients, control group). Patients with newly inserted cases after ureteroscopic lithotripsy were included. HA/CS or normal saline was injected into bladder after ureteroscopic lithotripsy. Patients completed Urinary Stent Symptom Questionnaire (USSQ) on the post-operative seven day just before to perform ureteral stent removal. The questionnaire included questions regarding urinary symptoms, general health, body pain, and work and additional treatments for ureteral stent discomfort. Results: Among 92 initial participants, 46 patients in group I and 46 patients in group II had completed the experiment (49 men and 43 women). Mean age was 45.7 vs 44.6 years (p = 0.669). The mean stent indwelling time in both groups was 7.6 and 7.7 days (p=0.56). Total USSQ score was observed superior effect in group I (p<0.001). Between the two groups there was shown significant difference in urinary symptoms (p<0.001) and urinary symptom related quality of life (p=0.018). Moreover, there were significant differences in VAS (p<0.001), total pain discomfort scores (p=0.01), pain discomfort by urinary tract infection (p=0.01), needs for antibiotics (p<0.01) and hospital visit (p<0.01). Conclusions: Highly concentrated HA/CS was shown positive effect not only on urinary symptoms but also in pain relief. And it also helped preventing additional needs for medication or procedures due to stent indwelling. Emerging  We examined ANGPTL4 expression in the prostate cancer cell lines LNCaP and LNCaP/CH incubated at 1% O2 for at least 6 months. We used quantitative real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction and western blotting to detect the level of ANGPTL4 mRNA and protein expression, respectively. We used enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to measure ANGPTL4 secretion in the culture medium of the cell lines. In addition, we investigated the effect of various concentrations of recombinant ANGPTL4 protein on cell proliferation and intracellular signaling pathways. Moreover, we used ANGPTL4 knockdown by RNA interference to investigate the influence of ANGPTL4 expression on these cell lines. Finally, we investigated the correlation between ANGPTL4 expression in prostate cancer specimens and clinicopathological parameters using immunohistochemistry. Results: In LNCaP/CH cells, the expressions of ANGPTL4 mRNA and proteins were more upregulated than those in LNCaP cells. In addition, ANGPTL4 secretion in the culture medium was significantly upregulated, and recombinant ANGPTL4 proteins significantly accelerated cell proliferation. Western blotting revealed that Akt phosphorylation was upregulated in the cells. Moreover, ANGPTL4 knockdown significantly suppressed cell growth and migration. A multivariate analysis showed that positive ANGPTL4 expression was an independent prognostic indicator of biochemical recurrence (p = 0.03, Hazard ratio = 2.02). Our results show that ANGPTL4 is induced by hypoxia and promotes cancer progression via the activated PI3K/Akt pathway. Moreover, ANGPTL4 can be used as a prognostic marker for prostate cancer patients undergoing radical prostatectomy. Introduction and Objective: Estrogen receptor beta (ERb) is a putative tumour suppressor, which interacts with androgen receptor (AR) to influence prostate cancer (PC). However, the mechanisms of these effects, and the relationship between ERb and AR are not well characterised. ERb is an attractive therapeutic target, as selective estrogen receptor modulators are already approved for clinical use. We investigated ERb to determine its relationship with AR, and establish whether it could be targeted in early disease. A published gene expression dataset (CamCaP) was interrogated for correlation between ERb expression and clinical outcome. A PC cell line treated with silencing RNA (siRNA) to AR and a prostate tissue microarray (TMA) of radical prostatectomy (RP) specimens from men who received LHRH antagonist (Degarelix) prior to surgery were examined to investigate the relationship between AR and ERb expression. ERb/AR cross-talk was studied using a cell line model with inducible ERb expression, treated with androgen (R1881) and/or ERb-selective estrogen (3b-adiol). The effects on cell proliferation, gene expression (RNA-sequencing) and DNA-binding (ChIP-sequencing) were tested. Results: Significant variability in ERb (ANOVA p = 0.04) expression was noted across the CamCaP prognostic groups, but in general, ERb gene expression was associated with favourable prognosis. Patients treated with degarelix prior to RP showed a trend towards increased ERb expression, suggesting that ERb is downregulated by AR. Similarly, siRNA to AR in LNCaP cells resulted in upregulation of ERb expression (p = 0.03). Using the LNCaP-ERb inducible cell line we created, we found that ERb activated by 3b-adiol in the presence of androgen-stimulated AR, inhibited cell proliferation and downregulated androgen-regulated genes, suggesting that active ERb is antagonistic to AR. We identified a set of DNA-binding sites shared by ERb and AR, suggesting that this antagonism occurs through competition for DNA binding sites. Conclusions: ERb is a tumour-suppressor gene, the expression of which is negatively regulated by AR signaling in early PC. We uncover an antagonistic relationship in prostate cancer cells whereby sustaining or replacing ERb may inhibit tumour growth through down-regulation of AR-target genes. In future, an ERb-selective compound may be used to slow or abrogate progression in early disease. Is Thiol/Disulphide Homeostasis Important in Prostate Cancer Diagnosis? Senel C 1 , Aslan Y 1 , Imamoglu MA 2 , Karakoyunlu N 2 , Altinova S 2 , Ozcan MF 3 , Erdogan S 3 , Erel O 3 , Balci M 1 , Tuncel A 1 Introduction and Objective: Thiol/Disulphide homeostasis has critical roles in antioxidant protection, detoxification, signal transduction, apoptosis and regulation of cellular signaling mechanisms as an indicator of oxidative stress. It is known that oxidative stress plays an important role in both the initiation and the progression of prostate cancer. In the present study we assessed the relationship between prostate cancer and Thiol/Disulphide homeostasis. To the best of our knowledge is this relationship analyzed in a clinical study for the first time in the literature. After Ethics Committee approval (546/2015); 388 patients aged between 46-75 years who undergone transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) guided prostate biopsies in three different centers between July 2015-2016 owing to serum levels of PSA ≥ 2.5 ng/ml and/or abnormal digital rectal examination were involved in this study. The plasma levels of Thiol/ Disulphide homeostasis parameters (Thiol, Total Thiol and Disulphide) were compared in patients with and without prostate cancer. The mean age of the patients was 62.9±7 years. In patients with prostate cancer ( n=130, 33.5%) the mean plasma levels of Thiol and Total Thiol were lower (332.9 vs 362 µmol/L and 363 vs 392.6 µmol/L, p<0.001 ) ( Table 1) . Patients with Gleason score ≥7 (45.4% of patients with prostate cancer) had lower plasma Thiol levels than patients with Gleason score 6 (321.3 vs 342.6 µmol/L, p=0,029). However, there were no statistically significant differences between plasma total Thiol and Disulphide levels (pTotal Thiol = 0.064 and pDisulfide = 0.933). Conclusions: Patients with prostate cancer and high Gleason score had lower plasma levels of Thiol. Plasma Thiol as one of Thiol/Disulphide homeostasis parameter could be an important biomarker in prostate cancer diagnosis. We believe that our results should be supported by further studies.  The synthesized polymer was electrospun in a rotating drum to prepare nanofiber meshes. hMSCs were prepared and confirmed. Eight week old male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into 4 groups of 10 each, including group 1=sham operation, group 2= CN injury, group 3= hMSCs treatment after CN injury, group 4= nanofiber meshes treatment after CN injury and group 5= nanofiber meshes-hMSCs treatment after CN injury (nano-hM-SCs). In group 4 and 5, nanofiber or nano-hMSCs covered the MPG. Erectile response was assessed by CN stimulation at 2, 4 weeks. Thereafter, penile tissue samples were harvested and examined using morphological analysis and immuno-histochemical stain against nerves (neurofilament), endothelium (CD31) and smooth muscle (smooth muscle actin). Results: At 2, 4 weeks, transplantation of nano-hM-SCs increased the neuron-like differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells more than hMSCs alone around MPG. Transplantation of nano-hMSCs increased the expression levels of cavernous neuronal, endothelial and smooth muscle makers more than hMSCs alone. At 2, 4 weeks, the group transplanted with nano-hM-SCs showed higher erectile function than the group with hMSCs alone (p<0.05). Conclusion: Increased neuron-like differentiation around the major pelvic ganglia after transplantation of stem cells cultivated on the nanofiber improved damaged penile cavernosa and repair erectile dysfunction in the rats with CN injury. Electrospun Introduction and Objective: Urinary bladder may encounter several pathologic conditions that could lead to loss of its function. Tissue engineering using electrospun PLLA scaffolds is a promising approach to reconstructing or replacing the problematic bladder. Materials and Methods: PLLA nanofibrous scaffolds were prepared utilizing single-nozzle electrospinning. The morphology and distribution of fiber diameters were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Human bladder smooth muscle cells (hB-SMCs) were isolated from biopsies and characterized by immunocytochemistry (ICC). Then, the cells were seeded on the PLLA nanofibers and Alamar Blue assay proved the biocompatibility of prepared scaffolds. Cell attachment on the nanofibers and also cell morphology over fibrous scaffolds were observed by SEM. The results indicated that electrospun PLLA scaffold provides proper conditions for hBSMCs to interact and attach efficiently to the fibers. Alamar Blue assay showed the compatibility of the obtained electrospun scaffolds with hBSMCs. Also, it was observed that the cells could achieve highly elongated morphology and their native aligned direction besides each other on the random electrospun scaffolds and in the absence of supporting aligned nanofibers. Conclusion: Electrospun PLLA scaffold efficiently supports the hBSMCs growth and alignment and also has proper cell compatibility. This scaffold would be promising in urinary bladder tissue engineering. Effects of Castration and Testosterone Replacement in Plasmatic and Prostatic Serotonin Introduction and Objective: Benign Prostate Hyperplasia is an elevated prevalence disease, with enormous impact in patient's quality of life. Its etiology still remains unknown, despite the accepted impact of aging and testosterone (TES) in its pathophysiology. Recent studies described how serotonin (5-HT) inhibits benign prostate growth through modulation of the androgen receptor in the presence of TES. The aims of this work were to determine the effects of castration and TES replacement in 5-HT plasmatic and prostatic regulation. Materials and Methods: C57BL/6 mice were submitted to surgical castration and divided into 3 groups, continually exposed to vehicle or to different TES doses, during 14 days. 5-HT plasmatic concentration was measured before, after castration and after TES reintroduction. Finally total prostatic weight and inter-prostatic 5-HT levels were determined in the different groups. Results: Our results demonstrate that mice prostate exhibits a high 5-HT concentration and that 5-HT intra-prostatic amount was similar in all studied groups, being independent of castration or TES reintroduction. Also, 5-HT plasmatic concentration levels significantly increased after castration, having normalized after TES administration. Our results demonstrate that mice prostate has a high 5-HT concentration and that its amount is regulated independently of androgens action. On the other hand, castration induces a signif-UP.035, Figure 1 . UP.035, Figure 2. A B Introduction and Objective: In the present study, we determined whether the level of serum prostate specific antigen (PSA) varies with thyroid hormones in patients with benign thyroid disorders. The study involved 50 male patients with a mean age of 56.7±9.9 (40-75) years who had benign thyroid disorders. All the patients were referred to our clinic by Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinic. The patients were divided into two groups. Group 1 consisted of 19 patients with hypothyroidism and Group 2 consisted of 31 patients with hyperthyroidism. Before the medical treatment, serum PSA levels were measured. Then, medical treatment was started by Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinic and continued until normal thyroid hormone levels were reached. Four weeks after the normalisation of the thyroid hormone levels, we measured serum PSA levels once again. Pre and post-treatment serum PSA, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), free T3 and free T4 levels were assessed in the groups. T-Test and Paired Samples T-Test were used for statistical analysis. Results: Serum PSA and thyroid hormone levels before and after treatment were summarized in Table 1 . Pre-treatment serum PSA levels were lower in Group 1 than Group 2 (1.5 ng/ml vs. 2.6 ng/ml, p=0.030). Group 1 had lower post-treatment serum PSA levels than Group 2. However, the difference was not significant (1.7 ng/ml vs 2.5 ng/ml, p=0.150). No differences were found between the mean serum PSA levels in each group ( and key epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) genes was investigated by gene expression array, RT-qPCR and western blotting. We used siRNA to knockdown of Slug and EFNB1, and used Lentivirus to overexpression of EFNB1. The luciferase reporter assay was used to evaluate whether Slug regulated EFNB1. Immunohistochemistry was performed to analyze the expression of Slug and EFNB1 in specimens from prostate cancer patients. Results: Tumor cell migration and invasion were significantly increased under chronic hypoxic condition compared with normoxia and acute hypoxia. Of major EMT genes, the expression of Slug was specifically up-regulated in chronic hypoxia and knockdown of Slug suppressed tumor cell migration and invasion, but the EMT process was not activated. We focused on EFNB1 as a Slug-induced and chronic hypoxia-induced gene associated with cell migration and invasion. Knockdown of EFNB1 inhibited cell migration and invasion in chronic hypoxia and overexpression of EFNB1 increased it. Luciferase reporter assay showed that Slug activated the transcription of EFNB1 by binding E-box elements. Furthermore, whereas both Slug and EFNB1 expression were detected in specimens with prostate cancer, neither was expressed in prostate normal tissue. Conclusions: Our findings suggest that chronic hypoxia-induced Slug promotes cell migration and invasion in an EMT-independent manner. EFNB1 up-regulated by Slug is responsible for this invasive behavior. Urinary NGF in OAB after Anticholinergics Treatment Yoon H, Shim BS, Chung WS 1 Introduction and Objective: Nerve growth factor (NGF) is a neuropeptide involved in the proliferation and regulation of growth, and survival of certain target neurons. It is easily identified in urine. In our previous studies, urinary NGF was more expressed in several conditions with bladder irritation. In this study, we investigated the changes of urinary NGF expression in overactive bladder (OAB) patient depending on anticholinergics treatments responses. Figure 3 . ng/ml; post-treatment OAB 1.29±0.23 (0.9~1.7)ng/ ml; control 0.59±0.23(0.06~0.99)ng/ml, p=0.0000, ANOVA). In OAB group, urinary NGF was elevated compared with control group (p=0.000, paired t-test), and it was significantly decreased with antimuscarnics treatment (p=0.0002, paired t-test). Presence of lower abdominal discomfort, pain, frequency, nocturia, urgency, and urinary incontinence did not show any significant correlations between urinary NGF expressions. Conclusion: Urinary NGF is elevated in OAB compared with normal bladder. Anticholinergics treatments lower the urinary NGF. Urinary NGF changes combined with antimuscarinic treatment may represent the treatment responsibility of OAB. This may provide a prognostic factor of medical treatment in OAB for deciding next step of treatment. Induction of Akt in Urinary Exosome by Bacterial Infection Mizutani K 1 , Horie K 2 , Shirahama T 1 , Akiyama N 1 , Kawakami K 3 , Fujita Y 3 , Kameyama K 1 , Ito M 3 , Deguchi T 1 Introduction and Objective: Urinary tract infection (UTI), one of the most common bacterial infections, is treated by antibiotics and the prognosis is good in most cases except specific patients (infants, pregnant women, the elderly and patients with complications). Bacterial infection induces activation of intracellular signaling pathways through the interaction between bacterial factors and host cell receptors (e.g. lipopolysaccharide and toll like receptor 4). Exosomes are membrane vesicles with a diameter of 40-150 nm and carry various molecular constituents such as proteins and nucleic acids that are contained in cells from which they are derived. Thus, exosomes are expected to serve as a diagnostic marker for various diseases. Since exosomes are also secreted from cells infected with bacteria, urinary exosome analysis may be useful for understanding of mechanisms in UTI. In the present study, we investigated the expression changes of Akt (protein kinase B) in urinary exosome, one of signaling molecules that is activated by LPS. Exosomes were isolated by ultracentrifugation from the culture medium of SV-HUC-1 (immortalized uroepithelium cell line) and THP-1 (acute monocytic leukemia cell line) cells that were co-cultured with or without E. coli. Urinary exosomes were collected from patients during UTI and after treatment. The expression level of Akt was analyzed by western blot. Isolation of exosomes was confirmed by western blot for CD9. Results: Akt expression was increased in exosomes isolated from both cells that were co-cultured with E. coli when compared with those without E coli. Akt was also detected in the urinary exosome fractions separated by density gradient ultracentrifugation that were positive for CD9. Exosomal Akt expression was higher in urine from patients with UTI than in post-treated urine. Conclusion: There has been no report that described expression changes of signaling molecules in urinary exosome in response to bacterial infection. Our results suggest the potential role of urinary exosome analysis as a tool for understanding mechanisms of UTI. Bioengineering Materials and Methods: Human ADSCS harvested using enzymatic method. They were induced to SMCs with differentiation culture media containing human (Transforming Growth Factor β1 (TGF-β1) in thermosensitive cell culture dishes. The growth and characteristics of the cells were followed for 3 weeks. The induced cell sheets were harvested by lowering the temperature at different weekly for 3 weeks. The cell sheets were stained with H&E and Masson Trichrome and checked for smooth muscle actin, calponin and collagen IV. The cells sheets could be detached easily intact by lowering the temperature. The sheets were formed of 2-4 layers of cells that showed positive staining for smooth muscle markers. They also showed positive staining for collagen VI indicating the formation of extracellular matrix. Introduction and Objective: 3D printing creates real objects using 3D computer-designed models. In our study we made hollow tubes using a biomedical thermoplastic polymer to mimic the structure of the Urethra. Fused deposition modeling (FDM) 3D printers were used for the additive manufacturing process. Materials and Methods: Blender ® software was used to design 3 different images of hollow tubes similar to the structure of the urethra. The first model had a single non porous lumen. The Second was bilaminar with an outer porous layer. The third was trilaminar with an intervening corpus spongiosum like pattern. Biomaterials used were thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) filaments. Sharebot ® 3D printer received the images and extruded the filaments using dual heads. Mechanical properties such as stress strain and suture retention were tested accordingly. The Printed tubes were analogous to the computer images. However, thin hairy filaments were noticed on the inner surface. Scanning electron micoscopy revealed a haphazard pattern with loss of pore geometry. Scaffold samples were stretched by 340.7 ± 9.823 % with a maximum stress of 210 ± 24.72 N. The constructs were compressed to 1/3 of their diameter by 2.31 ± 0.02 N. Lastly, a mean of 3.579 N load was needed to tear a 5/0 Vicryl suture from the printed tubes. Our results have shown that FDM 3D printing is a rapid and simple way of prototyping tube models mimicking the urethra. However, mechanical properties did not match the native urethra. Therefore, we recommend using a softer hybrid material for urethral reconstruction. In Vitro Fabrication of a Biomimetic Tube Model for Urinary Diversion Using a Synthetic Polymer and Autologous Cells Introduction and Objective: Several lower Urinary tract pathologies result in high pressure voiding. Patients require a self catheterizable conduit for CIC. The Appendix and Ileum are commonly used, but often result in patient morbidity. Aim of our study is to develop a tissue engineered biocompatible tubular construct using a synthetic elastomer seeded with autologous cells for safe and easy catheterization. A scaffold tube using poly (carbonate-urea) urethane (PCU) functionalized with L-Arginine Methyl Ester (L-AME) particles were used. LAME-PCU was casted to produce a 10 cm long, 8mm wide tubes. Mechanical properties including tensile strength, burst pressures and suture retention were assessed. Cell seeded grafts were fabricated using Human Dermal Fibroblasts (HDFs). Fluorescence microscopy and Alamar blue fluorescent assay were used to characterize and track the metabolic behavior of HDFs respectively. Results: Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) revealed a honey comb highly porous structure. Maximum stress applied to the scaffold was 25.17± 3.619 MPa with a strain to break at 314.3 ± 6.197%. The tubes resisted burst pressures up to 1028 mmHg. A mean of 2.852 N load was needed to tear a 5/0 PDS suture from the construct. The Alamar blue assay curve confirmed high HDF viability. Fluorescence imaging Introduction and Objective: Neurogenic bladder dysfunction (NBD) is a major cause to the morbidity and mortality to subjects with spinal cord injury (SCI) who commonly have voiding dysfunction and loss of bladder fullness sensation. Bladder emptying with clean intermittent catheterization (CIC) is currently available measure to maintain urologic health with low urinary tract complication. However, patients have to rely on regularly scheduled urination to avoid overload in the bladder which greatly influence their quality of life (QOL). Although ultrasound techniques have been utilized to measure bladder volume in clinical with professional manipulation and in laying position, there is currently no effective way to monitor bladder in low-pressure storage and continuous monitoring for homecare and in different posture constraints. Our study aims are to develop an assistive device for non-invasive and ambulatory urodynamic monitoring in various posture positions (e.g. siting in wheelchair condition) based on wireless near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) and miniature ultrasound sensing techniques. A wearable NIRS module using optoelectronic method for measuring the changes in chromophore concentration related to oxygenation and hemodynamic changes in real time. This NIRS approach is particularly useful when the underlying pathology related to a disorder of oxidative metabolism or hemodynamics involving the bladder and or urinary sphincter. Ultrasound and inertial sensors will be utilized to measure the distance between abdominal with bladder urine which is useful for easy positioning. Results: Figure 1 Conclusion: The proposed measurement ultrasound positioning and non-invasive NIRS bladder hemodynamic measurement devices can be firstly validated in clinical setup for human healthy and SCI subject as a means of ambulatory monitoring of voiding. With recruitment of a SCI subject dedicating for this device, the developed device is designed for the needs of SCI subjects which not only will be validated in clinical setup but also tested for daily homecare toward optimal urination with CIC of SCI subjects. Quercetin as a New Regulator of the Potassium Channels in an Overactive Bladder Introduction and Objective: Overactive bladder disease is characterized with nocturia, frequency, urgency, often with incontinencethat worsening the comfort of patients' life. Nowadays it is known that overactive bladder associated with a malfunction of neurons, smooth muscle and urothelium, but the mechanism of this dysfunction remains unclear. However, it probably might be due to ВКСа channelopathy in bladder smooth muscle. Using the method of patch clamp we compare the characteristics of potassium current in smooth muscle cells of healthy Wistar line rats and rats with an overactive bladder model, clarify the role of ВКСа channels in the bladder and propose the pharmacologicalcorrection of these channels by liposomal quercetin. We have shown a significant decreasing of the potassium current density in smooth muscle cells of the rats with overactive bladder, from 168.7 ± 5.8 pA/pF in control to 65.7 ± 12.3 pA/pF in the model. Selective blocker of ВКСа channels paxilline reduced potassium current about half, indicating significant functional expression of these channels and their important role in the regulation of bladder contractile activity. An perspective activator of ВКСа channels, liposomalquercetin, increased current density in model rats from 32.7 ± 0.9 pA/pF to 53.1 ± 2.7 pA/pF. Overactive bladder disease is associated with channelopathy of potassium channels, particularly with ВКСа channels and their suppressed function can be partially restored by liposomal quercetin. UP.043, Figure 1 .  Experiments on the reproduction of the overactive bladder model was conducted on mature white Wistar line rat females weighing 300 g with permission of the local ethics committee. The animals were divided into two groups. The first group was a control line rats were injected with 0.3 ml of sterile Saline daily for 14 days. Animals of the second experimental group once a day for 14 days were injected intravenous 0.3 ml of the drug solution, Homviotensin that contained 0.45 mg of Reserpinum D3. SUI was determined by the sneeze test using a rat whisker inserted into the nostril to induce sneezing after 2 weeks. Full-thickness bladder specimens were obtained from 20 rats with OAB and 5 controls, and processed as paraffin-wax. The slides were stained with hematoxilin-eosin and van Gieson's. Sections were assessed using single immunohistochemistry with monoclonal and polyclonal anti-CD117 (c-Kit) antibodies (Dako) and. anti-alpha-smooth muscle actin (SMA) antibody (Dako) Morphometric evaluation was carried out with the help of image analysis software (Quick PHOTO MICRO 2.3), the slides were analyzed and photographed with a light microscope (Olympus BX41 ™ ). The results were expressed as the mean ± the standard error of mean. Differences were considered significant at p<0.05. In the group with OAB, histological findings showed decreased thickness of urothelial/basal layer of urothelium and hypertrophy detrusor smooth muscle in 96 % of experimental animals, where ICCs were predominantly distributed. In the OAB with SUI group compared to the control, the histology of bladder tissue showed relative thinning of the epithelium and atrophic change. ICCs were detected in the lamina propria in 65% and within and adjacent to smooth muscle bundles in70% of rats. Interstitial cells were markedly increased in the OAB as visualized on staining with CD-117 (c-kit) and as a rule locate around SMC. SMA staining showed marked hypertrophy of the muscle bundles in OAB. One of the most common morphological features in OAB was hydropic changes or vacuolization of the SMC. alpha-SMA immunoreactivity was lower in the areas of vacuolization than in control sections. The reproduction of the model was confirmed by histological studies. This model comparing to others is cost effective. On the basis of these findings, we hypothesize that the ICCs are involved in some way in generating or regulating the phasic activity and might be involved in the physiology of detrusor overactivity induced by Homviotensin. Furthermore, the characteristics of a heterogenous population of ICCs that surrounding SMC with distinctive lesions of the bladder wall including lamina propria and detrusor muscle requires much research. Modulation inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA) or the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) inhibitor, anacardic acid. Modulation of histone acetylation and recruitment of the transcription factors AP-1 and Sp1 at the Cx43 promoter region in response to TSA or anacardic acid (AA) was analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. Results: While the treatment with TSA promoted the expression of both the Cx43 mRNA and protein in HBSMCs, the expression of both the Cx43 mRNA and protein were suppressed in the presence of anacardic acid, compared to the levels in the untreated cells. ChIP assays confirmed that TSA-induced transcriptional up-regulation of Cx43 in HBSMCs was associated with increases in the accumulation of acetylated histones H3 and H4 accompanied with the enrichment of accessible AP-1 and Sp1 in the critical promoter region of the Cx43 gene. On the contrary, ChIP assay after treatment with anacardic acid showed that repression of Cx43 in HBSMCs was associated with decreased acetylation levels of histone H3 and H4 accompanied with subsequent reduction in the binding of AP-1 and Sp1. Conclusions: Our finding suggested that TSA-mediated induction and anacardic acid-mediated reduction of Cx43 expression in HBSMCs might be associated with the histone acetylation dependent mechanism linked to the transcription factors AP-1 and Sp1 in the Cx43 promoter. Introduction and Objective: Docetaxel based chemotherapy is the standard first line regimen in prostate cancer. However, many of those who receive docetaxel are refractory to docetaxel or develop docetaxel resistance. The underlying mechanisms about docetaxel resistance has not been clarified until now, which has worked as big burden in management of prostate cancer. In the present study, we established docetaxel-resistant cell line and analyzed the differential gene expression between docetaxel-sensitive (PC3) and docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer cell line (PC3DR2) using microarray and RT-PCR. Results: Total 17,084 genes were analyzed and we identified that 1227 genes were 2-fold upregulated while 1190 genes were downregulated using n-fold method after regression normalization. When fold change value was 3, the upregulated genes were 392 while downregulated genes were 243. Revering to microarray results, we try to confirm the microarray results using RT-PCR. Microarray analysis and RT-PCR revealed that IGF1R, DBF3, ZAK, PTCH1, SERPINE, and BRCA2 that are involved in cancer pathway showed over 3 fold increase in PC3DR2 compared to PC3. To elucidate the role of BRCA2 in docetaxel resistance, siRNA on BRCA2 was transfected into PC-3DR2 and we found that BRCA2 knock down reduced the docetaxel resistance in PC3DR2. Our results suggest that BRCA2 play an important role in the docetaxel-resistance of prostate cancer cell. In addition, BRCA2 modulation may, at least partially, reverse docetaxel resistance in prostate cancer. However, to clarify this suggesting, the further study will be required in vivo model. The done in 5µm thick sections and stained with histochemical methods: hematoxylin and eosin, Masson's trichromic, Weigert resorcin-fucsin for elastic system fibers. Also, we used imunohistochemistry with the following anti-bodies: anti alpha-actin and anti-elastin. The corpora cavernosa were involved by a thick tunica albuginea with 798 µm. The corpora cavernosa components showed the following values in percentages: connective tissue = 7.5%, smooth muscle fibers = 19% and elastic system fibers = 6%. Conclusions: The knowledge of the anatomy of laboratory animal's is essential in experimental research. Due to phylogenetic proximity of Rhesus Monkey with man, the penis and prostate, only to name the urogenital system organs, are widely used in research. The present results showed that, besides the phylogenetic proximity, the corpora cavernosa of the Rhesus Monkey present similarities with the corpora cavernosa of the man. Therefore, we concluded that Rhesus Monkey would be a good model for experimental studies on the penis. Introduction and Objectives: Different tissues have been used for urethral repair. These substitutes have limitations compared to urethral tissue (UT). Acellular scaffolds from human urethras may be a suitable alternative. The objectives were to develop a decellularization method for UT, evaluate cryopreservation effects and biological response. Materials and Methods: Seven urethral samples from male patients were used. 2 decellularization protocols in 2 periods (3 or 7 days) were analyzed: sodium deoxycholate 1% (PR1) and Triton X-100 1% (PR2). 2 freezing media with DMSO 0.7M (PRA) and 1.5M (PRB) were evaluated. Decellularization and structural integrity were assessed by histological analysis, β-actin WB, DNA levels and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Extracellular matrix (EM) proteins (collagen I and IV, laminin, fibronectin and elastin) were studied by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and dot blot. To evaluate biological respond, scaffolds were implanted into the subcutaneous space of 8 week old male mice (2 BALB/c and 2 athymic nude). Mice were sacrificed after 3 weeks. The implants were fixed in formalin to histological analysis, immunofluorescence (cytokeratin and vimentin) and IHC of PCNA and VEGF. Results: PR1 and PR2 applied for 3 days, maintained high cellular components, while PR2 applied for 7 days showed total decellularization, undetectable DNA and actin levels with high structural integrity evaluated by SEM. EM proteins were higher in PR2 than PR1. Comparing the 2 freezing protocols, PRA presented better integrity and protein levels than PRB. PRA/PR2 showed the highest levels of EM proteins and VEGF, even better than PR2 without freezing cycle. Mice implants showed no inflammatory responses with both decellularization protocols. Histological analysis showed high fibroblastic cells with the presence of some macrophages. Blood vessels assessed by VEGF were observed mainly in PR2 protocol. Vimentin and PCNA showed strong expression in infiltrating cells in both protocols. These results indicate that PR2 used is successful to achieve a decellularized urethral with an intact native architecture and suggest that a freezing cycle promotes the UT integrity. Furthermore, PR1 and PR2 have high degree of tissue integration. Therefore, our results suggest that urethral scaffold from sex reassignment patients represents a feasible tissue for urethral repair. Quantitative The prostate has been divided into 3 different zones: central zone (CZ), peripheral zone (PZ) and transitional zone (TZ). Each one has its own and peculiar stromal and acinar components. The aim of this study is to quantify, by using computerized analysis, the different elements of the prostatic stroma for characterizing the structure of each region. Nineteen samples were collected from different zones of the prostate obtained from autopsies of young men (less than 30-years old) who had been killed in accidents and whose post mortem examination showed no changes in the urogenital system. The time elapsed between death and fixation of the excised samples was less than 24h and during this period the subjects were maintained under refrigeration. Each sample was fixed in 4% buffered formalin and 5 sections of each fragment was made and processed to the following histochemical and immunohistochemical techniques. Quantitative analysis was performed by using Image J software. Statistical analysis was performed by using GraphPad Prism 6. Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni post-test, considering p<0.05.  Male Sprague Dawley rats were randomly assigned to four groups (n=10, respectively). The control group comprised sham-operated rats. The animals in the BOO, CB1 and CB2 agonist groups all underwent BOO surgery. Three weeks postoperatively, cystometrography (CMG) was performed on all rats. After confirming the presence of DO in the CB1/CB2 agonist groups, CB1 receptor agonist (WIN 55,212-2) and CB2 receptor agonist (CB65) were instilled intravesically, and CMG was repeated. CMG parameters including the contraction interval (CI) and contraction pressure (CP) were then analysed. The bladders of the control and BOO groups were excised following CMG. Immunofluorescence staining and Western blotting was performed to localize and expression levels of CB1/CB2 in the urothelium and detrusor muscle. The CI was longer and the CP was lower in the CB1 agonist group than in the BOO group, significantly. These factors in the CB2 agonist group also demonstrated the same results. Signals of immunofluorescence staining and immunoreactive bands in Western blotting of the CB1 receptor were increased in the BOO group compared with the control group. Similarly, These of CB2 receptor were also increased in the BOO group, although this difference was not significant. The CMG parameters in the BOO group were significantly improved by the inhibitory effects of CB1 and CB2 receptor agonists on the BOO-associated DO. The expression of CB1 was significantly increased in the urothelium and detrusor muscle in BOO-associated DO, but no significant change in CB2 expression was observed. (A) Metformin and everolimus inhibits normal kidney epithelial cells (HK-2, LLC-PK1) and RCC (Caki1, Caki2) growth. Cells were treated with metformin (0, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, and 50 mM) and everolimus (0, 1, 5, 10, 50, 100, 500, 1000, 2000, and 4000 mM) for 72 hours and cell viability assay was performed. After 72h, WST was added to each well and incubated for 4 hours at 37°C. The absorbance at 450nm, 650nm was measured. (B) Metformin combined with everolimus synergistically inhibits normal kidney epithelial cells (HK-2, LLC-PK1) and RCC (Caki1, Caki2) growth. Cells were treated with metformin (0, 1, 2, 5, 10, and 20 mM) and everolimus (0, 10, and 50 mM) for 72 hours and cell viability assay was performed. After 72h, WST was added to each well and incubated for 4 hours at 37°C. The absorbance at 450nm, 650nm was measured. (C) Metformin and everolimus inhibits colony formation of Caki-2 cells. Metformin combined with everolimus synergistically inhibits colony formation of Caki-2 cell. Cells were seeded in 6-well plates in triplicate at a density of 200 cells/well with 10% FBS. . After 24 hours, cultures were replaced with fresh medium containing 5% FBS as control, or the same medium containing different concentrations of metformin, everolimus and their combination for 14 days at 37°C. The formed colonies were stained with a solution maintaining 0.5% crystal violet and 25% methanol, followed by washing with water to remove excess dye. (D) Metformin and everolimus inhibits mTOR signaling in Caki-2 cells. Caki-2 cells were treated with 10 mM metformin and 10nM, 50nM everolimus for 72 hours and cell lysates were resolved by SDS-PAGE. Immunoblot analysis was carried out using antibodies against mTOR, phospho-mTOR, AMPK, phospho-AMPK (Thr172), 4E-BP1, phospho-4E-BP1 (Thr37/46), 70S6K, phospho-70S6K and β-actin. 37th CONGRESS OF THE SOCIÉTÉ INTERNATIONALE D'UROLOGIE -SIU 2017 ABSTRACT BOOK maximized when metformin was combined with everolimus. The study indicated the synergic antitumor effects between metformin and everolimus, which may be a prospective therapy strategy to achieve potent antitumor effects on renal cell carcinoma. Chemokine Receptors CXCR4 and CXCR7 are Associated with Tumor Aggressiveness and Prognosis in Extramammary Paget Disease Chang K, Gu C Introduction and Objective: Chemokines are involved in many aspects of oncogenesis, including regulation of cancer cell growth, dissemination and host-tumor response. However, the potential of the chemokine receptors, CXCR4 and CXCR7, in serving as biomarkers in extramammary Paget's disease (EMPD) has been rarely examined. Expressions of CXCR4 and CXCR7 were evaluated in 92 EMPD specimens by immunohistochemistry. Results: High expression of CXCR4 and CXCR7 were both correlated with regional lymph node metastasis and presence of lymphovascular invasion. High expression of CXCR7 also correlated with the depth of invasion. The prognostic value of these two chemokines was also investigated in progression-free survival (PFS) and cancer-specific survival (CSS). Both high expression of CXCR4 and CXCR7 were indicative of shorter PFS and CSS. In the combined prognostic model, concomitant high expression of CXCR4 and CXCR7 were suggestive of poor prognosis compared with the other two groups. In the multivariate analysis, depth of invasion, combined prognostic model and regional lymph node metastasis at diagnosis were the independent prognostic factors for EMPD patients for PFS, and the former two factors independently impacted CSS. Our results demonstrated that CXCR4 and CXCR7 can be used as prognostic biomarkers and prediction of aggressiveness of EMPD. Therapy targeting CXCR4 and CXCR7 may helpful to prevent EMPD progression and improve the prognosis of EMPD. Plasma  Introduction and Objective: Plasma homocysteine levels are seen to be elevated in chronic renal failure patients. Studies regarding the relation of kidney function and plasma total homocysteine concentration have been done in past. In this study we aimed to see the difference of the total homocysteine concentration levels between two groups of patients after extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL). We compared groups based on slow vs. fast shock wave frequency rates and its effect on renal injury by assessing the homocysteine concentration. The study consisted of 15 patients in each group who underwent ESWL for renal stones. Group A patients underwent slow shock waves 90/minute while group B patients underwent fast shockwaves delivery rate of 120/minute. Every Patient blood was taken before procedure and then at 3 days and 2 months period. The measurement of total homocysteine concentration, creatinine, vitamin B6, and vitamin B12. Elevations in plasma total homocysteine concentration levels may be caused by folate and vitamin B12 deficiencies that's why we checked if these folate and vitamin B12 levels were in normal range in our patients. The mean age of patients was 38.3 ± 10.6 years in slow shockwaves rate group while 39.1 ± 11.4 years in fast rate shock waves group. The total homocysteine concentration levels were increased in both groups but there was no significant difference of measurements between the two groups (p >0.05). The homocysteine concentration increase in both groups was statistically significant viz from 8.7 ± 1.8 to 16 ± 3.9 and 12.1 ± 3.2 at 23 days and 2months, respectively. Conclusion: After first-time ESWL, the increase in serum levels of total homocysteine concentrations due to renal injury. There was no significant difference in their levels between the slow rate and fast rate shock waves delivery. UP.053, Figure 2 . UP.053, Figure 3 . Preclinical studies suggested that administered cultured stem cells protected kidney function against renal ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI). The purpose of this study was to determine the therapeutic effects of hypoxic preconditioned human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cell (hBMSC) and the optimal route for cell delivery in a rat model of renal IRI. Sixty male Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly divided into 6 groups (10 animals per group): sham, nephrectomy control, IRI control, renal arterial injection, renal parenchymal injection and tail venous injection. To induce renal IRI, the left renal artery was clamped with a vascular clamp for 40 minutes, and the right kidney was removed. Serum creatinine, BUN and glomerular filtration rate were evaluated 1 day prior to IRI, and 1, 2, 3, 4, 7 and 14 days after IRI. For histological studies, the kidney was removed 14 days after IRI. Results: Two and one of mortality cases were observed in the renal parenchymal and tail venous injection groups, respectively. All hBMSC injections significantly reduced the extent of elevation in serum creatinine compared with the IRI control group 1, 2, 7 days after IRI. Renal arterial injection significantly reduced the extent of elevation in serum BUN compared with the IRI control group 1, 14 days after IRI. Renal arterial injection significantly reduced the extent of decrease in glomerular filtration rate compared with the IRI control group 2, 4, 7 days after IRI. Sirius red stain for the degree of fibrosis showed that kidney of renal arterial injection group was significantly less fibrotic than that observed in the IRI control group. The number of TUNEL positive cells increased after IRI, suggesting apoptosis or necrosis had occurred. TUNEL assay showed significantly decreased apoptosis in renal arterial, renal parenchymal and tail venous UP.054, Figure 1 . UP.054, Figure 2 . UP.054, Figure 3 . injection groups compared to the IRI control group. A greater increase in glutathione reductase and glutathione peroxidase was observed in renal arterial, renal parenchymal and tail venous injection groups than in the IRI control group. These findings further suggest that anti-oxidative responses were elicited by IRI and hBMSC treatment contributed to further anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative effects after IRI in this study. Introduction and Objectives: We aimed to assess the possible negative health effects of human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSCs) on fertility and early embryonic development following intracavernous injections in rats. A total of 88 Crl: CD (SD) male and female rats were equally divided into 4 groups in a random manner: control group (normal saline), low-dose group (2 x 105 hBMSCs), moderate-dose group (1 x 106 hBMSCs), and high-dose group (2 x 106 hBMSCs). hBMSCs or normal saline was injected into the penis of the rats 3 times at 2-week-intervals prior to mating. Results: For male rats, various degrees of flushing and swelling were observed at the penile injection site in all the groups, although the severity increased in a dose-dependent manner in the hBMSC injection groups. The mean body weights, food consumption, and reproductive parameters did not significantly differ among the groups of both genders. The absolute and relative organ weights did not significantly differ among the groups. At the time of necropsy, no remarkable findings were observed in gross examinations in all groups. On histopathological analysis, minimal mononuclear cell infiltration was observed in the right epididymis of each rat in the moderateand high-dose groups. The non-toxic amount of hBMSCs for male fertility and early embryogenesis in rats under the test conditions was determined to be 2 x 106 cells/ head. Second Look  A total of 107 patients with either T1 or high grade urothelial bladder cancer underwent restaging TURBT in this multi-institutional study. Repeat TURBT was performed in all patients within 6 weeks after initial surgery and prior to starting intravesical immunotherapy. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants and Institutional review board approved the study. Results: Upstaging and/or upgrading was noted in 11 (10.3%) patients and residual tumor with the same grade and stage was evident in 18 (16.8%) patients. Tumor size, multifocality and presence of muscle at initial resection were predictors of upstaging and/or upgrading. Among 48 patients with single, small (<3 cm) tumor who underwent adequate initial resection, identified by the presence of muscularis propria in the specimen, neither upstaging nor upgrading was found in second look TURBT. Second look TURBT is a valuable strategy in accurate staging of non-muscle invasive bladder tumors. However, in contrast to prior reports it does not seem to be necessary in all patients with T1 and/or high grade tumors. We noted that Second look TURBT in patients with single, small T1 and/or high grade tumor who underwent adequate initial resection is not associated with upstaging/upgrading or residual disease. Introduction and Objective: Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) is crucial for cell proliferation, differentiation and invasion, and may contribute to tumorigenesis. Overexpression of EGFR has been reported in many epithelial tumors such as urothelial bladder cancers, and may be an important predictor of prognosis. Our objective was to prove that the more EGFR is overexpressed, the higher tumor stage is and thus, the more aggressive tumor is. We included 64 primary urothelial bladder cancers selected from our patho-logical files and six control cases of a normal bladder mucosa. Pta and pT1 samples were obtained from transurethral resection and pT2, pT3 and pT4 samples from radical cystoprostatectomies. Immunostaining was performed using lyophilized mouse monoclonal anti EGFR antibody. The following scoring approach was used: *Score 0 = no staining, unspecific staining of tumor cells or less than 10% staining *Score 1 = membranous weak and incomplete staining of more than 10% of tumor cells *Score 2 = moderate and complete membranous staining of more than 10% of tumor cells *Score 3 = strong and complete membranous staining of more than 10% of tumor cells. Scored 1+ tumors were classified as Low EGFR expression (LEE) and those scored 2+ or 3+ were classified as High EGFR expression (HEE). Tumor stage was pTa in four cases (6%), pT1 in 21 cases (33%), pT2 in 33 cases (51.5%), pT3 in 2 cases (3%) and pT4 in 4 cases (6.5%). In normal bladder mucosa, four cases (66%) revealed a completely negative staining and two cases (44%) were found to be score 1. In tumoral samples, 11 cases (17.2%) were HEE and 53 cases (82.8%) were LEE profile. All pTa tumors were LEE profile. HEE profile was found in 9.5% pT1 tumors, 15% pT2 tumors, 50% pT3 tumors and 90% pT4 tumors. A significant association between EGFR overexpression and tumor stage was found (p = 0.011). Conclusion: EGFR overexpression by urothelial tumor cells appears to be associated with a higher stage, and may be predictive of local extension of the tumor. Zanaty F, Serag El-Dien M, Abdallah R Introduction and Objective: Urinary bladder cancer is a global health problem. There is increasing need to improve current therapeutic approaches to improve prognosis. Tumor-initiation, self-renewal and resistance to treatment characterize Cancer stem cells (CSCs). Urothelial CSCs cannot be isolated by a 'one-marker-fits-all' approach. Various marker combinations are better. Our aim was to study the immunohistochemical expression of ALDH1a and CD44 in bladder cancer and correlate them with clinicopathological parameters. The study included 60 archival cases stained by ALDH1a and CD44s antibodies (46 transitional and 14 squamous cell carcinoma). All cases were primary diagnostic specimens [either transurethral resection of tumor (TURT) or cystectomy] not preceded by any type of therapy. All specimens were analyzed after thorough examination of the whole slide. Positive expression was assigned when any number of malignant cells showed cytoplasmic staining for ALDH1a and membranous staining for CD44. Results: ALDH1a was positive in 39.1% of TCC and 57.1% of SCC cases. CD44 was positive in 80.4% of TCC and 100% of SCC cases. In TCC, ALDH1a and CD44 were associated with advanced stage (p=0.04 and 0.000 respectively). In SCC, ALDH1a was associated with high grade (p=0.007). CD44 was higher in cases presented in early stage (p=0.03) and associated with bilharziasis (p=0.02). CD44 was inversely correlated to ALDH1a (r= -0.6, p=0.03) and was significantly higher in SCC (p=0.001). Conclusion: ALDH1a expression was associated with unfavorable features like advanced stage in TCC and high grade in SCC. Target therapy against ALDH1a could be effective, especially in advanced tumors. Target therapy against CD44 could be helpful for bladder SCC or TCC with squamous differentiation. En-Bloc Transurethral Resection of Nonmuscle Invasive Bladder Cancer: Pathological Effectiveness Introduction and Objective: En-bloc transurethral resection (en-bloc TUR) is a modified procedure of transurethral resection of the bladder tumor (TUR-BT) for the patients with non-muscle invasive bladder cancer. Recently, en-bloc TUR has been induced in several institution, the safety has been established such as TUR-BT. Resection by en-block could lead to the accurate pathological diagnosis. We investigated the cases of en-bloc TUR and the pathological effectiveness in diagnosis. A total of 78 patients which underwent en-bloc TUR from April 2013 to November 2016 at our hospital. Pathological effectiveness in diagnosis was investigated. Of these, pathological T stage which diagnosed as pT1 were reviewed surgical margin and diagnosed in detail by the position of muscularis mucosae (MM). Results: Median size of tumor was 14.3mm (range: 1 to 50mm). Median operation time was 52 (range: 15 to 157min). Near perforation occurred in 5 cases, but none of them needed additional operation to repair. No other adverse events occurred. Muscularis was included inside the specimen in 66 cases (90.4%) of the total 89 cases. Pathological T stage was diagnosed: pTa (n=54), pT1 (n=15), ≥ pT2 (n=2), others (n=7). Recurrence rate and progression rate was 21.2% and 1.1%. Eleven cases which diagnosed as pT1 was enabled to diagnosis in detail by the position of MM: lamina propria invasion above MM (n=8), lamina propria invasion at the level MM (n=3), lamina propria invasion beyond MM (n=0). Surgical margin was enabled to diagnosis in all cases: positive (n=2), negative (n=9). Conclusion: En-bloc TUR was a safe and feasible procedure for the patients with non-muscle invasive bladder cancer. The difference of muscularis propria and MM was able to define clearly in the sample of en-bloc TUR. This enabled the in detail diagnosis of pathological T stage and shortened the time for diagnosis than TUR-BT. All pT1 cases were enabled to diagnosis in detail by the position of MM. Dynamic  Introduction and Objective: To compare the results of repeat transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) by institution performing the initial TURBT. We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of 289 patients who underwent repeat TURBT within 6 weeks after initial TURBT between 1998 and 2013. We divided the patients into two groups by institution performing the initial TURBT and then analyzed the intergroup differences Results: The mean age was 69.6 ± 11.1 years and the mean follow-up was 49.7 (range, 0-191) months. The referred group included 69 patients, while the non-referred group included 220 patients. The referred group included 57 (82.6%) patients with residual tumor after repeat TURBT. Overall upstaging occurred in 15 (21.7%), and upstaging to T2 occurred in 11 (15.9%) of the initial Ta and T1 patients. In the non-referred group, there were 123 (55.9%) patients with residual Tumor. Overall upstaging occurred in 10(4.5%), and upstaging to T2 occurred in 7 (3.2%) patients. Gross hematuria, grade, and tumor quantity and size were significantly associated with residual cancer on multivariate analysis. Conclusion: These intergroup differences reflect the relatively high staging of the referred group and variation in surgeon proficiency. Factors On univariate analysis, multiple tumor, sessile type tumor, T category and cancer grade, suspicious and positive urinary cytology, abnormal appearance of bladder mucosa, or smoking history, was significantly associated with positive random biopsy results. Multivariate analysis using logistic regression analysis demonstrated that independent preoperative factors on positive random biopsy results were urinary cytology (suspicious and positive) and abnormal appearance of bladder mucosa. (p= 0.0096 and p< 0.0001, respectively). Although random bladder biopsy in initially diagnosed non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer is not routinely recommended, random biopsy results have an impact on therapeutic decisions in patients with non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer. Our findings suggest that random bladder biopsy may be recommended for patients with initially diagnosed non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer, who have suspicious or positive of urinary cytology and abnormal appearance of bladder mucosa other than protruded tumors at preoperative cystoscopy. Red Results: Fifteen thousand and twenty-nine specimens of bladder cancer were included in the analysis including 12389 male specimens and 2640 specimens from females yielding an incidence rate of 6.84 for the total population and 11.14 for the male population. cases was measured in the initial pathological diagnosis as well as in the follow up specimen. The Ki-67 labeling index was compared in both settings in the bilharzial (83 patients) and non-bilharzial (57 patients) cases of non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer. All the patients were categorized according to the tumor progression during the follow up period regarding the histopathological stage of the tumor, as well as the change in Ki-67 labeling index in these groups. Results: There was significant correlation between Ki-67 labeling index and tumor stage in initial diagnosis and follow up. The higher the stage and grade of the tumor, the higher the Ki-67 labeling index. Ki-67 was higher in the follow up compared to its level in the initial diagnosis. The increase was directly correlated to the stage of the tumor (P value=0.001) ( Introduction and Objectives: Bladder cancer typically present with haematuria, although only a minority will have underlying malignancy. We aimed to identify predictors of bladder cancer diagnosis following evaluation of haematuria in order to inform an appropriate approach to haematuria in Australia. We undertook a retrospective cohort study identifying adult patients undergoing cystoscopic procedures at our institution for investigation of visible haematuria over a twelve-month period in 2015. Patients with a known history of bladder/renal/urinary tract cancer were excluded. Patient data including demographics were collected. Histology results were obtained for those who underwent tumour resection or biopsy. Results: Our sample comprised 231 patients, of whom 39 (17%) were found to have bladder cancer, the youngest of these being 54.7 years old. Age at cystoscopy was the only independent predictor of bladder cancer diagnosis following multivariable analysis. The predicted probabilities of bladder cancer after adjustment for gender, socioeconomic status and smok-ing status were: <1% at age <45 years, 13% at age 65 and 26% at age 80. Conclusions: Patients presenting with haematuria need to be promptly and appropriately investigated in order to diagnose underlying malignancy if present. Some guidelines encourage investigating all patients with haematuria, although this imperative must be balanced against limited resource availability, leading others to be more selective. Our findings support the routine investigation of visible haematuria in patients aged >45 years, with a more individualised approach in younger patients and those with non-visible haematuria, in keeping with the most recent BAUS/NICE guidelines. Identification  We undertook a retrospective cohort study using electronic medical records, identifying patients who underwent cystoscopy for investigation of haematuria at our institution. Cystoscopic procedures occurring from 1st January 2015 to 31st December 2015 were identified. Data on patient demographics, smoking, anticoagulation, degree of haematuria and referring clinician were collected. Exclusion criteria included age <18 years, history of bladder/urinary tract/renal cancer and cystoscopy for indications other than haematuria. Primary outcome measures were 1) Time from GP referral to urology consultation 2) Time from urology consultation to cystoscopy and 3) Receipt of investigations in the 180 days prior to cystoscopy. Comparisons between risk factors were carried out using negative binomial regression for count outcomes and chi-square test for categorical outcomes. Results: Over the study period, 308 eligible cases (228 males, 80 females) were identified. One hundred and ninety six (64%) patients were referred from the general practice setting. Patients waited a median of 38 days from GP referral to urology consultation and 28 days from urology consultation to cystoscopy. The median time to urology consultation was 65 days for women and 33.5 days for men (P = 0.015). However, the observed difference between males and females was no longer statistically significant on multivariable regression and the only independent predictors of a shorter interval were macroscopic haematuria and suspicious imaging findings. No significant differences in recent investigations between genders were observed. Conclusions: Gender is not a significant predictor of delayed haematuria assessment or receipt of recent  Introduction and Objective: The aim of the work is to identify and assess MMP-2 and MMP-9 in urine samples of bladder cancer patients and to validate results by correlations with analysis of urinary bladder tissue and blood samples. Correlations with histopathology findings, clinical picture, and tumor stage will also be conducted. Thirty two patients admitted to the urology department were enrolled in the study; 22 were histologically diagnosed as bladder cancer patient whereas the remaining 10 patient were diagnosed as cystitis. Ten healthy control subjects were also included in the study. Total proteins were extracted from samples and then subjected to vertical polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The immunoassay technique was used to assess the expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in urine,serum of the three group and tissue of malignant cases. Results: MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression is increased in urine of patients with bladder cancer than benign group and normal control group with significant difference (P Ë‚ 0.001). Figure (1) . MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression is increased in serum of patients with bladder cancer than benign group and normal control group with high significant difference (P Ë‚ 0.001). Figure ( 2). There was significant correlation between MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression in urine and tissue of the malignant group. (P Ë‚ 0.001). There was significant correlation between the expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in the tissue and both grade and stage of the tumor. Our study results showed that MMP-2 and MMP-9 were over expressed in urine, serum and tissue samples of patients with bladder cancer. While their expression was rare in benign tumor. This reveals that MMP-2 and MMP-9 may contribute to the invasive properties of bladder carcinoma and may play an important role in its progression. Results The theoretical and clinical data demonstrates a higher concentration of cisplatin within tumor following intra-arterial CT (IACT) as opposed to intravenous delivery. We used this fact successfully to increase the efficiency of treatment and overall survival (OS) of pts with platinum-based drugs in locally advanced BC cases. We studied the results of the regional IACT in 21 patients with BC in stages T3a-4aN0-1M0G2-3, mean age 68,4±3, 1 years, in 1998-2003. In the 16 cases previously conducted sparing treatment for BC (TURB + neo-or adjuvant CT), with weak effect. After catheterization and angiography of vesical arteries all pts received courses (6 to 36, median 18) of regional CT (cisplatin 50 mg/m² and adriablastin, 20 mg/m²). After completion of IACT the main group of pts was followed for the next 10 years. Results: Prolonged usage of IACT with the standard three-week break, contributed to a partial and complete remission of the tumor in 13 (61.9%) patients. During the 24 months follow-up after the CT we didn't found tumor growth in 7 (33.3%) pts. The treatment effect was determined with the degree of differentiation and tumor stage, regional metastases and the prior cancer history. In 4 (19.0%) cases with endoscopic confirmation of tumor progression, we evaluated palliative cystectomy (Guidelines EAU-2016). In one removal bladder were not found tumor cells, which was regard as curative tumor pathomorphosis. After the first 12 months of treatment (16 courses), 2 patients refused follow-up due to the increase of the creatinine: we diagnosed stage II ureterohydronephrosis, which required a nephrostomy puncture. During the first 60 months 6 (28.6%) patients died, while 5 -of tumor progression. Total toxicity during chemotherapy in patients revealed moderate myelosuppression (neutropenia I-II degree of thrombocytopenia and II degree). Five-year overall survival rate was 71.4%, the similar indicator, with other researchers. Overall survival of patients with BC was determined by tumor stage, age, severity of comorbidities and regional metastases. To 120 months of follow-up, 5 (23.8%) patients survived 10 years with a functioning bladder: 4 pts with T3N0M0G2, one -T3bN1M0G2. All survivers were younger than 65 years. Conclusions: Implementation of the IACT was effective in more than 61.9% of cases in T3a-4aN0-1M0G2-3 stage. Minimizing side effects was achieved through selective intra-arterial pass the drug to the tumor, with a decrease in medication dose. Ten-year overall survival rate was 23.8%, which is ahead of the average rates for patients with locally advanced BC and allows us to confidently talk about the need for further research in this direction. Source of Funding: Given the known benefits of organ treatment muscle-invasive bladder cancer, including transurethral surgery and intra-arterial chemotherapy, his method showed visible benefits with minimal side effects. Per-forming the regional (intra-arterial) chemotherapy with platinum-based drugs in patients with locally advanced bladder cancer the overall 10-year survival of patients was comparable with similar rates after radical cystectomy. C1orf198 May Serve as an Independent Predictor of Metastasis in Patients with Muscle-Invasive Bladder Cancer Shen Y, Wan F, Wang B, Xie H, Ye D Introduction and Objective: Determination of metastasis biomarkers is urgent in the management of bladder cancer (BC). With the existing models predicting BC metastasis, we found two deviant groups that were unpredictable with clinical parameters. One is at high risk of pN+ but actually with pN0 (good prognosis group, G) and the other one is at low risk of pN+ but actually with pN+ (poor prognosis group, P). The present study aimed to determine the gene expression differences between these two groups with SEER and TCGA database and validate the results in our own cohort. 1603 patients with radical cystectomy (RC) from the SEER database were enrolled to build a multivariate model predicting BC metastasis. This model was applied in 248 patients from TCGA database to distinguish these two deviant groups (G and P). The different expressed genes of the two groups were compared by t-test. RT-qPCR was applied to validate the results in a consecutive cohort of 127 BC patients from Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center who underwent RC in 2011-2015. The multivariate logistic regression model based on SEER population identified 256 patients as group G and 76 patients as group P. The similar phenomenon was observed in TCGA database with 37 patients of group G and 17 patients of group P respectively. 183 genes showed significant difference between these two groups. Finally, 18 genes achieved a significant statistical power (P<0.05) in predicting lymph node metastasis in the TCGA cohort excluding these two deviant groups. Furthermore, the RT-qP-CR results of our own cohort identified C1orf198 (P=0.04) as the only gene that expressed differently in the two groups. Our study suggested that C1orf198 may serve as an independent predictor of metastasis in patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer. Cancer Introduction and Objective: Given concerns regarding underutilization and morbidity associated with radical cystectomy, there is a need for incorporation of cancer-specific and competing risks into patient counseling and guideline recommendations. We developed and validated a nomogram assessing cancer and all-cause mortality following radical cystectomy. We conducted analyses of 5,325 and 1,257 patients aged 66 years diagnosed with clinical stage T2-T4 muscle-invasive bladder cancer between 2006-2011 using Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) and Texas Cancer Registry (TCR) Medicare linked-data, respectively. Cox proportional hazards models were used and a nomogram was developed to predict 3-and 5-year overall and cancer-specific survival with external validation and concordance indices. Results: Patients who underwent radical cystectomy were more likely to have been younger, male, married, non-Hispanic white and to have had fewer comorbidities than those who did not undergo radical cystectomy (p<0.001). Married patients, in comparison to their unmarried counterparts, had both improved overall (Hazard Ratio (HR) 0.76= 95% CI 0.70 to 0.83, p<0.001) and cancer-specific (HR 0.76= 95% CI 0.68 to 0.85, p<0.001) survival. A nomogram developed using SEER-Medicare data, predicted 3-and 5-year overall and cancer-specific survival rates with a C-Indices of 0.65 and 0.66 in the validated TCR-Medicare cohort, respectively. Older, unmarried patients with increased comorbidities are less likely to undergo radical cystectomy. Married patients had significantly improved utilization of surgery and improved overall and cancer-specific survival. We developed and validated a generalizable instrument which has been converted into an on-line tool (Radical Cystectomy Survival Calculator© (RCSC)), to provide a benefit-risk assessment for patients considering radical cystectomy available at https://www.utmb.edu/surgery/ urology/. Kosarek C 1 , Huo J 2 , Fang J 1 , Ghaffary C 1 , Kerr P 1 , Giordano S 2 , Kamat A 2 , Williams S 1 For older bladder cancer patients, there is limited evidence of the efficacy of concurrent chemotherapy with radiation therapy in the community setting. Our goal was to assess the relationship between concurrent chemotherapy use and survival in a large, population-based cohort of older patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer. To evaluate the concordance rate of lymphovascular invasion (LVI) and variant histology (VH) of transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) with radical cystectomy (RC) specimens. Furthermore, to evaluate the prognostic value of LVI and VH at TURBT in predicting non-organ confined (NOC) disease, lymph node metastasis, and survival outcomes. Two hundred sixty-eight patients who underwent TURBT and subsequent RC for clinically non-metastatic bladder cancer (BCa) at one institution were retrospectively reviewed. The presence of LVI and VH were determined in both TURBT samples and RC specimens. Logistic regression analyses were performed to evaluate the association of LVI and VH with NOC and/or lymph node metastasis at final pathology. Univariable and multivariable Cox-regression analyses were used to estimate recurrence-free survival (RFS), overall survival (OS) and cancer-specific survival (CSS). Discrimination ability was measured by the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC). Of the 268 patients, LVI and VH were detected in 13.8% and 11.2% of TURBT specimens, and in 30.2% and 25.4% of RC specimens, respectively. The concordance rate between LVI and VH at TURBT and subsequent RC were 69.8% and 83.6%, respectively. They were associated with adverse pathological features such as lymph node metastasis and advanced lymph node stage. TURBT LVI was independently associated with lymph node metastasis (p=0.033) while TURBT VH was independently associated with NOC and lymph node metastasis (p=0.02 and 0.037, respectively). On univariable Cox regression analyses, TURBT LVI was significantly associated with RFS and CSS (p=0.004 and 0.005, respectively) while TURBT VH was only associated with RFS (p=0.025). On multivariable analyses, only LVI was independently associated with RFS (p=0.036). TURBT specimens under-diagnose 78% of LVI and 60% of VH. Conclusion: Detection of LVI is missed in third of TURBT specimens while VH seems more accurately identified by TURBT. Moreover, they were independently associated with disease and survival outcomes. Assessment and reporting of LVI and VH at TURBT samples are of paramount importance for proper risk stratification and subsequently patient counseling and decision-making. Single  Ten patients underwent the radical cystectomy followed by single stoma tubeless cutaneous ureterostomy. The main differences of our method from previously described techniques were a) the preservation of parietal peritoneum covering the ureters as a mean for better blood supply preservation and b) fixation of ureteral orifices one to another forming one oval shaped stoma. The surgery lasted from 150 to 240 minutes. No need for intra-or post-operative blood transfusion and no significant in-hospital complication were observed. Nine patients were free of obstruction for a follow-up period of 12 months. One patient developed a stricture of stoma and underwent reconstructive surgery. Conclusion: Cutaneous ureterostomy is a safe method,which is the preferred method of urinary diversion for morbid patients. Our results showed that modified single stoma tubeless cutaneous ureterostomy is less prone to the stomal stenosis. How-  Introduction and Objective: Small cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder is an uncommon tumor that exhibits aggressive behavior and accounts for less than 1% of all primary bladder tumors. The clinical outcome of patients with small cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder is not well known because the literature about its treatment and survival are mostly case reports. We report the characteristics and clinical outcomes of small cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder in Japanese patients. We identified a total of 41 patients with primary small cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder between 1994 and 2015 at Yokohama City University and affiliated hospitals. Clinical, pathologic, and surgical data were retrospectively reviewed and analyzed. Results: The median age of the patients was 69 years (interquartile range (IQR), 63-77 years) and the male-to-female ratio was 2.7:1. According to the Veterans Administration Lung Study Group (VALG) definition, 32 (78%) patients had limited disease (TxN0-1M0) and 9 (22%) had extensive disease (TxNxM1/TxN2-3M0). Twenty-one patients had a radical cystectomy and 29 patients were treated with chemotherapy. After a median follow-up of 28.0 months, 19 patients had died. The estimated median overall survival period was 34.7 months. The overall survival probability at 1 year, 3 years, and 5 years was 80.9, 49.4, and 42.8%, respectively. In multivariate analysis, increased serum NSE (p=0.014) and VALG definition (p<0.001) were found to be significant independent prognostic factors for overall survival. Conclusions: Serum NSE and VALG definition were shown to be independent prognostic factors in small cell carcinoma of urinary bladder patients. Feasibility However, feasibility of LRC in high elderly patients is not yet clear. We performed a comparative analysis between elderly patients and a younger group who underwent LRC, assessing for perioperative/oncological outcomes. We reviewed and compared 52 consecutive patients stratified as those above 75 years, and those below 75, who underwent LRC between October 2013 and March 2017. Both groups were assessed for perioperative outcomes, including surgical time, blood loss, complications, pathological findings, recovery, and oncological outcomes. Results: Our cohort included 23 patients ≤75 years and 29 patients ≥75 years. Preoperative parameters (surgical indications and gender distribution) were similar in both groups. Operative time (median 485 vs 431 minutes), estimated blood loss (median 500 vs 320 mL), urinary diversion and pelvic lymphadenectomy were similar in both groups. Peri/postoperative complications of all grades were 34.8% vs. 27.6% (p=0.732), and over grade 3 were 17.4% vs 6.9% in the younger and elderly group, respectively. Median duration of hospital stay was 22 days in the younger and 23 days in the elderly group. One patient from the elderly group needed intraoperative open conversion due to hypercapnia. Positive surgical margin rates were also similar (13.0% vs 6.9% in the younger vs elderly group). Median follow-up period was 14.5 and 16.9 months for the younger and elderly group, respectively. The 2-yr overall survival rate was 65.7% in the younger vs 81.2% in the elderly group (p=0.189), and cancer-specific survival rates were 68.5% and 88.8% (p=0.085), respectively, in the two groups. There was a significant difference in progression-free survival rates between the younger and elderly groups (42.7% vs 84.6%, p=0.032). Conclusion: In our study, there were no significant differences between both groups with respect to peri-surgical/ oncological outcomes. LRC in elderly patients was relatively safe and yielded good oncologic results. Thus, LRC is feasible even in elderly patients.  (ASA), metastatic disease, and hospital volume, were used to calculate probabilities of 90-day mortality following RC for all patients. The area under the curve (AUC) was determined to assess agreement between observed and expected outcomes for prediction of 90day mortality. Ureterocutaneostomy is the simplest method of urinary diversion. Nevertheless, traditional cutaneous ureterostomy may lead to a series of adverse effects, such as stomal stenosis, ureter elongation, increased ureteral tension, etc. Ideally, permanent urinary diversion should be able to prevent post-operative complications, preserve renal function and enable patients to lead normal live, especially in patients with advanced disease. The aim of our study was to develop surgical modification that could improve outcomes of cutaneous ureterostomy. Of 359 patients who underwent cystectomy between 2011 and 2016, in 64 (17.8%) patients due to cytoreductive or salvage surgery, both ureters were used to construct the single cutaneous ureterostomy. The patients were divided into two groups according to the model of ureteral transposition. In group 1 (25 pts.), the distal ends of the ureters were brought throughout retroperitoneum onto the right iliac region. In group 2 (39 pts.) cutaneous ureterostomy included transposition of the ureters throughout the mesentery root to mesosigmoid colon. Then, the tunnel was formed beneath the visceral peritoneum of the mesosigmoid, which distally opened at the distance of 2 cm from colon. Both ureters were passed through this tunnel and their ends were exteriorized through the opening in the left abdominal wall -anti-McBurney point. The ends of ureters were anastomosed with the skin in modified X-shaped technique forming single cutaneous ureterostomy and preventing stomal stenosis. In both groups the ureters were intubated with stents. Preoperative clinical characteristics as well as intraand early postoperative (<90 days after surgery) data were evaluated and compared between two groups. The groups were comparable with regards to age, gender, ASA score, surgery indications, pathological features, operation time, estimated blood loss and length of hospital stay. Nevertheless group 1 had a significantly higher rate of stomal or ureteral stenosis (64% vs 17.9%) that electively required Bricker diversion (p<0.05), lower average total GFR level (42.1 + 6.3 vs 54 + 7.8 ml\min (p<0.05)) and higher serum creatinine level (1.42 + 0.26 vs 1.18 + 0.19 mg\ dl (p<0.05)). Moreover, second group ureterostomy according to our technique did not require ureteral stenting in 71.8 % of cases (p<0.001). Our results suggest that transperitoneal ureterocutaneostomy using the sigmoid mesentery is an effective and simple way to improve the results of cutaneous ureterostomy. A Modified Orthotopic Neobladder Reconstruction after Radical Cystectomy: Technical Point and Intermediate-Term Outcome Introduction and Objective: Orthotopic neobladder reconstruction has become an increasingly common urinary diversion following cystectomy for bladder cancer. This study aims to introduce a modified orthotopic neobladder reconstruction method after radical cystectomy, its technical points and interme-diate_term outcomes. Between 2012 and 2015, patients with bladder cancer were enrolled in this study, assigned to undergo a new pouch diversion after radical cystectomy. Patients were asked for routine follow ups at 6 weeks, 3 and 6 months after surgery. Items including urinary function, intermittent catheterization, anuresis, stress leakage, urinary frequency, nocturia, upper urinary system complications and sexual function were evaluated in all patients during post-op follow ups. We assessed outcomes in patients with pT0, pT1 and pTa, in the cystectomy specimen following radical cystectomy for transitional cell carcinoma, our objective was to identify prognostic risk factors and survival. We reviewed retrospectively the records of a single-institution and found 330 patients treated with radical cystectomy for bladder urothelial carcinoma without neoadjuvant chemotherapy between October 1999 and June 2015. We selectively analyzed the clinical records of 49 post-cystectomy pT0/pT1/pTa patients for the following variables: carcinoma in situ, lymphovascular invasion, history of non-muscular invasive disease, the delay between transurethral resection and radical cystectomy, residual tumor in the specimen and lymphatic invasion (pN). The quantitative and qualitative variables were analyzed using standard statistics. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to evaluate survival and the log-rank test to assess differences between groups. Statistical significance was set at p<0.05. The analysis was performed using SPSS version 22.0. The study sample included 49 cases. The median age was 60 years. All of the patients were male. The specimen was staged at T2 in 57% of patients after transurethral resection. After cystectomy, the specimen was staged as pT0 in 38.8% and pT1/ Ta in 61.2%. The time from TUR to cystectomy was 3.8 (1-17) months. Median follow-up was 53 months. Lymph node metastasis were detected in 6.1% of patients (pN+) and had a negative impact on survival (p=0.02). Overall survival was 89.8%, and cancer-specific survival was 83.3%. Eight patients (16.36%) developed tumor progression. An increased delay between the last bladder tumor resection and cystectomy, and T2 stages at endoscopy were the factors found to be associated with reduced disease-free survival (p = 0.01), disease-specific survival (p = 0.003) and overall survival (p=0.001). Conclusion: Although the prognosis of stage pT0/ pT1/pTa carcinoma in the cystectomy specimen is excellent, some patients experience progression. The increased delay between the last bladder tumor resection and T2 initially staged cystectomy were independent predictors of poor prognosis in our study. Predictive figure 1 . Further Survival analysis using landmark time-point with log rank showed there is a significant difference in cancer-specific survival between the groups (median 284 vs 547 days; p=0.01) (Figure 2 ). Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the first pilot study showing predictive role of epithelial tumor marker for recurrence of invasive urothelial bladder cancer. The results of this cohort suggest that patients with marker relapse following cystectomy are at significant increased risk of recurrence and mortality. A larger, controlled study with longer follow up is needed to determine their role in predicting survival. Early Outcome of Post Radical Urologic Pelvic Surgery-Patients Admitted to Intensive Care Unit (ICU) in Perioperative Period Introduction and Objective: The aim of our study to evaluate ICU mortality rates and lenghth of hospital stay (ICU LOS ) in radical urologic pelvic surgery-patients admitted to ICU in the perioperative period of radical pelvic surgery. And also to evaluate current risk stratification protocols used for patient assessment and ICU triage following radical pelvic surgery. Retrospective study performed on all adult patients who were admitted to the critical care unit in the perioperative period of radical pelvic surgery in the period from Jan 2014 to June 2015 with exclusion of patients younger than 18 years old, patients older than 80 years old and patients with less than 24h ICU length of stay. Collected data includes the following ; age, gender, nature of surgery, comorbidities, ASA physical status, Surgical Apgar score, first day worst vital signs, urine output, ABG, serum electrolytes, CBC, renal functions, liver functions, nature of ICU admission (planned or emergency), ICU LOS, ICU outcome (cure or death) and possible causes of death. Collected data was used to calculate ASA score, Surgical Apgar score (SAS), APACHE II Score and SAPS II score. Data Classifica-UP.087, Figure 1 . UP.087, Figure 2 . Cancer-Specific Survival Comparison between Study Groups using Landmark Survival Analysis tion: we classified data into groups: The cut-off value for significance was P â‰¤ 0.05. The total number of patients enrolled in our study was 115. The mortality rate in ICU was 8.7% (10 out of 115 patients). The different causes of deaths included in the study were sepsis, pulmonary embolism, pneumonia, ARDS, hemorrhage and ARF. Non-survivors (death) have significantly higher mean ICU LOS, APACHE II and SAPS II scores and significantly lower mean SAS Table (1) . High mortality rates were detected among cases of patients with APACHE II â‰¥ 25 (70%) and SAPS II score â‰¥ 30 Table  ( 2). Low mean of SAS and high mean of APACHE II and SAPS II score were detected among patients who stayed more than 7 days. The best score in prediction of ICU mortality was APACHE II score with sensitivity of 90%, specificity of 93.3% and accuracy of 97.2%. The cutoff point was 17. Conclusions: Surgical Apgar score, APACHE II score and SAPS II score are strongly recommended tools for predicting high mortality risk during perioperative period of major radical urologic pelvic surgeries. Further prospective research on larger number of patients is needed to help facilitate optimal care for surgical patients. Park SC, Kwon WA, Oh TH, Lee JW, Seo IY Introduction and Objective: The aim of this study was to identify factors that can be used to predict severe neutropenia (grade 3 or higher) in patients with advanced urothelial cancer after cisplatin-based systemic chemotherapy. Conclusions: The pretreatment neutrophil count was found to be the factor that poses a significant and independent risk in development of severe neutropenia induced by applying cisplatin-based systemic chemotherapy to patients with advanced urothelial cancer. Zhu Y, Wang B, Wan F, Ye D Introduction and Objective: Determination of metastasis biomarkers is urgent in the management of bladder cancer (BC). With the existing models predicting BC metastasis, we found two deviant groups that are unpredictable with clinical parameters. One is at high risk of pN+ but actually with pN0 (good prognosis group, G) and the other one is at low risk of pN+ but actually with pN+ (poor prognosis group, P). The present study aimed to determine the gene expression differences between these two groups with SEER and TCGA database and validate the results in our own cohort. One thousand six hundred and three patients with radical cystectomy (RC) from the SEER database were enrolled to build a multivariate model predicting BC metastasis. This model was applied in 248 patients from TCGA database to distinguish these two deviant groups (G and P). The different expressed genes of the two groups were compared by t-test. RT-qPCR was applied to validate the results in a consecutive cohort of 127 BC patients from Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center who underwent RC between 2011 and 2015. The multivariate logistic regression model based on SEER population identified 256 patients as group G and 76 patients as group P. The similar phenomenon was observed in TCGA database with 37 patients of group G and 17 patients of group P respectively. One hundred and eighty three genes showed significant difference between these two groups. Finally, 18 genes achieved a significant statistical power (P<0.05) in predicting lymph node metastasis in the TCGA cohort excluding these two deviant groups. Furthermore, the RT-qPCR results of our own cohort identified C1orf198 (P=0.04) as the only gene that expressed differently in the two groups. Our study provided an exquisite method to screen genes between two extreme populations, and identified C1orf198 as a potential metastasis promoter in bladder cancer. Kosarek C  Yuk HD, Cho M, Kwak C, Kim SW, Paick JS, Ku JH Introduction and Objective: To estimate the prognostic value of repeated transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) in patients with diagnosed highrisk non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC). We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of patients treated from October 2004 to December 2013 at Seoul National University who underwent repeated TURBT (re-TURBT) within 2-6 weeks after an initial resection. We used stepwise multivariate Cox regression models stratified by study to assess the independent effects of the predictive factors and estimated hazard ratios (HRs) from the Cox models.  Orthotopic Neobladder Constructed of Shorter Ileal Segment -"Belgrade Pouch" Introduction and Objective: Many surgical techniques try to create neobladder as simmilar as native blader is. We present results of original surgical pro-cedure with usage of shorter ileal segment for ortotopic neobladder substitution. One hundred and seventy four males and 28 female patients were operated between 2009 and 2017 year, according to "Belgrade Pouch"technique. "U"shaped neoblader was constructed of ileal segment average length of 28 (24-32) cm. Direct uretero-pouch anastomosis was performed. We report early and delayed complcations in 3 years follow up period, and we excluded pts with diabetes mellitus, HOBP, systemic ilness and chemotherapy.  A total of 201 TURBT specimens between 2013 and 2016 were retrospectively assessed. Tumour characteristics including size and number of tumours were recorded for each specimen. Histopathological grade, stage and presence of muscle were evaluated. Data was divided into three groups according to the Cutting/Coagulation power settings used for resection; Group 1: 120/40W (n = 51); Group 2: 120/50W (n = 116) and Group 3: 160/60W (n = 34). Statistical analyses including analysis of variance (ANOVA) were performed to compare the groups. Results: All three groups were statistically similar with respect to tumour characteristics. Muscle was present in 75% of all the specimens (Group 1: 82%; Group 2: 74% and Group 3: 68%). Overall rate of diathermy artefact was 20% with severe artefact reported in 12 (6%). Group 2 (120/50W) showed highest diathermy artefacts with 32 out of 116 (27.5%) specimens. Group 3 (160/60W) had only 6% (2 out of 34) specimens with artefacts, whereas Group 1 (120/40W) had 11.7% (6 out of 51) artefacts. Conclusion: Quality of resections using monopolar diathermy is good with an acceptable diathermy artefact rate. In our study, higher monopolar power settings were associated with lower incidence of diathermy artefacts. Further studies are required to establish the optimal power settings, so that thermal damage is reduced in TURBT. Evaluation of the Dwell-Time Difference in Intravesical Bacillus Calmette-Guèrin Therapy Results: Three thousand nine hundred and fifteen patients were included for analysis. One hundred eighty seven (4.8%) had PTBI, and they were prone to be male (p=0.025) and older (p<0.001). There were no statistical differences when it comes to disease recurrence (p=0.643), progression (p=0.811), or major AE (p>0.999). As for keeping up with the instillation schedule, patients with PTBI had fewer times of instillation within 3 months (p=0.017), but it became insignificant after adjustment for sex and age with Poisson regression test (β=0.113, p=0.290). Conclusions: PTBI does not affect the treatment efficacy or major AE of BCG treatment for superficial bladder cancer. The instillation schedule had no significant difference either. Iio H, Tsujioka T, Seto K, Tomida R, Nishimura K, Shinomori K, Fujikata S, Tanimoto S, Okamoto K, Yamashi S Introduction and Objective: Low-dose BCG and reduced dwell times are being examined to reduce adverse events associated with BCG therapy. We investigated whether intravesical induction therapy using BCG 40 mg and a 1-h dwell time, as performed at our hospital, is clinically useful. This study included 103 patients who underwent intravesical BCG induction therapy for non-muscle invasive bladder cancer at our hospital between April 2013 and December 2016. Pa-tients were divided into a standard dose (80 mg) and low dose (40 mg) BCG group; and patient characteristics, efficacy, and adverse events were retrospectively compared. The BCG dose was 40 mg in 77 patients and 80 mg in 20 patients. Mean age was significantly older in the 40-mg group (75 years) than in the 80-mg group (69 years, p=0.029), but no other significant differences in patient characteristics or pathological factors were evident between groups. The BCG Tokyo strain was used in all patients, and the BCG dwell time was 1 h. Prophylactic antibiotics were concomitantly used in 86.6% of all patients. The overall frequency of adverse reactions was 66.2% in the 40-mg group and 80.0% in the 80-mg group, but this difference was not significant (p=0.23). Treatment completion rates were comparable, at 93.5% in the 40-mg group and 95.0% in the 80-mg group. Response rates in CIS patients were comparable at 76.9% (20/26) and 77.8% (7/9), respectively. During the median observation period of 2.3 years; the 2-year non-recurrence and non-progression rates were 70.7% and 95.8%, respectively, in the 40-mg group, and 57.6% and 100%, respectively, in the 80-mg group. These differences were not significant (p=0.30, p=0.38). Conclusion: This study found no significant differences in adverse reactions or treatment outcomes with BCG induction therapy between the 40-and 80-mg groups. These findings suggest that use of concomitant antibiotics and reduced dwell times do not affect the clinical efficacy or safety of BCG induction therapy. Second Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the first study that came up with some new prognostic factors directly linked to the recurrence and progression of NMIBC in our real world practice. The shortage of BCG therapy products was reported as a significant new prognostic factor for both NMIBC recurrence and progression. However, our study had proved the lack of health coverage, the low economic incomes, and the rural origin as new and statistically significant prognostic factors for only NMIBC recurrence in our area. Further prospective studies including larger cohort of patients are needed in order to confirm our new NMIBC recurrence and progression prognostic factors and especially related to the impact BCG therapy products shortage. Interferon Alfa2b UP.095, Figure 1 . Intravesical immunotherapy with Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) is considered the gold-standard adjuvant treatment to prevent recurrence and progression in intermediate and high risk urothelial non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC). However, intravesical BCG is often poorly tolerated, leading to early treatment interruption in many patients. To obviate this, several schedules for BCG instillations have been proposed, with most differences occurring in the maintenance phase of the protocols. We evaluated the adherence and tolerability of patients with NMIBC submitted to a monthly instillation maintenance schedule of adjuvant intravesical immunotherapy in a tertiary center. Retrospective analysis of patients with NMIBC treated with monthly instillations of intravesical immunotherapy with BCG for three years in a tertiary center from 2010 until 2015. Results: A total of 187 patients were evaluable, with 34 patients already under treatment. The probability of been on treatment at the end of the first year was 57% and the probability of complete the treatment was 18%. During the first year of treatment, 23 (15%) patients interrupted instillations due to side effects, while 39 (25%) patients abandoned treatment due to other non-specified reasons.Considering the extended 3 years length of treatment, 24% (n=36) of patients quitted instillations due to side effects, while almost 38% (n=58) of patients abandoned treatment due to unclarified motifs.Cystitis-like syndrome constituted the most frequent cause of cessation (n=36, 28%). In 8 (6%) patients, systemic symptoms led to treatment cessation. Among the 3 year length of treatment, 5 out of 187 (3%) patients stopped treatment due to recur-rence, and 2 (1%) patients due to progression to muscle invasive disease. Conclusions: This study reveals that the adherence of patients to a long-term (3 years) monthly scheme of intravesical BCG instillations is low (18%), mostly due to adverse effects and non-clarified reasons, favoring short duration schemes (1 year) in detrimental to long term protocols (3 years). Weka  Identify new anatomo-clinical parameters associated with recurrence / progression of non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) and distinguish between parameters associated with early and late recurrences by comparing classical statistical methods and decision tree constructions and associative rule constructs generated by Weka. Data were retrospectively analyzed data of 728 patients (from three different department of urology in the north of Tunisia) who had primary NMIBC between the years 2000 and 2011. They were treated by transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TUR-BT) with 6 months maintenance bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG). Patients were followed for a minimum duration of 60 months or until progression to muscle infiltration. Clinical parameters were: age, gender, smoking, occupational exposure to carcinogens, symptom delays prior to first consultation, obstruction of the bladder, and possible perforation of the bladder during endoscopic resection. (table I) . Moreover, risk factor of tale and early recurrence are not the same according to Weka method and classical statistical tests. Conclusion: This method allows urologist to predict recurrence and progression, to discuss with the patient the different therapeutic options (based on reliable evolutionary data) and to make an individual choice of the most appropriate treatment and follow-up protocol. Introduction and Objectives: High quality transurethral resections of bladder tumours (TURB) are crucial for bladder cancer diagnosis and treatment. Conventional TURB (cTURB) goes against the basic principle of oncologic surgery. Tumours should be resected as a whole to reduce tumour spill. Additionally tumour fragmentation leads to loss of orientation UP.095, Figure 2 . and impedes optimal staging of bladder tumours. This has led to the introduction of the en-bloc resection technique. In this study we present our initial experience and results of en-bloc resection for treatment of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer. During en-bloc resection the bladder mucosa is incised using bipolar electrocautery. The tumour is then undermined and evacuated from the bladder in one piece. In this study, 14 patients who underwent an en-bloc resection were matched to patients that were treated with cTURB in the same time period, based on focality, tumour size and adjuvant instillations. Outcomes of interest were presence of detrusor muscle in resected specimen, intra-and postoperative complications, and the pres-ence of residual/recurrent tumours at first cystoscopic evaluation 3 months following tumour resection. Results: Tumour stage and grade are summarized in table 1. In 5 out of 28 patients, a tumour was present at cystoscopy 3 months following TURB (cTURB=2, en-bloc=3). Detrusor muscle was present in all en-bloc resected patients, and in 7 (50%) cTURB patients. In both groups no intraoperative complications occurred. Two postoperative complications occurred in the cTURB group, and 1 postoperative complication occurred in the en-bloc group (table 1) . Conclusion: Based on our initial experience, en-bloc resection seems a safe technique to treat patients with NMIBC. The number of tumours present 3 months after tumour resection was similar for both resection techniques. En-bloc resection could possibly improve staging of bladder tumours due to the presence of detrusor muscle and preservation of orientation. Oncologic Introduction and Objectives: Bladder cancer is the second most frequent genito-urinary cancer after prostate cancer in the world, and is the primary urinary cancer in Tunisia. In the other hand, benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is the most frequent affection of the elderly men and represents the most frequent cause of bladder obstruction. BPH, through its obstructive mechanism, can be a risk factor of bladder cancer. Their simultaneaous resection was considered but it has been a subject of controversies for a longtime. It was suspected to enhance the risk of tumor implantation in the prostatic fossa and then the recurrence risk in this site. Many recent studies have shown that simultaneous resection does not major the risk of recurrence in the prostatic urethra. The aim of this study was to evaluate the oncologic prognosis of this procedure compared to single trans-urethral bladder resection. After restoration of supply, BCG prescriptions for primary and relapsing TCC rebounded to a higher level with a faster rate of growth than prior to the first shock while for CIS the number of prescriptions have not rebounded and are currently close to zero. The global shortage of BCG intuitively resulted in a reduction of BCG prescriptions from October 2014. Following resumption, BCG was prescribed for primary and relapsing TCC in a higher volume than a manner prescribed prior to the global shortage and is growing faster. While BCG prescriptions for CIS remain low, the precise cause of this is unclear from the current data. Gender X comes of patients treated with adjuvant BCG, and to identify predictors of disease recurrence and progression in these population. Retrospective analysis of the patients with NMIBC treated in our institution, between 2010 and 2015, with intravesical BCG instillations after a complete TUR-B. We excluded patients who completed less than 6 instillations and those in whom a complete TUR-B hadn't been performed before. Patients' demographic data, tumor characteristics and the number of BCG instillations were reviewed. We then calculated Club Urológico Español de Tratamiento Oncológico (CUETO) scores for risk stratification and analysed the correlation of these variables with tumour recurrence and progression. Results: One hundred and twenty four patients were included (78.2% male gender, mean age 71.1 ± 9.1 years). After a median follow-up of 39.7± 20.5 months, 37 patients recurred (29%) with a mean time to first recurrence of 14.2 months, 15 progressed (12%), the overall survival (OS) was 87.1% and the disease-specific survival (DSS) was 93.5%. A 6-weekly induction scheme was used in 27.4% of patients, with the remaining receiving more than 6 instillations. A statistically significant correlation was found between CUETO risk score and progression (r=0.17, p=0.04). Patients' and tumour characteristics, individually, were not statistically correlated with none of the outcomes. Conclusion: In our sample we confirmed the usefulness of CUETO risk score calculation in the approach of patients with NMIBC treated with BCG, due to its correlation with disease progression. This evaluation might guide an individualized follow-up schedule of these patients based on the risk score, and it allows the identification of high risk patients in whom an early cistectomy should be weighted. The retrospective nature of this analysis, the reduced number of patients and the heterogeneity of the BCG scheme used are handicaps to consider in this study. The Expression of ARID1B Is Prognostic and Predictive for Postoperative Adjuvant Chemotherapy Benefit in Patients with Muscle-Invasive Bladder Cancer Treated by Radical Cystectomy Introduction and Objective: ARID1B, which exists as mutually exclusive isoforms with ARID1A in SWI/ SNF chromatin remodeling complex, has been recently identified as a major mutant gene in a wide variety of cancers. The present study aimed to determine the association between ARID1B expression with patients' outcome as well as the benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with bladder urothelial carcinoma. We recruited 143 patients consecutively with bladder cancer treated by radical cystectomy in Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center. TMAs were created in triplicated from formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded specimens. Immunohistochemistry was performed to assess the expression of ARID1B and their associations with outcomes as well as clinicopathological factors were evaluated. Results: ARID1B expression was significantly associated with tumor size (P=0.015), T stage (P=0.027), OS (P<0.001) and PFS (P=0.043). Furthermore, high expression of ARID1B was an independent indicator of poor OS (P=0.012) in patients with bladder urothelial carcinoma. The prognostic model containing ARID1B showed a better predictive accuracy than the bench models. Most importantly, the benefit of adjuvant chemotherapy observed in patients with low ARID1B expression was superior to that observed in patients with high ARID1B expression. Our study suggested that ARID1B might serve as a prognostic biomarker of bladder urothelial carcinoma, and might as a predictive marker for the patients' selection of adjuvant chemotherapy in high risk subgroup patients. Clinical Significance of Gamma-Klotho in Urothelial Carcinoma of the Bladder Hori S 1 , Miyake M 1 , Morizawa Y 1 , Tatsumi Y 1 , Nakai Y 1 , Onishi K 1 , Goto D 1 , Iida K 1 , Onishi S 1 , Okajima E 2 , Tanaka N 1 , Fujimoto K 1 Introduction and Objective: Non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) accounts for about 70% of all bladder cancers. Approximately 20% to 40% of urothelial carcinoma of the bladders present with or develop muscle invasive bladder cancer (MIBC). Gamma-Klotho (KLg) is a member of Klotho family which originally identified as an anti-aging gene. Alpha-Klotho and beta-Klotho has recently been reported to correlate with cancer prognosis in some malignancies. In contrast, the association between KLg and cancer prognosis remains unclear. In the present study, we evaluated the association between KLg and urothelial carcinoma of the bladder. We extracted tissue samples from 151 NMIBC and 54 MIBC patients undergoing TURBT in our institution. The expression level of KLg was examined with immunohistochemical staining (IHC) using paraffin-embedded tissues. Patients were divided into two groups according to KLg expression levels calculating from population and intensity. We investigated the association between patient's clinicopathological variables and their KLg expression. Next, we investigated the effect on bladder cancer of exogenous KLg in vitro assay using human bladder cancer cell lines (MGHU3, J82, UM-UC-3). In addition, we evaluated the roles of KLg using a human bladder cancer xenograft model. Patients with high expression level of KLg were significantly high risk of mortality compared to patients with low expression level of KLg (P<0.05). An elevated level of KLg correlated with a higher incidence of lymphovascular invasion (P<0.05). In vitro assays using human bladder cancer cell lines revealed that treatment with exogenous KLg protein increased the proliferation, migration ability invasion ability, and anchorage-independent growth potential of the bladder cancer cells. In addition, experiment of xenograft model showed tumor growth rate during the monitoring and tumor weight at sacrifice were significantly lower in mice treated with KLg siRNA compared to that of the controls Conclusion: Our results suggested that KLg plays important roles in tumor invasion and progression in bladder cancer. Expression of MDM2 Mrna, MDM2, P53 and P16 Proteins in Urinary Bladder Cancer Introduction and Objective: Here we imposed a multimarker molecular panel composed of P53, MDM2 protein and mRNA & P16 with identification of sensitive and specific cut offs among the Egyptian urothelial carcinomas bilharzial or not emphasize the pathological and molecular classifications, pathways and prognosis as a privilege for adjuvant therapy. Materials and Methods: Three hundred and ten urothelial lesions were pathologically evaluated and grouped as follows: 50 chronic cystitis as benign, 240 urothelial carcinomas and 20 normal bladder tissue as control. Immunohistochemistry for MDM Protein, P16 & p53 and In Situ Hybridization for MDM2mR-NA were done. Results: MDM2mRNA overexpression correlated with low grade low stage non invasive tumors, while P53>40% and p16<10% cut offs correlated with high grade high stage invasive carcinomas and bilharzial tumors (P=0.000). Conclusion: MDM2mRNA overexpression vs P53>40% and P16<10% constitutes a multimarker molecular panel with significant cut offs, proved to distinguish low grade, low stage non invasive urothelial carcinomas (MDM2mRNA overexpression, P53<40%, P16>10%) from high grade, high stage invasive urothelial carcinomas (with p53>40, p16<10% and absent MDM2mRNA overexpression). Combined P53>40 and p16<10%, together with the histopathological features can distinguish in situ urothelial lesions from dysplastic and atypical lesions. Introduction and Objective: Identification of molecular factors as diagnostic and prognostic indicators as well as targets for better therapy is a high priority. Human epidermal receptors constitute a family of receptor tyrosine kinases, which appear to be implicated in cellular transformation and can be over-expressed in a variety of solid tumors. Also, there has been a progressive interest in the expression of CD44 as a marker of tumor aggressiveness and metastatic potential in some human cancers. Hypothesis: A variety of urinary bladder lesions and urothelial neoplasms are associated with alterations in Epithelial Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) and CD44 gene and protein expression. Studying these factors by immunohistochemical methods and selectively by Fluorescent Insitu Hybridization (FISH) technique may give an idea about the influence of bilharziasis upon induction and progression of these lesions Materials and Methods: Urinary bladder biopsies were subjected to histopathological examination, immunohistochemical detection of EGFR and CD44 and gene expression of EGFR using FISH technique. Results: Malignant urothelial lesions, showed higher percentage of cellular positivity and scores for both markers compared to control and cystitis cases (p<0.01). Cases of bilharzial cystitis showed significantly higher percentage and higher scores of CD44 expression compared to non-bilharzial cystitis (p<0.01). Bilharzial Transitional Cell Carcinoma and Squamous Cell Carcinoma (TCC+SCC) cases showed significantly higher scores of both EGFR and CD44 expression, compared to non-Bilharzial (TCC+SCC) cases. EGFR protein and gene were upregulated in malignant urothelial lesions namely TCC and SCC, with significant correlation with grade of neoplasia. CD44 expression was also upregulated in urothelial bladder lesions especially SCC and was correlated positively with both the grade and stage of malignancy. All examined control, cystitis and adenocarcinoma cases showed negative results for EGFR gene activation by FISH technique. All cases of bilharzial TCC showed positive gene expression which is considered significant when compared with other non-bilharzial TCC (p<0.01). No significant difference in gene expression was detected between bilharzial and non-bilharzial cases of SCC (p>0.05). Conclusions: In our study we found that grouping cases of (TCC+SCC), showed a significantly higher scores of both EGFR and CD44 expression in bilharzial patients compared to non-bilharzial patients, pointing to the possible role of bilharzial infection in progression of cancer. TCC subgroups -although were of small numbers-showed variable expression of EGFR and CD44, denoting possible different molecular background. FISH results confirmed EGFR upregulation in TCC and SCC but not in adenocarcinoma. Introduction and Objective: The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is characterized by loss of cell-to-cell adhesion and cell polarity and is closely associated with the invasion and metastasis of several cancers. Given the multifocality and high rates of relapse, progression, and metastasis of bladder cancer (BC), the EMT is likely to participate in BC as well. Numerous factors associate with the EMT, and the key regulators of the EMT are E-cadherin, Twist, Snail, and Slug. In this study, we aimed to examine the expression of these transcription factors in human BC. One hundred and fifty different urinary bladder lesions were studied, including 25 cystitis cases (15 bilharzial and 10 non bilharzial cystitis), 75 urothelial carcinoma cases (18 bilharzial associated and 57 non bilharzial associated) and 50 squamous cell carcinoma associated with bilharziasis, beside 5 control cases . Data concerning age, sex, tumor grade, stage, and associated bilharziasis were obtained. Each case was studied for Slug, Snail, Twist and E-cadherin expression by immunohistochemistry technique. Results: All control and cystitis cases are negative for the Slug, Snail, Twist and E-cadherin expression 73.5% (50/68) , Twist; 65% (75/68) and Slug/snail, 40% (32/68) of associated bilharzial bladder carcinoma respectively while 70/1%( 40/57), Twist; 61.2% (35/57) and Slug/snail, 52.5% (30/57) of non-associated bilharzial bladder respectively. Immunohistochemistry analysis showed that Twist was elevated with increasing tumor stage (P <0.01), the grade (P < 0. 01). Slug/snail were elevated with increasing tumor stage (P < 0.05), the grade (P < 0.005).E-cadherin was reduced in expression corresponding with tumor grade (P < 0.01). Conclusions: These data demonstrate that Twist, Snail and Slug and E cadherin may play a part in the progression of human bladder carcinoma. Development and External Validation of a Novel 12-Gene Signature on Muscle-Invasive Bladder Cancer for Prediction of Overall Survival: Linkage to Data from the Cancer Genome Atlas Introduction and Objective: We aimed to develop and validate a novel gene signature from published data and improve the prediction of survival in muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC). We search the published gene signatures of MIBC on overall survival (OS) and compiled all the 237 genes to develop a novel gene signature. Statistics were conducted with R (version 3.2.1, The R Foundation for statistical computing). RNAseq data of TCGA bladder cohort was downloaded from website "https://genome-cancer.ucsc. edu/proj/site/hgHeatmap/", "TCGA_BLCA_exp_ HiSeqV2-2015-02-24". All genes were enrolled in the univariate Cox hazard ratio model. We used a reduced multivariate Cox regression model, only genes fulfilled P<0.10 in univariate model were enlisted. A consecutive cohort with 172 patients in Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center was treated as external validation set. Results: Only with intact clinical and follow up data were enrolled and finally a total of 327 patients in TCGA cohort were enrolled. We identified 236 genes, from 9 published papers on OS of MIBC. Using the TCGA Database we identified a total of 12 genes that correlated with OS (P< 0.05 in univariate and multivariate analysis both). By integrating these genes with the RT-qPCR data in our validation data set, we confirmed that the 12-gene panel prediction power of OS (the AUC were 0.741 and 0.727, respectively) was higher than just clinical data (including sex, age, T stage, grade and N stage) only (the AUC were 0.667 and 0.631, respectively). And combining the clinical and 12-gene data together, the AUC can increase to 0.768 and 0.757 respectively. Conclusion: Applying published gene signatures and TCGA data; we successfully build and externally validate a novel 12-gene signature for OS of MIBC. The improved prediction for these high risks of disease progression or survival will be helpful to doctor-patients consultation and finally benefit our patients. Introduction and Objective: Urachal anomalies are usually seen in children and most are presumed to be benign. Urachal remnants that persist into adulthood are rare but have the potential to become malignant due to exposure to chronic urinary stasis, infection and inflammation. Few studies have looked at urachal anomalies in adults and so the ideal management of an uncomplicated urachal anomaly is debatable with some advocating excision of every urachal remnant. We aim to review the management of urachal remnants within a single institution. This is a retrospective review of clinical notes and imaging of patients who had been diagnosed with urachal anomalies at Changi General Hospital, Singapore. Results: Forty-five patients (15 female, 30 male) with urachal anomalies were identified in the period from 2005 to 2016. Thirty (66.7%) patients had incidental findings while 15 (33.3%) were symptomatic. Symptomatic patients included 5 patients who presented with infected remnants, 5 with haematuria, 3 with voiding symptoms, 1 patient with suprapubic discomfort and 1 with recurrent urinary tract infection. Eight patients underwent excision, 1 underwent an incision and drainage of abscess while 34 of the 36 remaining patients elected to undergo surveillance. Two patients were lost to follow-up. Histology was benign in 5 (62.5%) of the 8 patients who underwent excision. Malignancy was confirmed in 3 patients. There was interval stability of the urachal remnant in all the patients who had repeat imaging while on surveillance. Conclusion: Urachal anomalies are uncommon in adults and are more likely to be diagnosed incidentally. The overall incidence of histologically confirmed malignancy in our series was 6.7%. Introduction and Objective: We investigated whether NBI (Narrow-band imaging) cystoscopy to heighten the detection rate of bladder tumor in transurethral resection of bladder tumor. domization and investigated the number of tumors that were diagnosed with cancer or found during surgery in both groups and compared the recurrence rate for 12 and 18 months in both groups. Results: A total of 142 patients were divided into the WLC group and NBI group each consisting of 71 and 71 patients, respectively. In the WLC group, 61 patients had been diagnosed with bladder cancer where 145 bladder tumors out of a total 174 bladder tumors were diagnosed with bladder cancer. In the NBI group, 62 patients had been diagnosed with bladder cancer where 158 bladder tumors out of a total of 232 bladder tumors were diagnosed with bladder cancer. Additional tumors that had been detected in the NBI group were 33 patients amongst where 10 patients had been diagnosed with cancer. In the NBI group, 13 additional cancers were found in 10 patients. The 1-year recurrence-free rate was 71.9% in the WLC group, 86.7% in the NBI group, and 553 days and 604 days in the recurrence-free time, respectively and did not show a statistically significant difference. The number of patients diagnosed additionally with bladder cancer via NBI cystoscopy was 10. It suggests the significant role in detection bladder cancer of NBI cystoscopy. Despite of no significant difference in recurrence rates between the two groups, it can be anticipated that significant difference may exist when long-term observation is carried out. Results: The mean of age was 67.4 years old (+/-9.23 SD), 93.1% (54 cases) were men and 6.9% (4 cases) were women. The median follow-up was 78.8 months . The mean of evolution time since the beginning of symptoms and the diagnosis was 5.5 months (RIC25-75 2-12 months). The most common clinical presentation was haematuria in 63.8% (37 cases) followed by lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) in 25.9% (15 cases). The cytology was positive in 89.4% (42 cases), and negative in 10.6% (5 cases), the carcinoma in situ was focal in 43.1% (25 cases) and non-focal or diffuse 56.9% (33 cases). 54 patients (93.1%) received BCG 81 mg doses with a pattern of induction and reinforcements during 3 years. 36.2% (21 cases) had recurrences and 27.6% (16 cases) progression. The overall survival rate was 50% and the cancer specific survival rate was 77.6% (Kaplan-Meier) for the in situ tumors, and in comparison for the non muscle invasive tumors an overall survival rate of 70.2% (p<0.0001) and cancer specific survival rate of 91.3% (p<0.0001 Log-rank). Conclusions: Carcinoma in situ of the bladder implies a worst prognosis and lowers notably the overall survival and cancer specific survival, therefore this group of patients should imply a more strict treatment approach. (rs472402, rs3822430, rs248805, rs39848, rs2677933, and rs3736316) in SRD5A1 gene and four SNPs (rs9332960, rs1 247014, rs1246791, and rs2754530) in SRD5A2 gene were selected and analyzed using direct sequencing. Multiple logistic regression analysis was conducted to evaluate associations between these SNPs in two genes and clinical parameters which characterize severity of BPH. Results: The mean age of the patients was 65.5 (39 -96) years old. The mean international prostate symptom score (IPSS), prostate specific antigen (PSA), peak flow rate (Qmax) and total prostate volume revealed 17.3 ± 0.6, 4.58 ± 0.36 ng/ml, 11.2 ± 0.4 ml/s and 39.0 ± 1.5 ml, respectively. Genotype distributions and allele frequencies of SNPs in SRD5A1 and SRD5A2 genes which were selected in this study had no relationship with prostate volume larger than 30ml (p>0.05). Furthermore, other parameters of BPH, such as PSA, IPSS, or peak urine flow rate, also had no associations with these SNPs (p>0.05). The associations were not observed between the polymorphisms of the SRD5A1 and SR-D5A2 genes and prostate volume, IPSS, PSA and uroflowmetry in Korean population. Introduction and Objectives: Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a common cause of bladder outlet obstruction in men worldwide. African men are known to have larger prostate volumes than other races. Giant benign prostatic hyperplasia (GBPH) is defined as prostate size greater than 200 grams. Management of GBPH is associated with several challenges which have been under-reported from the African sub-region. We highlight the peculiarities of clinical presentation, surgical management and outcome of GBPH cases at the Obafemi Awolowo University Teaching Hospitals Complex, Ile-Ife, South-western Nigeria between January and December 2016. All men with BPH and trans-rectal ultrasound estimated prostate size above 200g planned for simple prostatectomy over the 1 year period were prospectively studied. Demographic characteristics, clinical presentation, intra and post-operative details were entered into a proforma and analysed using SPSS version 22. Results: Four patients with GBPH had simple prostatectomy during the period under review. Their agerange was 68-78 years (mean age-73.7 years). They all presented with lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS), gross haematuria and recurrent urinary tract infections. One (25.0%) also had chronic urinary retention (CUR) and impaired renal function which normalised following continuous bladder drainage. Three patients (75.0%) required pre-operative blood transfusion to correct anaemia. Two of them (50.0%) had emergency prostatectomy on account of recalcitrant haematuria. Three patients had transvesical prostatectomy (75.0%) while one had retropubic prostatectomy (25.0%). The enucleated prostate glands were found to weigh 312.1g, 396.4g, 420.8g and 450.0g respectively with mean weight of 394.8g. They all had blood transfusion post-operatively (average of 2 units of blood) with relatively longer hospital stay (mean 5 days). There was resolution of the LUTS and other symptoms after surgery and none had urinary incontinence, erectile dysfunction or surgical site infection in the post-operative period.  Rats were assigned as 3 groups; control (n=6), persistent DO (n=6), and persistent DO treated with the plant combination (n=6) groups. Persistent DO after relief of partial BOO was made and 6 of them were orally administered with the plant combination. After 4 weeks administration cystometry was performed. And then 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) were measured for the evaluation of oxidative stress in the bladder. Pro-inflammatory cytokines as interleukin-8 (IL-8) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) were analyzed. M2 and M3 muscarinic receptor of the bladder were analyzed. Results: Significantly increased contraction pressure and decreased contraction interval were observed in persistent DO group after relief of BOO was observed. Moreover, oxidative stress, pro-inflammatory cytokines, and M3 muscarinic receptor were significantly increased. After treatment with the plant combination, significantly reduced DO by cystometry was observed compared with persistent DO group. Additionally, significantly decreased oxidative stress, pro-inflammatory cytokines, and M3 muscarinic receptor in the bladder were observed after treatment with the plant combination. Conclusions: Treatment with the plant combination improves persistent DO after relief of BOO mediated by antioxidative and anti-inflammatory effect. Further study is necessary to identify exact mechanism of treatment effect of the plant combination. We investigated the possible association between preoperative bladder wall thickness (BWT) or detrusor wall thickness (DWT) and bladder outlet obstruction (BOO) based on urodynamic studies in men with symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Data were prospectively collected from a BPH surgery database. A total of 196 men who underwent prostate vaporization for symptomatic BPH were included in this study. BWT and DWT were measured in the suprapubic area after uroflowmetry. Results: No significant difference was noted in BWT and DWT in any patient according to the presence of BOO; however, subgroup analysis showed that BWT and DWT were significantly thicker in the obstruction group in men aged 70 years or older than in those under age 70 (BWT: 3.6 + 0.9 mm vs. 3.1 + 0.9 mm, P-value = 0.022, DWT: 2.8 ± 0.8 mm vs. 2.3 ± 0.8 mm, P-value = 0.007). In this older age group, the classification based on a BWT ≥4.0 mm showed 31% sensitivity, 87% specificity, and 65% diagnostic accuracy for the diagnosis of BOO, whereas DWT ≥3.0 mm showed 49% sensitivity, 82% specificity, and 69% diagnostic accuracy. Conclusion: BWT and DWT were associated with BOO in men aged 70 years or older. Therefore, BWT and DWT will be a useful non-invasive parameter for deciding management strategy for elderly men with symptomatic BPH. An appropriate measurement method should be established as soon as possible for further application of the relationship among BWT, DWT and BOO. Introduction and Objective: To evaluate the effects of prostatic anatomical factors on male lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) and the peak flow rate (Qmax) in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). with LUTS/BPH. Patients whose total prostate volume (TPV) was greater than 40 mL were excluded; 156 patients were enrolled in the study. The TPV, intra-vesical prostatic protrusion (IPP), prostatic urethral angle (PUA) and prostatic urethral length (PUL) were measured by trans-rectal ultrasonography. LUTS were evaluated using the International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS). Uroflowmetric measurements were also made.  PVR Over 250 ml -What To Do? Persu C 1 , Chirca N 1 , Parlog M 2 , Jinga V 1 The post void residual volume (PVR) is an abnormal finding in any circumstance; still some patients have significantly higher volumes than others. The aim of this paper is to review the conditions behind the high PVR, the evaluation protocol and the treatment used. This is a retrospective study evaluating the hospital files of patients in the last four years who had a PVR of more than 250 ml at the initial evaluation, regardless of their symptoms. Only patients in which follow up data was available were included in our review so evolution after treatment and complications could be also recorded. Results: A total of 36 patients were included. The most common cause of high PVR in our series was a neurogenic bladder (23 cases). Other causes include detrusor-sphincter dyssinergia (6 cases), underactive detrusor (4 cases) or areflexive bladder (3 cases). Although some patients presented some degree of mechanical obstruction, all of them also presented another condition from the ones mentioned before, which increased the PVR. Urodynamics was not routinely performed during the initial evaluation but was performed at one of the following visits for a better understanding of the behavior of the bladder. Treatment options were surgical desobstruction, which failed to solve the PVR in all cases, CIC, very effective but not easily accepted by the patient, and the use of provocative maneuvers, which also did not cure the PVR. One patient underwent sacral neuromodulation, PVR remained present. 86% (31 cases) of our patients had at least one symptomatic UTI episode and 25% (9 cases) had some degree of renal faliure. Conclusions: Obstruction alone is not explanatory for a high PVR. Urodynamic testing should be done during the initial evaluation, considering the relatively low number of patients with this condition. An increased PVR does not indicate surgery, but should lead to in-depth evaluation. CIC is still the ultimate treatment in such cases, although most patients are initially reluctant to it. Standardization of treatment is not possible for high PVR patients. Ager M, Agarwal P, Katmawi-Sabbagh S Introduction and Objective: Post-micturition dribbling is a poorly understood condition. It describes benign involuntary leaking of urine immediately after micturition. With a prevalence of 11.5% of men in their 20s rising to 63% over 60s it has a significant impact on patient's quality of life. We carried out a literature review of post micturition dribble aetiology to inform management strategies. The literature supports 2 main theories neither unrelated to bladder or prostate pathology: Theory 1: Weakness in bulbospongiosus and ischiocavernosus muscles. These muscles assist in clearing the urine. Causes include obesity, lack of fitness, straining from constipation, chronic cough and persistent heavy lifting. Neurological pathology such as pudendal nerve injury is also sited. Theory 2: Failure in the urinary milk-back mechanism. This is supported by findings on micturating-videocystography showing a bulbar residue between the external sphincter and bladder neck when asked to halt urinary flow. When the external sphincter relaxes, urine falls into the bulbar urethra causing dribbling. Optimal therapy targets the cause. One RCT concluded that pelvic floor exercises showed a greater reduction in urine loss compared to those managed with urethral milking. Pelvic floor exercises and physiotherapy are therefore strongly encouraged for Theory 1. Urethral milking forms the treatment basis for theory 2. The literature also highlights association with sexual dysfunction. We propose a multi-disciplinary treatment algorithm for the management of these patients including targeting causation, physiotherapy and treating associated sexual dysfunction. Further studies to assess results of different management approaches are required. Introduction and Objective: Holmium laser enucleation of the prostate (HoLEP) in BPH is widely used and the effects are known to be equivalent or better than traditional TUR-P with low incidence of complications. However, some patients who underwent HoLEP still have the lower urinary tract symptoms(LUTS) after surgery. We evaluated the characteristics of patients who visited our clinics due to persistent LUTS and required additional medications after HoLEP in BPH patients. The medical records of the patients who underwent HoLEP from March of 2011 to June of 2015 were reviewed retrospectively. The analysis was performed in patients who have been followed for more than 6 months after surgery. The patients were divided into 2 groups. Group A is the patients with persistent obstructive symptoms and group B is with irritation symptoms. Age, prostate specific antigen, International prostate symptom score (IPSS), prostate volume, transition zone volume of prostate, peak flow rate, maximum cystometric capacity, post voided residual volume, resected weights, operation time were analyzed.  Nolazco JI, Tobia I, Gonzalez M, Favre G, Tejerizo JC, Gueglio G Introduction and Objective: Acute urinary retention (AUR) represents one of the most frequent emergencies in urology. The initial management consists of the placement of a bladder catheter. Gradual decompression (GD) of the bladder is believed to decrease the risk of hematuria compared to Rapid decompression (RD). "Intermittent clamping" is more time-consuming and is complex compared to rapid drainage.The aim of this study is to compare the occurrence of hematuria among AUR patients who underwent rapid versus slow bladder decompression. A secondary objective was to determine factors predictive of hematuria ex-vacuum. A prospective cohort study was performed between June 1st and October 30th, 2016. We included 72 adult male patients with AUR who consulted our institution emergency room. Patients were randomized based on the day of the consultation for continuous bladder emptying or for a ratio of 200 ml alternated by a clamping of 2 minutes (Gradual decompression). Patients were observed for at least 2 hours. Hematuria was defined as the presence of macroscopically visible blood after placement of the catheter. Patients with traumatic catheter placement were excluded. Data analysis was performed with the Chi-square test, T test, and logistic regression. The mean age was 69.8 years (19-91). Of 72 patients 49 (68.1%) were randomized to RD and 23 (31.9%) to the GD group. The groups did not present statistically significant differences in age, anticoagulation, and type of probe used or volume retained. Hematuria was evidenced in 3 (6.1%) of the patients with rapid emptying and in 3 (13%) of patients drained with the intermittent clamping technique (Fisher Test p 0.376). No hematuria required intervention or decompensated the patients. Rapid bladder decompression factor was not a predictor of hematuria in the uni and multivariate analysis. The volume retained was a predictor of hematuria. An OR of 1.33 (95% CI 1.02-1.42) was estimated for each 100 ml retained. We did not find a significant difference between patients who presented hematuria with rapid or slow decompression after an AUR. The retained volume was the only significant predictor of hematuria. Is Introduction and Objective: The appearance of storage symptoms in the early postoperative period after surgery with laser techniques for benign prostatic hiperplasia is prevalent. Our objective was to assess the efficacy of postoperative oral antimuscarinics as a preventive strategy to decrease storage symptoms and incontinence following photoselective vaporisation of the prostate (PVP) with 180W XPS GreenLight laser. We retrospectively reviewed 105 patients who underwent PVP in our institution. We divided them into two groups according to whether they received oral antimuscarinics (AM) or not (no AM) for a month after surgery. Qmax, IPSS, OABQ-SF and ICIQ-SF questionnaires are used in our department as protocol follow-up in these patients and were compared before surgery, and 3 and 9 months after. To establish homogeneity between the groups, we compared several pre, intra and post-surgical variables, without finding statistically significant differences. Results: Up to 58 patients received oral AM and 47 patients did not. No statistically significant differences were found between the two groups in the IPSS, ICIQ-SF and OABQ-SF scores during follow-up. For both groups there was a statistically significant improvement between the first and second checkups after surgery in the mean score of the questionnaires. (Table 1) . (-18.9 ), Qmax 19.2 ±4.7 ml/sec (+13.0) and and PVR 18.8 ± 5.3ml (-112.8) . Most frequent problems were burning micturition (35%) and terminal dysuria (29%). Only Nine patients were converted to TURP. No significant difference in post-operative hemoglobin seen in patients who were on antiplatelet drugs. Conclusion: PVP with a diode laser is as safe and effective procedure for the treatment of BPH, is also safe in patient who are on anti-platelet agents. Photoselective Vaporization of the Prostate as Treatment Option for Benign Prostatic Obstruction Introduction and Objective: We review patient characteristics and outcomes after photoselective prostate vaporization of the prostate (PVP) using a 532 nm 120 W lithium triborate laser (GreenLight HPS, American Medical Systems, Minnentonka, USA). We performed retrospective review of medical records from inpatient and outpatient data of patients who underwent photoselective vaporization of the prostate (PVP) between 2012 and 2014. We recorded patient characteristics, operative details and postoperative data. Values are reported mean +/-standard deviation unless otherwise stated. Results: Between 2012 and 2014, a total of 69 patients underwent PVP. Patient age is 69.6 +/-7.4 years (range 56-87). Comorbidities present were 20% with diabetes mellitus and 15% with cardiovascular conditions (high blood pressure, coronary heart disease, or arryhtmia). Urinary retention was the presenting symptom in 40.6% of patients, while lower urinary tract symptoms were present in the remainder. Operative time was 105.8 +/-42.8 minutes, lasing time 53.7 +/-29.9 minutes. Prostate volume was 68.4 +/-31.5 ml and was correlated with lasing time (r=0.4272, p=0.02). No significant hemorrhage during operation was noted in 90% of patients, with hemorrhage estimated 25-600 cc (median 200 cc) in the rest. Patients were admitted for a mean of 6.4 days, with a range from 2-16 days. 65% of patients did not need bladder irrigation at the end of procedure. Nine patients were discharged with a transurethral catheter, four of which presented preoperatively with urinary retention. Median duration of postoperative urethral catheterization is 3 days. Median follow up was 7 months. Preoperative peak flow rate was 9.9 +/-5.0 ml/min and postoperative was 17.2 +/-10.6 ml/min. Preoperative post void residual urine was 111.0 +/-146.3 ml and postoperative residual was 59.0 +/-54.2 ml. Conclusion: PVP is a treatment option for relief of prostatic obstruction. Benefits include limited risk of hemorrhage, bladder irrigation, and use of isotonic peroperative bladder solution which possibly allows for a wider spectrum of patient risk. Advantages should be balanced against limited outcomes data and increased resource utilization. Padilla-Fernández B 1 , Bliek-Bueno K 2 , Álvarez-Ossorio-Rodal A 2 , Hernández-Hernández D 1 , Cabral-Fernández AV 1 , García-Cenador MB 2 , Castro-Díaz DM 1 , Lorenzo-Gómez MF 2 Introduction and Objective: Given that the inflammatory reaction is an important step in synthetic sling incorporation after stress urinary incontinence surgery, even in post-prostatectomy incontinence (PPI), we aimed to study the effect of chronic inflammatory or autoimmune disorders in the results after implantation of an adjustable male sling. Retrospective study of 92 men who underwent implantation of an adjustable male sling (REMEEX ® , Neomedic, Spain) due to PPI. The sample was divided into 3 groups: Group A (n=60): patients who were totally continent after surgery; Group B (n=20): patients who were partially continent and needed readjustment; Group C (n=12): patients who were incontinent after surgery. Variables investigated: age, secondary diagnoses with special interest in autoimmune or chronic inflammatory disorders, physical examination, complementary studies and ICIQ-SF questionnaire. Statistical analysis: descriptive statistics, ANOVA, Student's t-test, Fisher's exact test. p<0.05 was considered statistically significant. Results: Age was similar in the three groups as shown in figure 1 (average 69.02 years, range 56-82) . Complete continence was achieved in 65.21% of the patients. Table 1 shows the distribution of the most important secondary diagnoses in the three groups. Conclusions: Male re-adjustable sling REMEEX ® achieves a 61.25% of continence in post-prostatectomy incontinence. A medical background with inflammation and immune disorders is more frequently found in patients with a worse response to treatment. Efficacy and Safety of Tadalafil UP.139, Figure 1 . We evaluated the efficacy and safety of tadalafil in medically complex vulnerable elderly patients with lower urinary tract symptoms associated with benign prostatic hyperplasia. In this 12-week, patients were community dwelling men 75 years old or older. Patients with BPH had scores of less 3 or more on the VES-13 by NCCN (Vulnerable Elders Survey). We evaluated the changes of each parameter before and 4 to 12 weeks after the administration of tadalafil 5 mg per day. The overactive bladder symptoms score (OABSS), IPSS were used as a subjective questionnaire for overactive bladder symptoms. We compare between vulnerable elderly group and no-vulnerable elderly groups.Statistical comparisons before and after the administration were made using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. To examine the relation between OABSS and IPSS, Spearmans testing was used for correlations between independent variables and P<.05 was considered statistically significant. Safety evaluations included self-reported symptoms and post-void residual volume. age or low body mass index among those who underwent hip surgery or general anesthesia, and among those who received a higher rate of fluid administration or transfusion. Multivariate analysis revealed that age ≥ 75 years and intraoperative fluid infusion ≥ 12 mL/min were independent risk factors for POUR. The optimal cutoff value for age as a predictor of POUR was 75 years (area under the receiver operating characteristic curve = 0.764). The incidence of POUR in the present study was 27.4%. Older age and intraoperative volume overload were identified as independent risk factors for the occurrence of POUR. Our data suggest that the age cutoff to predict the risk of POUR is 75 years. To prevent POUR after lower limb arthroplasty, the administration rate of intraoperative intravenous fluid, especially in older patients, should be closely monitored to avoid excessive fluid accumulation during surgery. The  Twelve BPH patients with at least moderate levels of Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms (LUTS) (IPSS>9) for a minimum of one month who had a history of cardiac problems were included in this clinical trial (before-after study). All participants underwent EECP (VAMED) for 35 sessions (one-hour sessions, 5 days a week for 7 weeks) in addition to standard BPH medical treatment. They were evaluated before and after treatment using IPSS and IIEF-5 scoring system. Post-voiding residue (PVR) and maximal urine flow rate (Q-max) were also measured. Quantitative variables were compared using Anova test and qualitative variables were compared with Chi square and Friedman tests. Results: Of 12 patients who were included in this trial, nine completed the follow up. The mean IPSS was 15.78±7.9 at the beginning and 13.67±7.1 at the end of the study (p=0.1). The mean PVR was 35.33±21.7 before and 31.11±20.3 (p=0.8) after the procedure. This lack of statistically significant difference was also seen in the mean IIEF (9.89±3.6 before and 11.56±6.3 after, p=0.2) and mean Q-max (10.3±4.7 before and 14.7±6.1 after the study, p=0.1). The only significant difference was seen in the mean Quality of Life (QOL) rank which was 1.6 at the beginning and 2.5 at the end of the study (p=0.01). (PDEI5) to a-blockers, as a mean to increase pelvic organs perfusion has shown to increase the efficacy of a-blockers. However, the effect of PDEI5s as a sole treatment in atherosclerotic patients with urinary symptoms has not been studied before. In this trial we studied the effect of Tadalafil (PDEI5) in BPH patients with atherosclerosis. In this clinical trial, male patients with urinary symptoms attributable to BPH were assigned into two groups of high and low to moderate-risk coronary artery disease, based on Framingham criteria. Patients in each group were matched for age and other confounding variables and prescribed Tadalafil 5 mg daily for 12 weeks. Urinary Severity Symptom Score (IPSS) and its related quality of life, Post Void Residual volume (PVR) and Urinary max flow rate (Q-max) were measured before and during treatment at 4, 8 and 12 weeks. Results: Eighty-two patients enrolled in this study (50 high-risk and 32 low to moderate risk). Mean age was 57.3 ± 5.6 and 63.5 ± 6.7 years (P< 0.0001), in low and high risk group, respectively. Comparing IPSS scores reveals a gradual improvement through the end of treatment in both groups, however, the difference was not significant; first IPSS: (17.3±3.5 in low risk and 18±4.8 in high risk group, P=0.9), last IPSS: (12.6±3.4 in low risk and 12.8±2.9 in high risk group, P=0.4). Improvement in other parametres was also seen overtime but without significant difference in the 2 groups. Conclusion: Although prescribing Tadalafil improved our parameters, it didn't result in any significant difference between them in 2 groups of atherosclerosis severity. This may indicate that the severity of perfusion impairment induced by atherosclerosis overcomes the dilatory effect of PDEI5 medication. Introduction and Objectives: Both hypertension and lower urinary tract symptom (LUTS) are common conditions in the elderly population. This study investigated the efficacy and safety of silodosin in the treatment of LUTS in elderly men who were taking anti-hypertensive medications. This is an observational study which collected the medical records of patients who started silodosin medication for their LUTS between April 2015 and December 2015. Inclusion criteria were age ≥65 years, currently taking anti-hypertensive medication, and International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) ≥8. Pre-treatment evaluation included IPSS, Male Sexual Health Questionnaire, systemic symptoms, blood pressures, and uroflowmetry. Post-treatment evaluation was performed 3 months after the initial administration of silodosin medication. Results: Mean age of the total 48 patients was 70.7±5.2 years. Thirty-two (66.7%) patients who continued silodosin single treatment showed a significant decrease in IPSS scores (4.2±1.1 vs. 3.0±1.6, p=0.001) and an increase in the maximum flow rate (10.7±6.0 ml/sec vs. 14.0±4.5 ml/sec, p=0.001). Blood pressures did not change, and none of the patients needed to adjust their anti-hypertensive medication. New development of orthostatic hypotension was observed in one (2.5%) patient. Among the six patients who had orthostatic hypotension before silodosin treatment, none of the patients showed symptom aggravation. Ejaculatory dysfunction that required discontinuation of silodosin medication developed in only one (2.5%) patient. Silodosin is an effective and safe agent in elderly men who are taking anti-hypertensive medications. Silodosin has an advantage in the treatment of LUTS in this population, even if the patients have orthostatic hypotension before treatment. The In men, overactive bladder (OAB) symptoms may coexist with bladder out-let obstruction due to benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Recent studies showed the safety and efficacy of anticholinergics in men with lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS). We evaluated the efficacy of combination therapy using alpha blocker plus anticholinergic in initial treatment of both BPH and OAB, and the predictive factors were investigated. This study enrolled 195 patients with both BPH and OAB who were treated with alpha blocker (tamsulosin or alfuzosin) and anticholinergic (solifenacin) as an initial therapy. Inclusion criteria were: male, age 50 years or older, total International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) of 12 or higher, prostate volume of over 20cc and IPSS urgency score of 2 or higher for OAB. We measured the treatment efficacy, the clinical parameters and we examined the IPSS, the quality of life (QoL) score, three days of the voiding diaries, uroflowmetry and post-voiding residual (PVR) volume at baseline and after 12 weeks of treatment. The patients were divided into responders (including 'very satisfied' and 'somewhat satisfied') and non-responders on the Treatment Satisfaction Question. Results: Overall, 31 patients were lost to follow-up and dropped out, and the remaining 164 patients were followed up for 12 weeks after treatment. The mean IPSS, QoL score, micturitions per 24 hours, voided volume and peak flow rate were significantly improved after treatment (p<0.05). PVR volume increased slightly (from 39cc at baseline to 51cc at week 12) but not statistically or clinically significant (p=0.31). 125 patients (76%) were responders and 39 patients were non-responders. The prostate volume and initial voiding symptom score of the responders was significantly lower than that of the non-responders (30cc vs 37cc, p=0.02), (6.2 vs 9.9, p=0.04) and Qmax of the responders were higher than those of the non-responders (13.2ml/s vs 9.8ml/s, p=0.02). The most commonly reported adverse events were dry mouth (18%), constipation (6%) and dizziness (2%). Conclusion: Initial combination therapy of alpha blocker plus anticholinergic agent in men with BPH and OAB may be effective therapeutic option. Predictive baseline parameters for a good response were a smaller prostate volume, higher Qmax and lower voiding symptom score. Evaluation To evaluate the effect of silodosin (8 mg, once a day for 12 weeks) on benign prostatic obstruction (BPO) and lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) in men with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and non-responder to first treatment with selective alpha 1-blocker. Patients, non-responder to alpha 1-blocker (reporting IPSS improvement of less than 2 points under alfuzosin or tamsulosin during 8 weeks period), were enrolled. IPSS, suprapubic ultrasonography and uroflowmetry with post-void residual (PVR) urine volume were investigated. After 4 weeks of alpha-blocker medication, patients were reevaluated and divided into two groups. Treatment success was defined as an improvement in IPSS of 5 points or more; the non-responders are patients who reported improvement of less than 5 points or when developed acute urinary retention or those who demand surgical treatment. The primary outcome measure was a change in the IPSS, and the secondary outcome measures were changes in individual subjective symptom scores, quality of life score (QLS), and peak flow rate (Qmax) and PVR from baseline. The treatment response was monitored at 4, 8, and 12 weeks. Clinical parameters were compared before and after treatment. Results: Thirty-four patients were included in the study. The average age of the patients was 68.2 ± 9.1 (57-83) years. The prostate volume was 46.8±11.6 ml. The average treatment period with initial alpha-blocker was 4.6 ± 3.3 (2-10) months. They were under alfuzosin (n=6) or tamsulosin (n=28). Evolutionary data are reported in table I. At the end of the study, only 9 patients (26.5%) demand surgery. Conclusion: Silodosin showed significant efficacy in improvement in LUTS/BPH patients, non-responders to alpha-blocker, with good tolerability and minimum adverse effects. Silodosin may be indicated in non-responder to first alpha-blocker treatment. Patients with a reduction of IPSS ≤ 3 or dissatisfaction in TSQ after tamsulosin 0.2mg treatment for 4 weeks were decided to receive tamsulosin 0.4mg. The primary endpoint of this study was to assess the change in total IPSS and treatment satisfaction by flexible-dose tamsulosin at week 12. Secondary endpoints included the proportion of patients with escalation of tamsulosin dose from 0.2mg to 0.4mg, changes of IPSS quality of life (QoL) score, storage subscore and voiding subscore by flexible-dose tamsulosin, change of total IPSS in tamsulosin 0.4mg group, comparison of total IPSS at week 12 between tamsulosin 0.2mg group and 0.4mg group, and baseline factors affecting 0.4mg dose escalation. Safety assessments included adverse events. Results: One hundred and twenty one patients were enrolled and received tamsulosin 0.2mg. Ninety five patients completed the study, 52 (54.7%) in tamsulosin 0.2mg group and 43 (45.3%) in tamsulosin 0.4mg group. Total IPSS was significantly improved by flexible-dose tamsulosin in this study (P < 0.001). Satisfaction rate on 12 weeks flexible-dose tamsulosin treatment was 59% and dissatisfaction rate was 27.3%. IPSS QoL score, voiding subscore, and storage subscore were significantly improved by flexible-dose tamsulosin too. Total IPSS after 0.4mg dose escalation was significantly improved compared to IPSS before dose escalation in tamsulosin 0.4mg group. However, total IPSS changes from baseline to week 12 in tamsulosin 0.4mg group were lower than in 0.2mg group. Maximum uroflow rate was an independent factor affecting tamsulosin 0.4mg dose escalation. Most adverse events were mild, and none were severe. Conclusion: Without belittling the importance of chronic prostatitis, we would like to estimate this diagnosis as speculative in some cases. Patients with diagnosis chronic prostatitis are suitable for commercial medicine and unsuitable for municipal clinic. We believe multicenter study for evaluation of epidemiology of prostatitis is necessary. The Influence of Positioning in Urination Introduction and Objective: Uroflowmetry is frequently used and simple urodynamic test, but it may be affected by various factors, for example by voiding position -both in men and women. We compared the uroflowmetric parameters depending on sitting or standing positions during urination in men and women. On open prospective randomize study 72 men and 9 women were enrolled. All patients underwent an uroflowmetry in standing and sitting position; Mean maximum flow rate (Qmax), mean average flow rate (Qave), and duration of urination (t) were estimated.  Post The results of the symptom management after reducing therapy study suggest that after reduction, monotherapy using an alpha blocker may be feasible. However, withdrawal of dutasteride is not fully understood. The aim of this study was to identify predicting factors for the restarting medication after discontinuation of dutasteride. Between September 2010 and December 2015, 30 patients in who were treated with dutasteride by the diagnosis of benign prostatic hypertrophy and discontinued dutasteride were included in this retrospective study. In the groups of restarting and discontinuing dutasteride, patient's age, body mass index (BMI), International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS), QOL score, Overactive Bladder Symptom Score (OABSS), the duration of medication, prostate volume, the reduction rate of prostate volume, post-void residual urine volume (PVR) using transabdominal ultrasound, concomitant medication and comorbidities were evaluated. Although patients were followed for 12 months after cessation, patients were allowed to restart dutasteride during the follow-up period by their desire. Statistical analysis was carried out to identify clinical covariates significantly between restarting group and discontinuing group. Results: Six patients (6/30, 20%) restarted dutasteride for up to 12 months. Mean PVR before discontinuation of dutasteride was 79 ml (range 24 to 218) in the restarting group and 34ml (range 0 to 130) in the discontinuing group, respectively (p=0.0205). Mean duration of medication before discontinuation of dutasteride was 40 months (range 17 to 63) in the restarting group and 24 months (range 5 to 62) in the discontinuing group, respectively (p=0.0382). No significant differences in the patient characteristics were observed between restarting group and discontinuing group in other factors. Conclusions: This study indicated that PVR and the duration of medication before discontinuation of dutasteride were predictive factors for restarting dutasteride. Our present finding suggested that the possibility of the discontinuation or intermittent  Feasibility Study of a Trial of a Web-Based Self-Management Program for Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms (LUTS) We adapted the Emberton model of self-management of LUTS for a web-based delivery in place of the traditional classroom-based model. This pilot study was done to identify the characteristics of men most likely to enroll in a study of its efficacy. We identified a sample of men ages 45 through 74 years of age enrolled in the Kaiser Permanente Southern California health plan who did not have a history of prostate cancer or surgical treatment for benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Random samples of men with no prior diagnosis of BPH (n=2990), a diagnosis of BPH with no other treatment (n=779), or men with a diagnosis and history of treatment by medication only (n=794) were emailed a screening questionnaire that included the International Prostate Symptom Score. Men who reported moderate symptom severity ) were asked to provide informed consent for enrollment in the study. Results: Initial participation rates for the screening questionnaire were greatest among men who had prior medical treatment n=70 (9%). Those with a BPH diagnosis only n=54(7%) and those who had no history of BPH n=109 (4%) were lower. By contrast, among eligible men, participation rates were comparable across the three groups: 23/38 (61%); 13/20 (65%); 29/44 (66%), respectively. Enrolled participants in the BPH naive group were more likely to be younger and have less comorbidity (Table) ; whereas enrolled participants with a prior BPH diagnosis were more likely to be older with more comorbidity. Conclusion: These data demonstrate the ability to recruit men into a randomized trial of a web-based self-management program for LUTS. Men with prior experience with LUTS medications were much more likely to participate and while there were some differences between participants and non-participants, men with a variety of demographic and clinical characteristics would be included. Introduction and Objective: Uroflowmetry and simple non-invasive test, useful for a diagnosis of many diseases. However, uroflowmetric parameters may depend on various factors, including voiding position. We tried to compare the uroflowmetric parameters in sitting and standing positions during urination.  Introduction and Objective: The Surelift system is a versatile mesh with 6 anchor points. The present study evaluates its efficacy and safety after a mean follow-up of 5 years. It is a retrospective study conducted between January 2010 and December 2016, a total of 43 women. They were operated through the SURELIFT system (Neomedic Int., Spain). Of these, 27 were operated on anterior wall prolapse and another 16 on apical prolapse. In 44.2% (19/44) a tension free suburethral mesh was also placed. Postoperative regional pain and patient satisfaction were assessed using a questionnaire. In cases that were considered necessary, a urodynamic study was performed at any time of follow-up. Mean age: 68.2 (range 53-81), mean parity: 2.2 (range 1-4), mean BMI: 26.1 ± 1.6. A 41.8% (18 cases) had a urogynecological surgical history (7 anterior colporraphy, 15 hysterectomy and 5 TOT without tension). Results: After a mean follow-up of 36 months (6-78) a subjective cure of 92.4% and objective (anatomical) of 90.1% was achieved in patients with anterior prolapse. Likewise, in the cases of apical prolapse, subjective and objective cure rates of 80.2 and 77% were obtained. No patient had stress incontinence after the operation. Eight women (18.6%) had to receive parasympatholytics due to urgency incontinence. 39/43 (90.7%) of patients were satisfied or very satisfied with the operation. Complications: postoperative pain 5, dyspareumia 3 and vaginal erosions 2. The Surelift system is a high quality macropore polypropylene mesh with 6 anchoring points. Harpoon anchoring is safe and effective. The possibility of being cut and adapted to the particular anatomy of each patient helps to achieve high elevated rates of clinical and anatomical healing. The existence of 6 fixation points favors this placement and allows, if necessary, trim a pair of said arms to get the correct adaptation to the anatomy of each patient. The repair of the previous prolapse with the SURELIFT system is effective in terms objectively and subjectively without relapses of the POP and without limited complications. Pregnancy Results: During the study period, six patients were pregnancy among 57 residents at the center "OASIS" means .the age of our patients in pregnancy was 26.66 years, ranging from 21 to 33 years. The age of the fistula was eight months in two patients, between 8 and 12 months in three patients and more than one year in one patient. The author of the pregnancy was the husband in three cases, two cases outside marriage, and if the author is unknown. The anatomical and topographic type of fistula has not changed in any case, it was kind of fistula IIAB (partial avulsion cervical-urethral) in four patients, and type I (vesicovaginal wall in two patients). Cesarean section was performed in all patients of our systematic way in collaboration with the obstetrics and gynecology department. The occurrence of pregnancy on obstetric fistula is a reality in our regions, whose complications can be devastating if support is not rigorous. This prospective study was done on patients undergoing operation for urogenital fistula to review its aetiology which has changed dramatically over the last few decades in Bangladesh. Result: The mean operative period was 1.3 hours ranging from 45 minutes to 1.8 hours. The interval between the occurrence of fistula and its repair ranged from 4 months to 29 years. The mean hospital stay was 6.5 days ranging from 5 to 8 days. Analysis of the aetiology revealed 71.42% cases followed hysterectomy, 21.42% cases followed birth trauma and 7.14% followed caesarean section. The success rate of the series was almost 90%. The major cause of the female urogenital fistula in Bangladesh was birth trauma due to lack of nationwide effective and efficient maternal care. Due to the improvement in maternal care system from the later part of the last century the contributing factor in the aetiology of female urogenital fistula has shifted drastically from obstetric to iatrogenic. Prognostic Table 1 shows the percentage of patients affected with autoimmune/ chronic inflammatory disorders per group. Conclusions: A mid-urethral transobturator sling achieves very good continence rates. When stratifying by secondary diagnoses, the presence of a chronic inflammatory disorder, local or systemic, seems to be an independent risk factor for surgical failure. A re-adjustable sling may be a better option than a TOT for this group of patients. It is hypothesized that the material induces an acute inflammatory response, which leads to constructive remodelling and material integration, but when an excessive inflammatory reaction is given, patient's tissues and/or the synthetic material may be damaged, leading to a mechanical failure of native tissue erosion. The results shown in our study may support this theory, having a higher failure rate of the gold standard procedure for stress urinary incontinence in women with autoimmune or chronic inflammatory disorders. Alternative Therapy for Acute Uncomplicated Cystitis in Women Introduction and Objective: Acute uncomplicated cystitis in female patients is one of the most frequently diagnosis, which basically is considered as an indication for prescription of antibiotic. As cystitis is often recurrent disease, women take some courses of antibiotics annually. It leads to the selection of resistant strains and increases development of side effects. The purpose was to evaluate the efficiency of non-antibacterial treatment for acute uncomplicated cystitis in female patients. In pilot open non-comparable prospective study 17 women in age of 18 -28 (22.4 on average) were enrolled. Including criteria were: diagnosis acute uncomplicated cystitis, non-pregnant sexually-active women in reproductive age, using optimal contraception, agreement to participate study; visit to a doctor for 12 hours from the beginning the disease. Excluding criteria were: using condom / spermicide, menopause, intake even one dose of any antibiotic due to any reason during 10 days before study participation; symptoms of pyelonephritis, any complicated factors, duration of the disease more than 12 hours. All patients received unique therapy: non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug ketoprofen (flamax forte) 100 mg once a day for 5 days and canephron 2 tablets thrice a day during one month. Control visits were in 2 days to estimate whether indications for antibiotic developed, in 7 days to estimate the result of the therapy and in 1 and 6 months -to evaluate a frequency of relapses. In three patients (17.6%) symptoms had no tendency to improvement, so antibiotics were prescribed to them. These patients were excluded in study. The rest 14 patients showed significant improvement and they continued the therapy with flamax and canephron only. In 7 days 12 patients (85.7%) had no dysuria and leucocyturia; it was the reason to consider them as cured. In two patients (14.3%) after 6 days of the therapy insignificant dysuria and leucocyturia were found. All 14 patients continued the intake of canephron to prevent a relapse. A month later, at the end of the reception of canephron, all patients were well-being. In six month none relapse was diagnosed. Conclusion: Non-antibacterial therapy with non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug in combination with phytodrug canephron was effective for acute uncomplicated cystitis in 82.4%: in 85.7% it shows good results, and in 14.3% 0 moderate results. None relapses there were after this therapy. Sexual Debut as a Base for Sexual Life These women were divided on 3 groups: 1st group -26 patients were treated for recurrent cystitis with standard therapy and continue contraception with condom, 2nd group -31 patients, who after standard therapy changed contraception on oral pills, and 3rd group -32 patients, who changed contraception on oral pills and took phytotherapy (canephron) for one month and repeated course in 3 months. Follow up was 6 months. Results: In 1st group relapse in 6 months was in 43.3%, and in 26.9% -twice. In 2nd group relapse was in 25.8%, in 12.9% -twice. Best results were in 3rd group -relapse of cystitis occurred in 15.6% only, and none patient had relapse twice. Conclusion: Barrier contraception predisposed to recurrent course of cystitis, and oral contraceptives reduced a risk of a relapse twice, additional intake of canephron -in three times. The History of Peyronie' However, in 1743, Lapeyronie's description of a rosary-bead-pattern of induration along the cavernous bodies would change the name of the disease forever (despite its incorrect shortening to Peyronie). The aetiology of Peyronie's disease remains unknown. It is thought to occur due to a wound healing disorder occurring after trauma in predisposed men. However, many previous postulations have existed. Heraclius' unfortunate urination was attributed to numerous incestuous relationships. Others theorised that the frigidity of the post-menopausal partner was the cause, or shockingly that the "annoying" resistance of a partner during forceful penetration was to blame. Lapeyronie associated the disease with venereal infection, but noted that treating one did not treat the other. Peyronie's was so common in wounded soldiers requiring penile transfusion, that a vascular cause was also postulated. Historical treatments include mercury or milk, intralesional injections, and even the suggestion by Lapeyronie himself of bathing in the holy waters of Barèges. Surgical treatments such as plaque excision or repositioning were described as early as the 19th century, before techniques by Nesbit and Lue gained popularity. We have discussed Peyronie's disease from Byzantine to eponymous description, from unknown aetiology to unknown aetiology, and from divine intervention to current surgical management. History of the History dates its use as early as 1500 BC using materials such as bronze tubes, reeds, straw and curled up palm leaves to relieve urinary retention. Later, gold, silver, brass, lead and copper were used. Malleable silver tubes with side holes were subsequently used and Benjamin Franklin used the malleability and presumed antiseptic property of silver to design a catheter for his brother who suffered from urinary retention. Coude-tip catheters entered the field in the 18th/19th century. [1] . It was based on Veterans Administration randomised study. In 2004 Gleason Grading system was endorsed by WHO. In this presentation we discuss the history of Gleason Grading system and its future directions. We performed a literature search on Gleason Grading system from 1960 till present date. Thousands of articles were found and we selected only the full text articles with Gleason Grading system as main focus of discussion. We have chosen Gleason Grading system as it is a landmark prostate cancer grading system which influenced treatment decision and is also still evolving. The 19th century finally saw the development of an alternative surgical technique -litholopaxy. Bigelow, who progressed this crushing procedure, described a fall in mortality rate to 2.4% from 25% in his 1878 paper 'Lithotrity by a single operation' . The early part of the 20th century saw increasing use of Nitze's cystoscopy and lithotripsy internally with electrohydraulics. This was followed by extracorporeal shockwaves (ESWL) which finally provided a non-invasive technique. We report the transformation of stone management from a highly dangerous procedure to the simple procedures we take for granted today. Sonourethrography in the Evaluation of the Male Urethra for Assessment of Urethral Stricture: Single Institution Study Panackal A, Jayagurunathan U, Sellamuthu E Introduction and Objective: Radiographic retrograde urethrography has traditionally been the preferred technique used by urologists to image the urethra. Since originally described by McAninch in 1988, ultrasonic imaging of the urethra has evolved into a powerful and clinically useful tool for the accurate delineation of urethral pathology. The aim of our study was to evaluate urethral stricture using high resolution ultrasound (sonourethrography) and to detect degree of spongiofibrosis and correlate with surgical findings. A total of 80 male patients between age group 20 to 65 years with symptoms of lower urinary tract obstruction underwent sonourethrography (SUG), between 2013 and 2015 in the department of urology. The findings of sonourethrography are compared with the findings of cystoscopy and intra-operative findings. Result: Most of the patients presented with thin stream of urine (90%), followed by straining on micturition (60%). Etiologically, the commonest cause for stricture was found to be traumatic which was seen in 43% cases followed by previous surgery in 25% and infective in 18% cases. No cause could be detected in 14% cases. All strictures were evaluated and treated cystoscopically with visual internal urethrotomy (64%) or at open operation (36%), which allowed comparison of the ability of each study to predict operative stricture length. Anterior urethral strictures were found in majority of cases 70 followed by calculi 6 cases and diverticuli 4 cases on sonourethrography with sensitivity and specificity of 98.5% and 90.9% respectively. The most common site involved was bulbar urethra 53.3 % followed by penile in 33.  Correlation between Multiparametric MRI (PI-RADS V2) and the New Prostate Cancer (Pca) Grading System of Pathological Specimen in Robotic-Assisted Laparoscopic Radical Prostatectomy (RALP) Introduction and Objectives: The use of Multiparametric MRI (mpMRI) and the introduction of PI-RADS v.2 have changed dramatically the diagnosis and the management of PCa. Otherwise, a new PCa grading system has been described in order to reduce the overtreatment and simplify the classification of the prostate cancer pathology. The aim of our study is to evaluate the correlation between these novel classifications (mpMRI PIRADS V2 and the new PCa grading system) in our serie of robotic-assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomies (RALP). We retrospectively analyzed our serie of 103 patients who underwent a RALP between January 2015 and September 2016 in our center. All patients were diagnosed with clinically significant prostate cancer (according to Epstein Criteria). A mpMRI was performed before the surgery in 56 of the 103 patients included, six of them had important artefacts due to a prior transrectal biopsy. All mpM-RI were performed using a 1.5 T system with external antennal and data were reviewed according PI-RADS v2 by expert uroradiologists. Pathological specimens were classified according the new PCa grading system: grade 1: Gleason 6 (3+3), grade 2: Gleason 7 (3+4), grade 3: Gleason 7 (4+3), grade 4: Gleason 8 (4+4) and grade 5: Gleason 9-10. Statistical data was achieved with SPSS v.20: The agreement between the mpMRI and PCGS was measured by the kappa concordance coefficient (KCC). Hypothesis testing was performed using the chi square test and the Fisher's exact test. Conclusions: According to our results, mpMRI has a high level of accuracy detecting clinically significant prostate cancer. mpMRI is a reliable tool to establish the status of extracapsular extension. The association between PIRADS 4-5 and Grades 2 or higher is confirmed. Risk-Stratified Pre-Biopsy mpMRI: A Realistic and Sustainable Approach? Introduction and Objective: Multiparametric MRI (mpMRI) is widely used for local staging of prostate cancer (PCa); however, increasingly mpMRI is utilised as a diagnostic tool pre-biopsy. NICE and EAU recommend mpMRI for patients managed on active surveillance (AS), for local staging, and before a second biopsy. This causes significant demand for mp-MRIs; we investigate the feasibility of introducing a protocol driven service for pre-biopsy mpMRIs. One hundred and sixty one patients had a first TRUSS biopsy between January 2014 and April 2015 were retrospectively evaluated with ≥20 months follow up. Results: One hundred and forty two patients had a PSA <50, a T1/2/3 DRE, and were <80 years old. Those with a PSA >50, T4 DRE or >80 years would unlikely benefit from mpMRI. Our proposed inclusion criteria for pre-biopsy mpMRI were PSA 10-49.9 or T2/3 DRE. This would result in 83/142 having a pre-biopsy mpMRI. The outcome of the 59 remaining patients was analysed. Twenty six subsequently had an mpMRI for staging or active surveillance. This leaves 33 patients, 17 were diagnosed with PCa; 4 had radical treatment for Gleason 6, and 4 went on AS. Sixteen had benign biopsies; 12 were discharged and 4 continued PSA surveillance. Therefore, 16/161 (10%) (4 Gleason 6 having radical treatment; 12 benign patients discharged) had unnecessary mpMRIs. Considering current pressures on resources, a risk-stratified approach does not significantly increase requirements based on NICE guidance. Our data, when considering further mpMRIs required after risk-stratification suggests only those having active treatment for Gleason 6 or those discharged following benign biopsies have unnecessary mpMRIs. The Significance of Bladder Filling during Computerized Tomography in the Diagnosis of Bladder Rupture Oh TH 1 , Choi S 2 , Bae YG 3 Introduction and Objective: Computerized tomography (CT) is the method of choice for establishing patients with abdominal and/or pelvic trauma. However, the sensitivity of CT for detecting bladder rupture has been questioned. We investigated the roles of CT as the initial evaluation of abdominal and pelvic trauma in diagnosis of bladder rupture. We reviewed the medical records and radiographs of 93 patients with bladder rupture for last 10 years. And among them, all radiographs of 60 patients who underwent both CT and retrograde cystography were evaluated independently by two urologists who had no knowledge of the final diagnosis. Results: Among 60 patients, all of patients were correctly diagnosed by retrograde cystography, but the CT diagnosis was correct in only 46 patients (76.7%), who were 37 patients (80.4%) with showed the intraperitoneal rupture and 9 patients (19.6%) with extraperitoneal rupture. And of the 14 patients (23.3%) who were negatively by the CT, all showed the sign id inadequate bladder distention. If properly performed with adequate bladder filling, CT is sensitive for detection of bladder injuries as conventional cystography. Especially, in trauma patients with hematuria and suspected other organ injury, CT-cystography with bladder filling may be as accurate as conventonal cystography and obviate the need for an additional cystography. Introduction and Objectives: Testicular trauma is relatively uncommon and management aims to prevent organ loss. In this paper, we discuss the difference between testicular rupture and testicular fracture with regards to pathophysiology, radiological appearance and clinical management. We reviewed testicular trauma cases at our tertiary trauma centre and performed a review of available English language literature to describe and differentiate between testicular rupture and testicular fracture. Results: Blunt testicular injuries accounts for 85% of all testicular traumas. Ultrasound findings can range from scrotal haematoma or haematocele to testicular rupture or fracture. Testicular rupture is more commonly reported, whilst testicular fracture is quoted more rarely. Testicular rupture represents the disruption of the tunica albuginea, whilst testicular fracture is a 'break' in the testicular parenchyma. The two pathologies can occur in synchrony. Management should always be tailored to the specific injuries. Testicular rupture is best managed by scrotal exploration and repair of the tunica albuginea to improve the chances of testicular function preservation. In contrast, testicular fracture can be managed conservatively when there is Introduction and Objective: Cowper's syringoceles are uncommon, usually described in children and most commonly limited to the ducts. We describe more complex variants in an adult population affecting, with varying degrees of severity, the glands themselves and the complications they may lead to. One hundred consecutive urethrograms of patients with strictures, who may or may not have had endoscopic intervention but not urethroplasty, were reviewed. Twenty six patients with Cowper's syringoceles who were managed in our unit between 2009 and 2016 were then evaluated. Mean age was 41.1 years (19 -63years). Presentation, radiological appearance, treatment (when indicated) and outcomes were assessed. Results: Of the 100 urethrograms in patients with strictures, 33% demonstrated filling of Cowper's ducts or glands to some extent. This was seen twice as commonly on the ascending study and occurred predominantly in patients with bulbar strictures. Only 1 of 26 patients with non-bulbar strictures had a visible duct/ gland. Previous urethrotomy/ dilatation made no difference to the incidence of the positivity for duct/ gland nor did stricture length and tightness. Of the 26 patients with symptoms, 15 presented with poor flow. In 4, a grossly dilated Cowper's duct obstructed the urethra on urethrogram. In the remaining 11 a bulbar stricture was the cause of symptoms and syringocele identified as an incidental finding. Eight patients presented with perineal pain. In 6, fluoroscopy and MRI revealed complex multi-cystic lesions within the bulbo-urethral glands in continuity with the dilated ducts. Four patients presented with perineo-scrotal abscesses, one of whom had a chronically discharging perineal sinus. In the 11 with urethral strictures, the syringocele was no longer visible after urethroplasty. In 3 of 4 patients, obstructive symptoms secondary to a grossly dilated Cowper's duct resolved after transperineal excision (n=2) and endoscopic de-roofing (n=1). The fourth patient, with mild symptoms, was managed conservatively. Five of 6 patients with large complex syringoceles involving Cowper's glands were managed by surgical excision with symptomatic relief in all. Cowper's syringocele in adults may be more common than previously thought and may be a cause of lower urinary tract symptoms or be associated with serious complications which usually require surgical treatment. One  Introduction and Objectives: MRI is a helpful imaging adjunct especially in complex cases of PFUI, which includes patients with long gaps, floating bone chips, and rectourethral fistula and bladder neck injury. Conventionally radiologists perform MRI on an empty bladder. The aim of this study was to evaluate the urethral gap via MRI using a new point of technique. From 1996 to 2016 1064 cases of PFUI have been seen at our institution with about 10% being complex. MRI was routinely acquired by for complex PFUI by radiologists using traditional protocol involving IV contrast. We formulated a technique where the images were obtained without giving IV contrast and using urine as a natural MRI contrast. Ten consecutive cases of complex pelvic fracture urethral injuries were prospectively evaluated with the new MRI protocol. First, a T2 image acquisition was performed. Urethral gap measurements by 4 radiologists were recorded for each case. A second T2 image acquisition was performed with patient lying on the table with a full bladder, SPC clamped, straining to pass urine post administration of Tamsulosin while at the same time a premixed solution of saline and lubricating jelly is instilled in the urethra. The bladder was filled physiologically prior to the study. Urethral gap assessments were repeated using the same 4 radiologists. Additionally, 4 urologists were shown images from each phase of the study and their visual score was recorded -very satisfactory (4), satisfactory (3), disappointed (2) and extremely disappointed (1). Conclusion: The described novel technique of MR assessment of urethral gap in PFUI shows promising results and is true reflection of the actual urethral gap which helps in planning surgical approach. The simple modification of having a full bladder,and straining (dynamic images) helps to mimic a conventional VCUG and RGU along with advantages of MRI. We examined whether VR and hologram technology are useful in urological surgery, especially robotic surgery. We studied whether navigation surgery using VR and hologram technology is possible in five each cases of robotic partial nephrectomy and robotic prostatectomy. By using the technique of VR, this VIVE improves space recognition by displaying the organ and the resected area with a size that surrounds the surroundings of the surgeon, so that the positional relationship can be experienced throughout the body. Moreover, it has a head-mounted display and a wireless controller, and we can operate it ourselves freely. For the hologram, MR technology using a head mount called a Hololens developed by Microsoft was applied. That is, CG images were superimposed on the patient's body, and anatomical navigation was performed. Results: VR and MR contributed to shortening of resection time and reduction of bleeding volume in partial nephrectomy as compared with previous surgery. The surgical margin was negative in all cases of kidney cancer surgery. No complications such as leakage of urine from the urinary tract were observed. Using VIVE, the depth, the three-dimensional feeling and the immersive feeling of organ dissection were more intuitively understood than before. Therefore, it was easy to intuitively recognize the positional relationship with the feeding vessels of the tumor and the renal calyx, and there was an advantage to compensate for the lack of touch of da Vinci. Since VR made it possible to navigate in a three-dimensional space, a sense close to da Vinci's 3D viewing monitor was ob- MR assessment of urethral gap with usual protocol T2 image standard protocol New images with our modified protocol of full blader and jelly in urethra tained. In prostatectomy, we could intuitively understand the deep depth of the pelvis by seeing it around. Specifically, it helped to confirm the angle of resection and understand the positional relation with the ureter in the cases of middle lobe proliferation protruding into the bladder. By making the image of the blood vessel transparent, the accuracy of pelvic lymph node dissection was improved. The VR and MR surgical navigation provided better understanding of depth perception for understanding intra-pelvic anatomy than conventional image guidance on the flat monitor in robotic and open urological surgery. Is a Contemporary Management Algorithm Possible for Atypical Small Acinar Proliferation and High Grade Prostatic Intraepithelial Neoplasia in the Era of The Multi-Parametric MRI? Introduction and Objective: Multiparametric Magnetic Resonance Imaging (mpMRI) is now an established investigation for the diagnosis and surveillance for organ confined prostate cancer. Atypical small acinar proliferation (ASAP) and high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) are premalignant prostatic lesions. Guidelines regarding diagnosis and surveillance of these lesions are contentious. The aim is to perform a comprehensive review of current evidence regarding ASAP, HGPIN and mpMRI to ascertain a consensus for a current management algorithm. Comprehensive contemporary review of medical literature was undertaken in line with PRISMA recommendations by two separate authors. Articles pertaining to ASAP, HGPIN and mpMRI were assessed and included in the review if relevant. Discrepancies were resolved between authors prior to formal assessment. Results: Contemporary evidence regarding the aetiology, natural history, suiveillance and management of ASAP and HGPIN is limited. As such, the use of mpMRI in the management and surveillance of diagnosed ASAP and HGPIN lesions remain unclear also. More comparative studies with subsequent histopathological data and patient follow up is required. Overall, the key for mpMRI utility in premalignant lesions may lie in interval change on serial mpMRI. The management of such lesions remains contentious, and the addition of mpMRI introduces further uncertainty given its ability to pick up indolent lesions and its use in targeted biopsy. A complete management algorithm is not possible at this stage. With the continued accumulation of evidence and consequent resolution of key dilemmas this may be plausible in the future. We aimed to assess the feasibility and potential advantages of a system that displays 3D reconstructed medical imaging parallel to the 3D images displayed in the surgeon console of robotic assisted surgery. Patients selected as appropriate cases were those with previous surgery, endophytic renal masses or complex anatomy. DICOM images from patient's radiology were used to create 3D reconstructions of targeted sites. Two types of operation groups were investigated: Partial nephrectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection. Prostate specific membrane antigen PET positive sites were used as localisers for 3D reconstruction for the latter. A single surgeon, experienced in robot-assisted laparoscopic surgery, completed cases with 3D reconstructions visible in the surgeon console unit and was surveyed following their completion to assess ease of use of the parallel images and their utility in the cases. Results: Marriage of the DaVinci system and external 3D reconstructed images was successfully achieved. The 3D reconstructed images were used successfully in both cases to create a parallel series of images that could be viewed during surgery through the DaVinci console. These images could be manipulated throughout the cases to mimic the orientation of in-vivo structures. The operating surgeon expressed satisfaction with the 3D images and stated that intraoperative localization of disease sites and decisions for operative technique were improved compared to cases without 3D adjuncts. The marriage of 3D reconstructs to real-time 3D images seen in robotic cases has definite potential benefits. Reconstructed 3D Images afford the operating surgeon the ability to improve localization of sites of interest and improve the surgical experience. This technology is not limited to robotic consoles and may also prove beneficial in laparoscopic surgery where pathology is difficult to localize. One to One Correlation of Needle-Based Optical Coherence Tomography with Histopathology: A Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis in 20 Prostatectomy Specimens Introduction and Objective: Prostate cancer treatment is shifting from radical to focal therapy. Instant tumor visualization on a microscopic level is crucial for clinical application of focal therapy. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is a light-based imaging technique that facilitates instant three-dimensional tissue visualization on a µm scale down to ~2mm depth. The probe fits trough a needle and images can be analyzed be eye and quantitatively by signal analysis. The objective is to define diagnostic accuracy of needle-based OCT for prostate cancer detection in a cohort of 20 patients. Twenty prostates were analyzed by needle-based OCT after radical prostatectomy. For precise correlation, whole mount histology slides were cut through the OCT trajectory. An uropathologist analyzed and annotated tissue types in the prostate on these slides. OCT data were precisely fused with histopathology slides; thus, histopathology of every OCT image was known. OCT images were classified in histological categories. Two reviewers independently scored the OCT images into these categories. Sensitivity and specificity for detection of malignancy on OCT were calculated. Analysis of light scattering properties was performed by automated calculation of the attenuation coefficient (the decay of light in depth) and the residue, a difference of the fitted and the measured signal, as a measure of inhomogeneity. Results: Visual analysis assessment showed that with OCT the reviewers could reliably differentiate malignancy from fat, cystic atrophy, regular atrophy and benign glands. Differentiation of malignancy from stroma and inflammation is less successful. Sensitivity and specificity for visual detection of malignancy on OCT were calculated to be 83% and 85%. Quantitative analysis of the light attenuation coefficient for differentiation between stroma and malignancy showed no significant difference with an AUC of 0.67. The residue of the fitted signals correlated with the malignancy, resulting in an AUC of 0.80. Conclusion: Precise correlation of histology and OCT is essential to understand what we see and measure on OCT. Visual malignancy detection has reasonable sensitivity and specificity. Quantitative malignancy detection is promising. Future studies will focus on increasing malignancy detection in the prostate by improving quantitative analysis and by combining additional optical imaging modalities. Introduction and Objective: In our 2006 study, we presented reliability of Cellphone "Multimedia Messaging Service" (MMS) transmitted uro-radiographic images for referral of emergency urological conditions. In our 2014 study, we established reliability of Smartphone application "WhatsApp Messaging" transmitted endoscopic images for intra-operative tele-referrals. In this present 2017 study, we aim to determine reliability of Smartphone application "Viber Messaging" transmitted radiologic, cystoscopic and ureteroscopic images for "online urology tele-conferencing. " Materials and Methods: Radiologic, cystoscopic and ureteroscopic images of urologic procedure being performed intra-operatively by attending urologist were photographed with Smartphones and transmitted online (using "Wi-Fi, Mobile data or Data connection" Smartphone technology) through "Viber Messaging, " a cross-platform instant messaging application. Accompanied with brief patient history, physical examination findings and results of imaging studies, the images photographed were shared online exclusively with the six urology consultants of our Department. To protect confidentiality, no information that identifies a patient was disclosed. The urology consultants were consulted via "online urology tele-conferencing" through "Viber Messaging" if they "Agree" or "Disagree" with the planned management of attending urologist currently performing endoscopy. Results: A total of thirty-eight radiologic, cystoscopic and ureteroscopic images were photographed by Smartphones and transmitted through "Viber Messaging" by the respective attending urologist performing endoscopy. A total of 158 replies were received respectively by the five other urology consultants of our Department. The other urology consultants replied to the attending urologist doing cystoscopy or ureteroscopy with a "Viber text reply" or a "Viber heart icon. " Using their respective Smartphones, the urology consultants transmitted "Agree" in 132 (83.5%) of replies and transmitted "Disagree" in 26 (16.5%) of replies. There was significant agreement (p < 0.0001) in the planned management of attending urologist with the other urology consultants of our Department. The "online urology tele-conferencing" agreed consensus among urology consultants assisted the attending urologist in his planned treatment. Conclusion: Our present 2017 study showed that the Smartphone application "Viber Messaging" transmitted radiologic, cystoscopic and ureteroscopic images for "online urology tele-conferencing" is reliable. This was demonstrated by the significant agreement of urology consultants of our Department with the planned management of attending urologist performing the endoscopic procedure. Prostate Cancer Heterogeneity: Texture Analysis of Multiple mpMRI Sequences for Detection and Stratification at Time of Biopsy Orczyk C 1 , Villers A 2 , Rusinek H 3 , Fohlen A 4 , Bazille C 4 , Mikheev A 3 , Samuel V 5 1 Introduction and Objective: To develop and test in a biopsy population a texture analysis score, entropy score, based on analysis of multiple MRI sequences and derivatives for detection and stratification of prostate cancer in view of selection of MRI targets for biopsy. Volume of Interest (Vois) were retrospectively generated from 20 consecutive patients who underwent a clinical 1.5T mpMRI (T2WI, DWI with ADC map and DCE WI) at time of biopsy. Vois comprised zonal anatomy segmentation, normal peripheral zone and transition zone, biopsy targets and cancer. Reference standard for correlation was cognitive targeted biopsy and systematic saturation biopsy. As Order 1 texture analysis, calibrated Entropy (E) for each imaging feature was computed and plotted as a multiparametric score defined as Entropy Score (ES)= E ADC+ E Ktrans + E Ve+ E T2WI. Area Under the Curve (AUC) calculations were performed for significant cancer (pattern 4 and/or more than 3 mm of cancer). Correlation to Gleason Score (GS) and Maximum Cancer Length (MCL) were calculated using Pearson and Spearman. Results: Cancer (GS 6-8) was found in 12 of the 20 patients with a median PSA of 8.22ng/ml. ES performed respectively an AUC of 0.89 and 0.88 for detection of significant cancer among the 34 Vois for targets and cancer and all segmented Vois. Best estimated threshold for the ES of 16.61 NAT led to a sensitivity of 100% and negative predictive value of 100%. Under this threshold, 52% of score 3 targets wouldn't have been selected for sampling. AUC for ES trended to be higher than each of its component. Significant cancer (ES=17.96 ±0.72 NAT; CI 95%) showed a significant higher ES than non-significant cancer (ES=15.33 ±0.76 NAT; CI 95%)). ES positively correlated with Gleason Score (rs =0.5683, p=0.033) and MCL (p=0.781; p=0.0009). Conclusion: Texture analysis with ES performed high performances for detection and stratification of significant prostate cancer in this pilot biopsy population with potential to select accurately MRI targets for biopsy. Introduction and Objective: Lead gowns have evolved over the decades with manufacturers striving to create a lightweight product that maintains adequate protection from radiation. It has been shown that the added weight of protective gowns can cause chronic musculoskeletal stress for users (1, 2) . We aimed to audit the variation in weight of available protective outerwear options at four hospitals in Melbourne. UP.181, Figure 1 . ROC Curves for Detection of Significant Cancer Using Entropy Score and Each of Its Component within the MRI Target and Cancer VOIS (B Analysis) Materials and Methods: Across four sites lead gowns were weighed. Gowns were identified as small, medium, large or extra large according to manufacturers tagged sizing. Two types of gowns were identified; one piece apron or two pieces vest and skirt. Both designs require the additional thyroid guard. A single person was weighed without the gowns, with separate individual items and then all components. This process was repeated three times and the average weight recorded. The results were then compared using an unpaired t test. Results: Table 1 reports the recorded weights of the outerwear. Age of the garmets was not able to be scertained. The weight of the three piece set weiged a minimum of 3.98kg and can be up to 7kg. A butchers apron two piece set weighed a minimum of 2.7kg and up to 4kg. When compared with large cross back butchers apron, the large three piece skirt and vest set was heavier (p=0.035). Conclusion: Some theatres are stocked with old equipment, that is heavier, to supplement newer technology to meet demand. We fownd that the apron style garment is lighter than the three piece set. Surgeon ergonomics is often a part of health and safety that is forgotten and although the use of lead gowns is unavoidable for protection against radiation, hospitals should be phasing out older, heavier gowns as soon as possible in favour for newer lighter technology in order to attenuate work related musculoskeletal stress. Extracorporeal Shock Wave Therapy as a Diagnostic Method for Latent Chronic Prostatitis Introduction and Objective: Basically patients with chronic prostatitis have abacterial disease, but in some cases antibiotics are often effective. We supposed that in fact these patients have latent bacterial prostatitis which cannot be diagnosed by standard methods. Twenty three patients with chronic pelvic pain syndrome (CPPS) with signs of inflammation (chronic prostatitis category III-a) were enrolled in study. All patients had at least 15 scores of National Institutes of Health Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index (NIH-CPSI), all had ≥15 leucocytes in expressed prostatic secretion (EPS) and all had no growth of any microflora in EPS as well as polimerase chain reaction (PCR) on sexually transmitted infection and M.tuberculosis (Mtb) was negative. All underwent extracorporeal shock-wave therapy (ESWT) with the Dorier Aries ® (Dornier MedTech GmbH, Germany) using smart focus technology by the following protocol: Two procedures per week, three weeks for a course of total 6 procedures. Parameters of ESWT were as follows: energy level 5-7 (according to individual sensitivity), energy density 0.056-0.085 mJ/mm2, 4000 -5000 shock waves per procedure (according to individual sensitivity). In three weeks EPS microscopy and bacteriology, PCR of EPS were repeatedly measured. Results: ESWT was well tolerated, where 19 patients approved to go up to the 7th level of energy, and four patients up to level 6. Directly after 3 weeks, after finishing the ESWT, there was no significant change in the NIH-CPSI scores, although we have found some positive tendencies in domains "pain" and "quality of life". Leucospermia increased twice: initially average number of white blood cells in EPS was 22.5, after . In 18 patients the growth of microbes in EPS was found: E.Coli -in 9, Enterobacter spp -in 6, Staphylococcus spp -in 6, microbial association -in 3 patients. In 4 patients Mycoplasma genitalium was found by PCR, in 3 -Ch. Trachomatis, in 2 -M.tuberculosis. In seven patients prostatolithiasis was revealed, but concomitant renal stone disease was not diagnosed. In 5 patients among them (71.4%) the disintegration of prostatic calculi occurred after course of ESWT, confirmed by transrectal ultrasound investigation. In fact CPPS / chronic prostatitis category III-a is often latent underdiagnosed bacterial prostatitis. ESWT allows revealing a latent infection and inflammation in 78.3%, including prostate tuberculosis. ESWT provides a disintegration of calculi of a prostate, that may be one more reason for the efficacy of the shockwave treatment for this indication. The Microbial Spectrum in Hospitalized UTI Patients in Two Siberian Clinics Novosibirsk Research TB Institute, Novosibirsk Medical University, Novosibirsk, Russia; 2 Altay Medical University, Barnaul, Russia Introduction and Objectives: Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are about the most common diseases in hospitals. Result of the therapy for UTIs often is poor, recurrent course is in more the half of cases. One of the reasons is inappropriate antibacterial treatment: first, the prevalence of drug resistance is higher, and second, the antibiotic is inactive to the infection agent. E.Coli is considered as the most common cause for UTI, and all empiric therapy is aimed against E.Coli. Insufficient results compel to think about another cause of infection. The aim of this study was to analyze the urine cultures performed at two Siberian hospitals (in Novosibirsk and Barnaul), during five years (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) for estimation the dynamic of microbial spectrum. We analyzed total of 714 aerobic urine cultures. Results: Proportion of microbes was instable, but Gram-negative microflora predominated with maximal part in 2009 (84.7%) and minimal in 2011 (35.0%). Among Gram-negative microflora E.Coli was found in 37.1% -70.4%, Klebsiella spp -in 5.8% -33.7%, Proteus spp -in 3.0% -9.0%. Among Gram-positive cocci Enterococcus spp was detected in 8.5% -64.6%, Staphylococcus spp -in 2.4% -35.4%. Highest susceptibility of microflora was to imipenem and fosfomycin (resistance had 0-2.7% of strains). Resistance to Cefalosporins 1-2 generation was up to 54.6%, to Norfloxacin -70%. We have found surprisingly unexplained instability of microbial spectrum in hospitalized UTI patients. Percentage of E.Coli varied in 2 fold 37.1% -70.4%, Enterococcus spp was the second predom-Introduction and Objectives: Urogenital tuberculosis (UGTB) is the second most common form of TB in countries with a severe epidemic situation and the third most common form in regions with low incidence of TB. 77% of men who died from tuberculosis of all localizations had prostate tuberculosis which had mostly been overlooked during their life time. In actual figures, this means about 19,000 men yearly in Russia. The main reason for late diagnosis is an atypical clinical feature of UGTB, it courses under the mask of another disease. We analyzed 816 history cases of UGTB patients to estimate clinical features. Results: Most common complains were flank pain (68%), dysuria (48%) and renal colic (24%); among laboratory signs -pyuria (78%) and haematuria (34%). Patients were treated by urologists or GPs with misdiagnoses of pyelonephritis (27%), cystitis (43%), cancer (8%) or urolithiasis (22%) during 5.6 years on average. Positive smear was in 17% and positive culture of Mycobacterium tuberculosis was in 44%. 64% were diagnosed in late complicated cavernous stage, when surgery is necessary -and 90% of operations were nephrectomy due to total involvement of kidney tissue. Conclusions: Most common masks of UGTB are pyelonephritis, cystitis and urolithiasis. UGTB presents non-specific symptoms and laboratory findings, except for positive MBT culture, but only about 44% cases are culture-positive. This is one of the main reasons for late and poor diagnosis of UGTB. The significance of UGTB may be considerable when the high prevalence of overall TB and the asymptomatic nature of UGTB are taken into account. Introduction and Objective: World Health Organization (WHO) defined Extrapulmonary Tuberculosis (EPTB) as TB of organs other than the lungs exactly, such as lymph nodes, kidneys, genitals, breast, liver, skin, bones and joints, and pleura. Accordingly Russian Guidelines pleural TB is a part of pulmonary TB, as pleura actually is a cover of lungs and belongs to respiratory system and thus couldn't be considered as extrapulmonary organ. Different approaches makes estimation of real epidemiology of EPTB impossible. To confirm this point we estimated a spectrum of EPTB in Novosibirsk including and excluding pleural TB. Table 1 . We see very different incomparable proportion of EPTB forms in dependence on its spectrum. We think pleural TB should be excluded from the spectrum of EPTB. Why isolated pleural TB is EPTB, but if it accompanied widespread destructive forms of pulmonary TB it is not counted at all? A rule of mathematic statistic notes -if one parameter of the system is significantly higher than others, this parameter doesn't belong to the estimated system. For example, the share of TB of CNS among real EPTB is 26.8%, but among EPTB including pleural TB -16.6% only. What figure is true? For the best comparison we need unique approach, and Russian one is optimal. Introduction and Objective: Urogenital TB (UGTB) is the second common form of TB in countries with severe epidemic situation and the third common form in regions with low incidence of TB. UGTB is complicated by bladder tuberculosis (BTB) in more than half of cases; late diagnosis and/or absence of pathogenetic therapy leads to the development of shrinked bladder up to full its obliteration. The intravesical bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) after transurethral resection in Ta and T1 bladder cancer provides a significantly better prophylaxis of tumour recurrence than TUR alone. Nevertheless alongside with positive results many complications of BCG therapy, including lethal, were noted. We describe two cases of shrinked bladder tuberculosis -one was caused by M. tuberculosis, and second -by M. bovis. Results: Typical scenario of development of natural bladder TB grade 4 (classification of E. Kulchavenya) caused by M. tuberculosis, is demonstrated by case 1, and a case 2 demonstrates the iatrogenic bladder TB as a complication of BCG therapy. Conclusion: BTB is a complication of kidney TB. Not all patients with natural bladder TB had mycobacteriuria, in 62% of patients diagnosis was confirmed by clinical and radiological findings as well as results of provocative tuberculin test. Specific histology in bladder biopsies is rare. It is unknown the degree and duration of contact Mtb with urothelium in case of natural BTB. In case of iatrogenic BTB as result of BCG instillation there is certain contact of Mtb with urothelium. In some conditions (co-morbidity, immunodeficiency, inflammation etc) infection agent may absorb and provoke BTB. Low resistance of macroorganism may lead to the spread of TB -especially in the prostate, the abdominal organs, regional lymph nodes, and in some cases it is possible generalization of infection with a fatal outcome. Introduction and Objective: Tuberculosis (TB) remains global problem. The efficiency of the therapy of TB, like any other infection disease, depends on the antibiotic concentration in the affected tissue. A few numbers of antibiotics can penetrate prostate epithelium and manage high concentration. Also enough level of antibiotic in prostate tissue may be attributed to the level of inflammation as well as a method of introduction of the drug. The purpose of this study was to estimate which method of the introduction main anti-TB drug -rifampicin is safer and more efficient. In our study 30 patients with prostate TB were enrolled. The average age was of 38.9 years (range 28 -58). The patients were randomized in 3 groups; all received the therapy once day daily in 5 days. First group was treated with rectal introduction of the cocktail: procaini 0.5% -20 ml, dimethyl sulfoxide 2 ml and rifampicin 0.6. Second group was treated with intravenous infusion of the rifampicin 0.6 with Sodium chloride 0.9% -200 ml. Third group took rifampicin 0.6 in pills per os. Ejaculate was investigated before therapy and after ending -in 5 days. Most important aim for prostate TB patient is reducing of leucospermia (that means efficiency of the treatment) and improving of the quality of the ejaculate (that means safety of the treatment). Results: Leucospermia decreased in 1st group on 37.2%, in 2nd group -on 49.0%, in 3rd -on 39.4%. So efficiency of rectal and peroral introduction was the same, but intravenous infusion was more effective. Sperm motility in first group decreased on 44.5%, in second -on 34.3%, in third -on 32.4%. Thus rectal introduction is more toxic for sperm, and intake per os and intravenous administration have the same toxicity. Introduction and Objective: Fluoroquinolones are "Gold standard" for antibacterial therapy for chronic prostatitis. But using of these antibiotics is limited by growing resistance of infection agents to fluoroquinolones. Alternative may be using macrolides, as they provide good concentration in prostate parenchyma, are effective against intracellular micro-organisms, including chlamydia and mycoplasma, and exhibit definite anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects. To estimate the clinical efficacy of roxithromycin in chronic abacterial prostatitis Category IIIa, we compared the effect of roxithromycin with ofloxacin. A total of 67 patients with CP/CPPS were enrolled in study. All patients were randomized to two groups in open-label: group 1 included 35 patients who were treated with roxithromycin 150 mg twice per day, and group 2 included 32 patients, who were treated with ofloxacin 400 mg twice per day. Pathogenetic therapy was standard for our Clinic and was identical in both groups (prostanorm, afala and canephron). The patients were treated for 4 weeks and were subsequently followed for 12 weeks. Efficiency was estimated basically by the changes from baseline in the total and domain scores of the NIH Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index (NIH-CPSI). Results: All patients had ≥20 leucocytes in expressed prostatic secretion (EPS), all had no any microflora in EPS or ejaculate, but Chlamydia trachomatis was found by polymerase chain reaction in 9/25.7% patients in group1 and in 8/25.0% in group 2, and Ureaplasma urealiticum was found in 6/17.1% and 7/20.0% accordingly. The NIH-CPSI initial was 21.1 in group1 and 20.9 in group 2. In one month, after ending of the therapy the NIH-CPSI score decreased in the roxithromycin and ofloxacin groups to a similar degree -to 11.4 and 12.4 accordingly. In 3 months Chlamydia trachomatis was identified in group 1 in 5.7%, in group 2 -in 9.4%. The NIH-CPSI 12-week total scores were 11.8 in group 1 and 13.4 in group 2. Conclusion: Roxithromycin showed similar or favorable effects on the improvement of symptoms compared to ofloxacin and was more effective against intracellular micro-organisms. Roxithromycin is recommended for the therapy patients with chronic prostatitis, especially accompanying with intra-cellular infection. Results: Most common complains were flank pain (68%), dysuria (48%) and renal colic (24%); among laboratory signs -pyuria (78%) and haematuria (34%). Patients were treated by urologists or GPs with misdiagnoses of pyelonephritis (27%), cystitis (43%), cancer (8%) or urolithiasis (22%) during 5.6 years on average. Positive smear was in 17% and positive culture of Mycobacterium tuberculosis was in 44%. There were 64% diagnosed in late complicated cavernous stage, when surgery is necessary -and 90% of operations were nephrectomy due to total involvement of kidney tissue. Conclusions: Most common masks of UGTB are pyelonephritis, cystitis and urolithiasis. UGTB presents non-specific symptoms and laboratory findings, except for positive MBT culture, but only about 44% cases are culture-positive. This is one of the main reasons for late and poor diagnosis of UGTB. The significance of UGTB may be considerable when the high prevalence of overall TB and the asymptomatic nature of UGTB are taken into account. The Use of Tadalafil in Patients with Chronic Prostatitis/Chronic Pelvic Pain Syndrome Introduction and Objective: The treatment of chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome (CP/CPPS) can be a frustrating challenge to physicians and many drugs had been used with variable results. Objective To evaluate the safety and the efficacy of adding 5 mg tadalafil for patients with CP/CPPS with the conventional treatment. Twenty five patients received tamsulosin 0.2mg once daily, served as control group. Another 31 patients received the alpha blocker, as above with tadalafil 5 mg once daily for 1 month period comprised tadalafil group. The NIH Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index (NIH-CPSI) assessment was completed by each patient at baseline and 4 weeks after the drug therapy to assess the response to treatment. We consider in our study the chronic prostatitis/CPPS or category IIIa or b according to NIH classification system. Results: No significant difference in mean age and baseline score in between groups was found. After one month of starting treatment, it had been found that NIH-CPSI/pain, urinary and quality of life domains were significantly changed from (12.8±1.44, 5.9±1.77 and 8.8±1.82) at baseline to (9.6±1.04, 3.55±0.99 and 3.88±1.31) respectively in group A. In group B also there was a significant reduction in the NIH-CPSI among patients in this group; the baseline NIH-CP-SI/pain, urinary and quality of life domains were (13.4±1.66, 5.8±1.85 and 9.3±1.92) and changed to (6.28±0.90, 2.65±0.86 and 2.69±1.43) respectively after treatment. The total NIH-CPSI was 27.5±4.78 and changed to 17.03±3.91 after treatment in group A and 28.5±4.49 changed to11.62±3.59 in group B. Conclusion: The use of tadalafil in patients of CP/ CPPS with conventional treatment for 1 month was safe and has high efficacy in reducing the symptoms for the patients and improving the quality of life. The Potential Impact of UTI Template-Guided Triage Decisions for Patients with Urinary Tract Infections Introduction and Objective: Current guidelines provide limited evidence as to which patients with urinary tract infection (UTI) require hospitalisation. We evaluated the currently used triage routine and tested whether a set of criteria including UTI template like ①plt ②BP ③Hydoronephrosis ④SIRS and ⑤Elapsed days have the potential to improve triage decisions. Consecutive adults with UTI presenting to our emergency department (ED) were recruited and followed for 90 days. We defined five virtual triage algorithms, which included guideline-based clinical criteria, optimised admission ①plt ②BP ③Hydoronephrosis ④SIRS and ⑤Elapsed days in addition to a set of clinical criteria. We compared actual treatment sites and observed adverse events based on the physician judgment with the proportion of patients assigned to treatment sites according to the five virtual algorithms. Adverse outcome was defined as transfer to the intensive care unit (ICU), DIC, Septic shock, death, recurrence of UTI or rehospitalisation for any reason. Results: We recruited 203 patients (age 61.8 years; 61% females) and analysed the data of 201 patients with a final diagnosis of UTI. Of these 201patients, 42 were treated as outpatients. Virtual triage based only on clinical signs would have treated only 42 patients as outpatients, with higher proportions of outpatients equally in both template groups (29.3 %; p = 0.02). There were no significant differences in adverse events between outpatients according to the very low risk (2.8 %), low risk (4.5%). The mean length of stay was 6.6 days, including 2.2 days after reaching medical stability. Conclusions: Adding template to clinical criteria has the potential to improve risk-based triage without impairing safety. Current rates of admission and length of stay could be shortened in patients with UTI. Emphysematous Cystitis: Aggressive vs Conservative Novel Treatment Introduction and Objective: Emphysematous urinary tract infections are urinary tract infections (UTI) associated with gas formation. They can manifest as cystitis, pyelitis and pyelonephritis. Emphysematous cystitis (EC) is a rare entity characterized by a primary bladder infection gas producing pathogens. The objective is to report two cases of emphysematous cystitis, a rare but potentially serious condition. Analysis of two different cases treated in our center and review of the literature. Results: A radical cystectomy was practiced to the first patient due to the advanced condition; the second patient, benefited from a conservative novel treatment, two sessions of hyperbaric oxygen therapy. Conclusions: Early diagnosis is the cornerstone of the conservative management. Hyperbaric oxigenoterpia may be beneficial due to the improvement in oxygenation of the tissues affected by the disease. Introduction and Objective: Female pelvic pain is poorly understood, often thought to arise from the bladder but in the Beaumont experience is more commonly from pelvic floor muscle dysfunction (PFMD). Pelvic floor physical therapy (PFPT) is first line treatment for PFMD. We hypothesize that PFPT will be an effective treatment for pelvic pain. A retrospective chart review was performed for women with a primary diagnosis of pelvic pain who presented to a multidisciplinary clinic for PFPT in 2015. Data reviewed included pertinent history, initial and post-treatment scores for validated questionnaires [Pelvic Floor Distress Inventory Questionnaire (PFDI) and the Pelvic Floor Impact Questionnaire (PFIQ)], and patient-reported pain levels. Results: Two undred and eight underwent PFPT for primary indication of pelvic pain in 2015. Mean age was 45 yr ± 15. Mean number of visits was 9.3 ± 6.7 and mean pain level decreased from 4.6 to 2.2 by the last visit (p<0.0001). Pre and post treatment PFDI and PFIQ questionnaires were completed by 90/208 (43%) and 88/208 (42%) women respectively. Table 1 shows the mean scores for each questionnaire and the minimally important difference (MID) for PFDI. PFDI, PFIQ, and pain scores improved significantly. PFDI did not meet the MID. Conclusion: PFPT significantly improves validated pain scores in women presenting with pelvic pain. Comparison We compare the effectiveness of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and culture method in the diagnosis of urogenital trichomoniasis (UT) in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) with acute urinary retention. Between 2014 and 2016 we involved 153 patients with BPH who underwent transvesical prostatectomy. Excreta from urethra, expressed prostatic secretion and intraoperatively removed prostate tissue were investigated. UT diagnosis was performed in 153 patients with PCR method, over culture method examined 84 patients. Results: According to our research UT infected 38 (24.8%) patients. PCR was positive in 19 (12.4%) patients and Trichomonas vaginalis culture method identified 27 (32.1%) patients. In patients who underwent diagnostic UT over two methods, PCR was positive in 9 (10.7%) patients and only one patient outcome was not confirmed by culture. Conclusion: Analysis of efficacy of diagnostic UT showed that Trichomonas vaginalis in patients with BPH with acute urinary retention 2.6 times more often detected by culture method in comparison with PCR. Thus, it can be argued that to improve UT diagnosis in these patients is necessary to use culture method. Analysis Materials and Methods: Four hundred and thirty patients had presented 3 or more UTI with positive urine culture in the 12 months prior to starting the treatment. Exclusion criteria were: ureteral lithiasis, renal lithiasis over 5mm, ureteral catheter, percutaneous nephrostomy, urinary diversion, moderate-severe urinary incontinence with 3 or more pads a day, severe benign prostatic hyperplasia and cystocele with postvoid residual higher than 150ml. Uromune ® contains an inactivated bacterial cell suspension of selected strains of Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus vulgaris and Enteroccoccus faecalis. Age, sex, composition of the vaccination and number of UTIs with positive urine culture were analysed before starting treatment and 3 and 6 months after. The most frequent bacteria was E coli and the second K penumoniae. 80.9% were females. The average age was 71. The distribution of UTI before starting the treatment was: 3 UTIs in 29.8%, 4 in 31.2%, 5 in 24.4%, 6 in 9.5%, 7 in 3.7% and 8 in 0.4%. After 3 months: 0 UTIs in 45.6%, 1 in 27.7%, 2 in 21.6%, 3 in 4.9% and 4 in 0.2%. After 6 months: 0 ITUs in 34.4%, 1 in 33.3%, 2 in 20.5%, 3 in 10.9%, 4 in 0.7% and 5 in 0.2%. The inmunoprophylaxis was well tolerated. Only 3 patients had dry mouth and 5 gastrointestinal discomforts. After 6 months, 45.6% of patients had 0 UTIs, after 3 months and 34.4%. After 3 months, 73.3 % had 0-1 UTIs and 67.7% after 6 months. Active immunoprophylaxis with Uromune ® in the sample analysed shows a significant reduction in the number of positive urine cultures without encouraging antibacterial resistance. Fosfomycin Trometamol Concentrations in Central and Periferic Prostatic Tissue in Men with or Without Metabolic Abnormalities Saleh O 1 , Gacci M 1 , Novelli A 2 , Mazzei T 2 , Vanacore D 1 , D'Elia C 3 , Cerruto MA 4 , Nesi G 5 , Santi R 5 , Tasso G 1 , Frizzi I 1 , Finazzi Agrò E 6 , Cai T 7 , Serni S 1 Introduction and Objective: Men with abnormal metabolic parameters have a higher risk to present more aggressive prostate cancers. Therefore, the need of an adequate biopsy sampling for these patients is mandatory, even if they are more at risk of post-biopsy complications, including infections. Fosfomycin trometamol (FT), is a bactericidal, broad-spectrum antibiotic with low profile of resistance and elevated activity against multidrug-resistant bacteria but the prostate tissue distribution is not well know. Aim of our prospective study is to compare the prostatic concentration of FT in men with different metabolic abnormalities. arithmetic mean of C and P was considered as total prostatic concentration (T). Metabolic features, including waist circumference, blood pressure, glycaemia, HDL-Cholesterol and trigliceride was recorded from all men, and splitted into normal or pathologic values according to NCEP-ATPIII definitions. The differences in concentration of FT inside prostate (in zones: C, P and T) between men with or without abnormal metabolic parameters were analyzed by Anova. Results: Thirty-one men (51.7%) enrolled in the study were hypertensive, 19 (31.7%) presented hyperglycemia, 21 (35%) had high levels of Triglycerides while 2 (3.3%) low levels of HDL-Cholesterol and 10 (16.7%) had a pathologic waist circumference. Mean concentrations of FT in C, P and T, according to the normal vs. abnormal metabolic features are reported in the table below. Conclusion: Obese, hypertensive and hyperglycemic men present higher concentration of FT inside prostate after administration performed before a biopsy for suspected prostate cancer as compared to those with normal metabolic parameters. Therefore, in dysmetabolic men, FT can be considered an effective prophylaxis during prostate biopsy. Introduction and Objective: Infection is a common and can be one of the most dangerous complications of transretal prostate needle biopsy (TRPB). Classically, the antimicrobial prophylaxis is based on oral fluoroquinolones (FQ) starting on the day before the procedure. Lately, an apparent increase in infectious complications has been seen, which reflects the increase in the FQ-resistant bacteria prevalence in intestinal flora. Many risk factors have been suggested, but recent antimicrobial use has the major impact. The addition of peri-procedural intramuscular (IM) gentamicin theoretically offers better antimicrobial spectrum coverage, without significantly increasing time spent on the procedure, without nephrotoxicity and without increasing selective antimicrobial pressure. This study aims to evaluate the impact of a novel antimicrobial prohylaxis scheme on the infectious complications of TRPB. Materials and Methods: Between january'2015 and july'2016, patients submited to TRPB (n=433) with risk factors (defined by antimicrobial use in the last 6 months or presence of an indwelling vesical catheter) has been randomized and included in group A or B. Group A (n=46) had a standard oral FQ prophylaxis scheme (starting on the day before the procedure, for 3 days). Group B (n=26) did the same scheme plus gentamicin 180mg IM 20 minutes before the procedure. Patients without risk factors (group C, n=361) had the standard scheme. A statistical comparision between groups was performed to search for differences. Results: Infectious complications rate was significantly different between groups with and without risk factors (1.1% vs 7.6%, p=0.006). The adittion of gentamicin to the antimicrobial scheme has allowed a decrease in infection rate (with a statistical trend toward significance, p=0,08). Conclusion: Recent antimicrobial usage and presence of indwelling urinary cateter are risk factors for infectious complications after TRPB. The adoption of antimicrobial prophylaxis scheme based on FQ plus IM gentamicin 160mg appears to reduce the infection rate in this group of patients. Malakoplakia of the Prostate as a Mimicker of Prostate Cancer on Prostate Health Index and MRI-Fusion Prostate Biopsy: A Case Report Introduction and Objective: Isolated malakoplakia of the prostate is a rare inflammatory condition that has been clinically mistaken for prostatic malignancies. The development of Prostate Imaging -Reporting And Data Systems (PI-RADS) classifications, and Prostate Health Index (PHI) has led to more accurate diagnosis of clinically significant disease and stratification of patients that may be at risk of Prostate Cancer. We present a case of a 75 years old male who was on follow up with our hospital for elevated Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA). He was admitted for an episode of Urosepsis, which was treated with antibiotics and subsequently underwent further workup and was found to have a raised PHI, as well as a high PI-RADS classification and was later found to have malakoplakia based on histology of prostate tissue obtained during targeted MRI guided Fusion Prostate biopsy. Results: To our understanding, this is the first case where a prostate lesion has been labelled as a PI-RADS 5 lesion, with elevated PHI that has subsequently been proven histologically to be malakoplakia. Conclusion: An important possible confounder is the interval between the MRI and the episode of urosepsis and it is well known that Urosepsis can affect the PSA and MRI result. We present this case to highlight the potential for a false diagnosis of prostate cancer, in spite of laboratory and radiological findings. A Very Unusual Case of Renal Hydatid Cyst Presented as Post Labour Hydatiduria Introduction and Objective: Hydatid cyst is a parasitic disease that affects humans and other mammals. In human, it is caused by larval stage of E. Granulosus complex. Most common organs to involve with hydatid cyst are liver followed by lungs. Renal hydatid involvement is very rare in 2 to 3% of cases. There are very few cases of renal hydatid in literature. However, case with post labour hydatiduria is not reported so far. Twenty-three years old female pt on full term for first gravid presented to gynecologist with chief complaints of left flank and suprapubic pain for 2 days which was considered as initiation of labour. So, induction of labour was conducted and patient delivered a full-term female child. One day after delivery she had complaints of passing grapes like small structures passing in urine (hydatiduria). Pt was investigated further after recovery of labour. Results: All the routine investigations were normal. On USG abdomen, she had left cystic mass in kidney with daughter cysts possibility of hydatid cyst and mild hydroureteronephrosis. On CECT ABDOMEN pt had large 7*8*9 cm size well defined cystic lesion with internal daughter cysts. 6*3*8 cm size collection on left perinephreic space. On excretory phase contrast was seen within cystic lesion and in perinephreic collection along with filling defects in pelvis and moderate hydroureteronephrosis. We started albendazole 400mg once daily 1 week prior to surgery. We did cystoscopy with 1t RGP. On RGP there were multiple filling defects in PC system with extravasetion of contras from lower pole. We did laparoscopic cyst deroofing and scolicidal agent was (10% betadine) injected. Calyceal fistula repaired and DJ stent was kept. Pt was discharged on 3rd post-operative day.  Non-Antibacterial Therapy for Chronic Prostatitis Category 3-a  The patients who represented at the Hasan Sadikin Hospital Bandung from January 2011 to December 2015 were reviewed retrospectively from medical record and we analyzed patient's characteristics, age, length of hospital stay, etiology, mortality, surgical treatment and follow up patient. Results: All the patients were male with mean age 53.04 years ± 16.33. Of these, 11 patients (21.15%) died during the treatment. The mean length of hospital stay was 31.25 ± 20.85 days. The most common predisposing factor was idiopathic in 22 cases (42.3%). One or more predisposing factors such as diabetes melitus 28.9% (15/52), perianal abscess 13.5% (7/52), urethral stricture 9.6% (5/52), urethral stone 3.8 % (2/52) and adeno carcinoma recti 1.9% (1/52). Reconstruction of fournier gangrene after necrotomy debridement were achieved with suture primer 55,7% (29/52), Split Thickness Skin Graft 27% (14/52) and flap suture 3.8% (2/52). We found 11 patients (13.5%) died after necrotomy and debridement surgical emergency procedure. Concomitant Medical Procedure was performed intraoperative surgery such as colostomy 5.8% (3/52), cystostomy 3.9% (2/52), Conclusion: Mortality rate at Hasan Sadikin Hospital Bandung (Indonesia) is lower than others country with infectious rate similar Indonesia. Early recognition of infection associated with invasive and aggressive treatment is essential for attempting to reduce these prognostic indices. Keywords: Fournier's gangrene, Mortality, surgical debridement.  Introduction and Objective: Idiopathic xanthogranulomatous epididymitisorchitis (IXEO) is a rather benign testicular disease, constituting a rare and misleading form of testicular chronic inflammation. We conducted a retrospective study of 7 cases of IXEO collected over a period of 24 years (1992 -2016) in our urology department of the CHU Habib Bourguiba Sfax. Results: The average age of our patients was 51 years. The left testicular affection was slightly predominant and no case of bilateral IXEO was found. The IXEO represents 2.2% of all epididymitis orchitis monitored and treated in our departement in the same period. Our patients' clinical manifestations were dominated by epididymitis orchitis resistant to medical treatment (42.85%), spontaneous scrotal pain (71.42%) and scrotal swelling (42.85%). Physical examination of our patients was poor and revealed non-specific signs, dominated by Provoked scrotal pain (85.71%), a scrotal mass (42.85%) and the scrotum swelling in 42.85% cases. Scrotal ultrasound was performed for only two patients (28.57%). The curative treatment for the IXEO was based on antibiotherapy associated with orchidectomy: scrotal path first in acute and suppurative subacute forms and inguinal path first orchidectomy in pseudotumoral forms. The only case of focal epididymal involvement of our seriehas benefited of a conservative treatment after a surgical biopsy that has eliminated a malignant tumor process. Given the lack of specificity of clinical, biological and radiological signs, the positive diagnosis of IXEO remains often histological. The prognosis of this condition is generally favorable and recurrence remains exceptional. Antibiotic Resistance for Pseudomonas Infections from Culture Positive Urinary Specimens from a University Hospital Introduction and Objective: To look at the trends of antibiotic resistance patterns for all Pseudomonas infections over a 3-year period in urine cultures between 2014-2016, and to assess whether there has been a change in the resistance to the commonly prescribed antibiotics for Pseudomonas infections over this time. The department of infection collected results of organisms from urine culture (data collated and provided by Public Health England) over this period. Trends were obtained between urine culture positive samples. Resistance for Pseudomonas infections to commonly prescribed antibiotics including amikacin, tazocin, meropenam, ceftazidime and ciprofloxacin was collated. Results: A total of 64,028 positive hospital urine specimens were collected in the 3-year period. Of which 1,986 of them were positive for Pseudomonas. Ciprofloxacin, one of the most commonly used antibiotics against Pseudomonas infections, has been increasingly less effective against Pseudomonas infections (resistance grew from 26.1% to 37.5%). There has also been an increasing resistance against Ceftazidime over the 3-year window, from 30% to 41.1%. The trends have clearly shown an increasing need of prescribing second-line antibiotics for Pseudomonas infections, which may be of clinical value in guiding empirical treatment for Pseudomonas infections. Pettinger R, Yuen K, Singh R, Chahal R, Molokwu C Introduction and Objective: Clostridium difficile (C. diff) is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in hospitalised patients, frequently presenting with loose stools. Patients undergoing radical cystectomy (RC) for bladder cancer usually have a segment of small bowel used for urinary diversion. Small bowel recovery could lead to loose stools post-operatively in RC patients. Management of suspected C. diff involves isolation protocols that might necessitate patients to single rooms outside their parent ward. For RC patients, this could represent inadequate post-operative nursing care. This study analysed the incidence of C. diff infections in RC patients Materials and Methods: A prospective database of cystectomy patients is maintained in our institution, collecting data on patient demographics, operative and pathological outcomes. Patients having Bristol stool grade 6-7 and symptoms suggestive of infective diarrhea post-operatively had stool samples sent for microbiological analysis. Anti-microbial use during the peri-operative course was reviewed. C. diff positive patients, only 1.7% of those were RC patients. As loose stool is an accepted post-operative occurrence in RC patients and the low incidence of C. diff infection, should we adjust the protocol by which we isolate post-RC patients with loose stools to allow for the expected loose motion post-operatively. Risk Factors for Recurrent Febrile Urinary Tract Infection in Urinary Stone Patients with Acute Obstructive Pyelonephritis within 1 Year Dept. of Urology, Gyeongsang National University Hospital, Jinju, South Korea introduction and Objective: To identify and evaluate the risk factors for the development of recurrent febrile urinary tract infection (fUTI) among former urinary stone patients with acute obstructive pyelonephritis (OPN). We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of 52 patients, each of whom had urinary tract stones and presented with OPN within the 2010-2015 time period. Following their initial treatment, patients who were subsequently admitted to the departments of urology or nephrology via the emergency room within 1 year of their initial treatment were included. The mean age of patients was 62.2 ± 14.6 years, and the mean follow-up duration was 26.0 ± 20.39 months. E-coli was found to be the dominating organism (68.1%, 15/22) in the initial urine culture. After infection control and stone management, 23 patients showed recurrent fUTI during follow-up. Of them, 43.5% (10/23) patients developed a recurrence of fUTI and were re-admitted within 1 month after initial treatment. Patients were divided into two groups: a recurrent fUTI group (n=23), and a non-recurrent fUTI group (n=29). Between groups, significant differences were found with regards to diabetes history (47.8% vs. 17.2%, p=0.018), stone location (kidney, recurrent group: 63.0% vs. non-recurrent group: 24.0%, p=0.031) and initially positive urine culture (55.6% vs. 28.0%, p=0.016). In multivariate analysis, having an initially positive urine culture (p=0.040, 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.130-224.117) was identified as being an independent risk factor for developing recurrent fUTI. Of the recurrent fUTI group, 14 (60.9%) patients showed positive urine cultures which were newly diagnosed as being positive or were different from those found in the initial urine culture. In multivariate analysis, an initial laboratory test finding of acute renal insufficiency (ARI) at (p=0.019, 95% and the presence of a kidney stone (p=0.022, 95% CI, 1.345-46.926) were significant factors associated with a newly-diagnosed-positive urine culture diagnosis. Conclusions Having an initially positive urine culture was a significant risk factor for the development of recurrent fUTI in urinary stone patients with acute OPN. Additionally, cautionary management is also needed in patients found to have ARI or renal stones during follow-up. Min C 1 , Wei H 2 , Hongshen W 2 , Junjie C 2 , Yan Z 2 , Feifan W 2 , Ziemeng X 2 , Yongyi Y 2 , Xiaodong J 2 Introduction and Objective: Molecular diagnosis based on genomic amplification is a rapid method for the early detection of tuberculosis(TB) infection, which is limited by the quantity of nucleic acids from Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB). This limitation might result from i) the difficulty associated with disrupting the cell walls of the organism and ii) the low levels of MTB in certain clinical samples. New sample-handling methods, employing the Dounce homogenizer, were compared to an established method using sodium hydroxide (NaOH), to isolate MTB DNA. Real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) was then used to evaluate DNA recovery, sensitivity and its specificity for TB diagnosis. Results: Three hundred and ten suspicious TB patients were enrolled. Processing specimens with both the tight and loose pestles of the Dounce homogenizer recovered 300 -10,000 times more copies of MTB DNA than the NaOH method. Additionally, the Dounce methods offered greater detection of TB infections: 83.67-100% of those detected using the gold standard methods of culture oracid-fast bacillus smear. Although it initially appeared that this high sensitivity resulted in slightly reduced specificity (80.55-92.31%), it was shown that a number of apparent "false positives" were real TB infections by clinical standards. The new DNA extraction method also performed well in trace-samples: urine. Furthermore, of all the 310 suspected TB individuals, processing of samples with the Dounce homogenizer still achieved a sensitivity of 92.34% and specificity of 97.03%. These results demonstrate that the Dounce homogenizer generates a high quantity and quality of MTB DNA for RT-qPCR analysis of urinary MTB infections. Polymorphisms in Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Gene Are Associated with Idiopathic Male Factor Infertility Introduction and Objectives: We wanted to determine whether genetic polymorphisms of aryl hydro-carbon receptor (AhR) gene are associated with susceptibility to male infertility. This study comprised 176 men with idiopathic infertility and 352 healthy fertile men who served as controls. Seven single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the AhR gene (rs2066853, rs1476080, rs10250822, rs10247158, rs2282885, rs6960165, and rs7811989) were selected and genotyped by the polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis. The serum levels of reproductive and thyroid hormones and inhibin B were also measured. Results: After multiple regression analysis, 2 of the 7 studied SNPs were significantly associated with the occurrence of male infertility. Men with rs2066853 AA genotype had 33% decreased risk of being infertile (odds ratio [OR] ¼ 0.67, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.46-0.87; P ¼ .003). The C allele of rs2282885 was significantly associated with infertility risk, with an OR of 2.14 (95% CI: 1.64-3.72) for heterozygotes and 3.54 (95% CI: 2.25-5.84) for homozygotes. When haplotypes were composed of 7 AhR SNP sites, patients with AACACAG haplotype harbored more than 75% decreased risk of being infertile (OR ¼ 0.21, 95% CI: 0.11-0.32; P ¼ .001). Conversely, carriers of the AACACGA haplotype had more than 12-fold increased risk of being infertile (OR ¼ 12.62, 95% CI: 2.77-52.74; P ¼ .00001). Conclusions: Homozygosity for the rs2066853 A allele and rs2282885 C allele decreases and increases the risk of developing male infertility, respectively. The Effects of Opiate Consumption on Serum Reproductive Hormone Levels, Sperm Parameters, Seminal Plasma Antioxidant Capacity and Sperm DNA Integrity Introduction and Objectives: We evaluated the effects of opiate consumption on semen quality, sperm function, seminal plasma antioxidant capacity, and sperm DNA integrity. A total of 142 opiate addict men (group 1) were enrolled in the study and 146 healthy age matched male volunteers (group 2) served as controls. Two semen analyses were performed in all participants. Sperm chromatin structure assay (SCSA) was used to identify sperm DNA integrity. Results: The mean ± SD sperm concentration in opiate users and in control subjects was 22.2 ± 4.4 and 66.3 ± 8.3 million per ml, respectively (P = 0.002). A significant increase in the amount of fragmented DNA was found in opiate consumers compared with that in controls (36.4 ± 3.8% vs. 27.1 ± 2.4%, P = 0.004). Significantly decreased levels of catalase-like and superoxide dismutase-like (SOD) activity were observed in group 1 compared with group 2. Conclusions: Opiate consumption has significant adverse effects on semen quality. In cases of unexplained Introduction and Objectives: Although chronic stress is a common condition, its effects on testicular morphology and function are not well known. The aim of this study was to evaluate the immediate and late effects on sperm parameters and testicular morphology in prepubertal and adult rats submitted to chronic stress. The prepubertal (4 weeksold) and adult (10 weeks-old) animals were immobilized in a rigid cylinder, 2 hours daily, for 6 weeks, to simulate stress situation. Ten prepubertal and eight adult rats were killed 24 hours after the last stress session, for immediate evaluation, while ten prepubertal and nine adult rats were killed 6 weeks after the last stress session, for late evaluation. Other age-matched animals were used as controls (n=8). Spermatozoids collected during euthanasia were evaluated for concentration, motility and viability. Seminiferous tubule diameter, epithelial height and volumetric density of the tubular and intertubular compartments were analyzed in histological sections. Data were compared by the Student's-t-test and considered significant when p<0.05. No difference was observed in sperm parameters in the prepubertal group when compared to controls. However, the sperm motility decreased by 19%(p=0.012) and viability by 46% (p=0.0002) in the adult group of immediate effects analysis. The sperm viability decreased by 24% (p=0.0049) in the adult group of late effects analysis ( Figure 1 ). Seminiferous tubule diameter of the prepubertal and adult groups of immediate analysis showed a reduction of 4% (p=0.0254) and 6% (p=0.013), respectively. In the prepubertal group of late effects analysis, the density of tubular and intertubular compartments showed a decrease of 2% (p=0.0027) and increase of 18%(p=0.0027), respectively (Figure 2 ). Chronic stress caused morphological changes in testicles during prepubertal and adult age, nevertheless, spermatozoid alterations were observed only when it occurred during the adulthood. Hence, alterations promoted by chronic stress stimuli are more important in adult rats than in prepubertal animals. Y Chromosome Microdeletions and Hormonal Profiles of Azoospermic or Oligozoospermic Men Undergoing Assisted Reproductive Technologies Zeighami S 1 , Bahmanimehr A 2 , Namavar Jahromi B 3 , Parsanezhad ME 3 , Anvar Z 3 Introduction and Objective: Y chromosome deletions (YCDs) in Azoospermia Factor (AZF) region are associated with abnormal spermatogenesis leading to azoospermia or severe oligozoospermia. Assisted Reproductive Technologies (ART) by Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection (ICSI) mostly after Testicular sperm extraction (TESE) is required for their infertility management. To determine the frequency of YCD and the most frequent variant in infertile men who had ART in our center compared to a fertile group. Also, semen parameters, hormonal profiles and ART outcomes of the infertile group were studied. There were 97 oligozoospermic or non-obstructive azoospermic (NOA) infertile men who had ART at Infertility center of Ghadir-Mother and Child Hospital as our case group that were compared to 100 fertile men as the control group. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood of all of them and tested for YCD by multiplex PCR of eight known Sequence-Tagged Sites (STSs). No YCD was detected in the control group. However, 20 out of 97 (20.6%) infertile men had YCD. AZFc deletion was detected in 15 out of the 20 (75 %), AZFbc in four (20 %) and AZFabc in one (5%) patient. No fertilization or clinical pregnancy was seen following ICSI in the group with YCD in this study. The mean level of FSH was significantly higher in the group with YCD (28.45±22.2) compared to the groups without YCD either with (4.8±3.17) or without Clinical pregnancies (10.83±7.23). Conclusion: YCD has a relatively high frequency among oligozoospermic and NOA men. So YCD screening before ART and patient counseling is strongly suggested. Introduction and Objective: Varicocele (VA) is the most commonly reported correctable cause of male infertility. However, the mechanism is still far from clear. Increasing evidence suggests that seminal microbiota might play an important role in seminal quality. Therefore, we want to know whether patients with varicocele have a changed seminal microbiota. To demonstrate whether the unbalanced seminal microbiome is associated with low seminal quality in patients with varicocele. From October 2015 to May 2016, 31 VA patients (VA group) and 24 healthy volunteers (NS group), aged from 19 to 32 years, were enrolled. All the varicocele patients underwent microsurgical varicocelectomy. Semen and blood samples were collected before and at least 3 months after surgery. The seminal microbial community was in-vestigated by Hiseq sequencing of the 16S ribosomal V3-4 region. Results: Higher diversity and a distinct change in the seminal microbiome were found in patients with varicocele. Compared with normal volunteers, varicocele patients had more phylum Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes (p <0.05) and less Proteobaceria (p <0.05). Several orders and genera, such as Clostridiales(order), Pseudomonadales(order), Corynebactriales (order), Anaerococcus (genera) and Pseudomonas (genera), which might be related with inflammation, were significantly increased in seminal fluids of varicocele patients. The seminal microbial flora had a significant correlation with the semen parameters, the width of spermatic vein and hormones. Twenty-two varicocele patients with poor seminal quality had altered seminal microbiome compared with both 9 varicocele patients with normal seminal quality and healthy individuals. Interestingly, the seminal microbial flora had a trend to normal status along with an improvement of the semen parameters after surgery in varicocele patients with asthenospermia. Conclusion: Seminal dysbiosis was found in varicocele patients, which could be a novel mechanism for low seminal quality caused by varicocele. Decreased Semen Quality in Iranian Population: 22 Years of Experience Vahidi S 2 , Narimani N 1 , Moein M 2 , Ghasemi S 2 , Yazdinejad F 2 Introduction and Objective: In the literature, there are inconsistent reports about the over-time changes in semen quality from long ago. In this article, we have reviewed the semen quality changes in Iranian population during past 2 decades. During 20 years between 1990 and 2012, through a retrospective study, the records of more than 15000 patients have been reviewed. After epidemiologic consult, three consecutive years in each decade has been chosen as group 1 to 3 and the patients have been selected (1992-1994 as group 1, 2000-2002 as group 2, and 2010-2012 as group 3). Based on similar study, our inclusion criteria were the men younger than 55 years old with sperm count more than 20 million/ml and semen volume more than 1.5 cc (normal semen parameters based on WHO criteria). Sperm morphology and motility have been assessed according to WHO criteria. Results: Although the changes of sperm count were not significant, the mean percentage of rapid progressive spermatozoa in three groups decreased significantly from 39.22 to 30.24 and then 31.12 percent. In contrast mean percentage of slow progressive sperm increased from 21.69 to 29.79 and then 30.47 percent and the percent of immotile spermatozoa has not been changed significantly. Sperm morphology has the most impressive result, in which the percent of spermatozoa with normal morphology dramatically decreased from 62.18 in group 1 to 51.28 in group 2 and 44.37 percent in group 3.  Role of Antibiotic in the Treatment of Semen Hyperviscosity: A Single Institution Study Introduction and Objective: The prevalence of semen hyperviscosity is estimated to be between 12-29% and can lead to male factor infertility both in vivo and in vitro. Semen is composed of fluids secreted by the male accessory glands, which contain proteins essential to the coagulation and liquefaction of semen. Hypofunction of the prostate or seminal vesicles causes abnormal viscosity of seminal fluid. Hyperviscosity can impair normal sperm movement in the female reproductive tract, and can lead to decreased sperm count. Multiple factors have been predicated which result in the development of Semen hyperviscosity, of this infection is considered to be one of the main contributor. Aim of the study was to predict the effect of antibiotic in the treatment of hyperviscosity. This is a single institution study, 80 patients (age range 21-41 years) were recruited who were diagnosed with semen hyperviscosity (failure to liquefy after 30min). Medical, sexual, and family history were documented. All the patients semen were kept for culture and they all got levofloxacin for 14 days and patient who had positive culture were changed to appropriate antibiotics. All the patients underwent repeat semen analysis after 3 weeks. The percentage of patients that had previous history of prostatitis is 77%, 12% patient had past history of Sexual transmitted diseases and 75% patient are suffering from infertility, of this 7% patient had a family history. The percentage of patients with positive culture was 37% and of this only 10% patient had liquefaction post treatment. Culture negative patients, 40% patient had liquefaction post treatment. Conclusions: Semen hyperviscosity is associated with infertility and exact cause is considered to be multifactorial, of this infection is considered to be the main factor. In our study, we did found that most of the patients has infection but antibiotic treatment even for culture positive patients showed minimal effect. Treatment with antibiotic along to treat hyperviscosity cannot be considered curative since in our study the effect was only 30%. Further research is needed to better understand the contributors to semen hyperviscosity and the treatments that can be used for infertile males with hyperviscous semen. Prospective ultrasound may indicate a discrete, distal obstruction, amenable to reconstruction. We prospectively evaluated the ability of scrotal ultrasound to predict the ability to perform a VE and evaluated factors that could predict a patent anastomosis following VE. In an IRB approved prospective cohort study, men diagnosed with idiopathic obstructive azoospermia, scheduled for a longitudinal intussusception VE underwent a scrotal ultrasound measurement of testicular and epididymal dimensions. During surgery, site and type of anastomosis, presence of sperms in the epididymal fluid and technical satisfaction with the anastomosis were recorded. All men where VE could be performed were followed up for appearance of sperms in the ejaculate. Results: Thirty-four patients were included in the study and a VE was possible in only 19 (55%) of them while the remaining were abandoned. Of these 19, 6 had a patent anastomosis with one pregnancy. Preoperative ultrasound measurements could not identify patients where a VE could not be performed (table  1) . Motile sperm in the epididymal fluid was the only significant predictor of a successful anastomosis (table 2). Conclusion: Fourty five percent men planned for a VE for idiopathic obstructive azoospermia could not be reconstructed. Ultrasound assessment of testicular and epididymal dimensions could not predict the feasibility of performing a VE. The presence of motile sperms in the epididymal fluid was the only significant predictor a patent VE. The It has been shown that varicocele may have deleterious effect on male fertility. Varicocele induced sperm DNA damage may play role in this phenomenon. These damages seem to be reversible after microsurgical varicocelectomy based on numerous reports worldwide. In this study, we have reported the positive effects of microsurgical varicocelectomy on sperm DNA damage in our institute. Between January 2015 and January 2016, 30 patients with left side varicocele were entered to our study (24 to 34 years old with mean age of 28.75 years). Of those, 16% had grade 1, 44% had grade 2 and the remain had grade 3 clinical varicocele. Semen analysis and chromatin study (aniline blue, toluidine blue, chromomycin A3 and TUNEL test) has been performed before and 3 months after microsurgical varicocelectomy. Results: After microsurgical varicocelectomy Percentage of sperm with chromatin abnormality decreased significantly in Aniline blue stain (52.3% to 42.3%), toluidine blue stain (65.3% to 46.2%), chromomycin A3 (34.1% to 28.1%). In addition, percentage of sperm apoptosis which has been evaluated through TUNEL test also showed significant improvement (15.33% to 11.67%). Semen volume and percentage of sperm with normal morphology increased significantly after surgery (volume from 3cc to 5.66cc and normal morphology from 37.31% to 47.81%). Changes in sperm count and sperm motility before and after surgery were not statistically significant. To determine the effect of nifedipine before detorsion against germinal epithelial cell apoptosis, spermatogonia and spermatogenesis in the ipsilateral testicle with unilateral testicular torsion Materials and Methods: Thirty Wistar strain rats were randomly divided into 5 groups, each group consisting of 6 rats. Negative control group underwent sham surgery and then retrieved his left testicle. On the positive control group performed left testicular torsion 3x360° medially for 4 hours and 10 hours and after reperfusion phase for 4 hours left testicle is taken. Treatment group get the same surgical treatment with the positive control group, nifedipine (100 mcg / kg) was administered intraperitoneally 30 minutes before detorsion. Apoptosis was observed by TUNEL staining assay, spermatogonia and Johnson score to assess spermatogenesis was observed by hematoxylin eosin staining. Results: Unilateral testicular torsion-detorsion will cause significantly increased apoptotic cells followed by reduction the number of spermatogonia and Johnson scores on the ipsilateral testis, and it is positively correlated with the length of testicular torsion. Giving nifedipine before detorsion will cause a decreasing apoptotic cell with an increasing number of spermatogonia and Johnson scores than the positive control group either 4 hours or 10 hours testicular torsion. In the treatment group of 10 hours testicular torsion with the addition of nifedipine have a similar result to the positive control group of 4 hours testicel torsion. Conclusions: Nifedipine can decrease the amount of apoptosis, increasing the number of spermatogonia and score Johnson in ipsilateral testicle with unilateral testicular torsion. The Effect of Tamoxifen We conducted this study to evaluate improvement of spermatogenesis in patients with NOA and high serum estradiol level who took tamoxifen. Forty-four infertile men with NOA who were referred to the Infertility and Andrology Clinic from February 2013 till April 2016were participated in this cohort study. According to serum estradiol level, they divided in two groups (in each group N=22); Group A: Patients with normal estradiol level (mean ± SD: 34.1 ± 6.2 pg/ml, range: 24-43 pg/ml) and Group B :Patients with high estradiol level (mean ± SD: 65.3 ± 5.5 pg/ml, range: 56-75 pg/ml ). Serum FSH, LH and Testostrone were normal. These patients had hypospermatogenesis or maturation arrest at the level of spermatocytes and spermatids. Patients with Sertoli cell-only and those had received chemotherapy or radiotherapy were excluded from the study. Tamoxifen was administered 20mg every day for 8 weeks and thereafter evaluation of spermatogenesis with semen analysis and testis biopsy was done. Results: All the patients completed the study without any significant Drug side effects. Two patients of Group A (9.1%) and four patients of Group B (18.2%) demonstrated sperm in their semen analysis(S/A) (P=0.664). In those remaining azoospermic, testicular biopsy was done including 20 patients in group A and 18 patients in group B. Mature Sperms on surgical extraction were detected in two patients in Group A ( 10 %) and six patients in Group B (33.33 %). The difference was not statistically significant (P=0.117). The rest of the patients did not have any change in their samples. The treatment group 4 hours testicle torsion with addition of nifedipine half an hour before detorsion N2: The treatment group 10 hours testicle torsion with addition of nifedipine half an hour before detorsion Conclusion: Based on our results, higher rate of spermatogenesis was observed in patients with higher level of estradiol. Although the difference was not statistically significant, it might be due to small sample size and larger studies are required to better evaluation of the predictive role of serum estradiol as a hormonal test on spermatogenesis in patients with non-obstructive azoospermia who are receiving Tamoxifen. The Role of Natural Antioxidents in Improving Semen Quality in Infertile Men Introduction and Objective: Assisted Reproductive Technique (ART) is the last resort in the treatment paradigm of idiopathic male infertility (IMI). However, recent findings on the role of the oxidative stresses in the pathogenesis of IMI have highlighted the therapeutic potential of antioxidents in IMI. In this trial, we investigated the effects of Grape Seed Extract (GSE) with the contents of Proanthocyanidine and Transresveratol antioxidants on semen quality. In this double blind RCT conducted from November 2014 till March 2016, 57 patients (29 in intervention and 28 in placebo group) with IMI were administered GSE and placebo 300 mg twice daily for three months. The effect of GSE on semen parameters, level of antioxidents; including Catalase and Superoxide Dismutase (SOD), level of Malondialdehayde (MDA); as an oxidant level indicator, and the hormonal profile including FSH, LH and Testosterone levels were measured and analyzed. Results: In the intervention group, a significant increase in grade B sperm motility (15.9% ± 8.4 vs. 21.4% ± 12.2) and a decline of non-motile sperms (72.3% ± 10.7 vs. 63.6% ± 19.6) were observed. Furthermore, the level of Catalase increased significantly (44.6 ± 17.1 vs. 53.05 ± 18.6). MDA level decreased significantly (1.77 ± 0.48 vs 1.55 ± 0.43), however, SOD level did not change. Although FSH rose considerably in the intervention group (3.53 ± 1.51 vs. 4.3 ± 2.0), no significant difference was found in the levels of Testosterone and LH. In the placebo group, no differences were found in any of the investigated parameters. Our study showed a significant efficacy of GSE on improvement of semen quality and rising FSH level in patients with IMI. This seemingly cost-effective treatment modality not only would increase the fertility rate but also may improve the ART outcomes as well. Freire MJ 1 , Sousa AP 2 , Sousa L 1 , Ramalho-Santos J 3 , Parada B 4 , Figueiredo A 4 , Almeida-Santos T 5 Introduction and Objective: Varicocele is a well-recognized cause of decreased testicular function and occurs in approximately 15-20% of all males and in 40% of infertile males, being the most common cause of male infertility. Although its correction can improve abnormal semen parameters, it is still debatable if it improves the odds of spontaneous pregnancy. The aim of this study is to evaluate the spontaneous pregnancy rate, the need to resort to medically assisted reproduction techniques and the birth rate in a population of infertile patients who were submitted to percutaneous embolization of clinical varicocele. Results: After performance of the varicocele percutaneous embolization, and without accounting for the semen parameters, 42% of the couples resorted to assisted reproduction techniques. The overall pregnancy rate was 47% (52.4% were spontaneous and 47.6% occurred after assisted reproduction techniques). On average, the first pregnancy occurred 17.54±14.4 months after the percutaneous procedure. 55.7% of the pregnancies occurred in the first 12 months after the treatment. The time between embolization and spontaneous pregnancy or pregnancy after assisted reproduction techniques is not significantly different (p>0.05). Of these pregnancies, 83% resulted in delivery, mostly of a single newborn (81%). The patients that had higher mobility rates before the procedure had higher odds of pregnancy (p=0.031). Couples with men with higher sperm concentration after the embolization had also higher pregnancy rates (p=0.012). The improvement of semen parameters after percutaneous embolization of clinical varicocele in a population of infertile men is correlated with higher odds of pregnancy after a short period of time (average < 18 months). A significant portion of the couples were able to achieve a spontaneous pregnancy. Assisted Reproductive Technologies in Patients with Macrozoospermia: The Experience of the Medical University of Sfax Introduction and Objective: Macrozoospermia that accounts for less than 1 % of cases of severe male infertility is characterized by a high proportion of abnormal spermatozoa with enlarged heads and multiple flagella and a genetic common cause which is AURKC microdeletion. Although many publications have reported failure to conceive in couples with macrozoospermia, a few others have described successful pregnancies, thus raising question as to whether intra-couple assisted reproductive technologies should be avoided in men with macrozoospermie. Here, we report on assisted reproductive technology (ART) strategies and outcomes for macrozoospermic men who were seen at our genetic counselling at the Medical University of Sfax for 7 years. Between 2005 and 2012, a total of 14 patients were seen at our genetic counselling because of severe male infertility related to male large headed and multiple flagella spermatozoa. Results: Among our 14 couples, six (43%) have been enrolled in a program of intra-couple ART and have been referred to us after at least one failed attempt. The total number of cycles was 22 with a mean of 3.6% cycle per couple. ART programs included intra-uterine insemination (IUI) for 4 couples (67%), in vitro fertilization (IVF) for one couple, intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) for 3 couples and Intracytoplasmic morphologically selected sperm injection (IMSI) for one couple. ART failures were reported in 100% of cases secondary to fertilization or implantation failures or developmental failure. Indeed, fertilization was obtained in 4 couples 67%. The embryos obtained by (IVF or ICSI) and their transfers in the fresh or frozen state were reported for three couples. However, no pregnancy was obtained for these three couples with negative HCG levels following implantation failures. Nevertheless, obtaining a pregnancy following an IUI was reported for the 4th couple, unfortunately an early spontaneous foetal loss occurring at the 10th week of development ended the pregnancy. The remaining 33% of couples, there was no fertilization, both by IUI and ICSI. Screening for the homozygous c.144delC mutation in AURKC gene and a referral for genetics counselling are recommended for macrozoospermic men before ART program choice. Introduction and Objective: Although many studies have shown that the success of ICSI depends on a number of male factors, female factors and laboratory procedures, no one has analyzed these variables collectively. The aim of our study was to create a nomogram capable of predicting the outcome of ICSI based on all important available clinical and laboratory prognostic variables. We prospectively analyzed 1112 ICSI cycles performed for male or female infertility. We used multiple factors to build the first nomogram to predict the probability of clinical pregnancy of ICSI. All ICSI procedures were performed in the same institute using the same technique and the same operators. Eleven variables (male factors, female factor, and laboratory factors) were included in a multiple logistic regression analysis. The final nomogram was internally validated with bootstrap analysis. Results: Nearly half of the cycles (n=549, 49%) resulted in a clinical pregnancy. The female patients who became pregnant were young (median age = 26 years), had a healthy BMI (median = 28), and had a median infertility duration of 5 years. Most of the sperm used in the ICSI cycles came from ejaculation (64.7%). Multiple logistic regression analysis was conducted to study the predictability of clinical pregnancy. Prognostic variables included; 5 male factors (infertility duration, testicular grade, fresh/frozen, sperm source and percent of abnormal forms) and 6 female factors (age, BMI, smoking, infertility duration, number of good embryos, and transfer day) were considered. Restricted cubic splines were applied to numeric or ordinal variables to accommodate potential non-linear associations. The final nomogram was built from the logistic model with the 11 selected predictors. The model discrimination was quantified by a concordance index (CI), which is equal to the non-parametric area under the Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and represents the probability that for a randomly selected pair of cases, the one with clinical pregnancy would have a higher predicted probability of being clinically pregnant than the other without clinical pregnancy. The CI ranges from 0.5 to 1 with 0.5 indicating no discrimination ability and 1 representing perfect separation of patients with different outcomes. In addition, calibration was assessed graphically by plotting the observed against the predicted probability. Bootstrap analysis with 1000 resamples was used to correct over-fitting bias in the internal validation. All statistical analyses and plotting were performed using R version 2.12.2 (2011-02-25 R Development Core Team) with Hmisc and Design packages added. An alpha level of 0.05 was used. Based on this data, a nomogram was constructed to predict the outcome of ICSI (Figure 1 ). The nomogram was internally validated with bootstrapping and achieved a concordance index (CI) of 0.652. We constructed the first nomogram that is accurate to predict the probability of clinical pregnancy of ICSI. We believe that this tool will help physicians more accurately predict the chances of pregnancy for an infertile couple given the cost and the emotional stress associated with this procedure. Efficacy of Application of Vitamin C as an Antioxidant in Improvement of Sperm Parameters following Varicocelectomy Surgery Introduction and Objective: Varicocele has been associated with the presence of oxidative stress in seminal fluid, and both the levels of oxidative stress and of sperm damage seem to be related to the grade of varicocele. The aim of this study is to evaluate efficacy of application of vitamin C, as an antioxidant in improvement of sperm parameters following varicocelectomy surgery. In a prospective, controlled, randomized study, 120 patients with varicocele that were referred to Urmia Imam Khomeini Hospital for varicocelectomy were enrolled. After obtaining the demographic information of patients, sperm parameters were collected from patients before surgery. After surgery, patients were randomly divided into two groups. The participants in the case group were provided with a 250 mg vitamin C tablets twice daily for 3 months and in the same time the control group did not receive any treatment. Conclusion: Application of antioxidant drugs following a varicocelectomy surgery, can improve semen fluid quality. We suggest more studies to be done in order to reveal better antioxidant protocols to improve semen quality after varicocelectomy. Introduction and Objective: Tuberculosis (TB) is one of the most common reasons for infertility -both male and female in regions with TB epidemic. In open prospective comparative randomize study, 72 patients with prostate TB were enrolled. Patients were divided into 2 groups. First group (49 patients) who alongside with standard anti-TB therapy received spermato-protective treatment with Selzinc (this drug consists from selenium, zinc and vitamins A and E). Second group was control -23 patients with prostate TB who received standard anti-TB only. Results: Anti-TB therapy negatively influenced on fertility in 2nd control group: in 2 months number of sperms decreased on average on 23.9%, number of active sperms decreased on average on 10.6%, and number of sperms with normal morphology decreased on average on 32.3%. On contrary, in 1st group, who received spermato-protective treatment, total number of sperms increased on average on 47.8%; number of active sperms (A+B) increased on average on 40.5%, number of morphologically normal sperms increased on 41.9%. Patients with prostate TB need additional spermato-protective treatment with selenium, zinc, vitamins A and E to preserve fertility. Short LH serum level was significantly different between case and control group, but there is no difference in FSH and testosterone serum level between two groups. Also, there is no differences in mean weight and seminiferous tubule diameter between two groups. Increased rates of addiction and its broad societal complications are well known. One of the most important systems that may malfunction in drug abusers is the reproductive system, and evaluating patients for this potential risk may lead to increased awareness. Thirty 60-day-old male rats were divided into control and target groups. The target group underwent 5 mg/kg intraperitoneal injections of morphine twice a day while the control group underwent normal saline injections (at the same dos-age). After 60 days, the rats were anesthetized, and after blood sampling, they underwent bilateral orchiepididymectomy. Histological and hormonal evaluations were performed on the samples. Results: Levels of sex hormonal features and spermatogenesis were significantly reduced in the target group compared to the control group. LH levels showed a meaningful decrease in the target group, but FSH and testosterone levels did not. On histological section analysis, mature sperm were meaningfully decreased in the target group. Conclusions: Chronic use of opioids may lead to alterations in sexual features and sexual hormones. Therefore, opioids have the potential to cause infertility. These changesmayresult from the effect of the drugs on the hypophysis or hypothalamus, the direct effect of the drugs on the seminiferous tubules, or a combination of both. The findings suggest that public awareness about addiction may cause decreased infertility rates. Prognostic  Our data indicate that an increased CD 31 expression has been associated with smaller tumor size, lower nuclear grade, lower pathologic stage, lower VEGF A expression and lower degree of tumor necrosis. Increased CD 31 has been associated with better outcomes and better overall survival in CCRCC. Introduction  A total of 37 patients with metastatic CCRCC who underwent surgery and received molecular targeted therapies from March 2008 to April 2016 were retrospectively reviewed and analyzed. Tissue specimens from the patients were analyzed for PD-1 and PD-L1 expression by immunohistochemistry. Results: Median patient age was 64 years old (range=53-78). The majority of patients were male (83.8%). All MSKCC risk groups were represented among the patients with 35.1% with favorable-, 51.4% with intermediate-and 13.5% with poor-risk. The expression of PD-1 and PD-L1 was observed in 19 (51.4%) and 10 (27.0%) patients, respectively. The expression of PD-1 and PD-L1 was associated with larger primary renal tumor size, higher nuclear grade, sarcomatoid feature, pre-treatment lower hemoglobin level and higher C-reactive protein level. Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed that no significant difference in progression free survival of first line molecular tar-geted therapy was found for PD-1 (p=0.1744) and PD-L1 (p=0.6487) expression. However, PD-1 expression has significant impact on overall survival (OS) (p=0.0246), while for PD-L1 expression only a trend is seen for OS (p=0.0647). The patients with PD-1 expression showed higher infiltration of CD8 (p=0.0012) and FOXP3 (p<0.0001) positive tumor infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL). The patients with PD-L1 expression showed higher infiltration of FOXP3 positive TIL (p=0.0034), while there was no significant difference in CD8 positive TIL (p=0.1188). Conclusion: PD-1 and PD-L1 expression is significantly associated with adverse clinicopathological features in CCRCC. Furthermore, PD-1 expression could be one of biomarkers suggesting poor outcome in patients with metastatic CCRCC receiving molecular targeted therapies. Prognostic Recently there is a trend towards higher rates of incidence of non-clear cell renal cell carcinomas (RCC). The aim of our study was to evaluate prognostic factors that influence on the probability of recurrence and progression of disease, to assess progression-free (PFS) and cancer-specific survival (CSS). Five-year PFS and CSS was 83.8% and 84.6%, respectively. Cox regression analysis impossible to conduct due to small number of completed cases. The most important prognostic factors that have significant influence on disease recurrence and cancer-specific death in non-clear cell RCC patients were pT and pN+ stage, tumor size, presence of vascular invasion, sarcomatoid component, Fuhrman grade and symptoms. Introduction and Objective: Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is unique among the genitourinary malignancies in that up to 40% of affected patients show signs and symptoms of a paraneoplastic syndrome. The importance of understanding these paraneoplastic symptoms lies in the fact that they may be the initial manifestation of either primary or recurrent disease. This review will provide information on many paraneoplastic syndromes associated with RCC (prevalence, proposed mechanisms of action, clinical assessment UP.227, Figure 3 . Distribution of the Sertoli Cells in the Control Group and the Target  (in percent) UP.227, Figure 4 . Distribution of the Lydic Cells in The Control Group and the Target (in percent) and treatment options); as an example of a rare variant, an atypical case of paraneoplastic dermatomyositis treated with radical nephrectomy is also reported. A MEDLINE search for "paraneoplastic syndrome", "renal cell carcinoma", "renal cancer" and "dermatomyositis" was performed and information was selected to make a review. An atypical case of dermatomyositis associated with RCC was reported based on clinical data records of our Institution. Results: Hypertension, constitutional symptoms (fever, weight loss, and fatigue) and hypercalcemia are the most frequent paraneoplastic symptoms associated with RCC. Other less frequent conditions include polycythemia (1-8%), nonmetastatic hepatic dysfunction (3-20%), galactorrhea, Cushing's syndrome, hyper/hypoglycemia, amyloidosis and some neuromyopathies. A case of a paraneoplastic dermatomyositis is reported: a 35-year-old female, developed severe muscle weakness. Heliotrope rash, Gottron's papules, blood results and electromyography suggested a diagnosis of dermatomyositis. A computed tomography of the chest, abdomen and pelvis showed a solid mass in the left kidney. She underwent a left laparoscopic radical nephrectomy and histology confirmed renal cell carcinoma (clear cell subtype). After 3 months, dermatomyositis manifestations completely disappeared and the patient stopped corticotherapy. She remains asymptomatic 12 months after surgery. Conclusion: RCC was previously referred to as the internist's tumor because of the predominance of systemic rather than local manifestations. Most paraneoplastic syndromes associated with localized RCC are only definitively treated with nephrectomy. The reported case illustrates the potential role of nephrectomy in cases of dermatomyositis induced by renal cell carcinoma as there was no improvement with medical therapy prior to surgery. Only 5 cases of dermatomyositis associated with RCC were published. The recurrence of a previous paraneoplastic syndrome should alert the physician to possible disease progression. Huang H, Xing J, Chen S, Li W Introduction and Objective: In this study, we aimed to evaluate the correlation between renal sinus fat accumulation and the survival of non-metastatic clearcell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). We retrospectively enrolled 268 patients with ccRCC at our center between December 2009 and December 2015. The clinicopathological factors assessed were collected. Visceral fat area and subcutaneous fat area at the level of the umbilicus and renal sinus fat area (RSFA) were also evaluated. Progression-free survival (PFS) was determined by Kaplan-Meier curves and potential independent prognostic factors on PFS were identified by multivariable Cox analysis. The predictive value of RSFA in PFS was further examined in a propensity-score matched cohort by Kaplan-Meier curves. Introduction and Objective: Upper tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC) can often relapse despite radical surgery. The prognosis of the recurrent disease is mostly poor. Preoperative parameters that predict extra-urothelial recurrence are needed to identify patients who may benefit from intensified therapy such as neoadjuvant chemotherapy. We previously reported that serum CYFRA 21-1 level would be a prognosticator for patients with G3 or muscle invasive UTUC. The aim of this study was to determine the prognostic impact of preoperative serum CYFRA 21-1 level on extra-urothelial recurrence after nephroureterectomy in patients with non-metastatic UTUC. Despite the earlier detection of suspicious masses, mortality has remained largely stable, suggesting over treatment of small renal masses. These concerns have led to a resurgence in renal biopsies. However, minimal guidelines exist regarding who should undergo biopsy. We compare current biopsy practice at a large Australian tertiary institution with current guidelines and examine its efficacy in minimizing unnecessary intervention. Patients who underwent surgical intervention for small renal masses between July 2007 and December 2016 at our institution were retrospectively analyzed with a focus on the trends in patients with benign disease receiving intervention. In addition, a retrospective study of patients with small renal masses who received biopsies during the same period was conducted, identifying the indications for biopsy. as suggested by various urological and oncological societies. Despite this, the proportion of patients at our institution who receive intervention for post-operatively diagnosed benign disease continues to be around 20%. We believe there is a need to broaden the recommendations for the biopsy of small renal masses in order to minimize unnecessary intervention. Factors to Predict Malignancy Likelihood in Renal Masses and Their Utility in Improving Selection of Renal Biopsy Candidates for Evaluation of Small Renal Masses Introduction and Objective: Alongside the recent increased rates of incidentally detected small renal masses, we have seen a rise in the uptake of percutaneous renal biopsy. With no clear guidelines for whom to biopsy, there is a need for consensus. Patient factors, tumour characteristics and intervention options all influence the decision to biopsy. Considerable debate surrounding the topic of routine biopsy still remains. We review the current literature to identify factors predictive of benign disease and assess whether these characteristics could aid the selection of patients for biopsy. A formal PRISMA literature review was undertaken using EMBASE, Medline and Web of Science. MeSH terms were used including: 'kidney tumour' , 'kidney biopsy' , 'predictive variables' and 'benign disease' . Abstracts and non-English papers were excluded from our analysis. These were then analyzed and applied to patients who had undergone surgical intervention for small renal masses at an Australian tertiary institution. The literature suggests that increasing tumour size and increasing RENAL nephrometry score are associated with a higher risk of malignant disease. Lower age and female gender were found to be more likely correlating with benign disease. In addition, two pre-operative nomograms predicting likelihood of malignancy were identified. These nomograms used age, gender, tumour size, smoking and RENAL nephrometry scores as predictive variables. Whilst they do not have sufficient utility on their own to be used to make clinical decisions regarding management, there may be potential in selecting patients based on these nomograms for small renal mass biopsy. Conclusion: Percutaneous biopsy has a role in minimising over-treatment of small renal masses, particularly in an older population with increasing comorbidities. However, it is necessary to have clearer guidelines to encourage selection of patients appropriate for biopsy. We believe that the use of predictive factors of benign disease and pre-operative nomograms have potential to select patients for renal biopsy to minimise unnecessary intervention. Long-Term Oncologic Outcome after Robot-Assisted Partial Nephrectomy for T1 Renal Tumors Vartolomei MD 1 , Matei DV 2 , Musi G 2 , Rene G 3 , Tringali VML 4 , Bianchi R 2 , Cioffi A 2 , Cozzi G 2 , Cordima G 6 , Bottero D 2 , Ferro M 2 , de Cobelli O 5 Nowadays, open PN is not considered anymore a treatment option in clinical T1 tumors, but only in patients with renal masses unfit for minimally invasive approach (robot or laparoscopic PN). Robot-assisted partial nephrectomy (RAPN) seems to be the most promising minimally invasive approach in the treatment of renal masses suitable for organ spearing surgery. Long-term oncologic results are required to assess the presumed superiority of this approach. The aim of this study was to analyze RAPN long-term oncologic outcomes achieved in a tertiary robotic reference center.  Galectin-9 as a Biomarker to Predict the Benefit from Adjuvant Chemotherapy in Bladder Urothelial Carcinoma Introduction and Objective: Galectin-9, a member of the "tandem repeat" type galectins performing as animal lectins with an affinity for β-galactosides, has been well documented to exert crucial functions in immunomodulation, survival and growth of various tumors. This study aims to reveal the clinical significance of galectin-9 in urothelial carcinoma of the bladder (UCB) postoperatively. UP.237, Figure 1 . Prognostic Power of Galectin-9 in UCB Patients pression was assessed by immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays. Kaplan-Meier method was conducted to plot survival curves. Prognostic nomograms were constructed via integrating all the independent indicators from multivariate Cox analysis for recurrence-free survival (RFS) and cancer-specific survival (CSS). In addition, we evaluate whether patients with increased or decreased galectin-9 expression might benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy. Introduction and Objective: Laparoscopic partial nephrectomy (LPN) for small-diameter renal tumors is regarded as comparable with nephrectomy with regard to carcinostatic ability, and it is recommended as the standard surgical procedure for postoperative preservation of renal function. Forty-five patients who underwent LPN by April 2015 were retrospectively investigated. The operation time, ischemic time, blood loss, eGFR before and after surgery, and its reduction rate were analyzed. In addition, these were investigated in the early and late periods, and by the Renal Nephrometry Score. Results: The mean age of the patients was 63.1 (range 30 to 85) years old, the mean tumor diameter was 20.6 (range 9 to 35) mm, and the mean R.E.N.A.L Nephrometry Score (RNS) was 6.1 (range 4 to 10). The mean operative time was 152.0 (range 87 to 255) minutes, the mean ischemic time was 31.0 (range 12 to 68) minutes, and the mean blood loss was 117.9 (range 3 to 2305) ml. On comparison between the early and late periods of surgery, the ischemic time was shorter in the late period (p=0.030). By RNS, blood loss was lower in the moderate score group (p=0.033), and eGFR reduction was smaller in the low score group (p=0.003). On multiple regression analysis of postoperative eGFR, only ischemic time was a factor common with eGFR after one month and the reduction rate. Conclusion: LPN requires resection of the tumor and complete suture of the renal parenchyma within a limited time, which is considered technically difficult. In this study, the ischemic time shortened with surgery experience, but it did not influence the postoperative renal function. The ischemic time was the most influential factor for postoperative renal function. A New Hemostatic Patch in Partial Nefrectomy: Veriset™ Introduction and Objective: The open-or laparoscopic partial nephrectomy is a common used treatment in renal carcinomas. An important step in this procedure is to achieve adequate haemostasis of the renal parenchyma after resection of the tumour. The goal is to complete this step as quickly and efficient as possible to reduce the warm ischaemia time of the kidney. In this study, we will show you the prelimi- patch. This topical haemostatic patch is completely free of human or animal components and is made up by a layer of oxidized regenerated cellulose, a layer of trilysine with reactive polyethylene glycol. These ingredients ensure a rapid and effective haemosta-Among all the patients in the cohort, treatment with adjuvant chemotherapy was not related to cancer-specific survival (A). However, treatment with adjuvant chemotherapy was associated with a higher rate of cancer-specific survival in the galectin-9 low group (B), but it was not associated with a higher rate of cancer-specific survival in the galectin-9 high group (C). A test for an interaction between the biomarker and the treatment indicated that in the benefit associated with adjuvant chemotherapy was superior among galectin-9 low patients than among galectin-9 high patients. UP.237, Figure 2 Its use is feasible in partial nephrectomy. The limitation of this study is the small number of patients included. We expect however, that the use of this patch might lead to significantly less blood loss and a shorter warmer ischaemia time. Further expansion of the group and comparison to other patches will take place. Introduction and Objective: We evaluated the oncological outcomes and perioperative complications of a hospital-based cohort of patients submitted to partial nephrectomy (PN) and correlated these variables with RENAL score (RS). There was a statistically significant positive association be-tween RS, meanly the "R" component (radius score), and the occurrence of postoperative complications (p = 0.004) and the length of hospital stay (p = 0.034). Conclusion: Corroborating the most recent literature, nephrometric stratification of renal lesions is recommended before PN be performed to better predict oncological outcome and potential complications. Introduction and Objectives: Surgical tendency in treatment renal carcinoma had completely given preference to nephron sparing surgery (NSS) in last years. It is the "gold standard" for tumors less than 4 cm. Such approach also has reduced hospitalization, intraoperative blood loss, allowed to achieve comparable oncological outcomes and fits into the concept of Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS). Nevertheless, currently no data regarding the assessment of the use minimally invasive surgery in conjunction with ERAS principles for the treatment of kidney cancer. We had decided to compare the results of treatment in patients with end without ERAS protocol. Secondary end-point the search of predictive factors of complications. (p=0.0002), 1-2 grade were 34.0 vs 15.0 (p=0.0003). Complication rates both groups associated with location tumor in the kidney: the RENAL suffix 'posterior' increased the odds of developing urine leakage or hematomas by 2.6 times (95% CI: 1.07-6.30, p=0.042) when compared with those renal masses classed as "anterior". Other anatomical and clinical factors did not affect discrepancies between FT and CS groups. Median hospitalization in conditions of using ERAS elements, the absence of intraoperative drainage, early activation significantly differs from the length of hospitalization in the case of CS 13 days versus 6 for patients in FT group (U-Test p = 0.0032 CI 95%). Conclusions: Perioperative ERAS approach did not affect the frequency of intraoperative and could reduce postoperative complications rate in compare with meaning or tumor location in kidney. Effect of Late Renal Function and Oncological Outcomes with Partial Nephrectomy Introduction and Objective: Partial nephrectomy has been performed for small renal masses in terms of the preservation of renal function. We examined the relative effect of patients' background and perioperative results on late renal function and oncological outcomes. Almost of all patients received contrast-enhancing chest and abdominal CT before surgery to define tumors' maximum diameter and after surgery (1, 3, 6, 12 month and once every 6 months after that) to evaluate recurrence and metastasis. We evaluated renal function after surgery with the Percentage of total eGFR preservation(PtGFRP). PtGFRP was calculated in the same manner (postoperative eGFR/Preoperative eGFR × 100). Multiple linear regression analysis was performed to analyze. Results: Mean age was 66.6 years (range: 32-83), male was 72 patients (58.5%), mean BMI was 24.5 kg/m2 (range: 17.6-39.0), mean tumors' maximum diameter was 28.0 mm (range: 10-62), mean RENAL nephrectomy score was 6.3 (range: 4-11) and comorbidities (hypertension and diabetes) were 44 patients (35.8%) and 25 patients (20.3%) respectively. Mean operative time was 230 minutes (range: 130-436) and mean surgical bleeding was 281 ml (range: 10-1530). 109 patients (88.6%) received artery clamp. Mean ischemia time was 17 minutes (range: 6-60). Mean follow-up period was 20.6 months (range: 1-76) we had never experienced open conversion. Nine patients (7.3%) had complications and 3 patients (2.4%) were above grade III (pseudoaneurysm occurred in 3 patients and they received TAE). A patient (0.81%) had metastasis. No patients died during follow up. Multivariable analysis found that significant risk factors for renal function in postoperative 12 month were female and high RENAL nephrectomy score (7≦). (95% CI -18.3 to -5.3; p < 0.001 and 95% CI -13.1 to -0.6; p < 0.32). Conclusion: Our study demonstrated sex and RENAL nephrectomy score effected on the preservation of renal function significantly. In addition, it was difficult to show cancer prognosis because of short follow-up. Clinical Outcome of Laparoscopic Partial Nephrectomy Using 3D Imaging Fujii M, Mukai S, Kamoto T Introduction and Objective: Partial nephrectomy is the preferred surgical intervention for small renal tumors given the potential benefit of nephron sparing. We retrospectively reviewed our experience and investigated perioperative outcome of partial nephrectomy by laparoscopy using 3D imaging. We analyzed a series of 34 patients (35 tumors) who underwent partial nephrectomy by laparoscopy at Miyazaki University Hospital between April 2011 and March 2016. All patients received single-J stent before surgery. Our protocol called for combining open surgery (hybrid surgery) if the tumor proved to by cystic or larger than 3cm in size. Postoperative complications were recorded according to the Clavien-Dindo system. Results: Mean age at surgery was 64 years (range 45-77), and mean observation period was 21 months (range 1-53). Retroperitoneal approach was employed for 6 patients, and transperitoneal approach was employed for 20 patients, including eight cases of hybrid surgery. Mean tumor size was 26 mm (range 12 to 47). Mean operative time was 233 minutes (range 136 to 357), and mean laparoscopic time was 162 minutes. Mean warm ischemia time was 35 minutes (range 42 to 326). Average surgical bleeding was 387 ml (range 50 to 1800). There were 4 complications: post-operative hemorrhage (G3a), doren infection (G2), urine leakage (G3a), pseudoaneurysm (G3a). Perioperative blood transfusion rate was 2.9%. Pathological results revealed clear cell carcinoma 24 (70.5％), papillary carcinoma 4 (11.7％), angiomyolipoma 4 (11.7％), oncocytoma 2(5.8％)chromophobe carcioma 1 (2. 9%).There was no positive margin. All of the cases were resolved with non-surgical treatment. No patients developed local recurrence or distant metastasis. Conclusion: Laparoscopic partial nephrectomy using 3D imaging was safe, and may be of benefit for complete resection. Treatment of Advanced Kidney Cancer with Antiangiogenic Drugs: Our Experience after a Decade Martín-Way DA, Vázquez-Alonso F, Puche-Sanz I, Simbaña-García JJ, Orcera-Herrera V, Cózar-Olmo JM Introduction and Objective: Antiangiogenic agents are the treatment of choice for metastatic renal cancer. Since 2007 we have incorporated them into our therapeutic arsenal. We present our results after 10 years of experience. Materials and Methods: Between April 2007 and December 2016 we treated 94 patients with advanced renal cancer with antiangiogenic agents. 63 (67%) were men and 31(33%) women, with a mean age of 64 years (37-86). 52 (56.5%) of the patients had a Karnofsky score of 100%. Seventy-nine (83.2%) patients underwent a radical nephrectomy, 2 a partial nephrectomy, and in 11 patients no surgeries were performed. Seventy-nine patients (83.2%) had a clear cell RCC, 5 a papillary RCC, 3 a chromophobe RRC, 4 other renal tumours and 3 didn´t have an histological diagnosis. Forty-six (48.9%) patients had multiple metastases, the most common being the pulmonary site in 30 (31.9%). According to the MSKCC risk scale score, 29.3% had good prognosis, 52.2% intermediate and 18.5% poor. As first line treatment, we used sunitinib in 71 (75.5%) patients, sorafenib in 6 and pazopanib in 17; as second line we used axitinib in 19 (45.2%), everolimus in 10, sorafenib in 8, sunitinib in 2 and chemotherapy in 1; as third line we used everolimus in 14 (77.8%), axitinib in 3 and sorafenib in 1. 10 patients were treated in forth line therapies and 3 in fifth line. Results: Seventy six patients were evaluated according to the RECIST criteria: 7 (9.1%) patients showed a complete response, 33(42.9%) a partial response, 18 (23.4%) had stable disease and 19 (24.7%) progressed. The median of progression-free survival after firstline therapies was 12 months, and the overall survival median was 24 months. 30 patients are still alive. The toxicity has been very variable, requiring a dose reduction in first-line treatments 36 patients (38.7%) after a median of 5 months, and 10 patients required hospital admissions due to side effects. Materials and Methods: One hundred and two patients who were diagnosed pT3aN0M0 RCC after radical nephrectomy from Keimyung University Dongsan medical center, Kyungpook University medical center and Dongguk University Gyeongju medical center were included in this retrospective study from January 2001 to June 2016. In these patients, the prognostic values of PFI, SFI, RVI, age, tumor size, histology and grade to predict recurrence-free survival were analyzed by Cox proportional hazards models. 37th CONGRESS OF THE SOCIÉTÉ INTERNATIONALE D'UROLOGIE -SIU 2017 ABSTRACT BOOK Introduction and Objective: Wunderlich syndrome is a rare condition, described for the first time in 1856. The most frequent causes are represented by renal tumors, especially renal cell carcinoma and angiomiolipoma. The clinical presentation depends on the degree and duration of the bleeding. The aim of the study was to evaluate the diagnosis and treatment particularities. Between January 1997 -January 2017 in "Saint John" Emergency Clinical Hospital were diagnosed and treated 12 patients with spontaneous renal rupture. Clinical and imaging aspects as well as therapy options were revised. Results: From the total number of cases, 8 patients were diagnosed with renal cell carcinoma, 2 with angiolipoma, one with renal cyst and another one with choriocarcinoma. Three patients were admitted with hypovolemic shock, one patient was transferred in our department after retroperitoneal hematoma had been discovered during laparotomy for ectopic pregnancy suspicion. In the other cases the symptoms were: lumbar pain (8 cases), haematuria (6 cases), vomiting (2 cases). In all patients, perirenal collection was described ultrasonographically, the diagnostic being certified by CT. In 9 cases, emergency surgery was necessary. In other 3, the procedure was done after patient re-equilibration. In 10 cases nephrectomy was performed. In one patient with angiolipoma, partial nephrectomy was done. The patient with renal cyst was subjected to cyst resection. No significant complications were encountered. Conclusions: Wunderlich syndrome is a feared complication of benign or malign renal tumors. Correct and prompt diagnosis is mandatary for an appropriate treatment. Transitional Cell Carcinoma of Pelvic Kidney: A Rare Case with Some Technical Point Introduction and Objective: A 49-year-old gentleman referred to me because of mild lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) and microscopic hematuria. He was neither smoker nor addicted and was not anticoagulant user. First Abdominal contrast CT (21/ Nov./2015) was normal except left pelvic kidney. Second CT showed left pelvic mass. This is fourth case of the literature. Its surgery is a dilemma. A 49-year-old clerk man referred to me because of mild LUST and intermittent hematuria and 2-3 episodes of painless gross hematuria. His physical exam was normal, except mild BPH on digital rectum exam. His contrast abdominal CT (Nov./2015) was normal. I re checked his urine-blood test including PSA, all were normal (except microscopic hematuria). His new renal ultrasound showed mild hydronephrosis and distal hydrometer on the left pelvic kidney. Papanicolao Test for detecting malignancy was normal. His prostate was measured 43x36x38 mm (vol.32cm3). On cystoscopy, there was kissing lobe and random bladder biopsy reported to be extensive urothelial denudation. Then I advised to continue his medication (Alpha blocker) and re assure him. After one month or, he came again and complain of gross Painless hematuria. I asked blood and urine test and another abdominal spiral contrast CT to expert radiologist (June /13/2016). He reported a lobulated mass inside the left pelvic kidney which enhanced after contrast injection, left hydroureter and stenosis of left ureterovesical junction (UVJ). Results: On his cystoscopy only mild BPH was found. Our attempt to do left ureteroscopy was failed, because of stenosis. Then left nephroureterectomy with excision of bladder cuff, intraperitoneally, through left hockey steak shape incision was performed. The pathologic specimen was low gradeTCC (PTa). Conclusion: 1) CT scan for diagnosis of microscopic hematuria is inadequate 2) intra-abdominal nephroureterectomy with bladder cuff excision via hockey steak shape incision is safe and fast. Both groups were matched in terms of the major clinical and demographic parameters: the age (54.2 ± 11.1 years in group 1 and 55 ± 10.9 years in group 2); the gender ratio (61.9 % of males and 38.1 % of females in group 1 and 61.7 % and 38.3 % in group 2); the glomerular filtration rate (86.9 ± 17.8 vs 84.4 ± 19.8 mL/ min); ECOG performance status (0.54 ± 0.42 vs 0.5 ± 0.45). To delineate parameters affecting the selection of the appropriate surgical tactics, the univariate and multivariate analysis was used. The following factors were taking into account: tumor size, exo-or endophytic growth pattern, the proximity of tumor to the renal cavitary system, and tumor location -in sinus (n=425), polar (n=285) or lateral (n=193). The volume of the functional renal parenchyma (VFRP) was assessed by the original methodology. All the parameters were based on CT findings. The nomograms demonstrating how VFRP and tumor size affect the selection of the appropriate surgical treatment depending on the tumor location have been plotted. For RCC with polar localization, VFRP > 58 % should be considered as indication for PN. For RCC located in sinus, the tumor size less than 38 mm on the average should be considered as indication for PN. The analysis allowed us for the development of the novel nephrometric system for the assessment of tumors of kidneys (NCIU nephrometry). NCIU system that takes into consideration both tumor location (Nearness -central location of tumor; Collateral -peripheral location; Inferior -lower location; Upperupper location) and VFRP allows one for determining precisely the indications for PN or RN. The multivariate regression analysis demonstrated that the tumor size, the tumor location, and VFRP are the major factors affecting the selection of the appropriate surgical treatment of RCC. NCIU-nephrometry represents objectively the parameters mentioned above allowing for the optimal planning of the surgical strategy in the RCC treatment, namely PN or RN. In case of lateral location of the tumor with VFRP > 58 %, PN should be considered. In case of medial location of the tumor, the size of the tumor is the principal factor affecting the selection of the surgical tactics. The less is the tumor size (fewer than 38 mm), the more likely is PN as the treatment choice. Introduction and Objective: Use of neoadjuvant targeted therapy (nTT) prior to nephron-sparing surgery is a new approach in managing of complex kidney lesions. The use of TT allows for significant increase in survival of the patients with advanced and metastatic RCC decreasing the size of the primary foci as well. So such strategy may be an option for non-advanced lesions. Although complications profile after such surgeries is not well described. of the study is to assess the influence of the nTT on the complication rate during and after nephron-sparing approach in treatment of localized RCC. We retrospectively analyzed database of 1727 RCC patients treated in the Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Oncourology of the National Cancer Institute from 2008-2016. Forty-one patients that received 2 months of nTT prior to nephron sparing surgery were identified and matched to another group of 41 patients who underwent partial nephrectomy (PN) for similar lesions without nTT. All the clinical data with intra and postoperative complications were analized in the study. Results: No significant differences between groups were observed in terms of baseline features, oncological outcomes and complications rate, whereas there was a difference in the operation time. That is likely reflects technical peculiarities of neprhon-sparing approach after nTT due to severe adhesive process in retroperitoneal fat. The nTT in our series of localized RCC provided the average tumor regression of 20.6 ± 15.1 %. Complication rate after TT was comparable to group without nTT, the only difference was found was non-significant increase in operation time. Results of neoadjuvant TT in the RCC are encouraging and more studies needed to evaluate the place of such treatment strategy in management of localized RCC, especially in the setting of downsizing tumor for safer subsequent organ-sparing surgery. Quality of Life in Partial Nephrectomy: Single Center Experience Iqbal N, Rahim W, Alam U, Khan A, Akhter S Introduction and Objective: Partial nephrectomy is the accepted procedure of choice in benign renal lesions requiring excision and in certain malignant conditions. We hereby describe Partial nephrectomy experience in 40 patients terms of safety and efficacy and Quality of life. Materials and Methods: Partial nephrectomy was done by open technique in 40 patients. Data regarding patient age, gender, BMI, presenting symptom, tumor size & site on CT scan, histology, post op complications and recurrence on follow up CT scan at 6 months and at 12 months by chart review. SPSS version 16 was used for data analysis. short form-36 (SF-36) questionnaire was used to assess the quality of life in these patients. Results: A total of 40 patients with a mean age of 46.5±1.54 years were included. 28 (70%) were male and 12 (30%) were females. The mean BMI was 27.89±5.67. Mean size of renal mass on CTscan was 3.80±1.15cm. One patient needed DJstent for persistent urine leak in drain. Mean hospital stay was 5.1±1.41 days. Mean operating time was 248±79.72 minutes. Mean preoperative Hb was 13.73±1.66 g/dl and mean drop in Hb on first post operative day was 1.61±1.20 g/dl. None had developed sepsis or wound infection. The mean preoperative creatinine clearance was 103.11±3.07 ml/min and the mean drop in creatinine clearance at six months was 14.52±1.41 ml/ min. The 24 patients with malignant histology were followed with CT scan at 6 and 12 months and out of which 20 (83.3%) patients had no recurrence at six months to one year. Physical function was 45.3±14.2, General health score was 42.4±11.3 and Mental health was 42.4±8.23. Social function also improved after the procedure. Conclusion: Partial Nephrectomy is a safe and effective procedure which can be done without major complications. Physical, mental and social scores of quality of life were improved in patients after the partial nephrectomy. Renal Cell Carcinoma with Synchronous Solitary Mucosal Bladder Metastasis and Its Treatment Options: A Case Report Deshmukh C, Singh A, Mohankumar V, Ganpule A, Sabnis R, Desai M Introduction and Objective: It is well known that Renal Cell Carcinomas (RCC) commonly metastasize to liver, lung, adrenal, bone and brain. Rarely, RCC metastasizes to the urinary bladder. Bladder metastasis in RCC can be synchronous or metachronous. In our case report, we present a purely mucosal synchronous bladder metastasis from RCC presenting with painless gross hematuria. A 75 years old female with hypertension, asthma, hypothyroidism, presented with total painless, gross hematuria. On evaluation, she was found to have exophytic left renal mass along with a polypoidal bladder mass. There was no other evidence of metastatic disease in lung, liver and bone on CT scan. She underwent Transurethral Resection of Bladder Tumor (TURBT) followed 5 days later by Laparoscopic left radical nephrectomy. Histopathological diagnosis of the renal tumor was Clear Cell variant of Papillary RCC (Fuhrmann grade3), stage T3aN0. Results: Histological examination revealed that the bladder tumor was Clear Cell variant of Papillary RCC with invasion of lamina propria with muscularis propria free of tumor. Immuno-histochemical profile of both the tumors was similar. (Table) . Hence, the patient was diagnosed to have solitary synchronous metastasis to urinary bladder from RCC of left kidney with final staging being T3aN0M1. Conclusion: Most of the metastases to bladder from RCC involve the muscularis propria, but when muscularis propria is free, as in this case, radical nephrectomy with TURBT becomes the treatment of choice. By excising the entire disease, patient can be spared of targeted therapy at an earlier stage, which can be saved for later date if and when these patients present with demonstrable metastases. Introduction and Objective: Partial nephrectomy (PN) is the standard option for treatment of renal tumors less than 4 cm. We notice a significant number of specific complications with PN. Some authors described scores based on radiological features that can predict surgical complications. The aim of this work is to compare the RENAL score (tumor specific factors) and MAP score (the presence of adherent perirenal fat) in term of intra operative and post operative complications. We retrospectively evaluate patients treated with partial nephrectomy for renal tumor between 2000 and 2015. Clinical and pathological data, including localization, size, RENAL score and MAP score, were analyzed. Univariate and multivariate regression models were used to assess the impact of these variables on the complications during or after surgery. Results: Overall complication rate was 12% (one ureteric lesion and 6 hemorrhagic complications ). In bivariate analysis, the RENAL score was statistically relevant (p=0.05) in difficult dissection and total nephrectomy conversion rate. In multivariate analysis, only RENAL score was identified as a predictive factor of conversion to total nephrectomy, and difficult dissection. Also, RENAL score was significantly good predictor than MAP score in term of hospital stay, post operative transfusion rate, urine leakage and mortality. Conclusion: In our experience, the RENAL score is more specific than MAP score and appears like the major predictive factor of complications in PN Comparison Nephron-Sparing Introduction and Objectives: A side effect of tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) use for advanced renal cell carcinoma is proteinuria. Most proteinuria is reversible, but an increase in urine protein can cause nephrotic syndrome and irreversible renal failure. Thus, prediction of proteinuria is very important in treatment with a TKI. We evaluated urinary biomarkers for their ability to predict an increase in urine protein. We examined 22 patients with progressive renal cell carcinoma in our department from August 1, 2014 to August 31, 2016. We measured urinary nephrin, an indicator of glomerular epithelial cell damage, and urinary beta-2 microglobulin (β2-MG), N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase (NAG), and liver-type fatty acid binding protein (L-FABP), which are indicators of renal tubular damage, using semiquantitative methods before and after TKI treatment. Results: TKIs used in this study were pazopanib, axitinib, sunitinib, and sorafenib. We compared urine protein with urinary biomarker levels obtained before treatment. We also performed correlation analysis to determine whether an increase in urinary biomarkers was associated with increased proteinuria. The results showed increases in proteinuria and all biomarkers with TKI administration. Furthermore, a positive correlation was found with nephrin (r=.430, P <0.0001), β2-MG (r=.319, P <0.0001), NAG (r=.252, P =0.002), and L-FABP (r=.497, P <0.0001). Conclusion: This study was performed to identify biomarkers predictive of adverse effects with TKI treatment. Proteinuria is thought to result from TKI-induced vascular endothelial growth factor inhibition in the glomerular capillary wall. In this study, biomarkers of both renal tubular damage and glomerular epithelial cell damage were significantly increased. Proteinuria caused by TKI treatment may also be associated with tubular impairment. To identify a specific biomarker for use in prediction of renal failure caused by TKI treatment, more cases must be investigated. Introduction and Objective: Kidney cancer accounts for 2-3% of all malignant tumors of the adult. Sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma is a special entity that represents 1 to 8% of renal tumors. These carcinomas are recognized by their aggressiveness and their fearsome prognosis. The aim of our work is to specify the clinical, radiological, anatomopathological and evolutionary characteristics of this type of cancer. We conducted a descriptive and retrospective analysis of 10 cases of sarcomatoid renal cell carcinomas, collected in the urology department at the hospital HABIB BOURGUIBA of Sfax, during a period of 26 years , among 281 kidney tumors taken over in the department. The average age of discovery was 36 years; sex ratio was 1. These tumors were symptomatic in 90% of cases. The thoraco-abdomino-pelvic CT was the baseline examination for the diagnosis and the evaluation of locoregional extension. The standard anatomopathological examination supplemented with an immunohistochemical exam confirmed the presence of the sarcomatoid contingent and identified the carcinomatous contingent represented by clearcell carcinoma in 6 patients, tubulo-papillary carcinoma type 2 noted in three cases and chromophobic carcinoma in only one case. All our patients were treated surgically by radical nephrectomy. The potential of the tumors was studied with an average follow-up of 13 months and an average survival of 7.85 months, eight patients had died. Conclusion: Sarcomatoid renal cell carcinomas are considered as tumors with unfavorable evolution. Their prognosis is closely related to the pTNM stage, the histology of the carcinomatous contingent and especially to the rate of the sarcomatoid contingent as well as the presence of vasculo-lymphatic embolisms and tumor necrosis. Cytogenetics factors constitute prognostic parameters under evaluation. Introduction and Objective: Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma (CRCC) is a rare tumor representing only 5% of the kidney tumors. It is reputed to have good prognosis. The prognostic factors of this tumor are incompletely determined, which poses a management problem. The aim of our work is to specify the clinical, radiological, anatomopathological and evolutionary characteristics of this type of cancer. Our study consisted of a descriptive and retrospective analysis of 18 cases of CRCC from 214 patients operated for renal tumors in urology department at the Habib Bourguiba Hospital in Sfax, over a period of 16 years (2000) (2001) (2002) (2003) (2004) (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) (2015) (2016) . Results: The average discovery age was 54 years. There were 10 men and 8 women. These tumors were symptomatic in 11 cases. An enlarged nephrectomy was performed in 13 cases, partial nephrectomy in 4 cases and the last case was a simple tumorectomy. The mean tumor size was 9.4 cm. A tumor was associated with lymphangitis carcinomatosa and another invaded the peri-renal fat. After an averageof 31 months period, the evolution was favorable with no local or regional recurrence metastasis for 17patients. We deplore a death with bone and pulmonary metastases. Conclusion: Renal carcinoma with chromophobic cells remains of good prognosis. Long-term monitoring should be ensured in all cases given the possibility of metastasis even long term after curative treatment. Exceptional Results: The pathologic examination concluded to a renal angiosarcoma classified pT4N1. The evolution was marked by an alteration of the general condition with patient's death 1 month postoperatively. Conclusion: Primary renal angiosarcoma is an exceptional tumor. It is characterized by its hemorrhagic component and a very high malignancy potential with often metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis. The absence of coded treatment for kidney angiosarcoma is due to the fact that this type of tumor is very rare. However, surgery, consisting of radical nephrectomy, remains the first-line treatment. Renal Oncocytoma (About 18 cases) . Results: The average age of our patients was 52 years (37-69 years), with male predominance and a sex ratio of 1,4. The most affected side was the right side. The mode of revelation was most frequently lumbago (11 cases), palpable lumbar mass (2 cases) and hematuria (1case). The remaining cases were accidentally diagnosed. The diagnosis has been suggested by ultrasound and CT in all patients, but diagnosis was certainty retained only after histological examination of the surgical piece. A total radical nephrectomy was performed in 12 cases and conservative treatment in 6 cases: partial nehrectomy (4 cases) and tumorectomy (2 cases). The mean size of the tumor was 5.4cm (2-14.5cm). In all cases, there was no lymph node invasion or metastasis. The mean follow-up was 38 months (17-61 months) with a favorable outcome in all cases, without signs of recurrence or tumor progression. Conclusion: Renal oncocytoma is a rare benign kidney tumor. All imaging techniques can not make acertain diagnosis. This diagnosis remains anatomopathological. Despite the excellent prognosis of this tumor, we still lack reliable diagnostic means to avoid abusive radical nephrectomies. The conservative treatment should be considered whenever there are clinical and especially radiological signs of presumption. Introduction and Objective: Kidney cancer accounts for 2-3% of all malignant tumors disease of the adult and is the 3rd most common urological cancer. A particular entity which is tubulo-papillary renal cell carcinoma is now well individialised and its frequency is clearly increasing with the progress of medical imaging. It is proposed to study the diagnostic, therapeutic, evolutionary and prognostic aspects of these tumors. Our study consisted of a descriptive and retrospective analysis of 35 cases of renal carcinoma with tubulo-papillarycells among 258 patients operated on renal tumors, collected in our urology department over a period of 26 years . Results: The average age of discovery was 60 years; sex ratio was 3.14. These tumors were symptomatic in 38% of cases. The thoraco-abdomino-pelvic CT was the reference examination for the diagnosis and the evaluation of locoregional extension, showing a heterogeneous appearance of the tumor in 72% of the cases, with a heterogeneous enhancement after injection of contrast medium. Anatomopathologic standard examination supplemented by an immunohistochemical study confirmed the diagnosis and established a histological subtyping in type 1 and type 2. All our patients were surgically treated, 59% of the cases were treated with enlarged nephrectomy and 41% had conservative treatment. Two patients received adjuvant medical treatment. The progressive potential of tumors was studied with an average follow-up of 35 months. The evolution was favorable for 76% of patients. Conclusion: Tubulopapillary carcinoma is considered as an evolutionary tumor usually favorable, and particularly for type 1. Its prognosis is closely linked to the pTNM stage, the Führman nuclear grade, the histological type and the index of proliferation. Outcome events, and the main adverse event related to everolimus treatment was stomatitis (86.7%). In two patients, grade 3 or severer stomatitis was noted, but the symptom was improved promptly. Conclusions: Everolimus treatment to TSC-AML was effective in bleeding prevention by decreasing of tumor volume, but treatment intervention time and a treatment continuance period seemed to be controversial. JuRoLap Introduction and Objective: Specimen retrieval bags were used to remove cysts and masses in minimally invasive urologic surgeries for more than 3 decades. We described the safety, cost-effectiveness and resiliency of the JuRoLap as experienced by a single surgeon in Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center from January 2011 to December 2015. Materials and Methods: Our homemade retrieval bag (JuRoLap) is composed of a PVC Urine Bag custom fitted according to the expected specimen size by sealing the sides with an impulse sealer leaving one side open. Then, a 2-0 Nylon is sutured using a pursestring technique to seal the opening. These bags are rolled and introduced intracorporeally via the 12mm port. The bag is then opened followed by placement of specimen using standard laparoscopic instruments. Purse-string suture is tightened and specimen bag is extracted through the selected port extending the incision as necessary. Results: JuRoLap was used in 33 cases removing various organs such as adrenals, kidney, ureter, bladder and prostate. It was easily prepared, safe, resilient and economical costing approximately $ 0.68. It was essential to routinely check its durability by doing a leak test prior to sterilization. Proper rolling, transparent plastic component of the bag and the use of two laparoscopic graspers provided ease in bag deployment and specimen entrapment. It was also observed that smaller incision on extraction site as compared to the specimen size was needed due to the resiliency of the bag. Despite the required learning curve in organ entrapment and extraction, there was no noted specimen leakage, bag disruption and loss of specimen within the abdominal cavity in all the cases. Complications such as injury to adjacent organs, peritoneal or surgical site infection and intestinal obstruction were not observed. Conclusion: JuRoLap specimen retrieval bag is organ size specific, safe, resilient and low-cost specimen retrieval innovation. However, further prospective study is recommended to compare it with the commercial bags in the ease of specimen entrapment and extraction. Results: At a mean FU of 7.6 months, SCr dropped from 192.9 ± 151.9 umol/L to 167.6 ± 113.9 umol/L (13.15% decrease, p=0.008) and TGFR increased from 29.8 ± 21.2 ml/min preoperatively to 32.7 ± 22.5 ml/min postoperatively (9.79% increase, P=0.022) in group I. Similarly, SCr dropped from 238.5 ± 130. One umol/L to 215.8 ± 128.1 umol/L (9.50% decrease, p=0.013) and TGFR increased from 29.6 ± 21.4 ml/ min preoperatively to 32.9 ± 25.1 ml/min postoperatively (11.17% increase, P=0.014) in group II. No statistically significant difference between two groups according to SCr or TGFR variation was observed (P>0.05). Conclusions: Stone clearance resulted in improvement of split kidney function after single tract or multiple tracts MPCNL. Single tract or multiple tracts MPCNL didn't show statistically significant difference in split renal function postoperative recovery. Introduction and Objectives: Nowadays, many elder patients with operable renal cancer die of non-cancer-related causes. Due to this concept, cancer therapy should be based on patients' functional age rather than the chronological age. Our aim was to assess the long-term oncologic and functional outcomes in elderly patients after robot-assisted partial nephrectomy (RAPN) in a single tertiary center. Patients ≥70 years undergoing RAPN for localized renal cancer between July 2009 and March 2016 were analyzed from our institutional customized database. All data were prospective collected and retrospectively analyzed. Local Ethics Committees have approved the study and written informed consent to take part was given by all participants. All patients were stratified according to PAD-UA classification system in three groups: < 7 points, 8-9 points, > 10 points. Univariable and multivariate binary logistic regression analyses were performed to determine variables associated with trifecta accomplishment. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate survival. Statistical analyses were performed using Stata 11.0 statistical software (Stata Corp., College Station, TX, USA). Introduction and Objective: Radical prostatectomy is the standard treatment for patients with localized prostate cancer. Minimum incision endoscopic prostatectomy (MIE-RP), laparoscopic prostatectomy (LRP), and robot-assisted prostatectomy (RALP) have been performed as minimally invasive procedures in Japan. This study aimed to compare perioperative outcomes and complications from the first 100 cases of each procedure. The first 100 cases of MIE-RP, LRP, or RALP each were retrospectively evaluated. Age, operative time, estimated blood loss, surgical margins, complications, and continence rate were compared among these procedures. were seen in 4% of the cases in MIE-RP, 7% in LRP, and 4% in RALP. No significant difference was identified among MIE-RP, LRP, and RALP in the rates of return to continence (89%, 89%, and 88% after 1 year, respectively). When the 100 cases of each procedure were further divided into three subgroups, a rapid learning curve was observed in RALP with regard to the operative time. Conclusion: MIE-RP, LRP, and RALP were safe and feasible treatment methods in patients with localized prostate cancer. The operative time was the shortest in MIE-RP, whereas the estimated blood loss was the least in RALP. No significant difference was seen among the three procedures with respect to the rates of return to continence after 1 year. A rapid learning curve was observed in RALP with regard to the operative time. In conclusion, RALP should be globally adopted in the treatment of localized prostate cancer. Robotic Conclusion: Within retrospective limitations, RAPN was thought to be feasible and safe even for the high-complexity renal tumors. Among high-complexity factors, T1b and highly-endophytic tumors developed longer WIT and larger blood loss, but not in hilar-located cases even with same level on RENAL nephrometry score. Introduction and Objective: Ureteral injuries are well-known complications of any gynecologic surgery. We evaluated the safety and feasibility of ureteroscopic Double J (DJ) ureteral stenting in patients with a distal ureter injury due to gynecologic surgery. Ureteral leakage and ureteral stricture were appraised by intravenous pyelography. We evaluated the operative and clinical outcomes of these patients. The DJ ureteral stent was successfully inserted using ureteroscopy in all patients. None of the patients showed major or minor complications during the intraoperative and perioperative follow-up periods; however, in one patient, the DJ ureteral stent migrated downward after a successful placement. Intravenous pyelography performed every 3 months during the follow-up period verified recovery at the ureteral injury site without any urine leakage. However, five patients experienced ureteral stricture. Balloon dilatation or Holmium laser endoureterotomy was performed successfully in all patients with ureteral strictures. One patient with recurring ureteral stricture was again treated using Holmium laser endoureterostomy and balloon dilatation and, as of the last follow-up visit, there has been no recurrence. The overall long-term success rate was 100% with a mean follow-up duration of 20.4 months. Conclusion: DJ stenting using ureteroscopy diminishes the necessity for invasive surgical procedures and is regarded as one of the available management option in patients with an iatrogenic ureteral injury, before the consideration of an invasive operation. However, since ureteral stricture is frequently occurred after ureteroscopic procedures, it is essential to select the appropriate patients. Introduction and Objective: Studies regarding laparoscopic procedure has been focused on its cost, durability, upkeeping, and repairment cost, which will be important in the future. The aim of reusing instruments should reduce a cost without an affecting procedure quality. Until now, there is no sufficient data are available regarding to the effects of using reusable instrument to service quality. The data used on this study were retrospectively collected between January to December 2015. Total sampling method was used to collect data to all patients undergone laparoscopic procedures using resterilized laparoscopic instruments at urology operating rooms Cipto Mangunkusumo General Hospital (RSCM). The resterilized laparoscopic instruments used were harmonic scalpel handpieces, retroperitoneal balloons and pumps, laparoscopic trocars number 5, 10, and 11. Sterilization procedures were performed using plasma method in Sterilization Center RSCM. The specimens were swabbed from laparoscopic trocars, retroperitoneal balloon, and harmonic scalpel hand pieces. All of the results came negative. We evaluated 63 patients underwent laparoscopic procedures using resterilized laparoscopic instruments at urology operating rooms in RSCM between January to December 2015.Infection rates in trocar laparoscopic wounds was 1 (2.6%) and the rate of patients who experienced an increase in temperature greater than 37.5 C (Fever) after the surgery was 1 (3.2%). We obtained a difference in cost as much as Rp. 2.074.000 (9.7 times less) in the reuse of disposable trocar laparoscopic instruments. The reuse of re-sterilized harmonic hand piece will enable us to save Rp. 8.945.000 (3.5 times less) and last every each of retroperitoneal balloon that has been sterilized saved us Rp 862.500 (3,5 times less) Introduction and Objective: Although Holmium laser enucleation of the prostate (HoLEP) is currently considered a safe and effective therapeutic option for the treatment of adenomas of any size, it has problems such as technical difficulties , long learning curve and operative time and postoperative incontinence. We modified the technique with en-bloc no-touch enucleation technique, trying to overcome difficulties.  Functional Outcome of Incontinence after Transurethral Removal of Exposed Midurethral Sling Mesh Oh TH 1 , Choi S 2 , Bae YG 3 Introduction and Objective: Although the location of mesh to be found out is different, intravesically exposed mesh after midurethral sling procedures results from bladder erosion or missed intraoperative bladder perforation. It may result in considerable morbidity including stone formation and voiding difficulty and the mesh should be removed. We evaluated urinary functional outcomes according to the location of mesh. A total of twenty-six (26) patients had a transurethral removal(TUR) for intravesical mesh after midurethral sling surgery (tension free vaginal tape 15; transobturator tape 11). The mesh location was classified to urethral, neck, vesical and combined type. Patients were evaluated with physical examination, ultrasonography, stress test, bladder diary. The mesh locations were as follows; urethral type in 1 patient, neck type in 18 patients, vesical type in 4 patients and combined (neck and vesical) type in 3 patients. The mesh was removed in all cases. Mean follow up was 34 months after the transurethral removal of mesh (range 12 to 60). On follow-up cystoscopic examination, a remnant mesh was observed in 4 patients and the remnant meshes were removed with repeat TUR. All patients had similar voiding patterns before TUR. But recurrence of incontinence after TUR of mesh was observed in 3 patients; 1 patient in combined type and 2 patients in vesical type. But the symptom was managed with only medications. Conclusion: Although the recurrence mechanism of incontinence after TUR of mesh has been unknown, recurrence is very low. The severity of incontinence is mild and does not need additional operation. In our experience, all patients with recurred incontinence had bladder neck type. So, TUR of mesh exposed on bladder neck needs carefulness not to injury bladder neck function and prevent recurrence of incontinence. Radiation There were no differences in flouroscopy time and radiation exposure between the 2 groups (9.2 vs 8.7 min, P=0.12) and (180.3 vs 173.4 mSv. P=0.14) in modified supine and prone position respectively. Stone clearance rates, length of stay (1.5 days), and complications were similar. The modified supine position and prone position for PCNL has similar risk of radiation exposure to urologists. Length To evaluate the tolerance and satisfaction of patients undergoing flexible cystoscopy with a local anesthetic (containing 2% lidocaine hydrochloride, 0.25% chlorhexidine gluconate solution as antiseptic), and to study the correlation of perceived pain with age, anxiety before the procedure and overall satisfaction. A total of 155 patients (102 male and 53 female) undergoing outpatient flexible cystoscopy were prospectively recruited for the purpose of the study. In 53 women (group 1) and 50 men (group 2) the examination was performed immediately after the application of the local anesthetic. In 52 men (group 3) cystoscopy was delayed for a mean time of 11.3 minutes. Before the procedure anxiety scores were recorded on a visual analogue scale ranging from 0 to 10, whilst pain and satisfaction scores following cystoscopy were also recorded. Comparisons of anxiety, pain and satisfaction scores between group 1 and 2 and between groups 2 and 3 were studied using the Student's t-test, whilst the correlations between pain and age, anxiety and satisfaction were analyzed using Pearson's correlation coefficient (r). The average pain and satisfaction scores in groups 1, 2 and 3 were 1.68 and 9.43, 1.56 and 9.56 and 2.33 and 9.33, respectively. No statistically significant difference was found in the pain, anxiety and satisfaction scores between women and men undergoing immediate cystoscopy after local anesthetic application (p=0.39, p=0.34 and p=0.22, respectively) . Between men undergoing immediate and delayed cystoscopy there was a statistically significant difference in the pain score (1.6 versus 2.3, p=0,04), but not in the anxiety and satisfaction scores (p=0.09 and p=0.09, respectively). Regarding the relationship between the pain and the age, the anxiety and the satisfaction in all patients, pain was statistically significant negatively correlated with age and satisfaction (r=-0.23, p=0.004 and r=-0.70, p=0.0001, respectively) and positively correlated with anxiety before the procedure (r=0.41, p=0.0001). The practice of immediate cystoscopy after local anesthetic application was found to be very well tolerated and highly satisfactory in both men and women with minimum pain score as compared to delayed cystoscopy, which seems to be more painful in male patients. Comparing Introduction and Objective: To compare the influence of tolterodine, gabapentin with placebo in reducing catheter related bladder discomfort (CRBD) after percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) operations. To our best knowledge this is the first trial to compare tolterodine with gabapentin in reducing CRBD. The design of the study was a double blind (evaluator and patient) parallel group randomized clinical trial. After obtaining informed consent from PCNL candidates, patients were divided into 3 treatment groups by balanced blocked randomization. Visual analogue pain scales (VAS) were used to document bladder discomfort after the operations. Usage of pain medications was documented after the operation in treatment groups. The primary endpoint of interest was the VAS scores after the operation. Secondary endpoints included the amount of narcotic and non-narcotic pain medications. The difference in usage amounts of paracetamol, narcotic medications, and the VAS scores in gabapentin and tolterodine groups versus placebo was statistically significant (p<0.001 for all comparisons). In patients with a history of ureteral DJ catheter insertion, there was a statistically significant trend for VAS scores difference between placebo and intervention Introduction and Objective: The robotic surgery program at the American University of Beirut-Medical Center (AUB-MC) was initiated in July 2013, and since then, it has been adopted as the primary approach for treatment of prostate cancer. The literature from the Middle East lacks publications on robotic surgery experience and specifically on the outcomes of Robotic-assisted radical prostatectomy (RARP). The objective of this study is to report the early operative and oncological outcomes of a RARP experience from the Middle East. The robotic program was started with the recruitment of a 3-year fellowship trained robotic urologist. Initial cases were done in the presence of a senior urologist with large experience in open radical prostatectomy. The nursing team were sent for training in an expert robotic center. The retrospective data from 117 patients, who underwent RARP at our institute from July 2013 to March 2017, were collected and analyzed. Multiple peri-and post-operative parameters were highlighted including the final specimen's pathologies. The UCSF-CAPRA score for each patient was also calculated. Results: All prostatectomy cases were completed robotically; none were converted to open. Mean age was 63.4 years (48-77) and the mean BMI was 29.1 (22.9-57.5). The mean estimated blood loss was 266 ml, with only two patients requiring blood transfusions. There were 2.6% (3/117) minor (Clavien-Dindo II) postoperative complications, and no mortalities. Mean Hospital stay was 2 days (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) . On the final pathology, 71.4% were organ confined (pT2), and 75% had negative surgical margins. A pathological Gleason score 7+ accounted for 86.3% of our cases. Bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection was performed in 70.9% of the cases, yielding an average of 13 lymph nodes (3-37). Lymph node involvement was found in 6.0% of the cases. 18% of patients had a high-risk UCSF-CAPRA score. The initial experience from our region shows that despite the low volume and taking into account the learning curve of the team, robotic assisted radical prostatectomy was associated with a short hospital stay, low complications rate and good oncological outcomes. These results are a further proof to the importance of proper training and teamwork when implementing a new technology. Introduction and Objectives: Trocar site closure devices (TSCD) are routinely utilized in standard laparoscopy and robot-assisted surgery for closure of incision sites. Their utilization may lead to a more se-vere post-operative pain, an increased painkillers utilization and longer length of stay as a result of poorer pain control. We retrospectively reviewed outcomes from consecutive RALPs performed in 2016 at our Institution by a single surgeon beyond his learning curve. In our practice, we utilized the device to close the 12-mm assisting port at the end of the cases. Patients have been divided into two groups: group A included all patient on which we utilized the TSCD, group B included patients on which TSCD wasn't used. We compared results between groups including length of stay, post-operative analgesia requirement and risk of developing incisional hernia post-operatively. In all patients, we have utilized the same peri-operative and post-operative analgesia protocol. Forty-year female with no co-morbid illness, presented with hematuria. Contrast enhanced Computed Tomography (CECT) of abdomen and pelvis was suggestive of solitary, asymmetrical, in-homogenously enhancing mass arising from the dome of the bladder, measuring 5.5cm x4.5cmx 1.4cm in maximum diameter. Subsequent transurethral biopsy proved the mass to be a mucinous ade-nocarcinoma of bladder. We proceeded with a robotic partial cystectomy. After distention with normal saline, tumor bulge was seen at dome and anterior wall of the bladder. At this stage flexible cystoscopy was done using Karl StorzTM (Tuttlingen,Germany) cysto-nephroscope scope. Tumor was visualized simultaneously under cystoscopic and robotic view with help of Tile-Pro TM (Intuitive surgicals, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) feature. At this stage, the light intensity of the robotic lens was decreased so that the tumor could be trans-illuminated by the cystoscope. Cystoscopic view could be seen at the bottom of the console screen using the Tile-proTM feature. Area to be resected was marked with monopolar scissors, using electrocautery on the peritoneal surface of bladder, 1cm away from the tumor margin. Using simultaneous visualization, bladder was incised with a margin of 1cm around the tumor and tumor was excised along with urachus, anterior peritoneum and perivesical fat. Thought the same can be replicated in laparoscopic surgery, but the surgeon requires two separate screens and has to concentrate on both of them. Moreover, easy availability of a cystoscope makes it a preferred choice over intraoperative ultrasound which she is an expensive and scarcely available. Conclusion: Though this is a single case report, this technique has a potential to decrease positive margin rate in partial cystectomy, while maintaining a good bladder capacity. Robotic assisted Partial Cystectomy using Tile Pro application is feasible; it would help surgeon achieved better oncological results without compromising functional outcomes. Introduction and Objective: Encrustion of ureteral stents is a well-known complication that might lead to renal impairment. Severe encrustation presents a challenge in management and causes considerable problems at removal. Our objective is to evaluate the effectiveness of the endourologic management of severely encrusted double-J ureteral stents. Twenty-three patients with severely encrusted (stone > 1cm in diameter) and forgotten double-J ureteral stents were treated between June 2004 and January 2017. Encrustation and the related stone burdens were estimated by using kidney-ureter-bladder radiography or computerized tomography. All had conserved function of the affected kidney. The management method was chosen based on the stone burden, clinical and radiological findings. They were managed by endoscopic lithotripsy, percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL), extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) or combination of procedures. Results: Twenty-three patients, 19 males and 4 females, were included in the study. The mean patient age was 51.3 ± 7.5 (44-83) years. Double-J stenting was indicated for urinary stone (n=21) and hydronephrosis (n=2). One of the patients with forgotten stents had solitary kidney. Long indwelling time was due to "patient unaware stent needed to be removed" in 13 cases. The average indwelling time of the ureteral stents was 23.0 ± 13.3 (7-59) months. Treatment consisted in: ESWL (n=9), retrograde ureteroscopy with endoscopic lithotripsy (n=17), percutaneous nephrolithotomy (n=2), cystolithotripsy (n=9). No patient required open surgical removal of the stent. Ultimately, all stents were removed successfully. Stent fragmentation was reported in two cases only. All patients but four (residual stones < 5 mm) were stone free following an average of 1.6 (range 1-4) procedures. Renal function remains stable or improved in all patients postoperatively. Conclusions: Encrusted ureteral stents are a challenging problem. Endourological management of forgotten encrusted stents is highly successful. The Therapeutic strategy should be discussed on a caseby-case basis. It consists mainly in combination of one or many sessions of endourological procedure and ESWL. Comparison The indications for SMP treatment in all these kids were either previously failed shock wave lithotripsy or retrograde intrarenal surgery approaches, according to their parents' preferences. Nephrostomy tracts used in the SMP system ranged from 10F to 14F in size. Lithotripsy was performed using either a Holmium laser or pneumatic lithotripter. Perioperative and postoperative parameters along with operative data were recorded in detail and stone components were analyzed by infrared spectroscopy. Results: This study included 71 boys and 40 girls with a mean age of 3.90 ± 3.53 years (range 0.5-15). The mean stone burden was 1.4 ± 0.6 cm (range 0.8-4.8). Mean operative time was 39.4 ± 26.2 minutes (range 7-105). The mean hemoglobin drop was 10.2 ± 7.1 g/L (range 0-25) and no transfusion was needed. Significant complications were observed in 17 (15.3%) children with 10 and 7 cases in Clavien grade I and grade II, respectively. Complete stone clearance on postoperative day 1 and on 3-month follow-up was 84.7% (94/111) and 90.1% (100/111), respectively. Ninety-five (85.6%) children did not require any type of catheters (total tubeless). The mean hospital stay was 2.7 ± 1.5 days (range 1-7). Our preliminary data demonstrated that SMP was safe and effective. SMP could be a feasible treatment option for pediatric stone disease. Further randomized controlled trials are still needed to prove the efficacy of using the SMP system in children, particularly in those with larger stones. Laparoscopic Assisted Cutaneous Ureterostomy in Children: A Versatile Technique? Vanderbruggen W 1 , Cherian A 2 , De Baets K 3 , De Wachter S 3 , De Win G 3 Introduction and Objective: Laparoscopic assisted cutaneous ureterostomy (LA-CU) is a minimally-invasive approach for urinary diversion in children. We describe the technique, its feasibility and potential advantages in ten children treated for a variety of conditions. Three trocars were used transperitoneally, one of which was placed at the later stoma site in the semi-lateral position. With a panoramic view, the ureter of interest was easily identified, mobilized and exteriorized for stoma creation. We retrospectively reviewed our experience at two centers and included both refluxing and end ureterostomies. Study period: October 2014 to September 2016. Renal function and growth-curves were noted at follow up. Results: Ten children underwent LA-CU: 2 end and 8 refluxing CU (see table 1 ). Four cases had neurogenic bladder with VUR and breakthrough UTIs; five cases had lower urinary obstruction or VUR with breakthrough UTIs, renal impairment and/or delayed growth-curve; one case had a single functioning kidney with need for dialysis and VUJ-obstruction due to bladder distortion. Mean age: 21.9 ± 18.4 months (range: 24 days to 4 years and 6 months). Mean operating time: 80 ± 11.4 minutes. Mean follow-uptime: 11.7 ± 7.9 months. No major postoperative complications occurred. Renal function and growth-curves improved in all children and no urinary tract infection recurred postoperatively. Conclusion: Primary surgical correction of obstructive or refluxive uropathy is the gold standard, however temporary urinary diversion is useful in specific scenarios. In these patients, laparoscopic assistance offers better and direct visualization, achieves accurate and rapid identification of ureter, provides adequate mobilization, tension-free exteriorization, and excision of redundant ureter in some to optimize drainage. One trocar at the eventual stoma site minimizes scarring. Introduction and Objectives: Assess the incidence of testicular appendices (Tas), epididymal anomalies (EAs) and processus vaginalis (PV) patency in patients with undescended testis (UT) according to testicular position and compare with human fetuses with testis situated in scrotum. We studied 85 patients (108 testes) with cryptorchidism and compared with 15 fetuses (30 testes) with scrotal testis. Testicular position was classified as: a) Abdominal (proximal to the internal ring); b) Inguinal (between the internal and external rings); and c) Supra-scrotal (below the external ring). We analyzed the relationships among the testis and epididymis (epididymal atresia and disjunction were considered EAs), patency of PV and the presence of TAs. We used qui-square test for statistical analysis (p<0.05). UT (p=0.4082) and between the inguinal and supra-scrotal UT (p=0.0308), but we observed a higher prevalence of anomalies in abdominal (0.0002) and inguinal UT (p=0.0003) when compared with fetal testis and abdominal and supra-scrotal UT (p=0.0161). We do not observe differences in the incidence of TAs between UT and fetuses (p=0.1367). Conclusions: Undescended testis has a higher risk of anatomical para-testicular anomalies and the testes situated in abdomen and inguinal canal has a higher risk to present patency of PV and EAs. Role of Minimally Invasive PCNL Techniques: Micro and Ultra-Mini PCNL (<15Fr) in the Paediatric Population -A Systematic Review Introduction and Objective: Management of paediatric stone disease is challenging, with standard PCNL having a good stone free rate (SFR) but with associated high complication rates. Miniaturisation of this technique has led to the rise of minimally invasive PCNL techniques such as micro (<10Fr) and ultra-mini (<15Fr) PCNL procedures. Our objective was to perform a systematic review of the literature in order to evaluate the success and complication rates of minimally invasive PCNL techniques in the paediatric age group (<18 years). A Cochrane style search was performed and the following bibliographic databases were accessed: Pubmed, Science direct, Scopus, Google Scholar and Web of Science. This was carried out in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Pathophysiological mechanisms leading to buried penis remain unclear. Resection of dartos tissue usually corrects the penis in those with buried penis, suggesting a common pathophysiology related to dartos tissue. We conducted this study at Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital Jakarta from May 2013 to November 2016. We collected dartos fascia specimens from 2 groups, namely buried penis and normal penis served as control. We compared the fibers between these groups by Masson Trichrome histochemical staining, Gomori's silver impregnation staining, Weigert-resorcin fuchsin staining and CD31 immunohistoschemical staining for evaluation of collagen fibers, reticulin fibers, elastin fibers, and endothelial cells of blood vessels, respectively. The collagen fibers, reticular fibers, elastic fibers and vascular vessels were counted with ImageJ, and then were analyzed using independent-T test. The assessment conducted by two pathologic researchers was blinded, without knowing the clinical diagnosis of patients. We involved a total of 40 patients with 20 patients for each group. Median age for all the patients was 7 (range 1-16) years old. In term of collagen fibers, most cases of buried penis showed thicker but lesser number of collagen fibers than normal penis. Besides that, there was significant reduction of elastin fibers of dartos fascia in buried penis cases. On the other hand, ratio of reticulin fibers, which represent collagen type III, to total collagen in buried penis was increased in comparison to normal penis. Conclusion: There is a difference between connective tissue of dartos fascia in buried penis compared to normal penis, particularly in total collagen fibers, elastin fibers, and reticulin to total collagen ratio. Inelastic dartos fascia tissue in patients diagnosed with buried penis is an abnormal tissue. Therefore, it is suggested to excise this tissue during reconstructive surgery. Further research is needed to unveil the pathophysiology of the condition. The Results: During this period, a total of 180 patients presented with hypospadias giving an incidence of 2.7 in 1000 live births. Most patients (72%) had a distally placed meatus, only requiring a one-stage repair. Greater severity of disease was defined as complex abnormalities requiring two-stage repairs. This was seen in patients who had a proximally placed meatus or a distal meatus with a poor urethral plate. There was equal racial distribution seen in incidence, however Indotrinidadian boys were noted to have more complex abnormalities. Of all complex cases managed, 42% were Indotrinidadian therefore requiring a two-stage repair. Although most patients in our study (52%) originated from North Trinidad, a significant 39% of patients with greater severity of disease were found in the South-west region of the island. Conclusion: Hypospadias remains the most common type of congenital penile anomaly worldwide. In Trinidad and Tobago, there was no strong association with race however Indotrinidadian males exhibited a higher rate of complex disease. This may imply a genetic association which has been well documented in Indian literature suggesting V89L polymorphism of the SRD5A2 gene. There was a significant association with geographic location which suggests an environmental etiology, possibly due to petrochemical and pesticide use in that region. Further studies to determine significant etiological factors are therefore warranted. A 3 patients had residual valves, 2 of whom underwent further resection and 1 required a nephrectomy for a nonfunctional hydronephrotic right kidney and recurrent urinary tract infections. Conclusion: A descriptive study of posterior urethral valves in Trinidad and Tobago was embarked upon with the objective of determining the incidence and pattern of disease and how these compare to international data. Our population shows a similar pattern of incidence and presentation even with limitations encountered with antenatal diagnoses. Our complication rates and outcomes are acceptable compared to worldwide data, with recurrent UTI and enuresis being the most common causes of long term morbidity. Adolescent Varicocele: Are Somatometric Parameters a Cause? Introduction and Objective: It has been reported that varicocele is found less frequently in obese men. Accordingly, we evaluated varicocele patients and statistically analyzed the correlation between varicocele and somatometric parameters. Analyzing these data specifically in adolescents, they showed significant differences in age, height, and BMI (p=0.000, p=0.000, and p=0.004, respectively) between two groups. There were no significant differences in somatometric parameters between patients with different grades of varicocele. Our results showed that adolescents with varicoceles were significantly taller and had a lower BMI than adolescents without varicoceles. Carefully designed future studies may be needed. Distal Hypospadias Repair by the Modified Glans Approximation Procedure: Initial Experience of Snodgrass Modification Introduction and Objective: GAP for distal hypospadias repair has been an appealing procedure because it is technically quick and easy to perform and has a potential for a very normal glans meatal appearance. Application of this technique may be expanded to include distal hypospadias whose granular groove is not so deep when it is combined with incising the urethral plate. Between 2005 and 2014 we performed the GAP for distal hypospadias in 65 boys. Overall 33 patients underwent modified GAP with urethral plate incision. Pre-operatively the meatus was located on the glans in 56 boys (86.1%), 9 (13.9%) at the corona or an immediate subcoronal position. 20 patients (31%) were mega-meatus intact prepuce. Before incising the plate, we tested the diameter of urethral plate by approximating the edge of opposite glans over the 10 Fr. urethral catheter. When it was necessary to deepen the ventral glanular groove further, it was incised until the urethral plate was divided enough to make the urethra with an adequate diameter after tubularization. Thereafter, a horseshoe shaped de-epithelialization was made in the glans around the meatus as described by Zaontz. The neourethra was tubularized using a running subcuticular suture and absorbable interrupted suture was used for closure of intermediate layers of subcutaneous tissue. The glans was then closed over the repair for deep glans-to-glans approximation. Results: Mean age of patients was 12.06 (± 6.30) years old. Follow-up physical examination was performed 6 to 86 months (mean 8.2 months) postoperatively. There were 3 cases of mild meatal or urethral stenosis but none required reoperation. A urethra-cutaneous fistula requiring reoperation developed in 2 (6.1%) and 5 (15.6%) patients in GAP and modified GAP respectively. Comparing the GAP to modified GAP regarding fistula rate, there was no statistical difference (p=0.214). Patients were satisfied with the voiding stream and glans appearance in 63 patients (97%). Conclusion: GAP for distal hypospadias repair is technically quick and easy to perform. We frequently combined this procedure with urethral plate incision in a patient with a deep glanular groove which made a vertically oriented, slit-like meatus in the majority of cases. Complications of Childhood Circumcision in West Africa: A Review and Next Steps Results: Applying the process PRISMA, ten reports of childhood circumcision complications were included. These articles were not strictly comparable. There was a wide range of complications from 1.1% to 77.4% and dependent on pattern of practice and referrals. Serious complications were low (<2%). Urethro-cutaneous fistula caused considerable morbidity. These occurred with practitioners who lacked the skill and knowledge of circumcision. This study suggests that male neonatal/ childhood circumcision is safe but has some preventable risks and complications. Improved techniques, adequate training, supervision and inter-professional practice will help maintain and improve the safety of this age-old surgery. Varicocoeles and Heredity in First Degree Relatives  The Impact of Testicular Microlithiasis on and May 2013, we reviewed the records of 176 children with PMNE. The monotherapy group received 120 micrograms of desmopressin melt whereas the combination therapy group received 120 micrograms of desmopressin melt plus 1-2 mg oral tablet of tolterodine. The degree of response was evaluated at 1-3 months during the treatment and 6 months after complete cessation of treatment protocol. Results: Between 176 children, 84 and 92 patients received monotherapy and combination therapy, respectively. There were no statistical differences in gender, age, or baseline monthly frequency of PMNE between the two groups. At baseline, patients had an overall mean of 23.6 ± 5.6 wet nights per month, which decreased to 10.8 ± 5.6 and 7.3 ± 5.3 in monotherapy group and 8.9 ± 9.5 and 3.3 ± 4.9 in combination therapy group at 1 and 3 months after treatment. The rates of Complete plus Partial Response to treatment at 1 and 3 months for monotherapy and combination therapy group were 63.1% and 73.9% vs 72.5% and 93.47% (P value .12 vs .006). The relapse of PMNE 6 months after complete cessation of treatment was 16.39% and 9.09% for monotherapy vs combination therapy group. Conclusion: This study supports the efficacy of combination therapy with desmopressin melt plus oral tolterodine over monotherapy with desmopressin melt in the first-line treatment of PMNE in children. Evaluation Figure 1 . Seminiferous Tubule with Germ Cell (x400) Introduction and Objective: Vanished testis syndrome is identified in up to 35% of cases of nonpalpable testis. It seems that this syndrome is a common phenomenon; however, the optimal management of this condition remains unclear. We reviewed histopathological studies of the testicular nubbins associated with the vanishing testis syndrome, and determined whether surgical removal is indicated based on the histological findings. Materials and Methods: Between Jan. 1996 and Dec. 2015, a testicular nubbin consistent with a vanishing testis was excised in 62 patients. We reviewed the medical records, operative summaries, surgical pathology reports and slides. We also noted whether the testis was palpable or nonpalpable and whether laparoscopy had been done before inguinal exploration. The microscopic slides were examined in each case. The ages of patients ranged from 6 months to 35 years. On physical examination, no palpable testis was found in the scrotum in 48 patients. In 12 patients, there was a small palpable nodule thought to be a testis, 3 of which were within the inguinal canal. The surgical approach was via an inguinal incision in 58 patients. The 4 patients underwent laparoscopy followed by inguinal exploration. Of the explorations, 45 were on the left and 15 on the right, 2 patients underwent bilateral exploration. All 62 cases had fibrosis; calcifications were present in 25 and hemosiderin deposits in 28. An epididymis was present in 4 (6.5%) and vas deferens in 49 (79.1%) cases. Recognizable testicular elements (Seminiferous tubules) were present in 7 (11.2%) nubbin. The 5 (8%) with seminiferous tubules had germ cells identified (Fig. 1) . No recognizable Leydig cells were present in the stroma surrounding the seminiferous tubules. In all cases, intratubular germ cell neoplasia (ITGCN) was not present.  Introduction and Objectives: We aimed to compare the penile structures of normal fetuses with the penile structures of a fetus with Prune-belly syndrome (PBS). We studied the penises of 6 human fetuses without anomalies and 1 fetus with prune belly syndrome with 17 weeks post-conception. We used histochemical and morphometric techniques to analyze the parameters of total penile area, area of corpora cavernosa, area of corpus spongiosum, and thickness of tunica albuginea (in the dorsal and ventral regions using ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland). In addition, we analyzed the collagen, smooth muscle fibers and elastic system fibers in the corpus cavernosum and in the corpus spongiosum. These elements were identified and quantified as percentage by using the Image J software (NIH, Bethesda, USA). Microscopic structures in the corpus spongiosumcollagen: normal = 37.24% and PBS = 17.67%; smooth muscle cells: normal = 5.30% and PBS = 1.70%; elastic system fibers: normal = 7.85% and PBS = 4.41%. The penis of the fetus with prune belly syndrome presented significant difference in all parameters analyzed. These alterations could be associated to the characteristics of the syndrome that are defined by absence, deficiency or congenital hyperplasia of the abdominal wall musculature, bilateral cryptorchidism and abnormalities of the urinary tract. To our knowledge, this is the first study considering the penile structures in prune belly syndrome. Introduction and Objectives: Although nerves and vessels of the penis play important role in erection, there are few studies on their development in human fetus. Therefore, the objective of the present study is to analyze, quantitatively, in the corpora cavernosa (CC) and corpus spongiosum (CS), the development of the nerves and vessels in the fetal penis at different gestational ages. Fifty-six fresh, macroscopically normal human fetuses aged from 13 to 36 weeks post-conception (WPC) were used. Gestational age was determined by the foot length method. Penises were immediately fixed in 10% formalin, and routinely processed for paraffin embedding, after which tissue sections from the midshaft were obtained. We used immunohistochemical staining to analyze the nerves and vessels in the CC and in the CS. These elements were identified and quantified as percentage by using the Image J software. The quantitative analysis showed that the percentage of nerves varied from 3.03% to 20.35% in the CC and from 1.89% to 23.88% in the CS. The linear regression analysis indicated that nerves growth (incidence) in the CC and CS correlated significantly and positively with fetal age (r=0.9421, p<0.0001) and (r=0.9312, p<0.0001), respectively, during the whole fetal period studied. Also, the quantitative analysis showed that the percentage of vessels varies from 2.96% to 12.86% in the CC and from 3.62% to 14.85% in the CS. The linear regression analysis indicated that vessels growth (incidence) in the CC and CS correlated significantly and positively with fetal age (r=0.8722, p<0.0001) and (r=0.8218, p<0.0001), respectively, during the whole fetal period studied. In addition, the linear regression analysis demonstrated a more intense growth rate of nerves, in the CS during the 2nd trimester of gestation, when compared with the nerves in CC. Also, the linear regression analysis demonstrated a more intense growth rate of vessels in the CS when compared with the CC, during the whole fetal period studied. In the fetal period, the human penis undergoes major developmental changes, notably in the content and distribution of nerves and vessels. We found strong correlation between nerves and vessels growth (incidence) with fetal age, both in the CC and CS. There is significant greater proportional amount of nerves than vessels during the whole fetal period studied. Female Epispadias Managed by Single-Stage Subsymphyseal Cystoscopic-Guided Bladder Neck Plication, Urethral Elongation and Urethrogenitoplasty: A Single Center Long-Term Follow-Up Introduction and Objective: Complete female epispadias is a rare genitourinary anomaly. Traditional surgical approaches were staged procedures. We previously introduced a single stage technique using subsymphyseal cystoscopic-guided bladder neck plication, urethral elongation by shiny interclitorial flap and urethrogenitoplasty. The main goal in treatment is satisfactory continence, upper tract preservation and functional and cosmetic external genitalia repair. We present the long-term outcomes of single-institution experience of 24 females with epispadias undergone our novel technique. A retrospective chart review was conducted to gather records of patients who had undergone our surgery technique between 1994 and 2014. All patients had classic epispadias at presentation: bifid clitoris; patulous urethra and closed or minimally separated pubic bones. A single surgeon (AMK) performed all surgical techniques. The level of continence before and after the surgery was evaluated based on a urinary incontinence grading (Table 1) . Social continence was defined as dry periods of ≥3h during the day (grade 0 and 1). Results: Out of 27 cases, we were able to contact 24 patients. Of those, 22 cases presented with total incontinence (grade 3) while two patients presented with intermittent incontinence (grade 2). Patients' mean age at the time of surgery was 4.2 years (range 1-12). The mean (range) follow-up period was 8.3 years (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) . Four patients were not toilet-trained at last follow-up visit. Out of 20 toilet-trained cases, ten patients (50%) were completely dry (grade 0) and ten patients (50%) had occasional incontinence (grade 1). The cosmetic appearance of the external genitalia was good in all patients. All 24 girls were social continence at final follow-up. The present series suggest that single stage subsymphyseal reconstruction has a high success rate in achieving continence in female epispadias with a cosmetically acceptable appearance. We recommend this technique as a simple and effective method for restoring bladder neck resistance with promising long-term results. Pelvic Meatal stenosis is considered as a common complication of circumcision. It is also associated with several skin disorders of the penis in children, such as Lichen Sclerosus and bullous disorders. The exact pathophysiology of meatal stenosis is still debatable, but a possible underlying cause of meatal stenosis is considered as meatal irritation and inflammation. This study aims to evaluate the role of atopy (i.e. atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis, asthma, and food allergies) and its consequences on developing meatal stenosis. After obtaining ethics approval from institutional review board, between June 2009 and May 2016, a retrospective chart review was conducted to gather records of patients with meatal stenosis. History of any allergic reactions including skin allergy, seasonal rhinitis, asthma, and food allergies was considered as positive history of atopy. Data were analyzed by one sample binomial test using SPSS v20. Results: During the study period, a total of 411 boys were found to have meatal stenosis. Mean age was 3.6 (range 6 months to 11 years) years. Of all, 271 (65.9 %, CI95% = 61.1 -70.5) had history of allergic reactions. Comparing to prevalence of atopy among boys reported in the recent studies (24.7% -40%), patients with meatal stenosis have a significantly higher (P-value < 0.001) probability of suffering from allergic reactions. Conclusion: This preliminary study showed a remarkable relation between hypersensitivity reactions and meatal stenosis in boys. Therefore, in children with an allergic background, hypersensitivity of penile skin might be observed. Persistent inflammation in that area could potentially lead to meatal stenosis. Moreover, it is more likely to encounter recurrence of meatal stenosis after surgical repair in patients with history of atopy. However, more prospective investigations are mandatory in this regard prior to proving this pathophysiology. Effects Results: Mean maximum and average urine flow rates improved from 14.1 and 7.6 to 19.7 ml/s and 9.5ml/s, respectively, while mean EMG lag time decreased from 11.7 to 5.2 seconds after treatment (all P<0.05). Also, post-void residual volume decreased significantly from 33.6 to 7.6 ml at the end of the treatment courses. From these 23 children, 17 (75%) reported subjective symptomatic relief. To the best of our knowledge this is the first report on effects of neuromodulation on pelvic floor EMG lag time in children with voiding dysfunction. This study indicates that IF therapy appears effective, safe and reproducible in reduction of pelvic floor EMG lag time which resulted in improvement of pelvic floor and bladder neck relaxation. Introduction and Objective: Medical dissolution therapy is a well-tolerated, effective treatment (≈ 70%) for radiolucent renal stones in children. In this study, we prospectively evaluated the efficacy of extended dissolution therapy versus shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) for those with failed the 3-month oral alkalization treatment. Between 2011-2015, 32 out of 143 children with radiolucent renal calculi who had failed 3-month oral alkalization treatment was included in the study. Median age was 5 years (range 4 to 13). Median stone length was 12 mm (range 7 to 18). Patients were randomly divided into 2 groups; the extended medical group (16 patients) received potassium sodium hydrogen citrate at a dose of 1-2 mEq/kg per day for further 2 months (target urine pH 7.2-7.8) and the SWL group (16 patients) were treated with a Lithotripter S under general anesthesia. Complications were recorded for both groups. Patients were considered stone free when imaging within 3 months showed no evidence of stones. The stone-free rate was 87.5% after a single session of SWL vs. 6.25% after extended dissolution therapy (p < 0.001). One patient in SWL group experienced renal colic during followup (p = 0.310). Conclusion: SWL is the treatment of choice after failure of 3-month medical dissolution therapy for pediatric radiolucent renal stones. Introduction and Objective: Mirabegron has shown its efficacy in adult overactive bladder patients. However, there has been only a few reports regarding its use in patients with neurogenic bladder or pediatric patients. We retrospectively analyzed the urodynamic efficacy of Mirabegron in pediatric patients with spina bifida. Patients with spina bifida who underwent urodynamic study before and after the use of Mirabegron in our hospital were included in this retrospective analysis. Conclusions: This systematic analysis shows that prognostic differences exist based on the presentation of penile metastasis. Survival is substantial and treatment should therefore take into account definitive symptom improvement and quality of life. Is There a Role for Routine Histopathological Assessment of Circumcision Specimens? Introduction and Objective: We set out to determine the rate of penile cancer detected on histological assessment of routine circumcision specimens when malignancy was not suspected at time of operation. We conducted a retrospective audit of all circumcisions performed across two major metropolitan health networks in Melbourne, Australia. We analyzed 149 cases over 3 years across 7 Hospitals. The preoperative indication for circumcision and specimen histopathological results were compared. Results: Forty-nine were excluded as no specimen was sent for histopathological assessment resulting in 97 cases for analyses in the study. Of these, 92 cases were for benign indications with no suspicion of malignancy and the rate of malignancy on the histology specimens was 0%. 50% of cases with suspicious lesions were malignant on histology. Our results showed that when there was no benefit in histological analyses of foreskin specimens when there was no clinical suspicion of malignancy. Thus, routine histological analyses of circumci-sion specimens can be abandoned without increasing the risk of missing any malignancy thereby compromising the quality of care provided. Outcomes (159) underwent wide local excision. Glansectomy was associated with improved local recurrence rates with 1, 2, and 5-year local recurrence free survival of 91%, 84%, and 79% respectively (p<0.001). The 1, 2, and 5-year local recurrence free survival for laser ablation was 71%, 65%, and 47% respectively. The 1, 2, and 5-year local recurrence free survival for wide local excision was 87%, 74%, and 64% respectively. When stratified by tumors that were pT1, glansectomy was associated with improved local recurrence rates (p=0.003). Glansectomy was associated with improved local recurrence rates on multivariable analysis (HR 0.4, 95% CI 0.2-0.9, p=0.03). There were no differences between treatment groups for overall survival (p=0.66). Conclusion: Penile sparing surgery of the glans remains an appropriate option for carefully selected patients. Glansectomy is associated with improved local recurrence compared to laser ablation and wide local excision, with optimized post-operative surveillance strategies developed based on patterns of recurrence. Laser rare. In our supra-regional network the incidence is approximately 10% of the overall population of penile and urethral cancer patients. We believe that primary SCC of the urethra behaves in a similar fashion to penile SCC and therefore penile preserving surgery (PPS) can be adopted safely and effectively for these patients. Publications on urethral cancer are largely not gender, site or type specific therefore making the literature difficult to interpret. We aim to report our outcomes of management of this rare disease. We reviewed our prospective database of all urethral cancer patients referred and treated from 2001 onwards. Patients with urothelial cancer, penile cancer extending in to the urethra and penile intraepithelial neoplasia were excluded. All patients were discussed at supra-regional MDT and their pathology reported by specialist penile pathologists according to the Royal College of Pathologists, UK dataset. All patients were managed by a similar pathway to penile cancer. Results: Sixty-nine patients were included in our study with a mean age of 72 years. After a median follow up of 23 months (range 1-132) seventeen patients have died. Two patients died from unrelated causes; skull base cancer and metastatic colorectal cancer. Fifty-three patients (77%) had high grade disease (G3) and 38 patients (55%) had tumours with basaloid features. Twenty-one patients (30%) had advanced nodal disease at presentation (pN2). Forty-two patients (61%) were able to be treated with a single PPS. Conclusion: Our study represents the largest known series of men with primary SCC of the anterior urethra. Unlike in penile cancer the majority of patients presented with high grade cancer. The large proportion of basaloid tumours suggests an association with human papilloma virus (HPV). We provide evidence to illustrate the tumour biology of this rare disease and also demonstrate that penile preserving surgery in this group is oncologically safe with the additional benefit of excellent functional outcomes. Outcome of Early and Delayed Repair of Penile Fracture in a Tertiary Care Hospital in Bangladesh Mamun AMA, Rasul PMA, Karmekar DU Introduction and Objectives: Penile fracture is a rare surgical emergency. Although fracture of the penis can be easily recognized clinically, it is delayed-reported due to the embarrassing nature of the injury to the patient. We compare between early and delayed intervention of penile fracture in terms of overall and specific complications in order to raise awareness and exchange experiences. Materials and Methods: From 30th July 2014 to 30th January 2016, a total of 27 patients diagnosed to have penile fracture were enrolled in the study group. The diagnosis was made based on the clinical findings in the patients. Those who came within 24 hours were considered as early presentation while those who came after 24 hours were considered as delayed presentation. Out of 27 patients with penile fracture, 15 were in early group while 12 were in delayed group. All the patients were treated by surgical repair by standard method.  Introduction and Objective: The present study was conducted to investigate the influence of unilateral orchidectomy and age of orchidectomy on the subsequent contralateral testis. Sixty-four Wistar-derived male rats divided randomly in 4 groups. Group 1 named immature intervention, group 2 immature control, group 3 mature intervention and group 4 mature control. In group 1, rats castrated unilateral at 30 days of age (prepubertal). In group 2 sham surgery (midscrotal incision) was done at same age. In group 3 rats castrated unilateral at 70 days of age (postpubertal) and in group 3 sham surgery was done at same age. 20 days after first surgery, in intervention groups contralateral orchiectomy was done and in control groups random orchiectomy (left or right) was done. Blood sampling for evaluation of serum testosterone was performed just before second surgery. Results: Testis weight and the mean testicular weight per 100 g of body weight was greater in group 1 and 3. These parameters was greater in prepubertal group (group 1) than postpubertal group (3). There was no appreciable difference in serum testosterone levels in 4 groups. Our research demonstrated that unilateral orchidectomy resulted in compensatory hypertrophy of the remaining testis and it decreased as the animals aged. unilateral orchidectomy does not lead to reduction in serum testosterone levels and remaining testis can retrieve a normal serum testosterone level. Unusual Conclusion: There were only 26 published cases previously. In our series, pathological reports showed the majority of the GIST tissues are spindle-shaped and showed low cellularity, possibly from post-treatment effect. There is still no golden treatment for rectal GIST. National Comprehensive Cancer Network published the multiple disciplinary teams was important for the treatment of GIST. We utilized robotic surgery with the wristed instrumentation and three-dimensional vision which has proven advantages compared to conventional laparoscopy, especially in confined spaces such as pelvis. Rectal GISTs can be treated with safe surgical procedure with promising oncological results. Italian  Surgical Correction of Adult Acquired Buried Penis: A Single Center Analysis on Surgical and Functional Outcomes Introduction and Objective: Few medical conditions as well as metabolic syndrome can potentially lead to an acquired buried penis. This rare clinical entity represents a real challenge for reconstructive urologists. Due to the rarity of the disturb, it has been rarely reported in the scientific literature. The purpose of our study is to identify the surgical and functional outcome of this challenging reconstruction in a wide cohort of patients. Forty-six consecutive patients referred to our outpatient's clinic for a buried penis were retrospectively identified. Clinical data were retrospectively reviewed. Nevertheless, all patients were contacted through a telephone call and were asked to answer to an "ad hoc" created 4-items questionnaire in order to assess the functional outcomes and the satisfaction rate. As well as the surgeon who was enquired on the satisfaction for the postoperative result. -74) year in GI, GII respectively.The median stricture length 0.92(7-1.6) ,0.88 (6-1.5) in GI,GII respectively, pre-operative IPSS score 28 (22-31), 29 (23-30) in GI, GII respectively, Qmax 6.0 (3-10), 7 (4-11) ml/ sec in GI, GII respectively and PVR by ultrasonography 82 (40-280),79 (50-278) ml in GI,GII respectively without statistical difference in both group. The rate of DVIU 3.2,2.4 in GI, GII respectively after three year with highly statistically significant difference (p<0.001). Urethroplasty was done for 16 (50%), by graft in 12 (37.5%) and direct anastomosis in 4 (12.5%) in GI and 12 (37.5%) by direct anastomosis in 8 (25%) and 4 (12.5%) by graft in GII, the median length of urethral stricture in failed cases pre-urethroplasy assessment was 1.8 (1.4-3.5), 1.2 (.8-1.6) cm in GI, GII respectively. The median procedure time was 122 (90-185),168 (105-238) minutes in GI, GII respectively. The last follow-up assessment revealing improvement of in Qmax to 17.1 (11-23), 18.2 (12-24) ml/sec in GI, GII respectively,reduced PVR to 19.8 (12-56), 18.5 (11-60)ml, reduced IPSS to 8.2 (5-11), 7.8 (4-12) in GI , GII respectively. The long term follow-up of DVIU with UD accompanied by more failure of the procedure with increased rate of failure and frequently need of urethroplasty for correction of long segment stricture in lengthy complexed operative procedure but our data in need for multi -centeric studies for consolidation of our results in the era of endoscopy. Surgical Circumcisions were performed on 7 men with a further 2 undergoing hydrocelectomy. 2 had suprapubic tissue removed to release a buried penis. Long-term follow up is incomplete due to the wide geographical distribution of patients. All patients were seen at least once post operatively and discharged back to the care of their local lymphoedema service. Evidence suggests that at surgical follow up (between 2 and 6 weeks post operatively) most patients reported improvement in symptoms. Conclusion: Our joint lymphoedema clinic, combining the expertise of both urologists and lymphoedema specialists offers suitable patients unique access to surgery for symptom control. This case series, the largest reported worldwide, proves that such surgeries do offer excellent cosmetic and functional results. Increased awareness of our service is vital to ensure that we offer affected men the best possible quality of life. Allium™  Introduction and Objective: Sex reassignment surgeries (SRS) involve manipulation of the urethra and pelvic floor, being these patients at an increased risk of micturition disorders. In the post-operative period, sexual function is widely studied, but less in known about changes in urinary function. The aim of this study is to evaluate the urinary function of patients after SRS. Introduction and Objective: Rhabdomyosarcoma is a tumor developed at the expense of connective tissue. The para-testicular localization occupies the second place after the cervicocephalic localization. It occurs mainly in children and adolescents. The aim of thiswork is to study the clinical, para-clinical and therapeutic characteristics of this variety of rhabdomyosarcoma (PTR). Our study is retrospective spread over a period of 26 years involving 6 observa-tions of PTR. We have adopted the IRS (Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study) classification in staging and therapeutic management. Results: The average age of our patients was 20 years (from10 to 35 years). The discovery circumstances were as follows: a progressive testicular volume increase in three cases, a large mass appeared after scrotal trauma in one case, inguinal mass in one case and cervical mass in another case. Clinical examination revealed a hard scrotal swelling in all cases, associated with inguinal lymph nodes in 2 cases and cervical adenopathy in 1 case. All patients had an orchidectomy. Histothological examination concluded to embryonic PTR (4 cases), polymorphic form (1 case) and a well differentiated PTR (1 case). The staging was negative in 2 cases and showed retroperitoneal ganglia (3 cases), mediastinal lymphnodes (1 case) and pulmonary metastases (1 case). The tumor was classified as stage IV (3 cases), I (2 cases) and II (1 cases). An adjuvant treatment was instituted, including poly-chemotherapy in 5 cases and radiotherapy in 1 case. We deplored three deaths with a decline of 3, 12 and 24 months. Two patients were alive after a follow-up of 75 and 66 months. One patient was lost of sight.  Introduction and Objective: Little has been discussed on the effects of chronic intake of a diet rich in sugars and lipids (cafeteria-style diet) in the penis. Therefore, we aimed to evaluate the effects of cafeteria -style diet intake on penile morphology of Wistar rats at 5 months-old. Twenty male Wistar rats were divided into 2 groups from weaning (21 days): control (C; n=10) and cafeteria diet (CAF, n=10). Cafeteria diet was manipulated in our laboratory, having as constituents: commercial rat chow (60g/100g), condensed milk (25g/100g) and shortening (15g/100g), totaling 550 kcal/100g. The animals were feed with these diets until 5 months of life, when euthanasia has been performed. Biometric (food intake, body weight and blood pressure) and metabolic parameters (fasting glucose and oral glucose tolerance test) were evaluated in all animals. At euthanasia, the penis was removed for histomorphometrical analyzes. Results: There were no differences in food intake, weight gain and blood glucose between the groups (p=0.0943). Epididymal (p=0.0095) and retroperitoneal (p=0.0036) fat deposits were more pronounced in the CAF group. Regarding penis morphology, both groups showed similar area of tunica albuginea, total area of the penis and area of the corpus cavernosum with or without tunica albuginea. Inversely, CAF group presented a reduction in the volumetric density of the smooth muscle cells (-19%, p=0 .032) and sinusoids (-32%, p=0.006). Additionally, this group presented higher volumetric density of the connective tissue (+ 13%, p=0.006) when compared to controls. Cryptorchidism is a frequent congenital anomaly, most often diagnosed and treated during childhood. However, its incidence remains frequent in adults and continues to have a problem of therapeutic attitude: should we keep the testicle by lowering or sacrificing it? Materials and Methods: This is a retrospective 26year study concerning 258 patients with cryptorchidism over 15 years of age. Results: The average age of our patients was 24 years with extremes ranging from 16 to 63 years. The main circumstances of the discovery were: a systematic military recruitment in 48% of cases, a prenuptial investigation in 20% of cases and infertility reason in 17% of cases. The diagnosis of cryptorchidism was in all cases clinical. Cryptorchidism was unilateral in 87.7% of cases. The testicle was palpable in inguinal position in 75% of cases. Treatment consisted of a testicular lowering with orchidopexia in 80% of cases. The evolution was marked by fertility increase (12.5%), secondary testicular atrophy (2.5%), and subsequent carcinogenicity (1.16%). Conclusion: Late testicular lowering may lead to an improvement in spermatogenesis and will allow easier monitoring in the search for a possible cancer. The best treatment is preventive by diagnosis and lowering testicular at an early age to prevent the two major pitfalls: infertility and cancer. Introduction and Objective: Even though bone scan is cost-effective to evaluate bony metastasis in patients with prostate cancer, it is less sensitive to detect early stage bony metastasis and to monitor the vertebral metastasis. Magnetic Resonance (MR) imaging is valuable test for detecting spine metastasis in lots of studies. We evaluated the effectiveness of limited MR (only T1 + diffusion weighted image, DWI) for monitoring the vertebral metastasis in patients with prostate cancer. Materials and Methods: From July 2014 to June 2016, the patients diagnosed spine metastasis by prostate cancer using the 99mTc bone scintigraphy were enrolled. Regardless of primary local therapy, visceral and lymph node metastasis, the changes of the spine metastasis were followed using the bone scan and bi-parametric MR (T1+DWI). Each test was followed more than 3 months. Clinical data including serum PSA level, related symptoms and sign, bone scan, and MR data were collected in total 10 patients (14 follow-up) prospectively. RECIST criteria was used for determining MR and bone scan finding. Results: Among 14 follow-ups in 10 patients, 6 and 10 (including all progressed cases in bone scan) cases were determined as a progression disease using bone scan and bi-parametric MR, respectively (Table) . Otherwise, neurologic symptoms and pain could be expected using the bi-parametric MR. Examination time for each test was 15 minutes and 4 hours for bi-parametric MR and bone scan, respectively. In Korean medical reimbursement system by government, the patients diagnosed with any cancer need to pay only $15.9 and $5.6 for limited MR and bone scan, respectively.  Introduction and Objectives: Androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) is an effective systemic therapy for advanced prostate cancer patients. Lawrentschuk et al described the retrospective study of the efficacy of the switch to another GnRH agonist in patients with PSA failure received the first GnRH agonist, and 69% of patients experienced decreased PSA level after 3 months of switching regimen (J Urol. 185, 2011) . We conducted the prospective study on Japanese patients. Prospectively, 16 patients from 5 different centers undergoing ADT and presenting consecutive rising PSA and despite a castrated testosterone level (<0.5 ng/ml) were registered. All patients received GnRH agonist 3-month depot (goserelin acetate (GA) or leuprolide acetate (LA)) mono-therapy. We measured the PSA and testosterone level variation 3 and 6 months after the switch. Results: Of the total of 16 patients, 12 patients were switched from LA to GA and 4 patients were switched from GA to LA. The median PSA at the switch was 3.15 (0.93-13.30) ng/ml, and the median testosterone level was 0.17 (<0.03-0.27) ng/ml. At 3 months after the switch, the median PSA was 4.09 (1.79-17.77 ) ng/ ml, the median testosterone level was 0.13 (<0.03-0.28) ng/ml and only 1 patient (6.3%) responded to the therapy. At 6 months after the switch, the median PSA was 5.19 (2.20-23.61) ng/ml, and the median testosterone level was 0.11 (<0.03-0.23) ng/ml and 3 patients (21.4%) responded to the therapy. In total, PSA decreased in 4 patients (25%), and the median duration of response was 6.5 months. All of the response cases were the LA to GA group, but there was not significant difference between the LA to GA group and the GA to LA group (p=0.182). Conclusions: Our prospective study indicated the efficacy of androgen suppression was not different between LA and GA. Switching GnRH agonist therapy has a limited impact on PSA in castration resistant prostate cancer in Japanese patients. The Effect of Exogen Superoxide Dismutase on Inducing Apoptosis in Prostate Cancer Cell Lines Pc-3 Introduction an Objective: This study aimed to assess the administration of exogen Superoxide Dismutase on increasing apoptosis through intrinsic pathway by looking the expression of MnSOD. This study is an in vitro experimental study conducted with randomized design. Subjects in this study is prostate cancer cells of secondary Prostate cancer cell lines (PC-3) from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Rockville, MD, USA). Subjects were divided into 5 groups: control, extract SOD 62.5 mg/ml, 83 mg/ml, 125 mg/ml and 250 mg/ml. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) is derived from extracts of melon seeds and wheat gliadin biopolymer. Expression of prostate cell PC-3 in each group was determined with imunocytochemistry and the expression of MnSOD was determined by Elisa test and Apoptosis cell with TUNEL. The percentage of TUNEL was determined by counting 10 random fields per section. All values were expressed as means ± SE. Statistical differences between each group were determined by a χ2-test. In other studies, one-way ANOVA was used, followed by LSD test if there were significant differences between groups. Significance was indicated if p < 0.05. Results: Statistical analysis showed that SOD extract increasing the expression MnSOD in each group especially in 125 and 250 mg/ml group (p = 0.000). The percentage of TUNEL for apoptotic cells also increasing maximum in 125 and 250 mg/ml group (p = 0.000). with LSD test, there is significantly differences in incresing apoptotic cell in 62,5 and 83 mg/ml groups (p<0,05) but there are no differences between 125 and 250 mg/ml (p>0,05). In the ongoing monitoring of patients following definitive treatment for prostate cancer, it is not uncommon for patients to have biochemical recurrence (BCR). Prostate Specific Membrane Antigen (PSMA) Positron Emission Tomography/Computed Tomography (PET/CT) is increasingly being utilised for the diagnosis of loco-regional and metastatic prostate cancer due to its increased specificity compared to conventional imaging. Matching of surgical anatomy to PSMA PET positive nodes on imaging can pose a challenge to localisation of disease for resection. We describe a novel approach using pre-operative hook-wire localisation of PSMA-PET positive nodal tissue to improve localisation of target nodes. A patient who had previously undergone robot-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy and radiation therapy to the prostate bed was investigated for BCR with PSMA-PET/CT. This displayed 2 PSMA-avid nodes in the left pelvis only and the patient was planned to undergo salvage lymph node dissection. Given the difficult position of one of the target nodes (postero-lateral pelvic wall in close proximity to rectum) pre-operative CT and PS-MA-PET/CT images were used to place a hook-wire into the affected target nodal tissue. affected nodal tissue was reported by the operator to be much improved with the specimen and hook wire easily able to be palpated and removed. Histopathology revealed both sites found to be avid on PSMA scanning to yield metastatic prostate cancer. The patient is currently being and will continue to be followed up with serial prostate specific antigen measurements. Prostate biopsy is considered a common procedure for the diagnosis of prostate cancer, with few major complications. There are some reports on complications, voiding function, and health-related quality of life (HRQOL) after prostate biopsy, but the association between prostate biopsy and erectile function, anxiety, and depression has been only sparsely investigated. With the aim of improving patient counseling and informed consent, we prospectively evaluated HRQOL outcomes, including sexual function and mental health, after prostate biopsy. In total, 207 patients who underwent initial prostate needle biopsy were evaluated. All patients completed the following measurements before and 2-4 weeks after the procedure: Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form 8 (SF-8), Expanded Prostate Cancer Index Composite (EPIC), International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS), Inter-national Index of Erectile Function-5 (IIEF-5), and Self-Rating Depression Scale (SDS). Results: No significant differences were evident between baseline and postbiopsy scores for SF-8. The EPIC scores for the general urinary domain and all its subscales dropped significantly, and the scores for the general sexual domain and its function decreased significantly after biopsy. Positive correlations between function and bother subscales within domains, including urinary and bowel components were high, but no positive correlation was observed between sexual function and bother. The IPSS was not significantly increased, but the QOL score was significantly decreased after biopsy. A significant difference between baseline and postbiopsy was noted for the IIEF-5 score, and in particular, patients who were initially potent significantly developed erectile dysfunction (ED) after biopsy. The SDS score was significantly different between baseline and postbiopsy, and patients aged 73 years or older showed clinically significant depression after the procedure. Conclusion: Based on these data, urologists should pay attention not only to physical and short-lasting complications related to the biopsy procedure but also to HRQOL, including sexual function and mental health after prostate biopsy. Concordance Introduction and Objective: Concordance between biopsy Gleason Score (bGS) with systematic, 2D greyscale transrectal ultrasound (TRUS)-guided biopsies and prostatectomy Gleason score (pGS) is poor with GS upgrading ranging from 30-40%. We determined the value of 3D greyscale TRUS-guidance and biopsy core pre-embedding on concordance between the GS of prostate biopsies and radical prostatectomy (RP) specimens in a consecutive cohort of men undergoing systematic prostate biopsies and subsequent RP for prostate cancer. All consecutive patients who underwent prostate biopsies and subsequent RP for prostate cancer at our institution from 2007 to 2016 were retrospectively reviewed and divided into two: the 2D group (2007-2013, n=266) underwent systematic 12-core, 2D TRUS-guided biopsies with biopsy cores of each prostate lobe floating free in formalin vials. The 3D group (2013-2016, n=129) underwent systematic 12-core biopsies using a 3D TRUS system with real-time tracking and displaying of the needle in a 3D model. Biopsy cores were processed separately using a semi-automated pre-embedding system allowing for fixation of straight aligned biopsy cores on cassettes throughout the entire pathology processing. GS concordance of both groups was evaluated using the k-coefficient based on GS categories: 6, 7a (3+4=7), 7b (4+3=7) and 8-10. Predictors of GS 6 upgrading were assessed using logistic regression models. The GS of prostate biopsies and RP were concordant in 63.5% of all cases, while 29.1% were upgraded and 7.3% were downgraded. Gleason concordance was comparable between both groups with a κ = 0.44 (95%-CI: 0.33-0.56) and 0.42 (95%-CI: 0.33-0.50) for the 3D group and 2D group, respectively. On multivariate analysis, higher PSA (p=0.039), clinical T2 stage (p=0.018) and more positive biopsy cores (p=0.020) significantly predicted GS 6 upgrading. Biopsy GS 6 patients with GS upgrading had higher pathological T-stages (p<0.001), more positive surgical margins (p=0.035) and more biochemical recurrences after RP (p<0.001). Conclusion: 3D greyscale TRUS-guidance with biopsy core pre-embedding does not improve GS concor- Conclusion: We conclude that there was more than an half Gleason 8 on prostate biopsy that was downgraded at RP. Almost 1/3 were downgraded to Gleason 7 (3+4) and 1/4 to Gleason 7 (4+3). This means that we could be over-diagnosing Gleason 8. This is not only of concern for patients where no final pathology will be available (those undergoing radiotherapy or brachytherapy), but also for those patients where a small difference of one or two Gleason grades might influence the therapeutic decision. The limitations of this scoring system should be considered when selecting treatments, and should be an effort refining PC diagnostic techniques. Impact  We queried the Cancer Atlas, a global cancer database of the World Health Organization and American Cancer Society, for structural and socioeconomic variables pertinent to CaP in national health systems. We performed Pearson correlations and multiple regression analyses using these variables and country-specific rates of CaP incidence and mortality. Results: We analyzed CaP incidence and mortality rates reported by 187 national health systems. Country-specific incidence was strongly positively correlated with the quality of population-based cancer registries (PBCR), which collect and measure surveillance statistics (P<0.001). Having a national high-quality PBCR (vs. regional high-quality or lesser quality) was the strongest predictor of CaP incidence among all structural and socioeconomic variables ( Fig. 1A; P<0 .001). Health systems with cancer control policies had lower rates of CaP mortality. For instance, mortality was negatively correlated with the extent of warning labels on cigarette packaging (as a proxy for cancer prevention programs) (P<0.001); mean mortality was 11.7 and 11.8/100,000 for countries with medium and large labels, respectively, vs. 17.8/100,000 for small/no labels (Fig. 1B) . CaP mortality was also lower in countries with vs. without an operational national cancer control strategy ( Fig. 1C Studies reporting on at least one of the following outcomes, positive surgical margins, continence and potency with data available for nerve sparing and non-nerve sparing groups were included. 16 studies were available for final analysis and included 16269 participants. Primary outcomes analysed where positive surgical margins and functional outcomes (continence and potency). Results: Comparing nerve sparing with non-nerve sparing prostatectomy, the proportion of cases resulting in incontinence is lower for nerve sparing prostatectomy. The proportions of cases resulting in impotence were 0.92 (Cl: 0.88 -0.96) for non-nerve sparing operations, 0.43 (Cl: 0.40 -0.46) for all nerve sparing operations, 0.59 (CI: 0.51 -0.67) for unilateral and 0.39 (CI: 0.35 -0.42) for bilateral nerve sparing. With regards to positive margin rates, these are higher for T3 cancers than for T2 cancers, both for operations that used nerve sparing and for those that did not. For T2 cancers there is little or no difference in the proportion of cases resulting in positive margins for operations with and without nerve sparing. For T3 cancers the proportions of cases with positive margins were practically the same for operations with and without nerve sparing. Conclusion: This systematic review demonstrates a positive association between nerve sparing and better functional outcomes after prostate cancer surgery. The association with potency is more robust than that for continence outcomes. Combined Chemo-Hormonal-Radiation Treatment of High-and Very-High-Risk Non-Metastatic Prostate Cancer (Overview) Introduction and Objective: Treatment of high-and very-high risk prostate cancer appears to be extremely difficult. EBRT combined with long-term ADT plays the main role, though low treatment effectiveness compared to one of intermediate-and low-risk groups pushes towards finding new treatment options and modalities. This review enlightens data from modern publications and reviews concerning combined treatment uncluding (or not) chemotherapy and different types of radiation therapy. Materials and Methods: Seventy six sources used, including data from meta-analyses and phase III trials. Risk stratification. Several organizations (NCCN, NICE, ESMO, AUA, EAU and others.) offer risk stratification systems. The NCCN system includes the very-high-risk group (Т3b-T4). Nowadays high-risk is set (EAU) when stages ≥T2c or PSA >20 or Gleason score 8-10 appear. Results: EBRT: Recommended dose is ≥74Gy not depending on risk group. Low overall 10-years survival rate makes searching for new effective treatments inevitable. Androgen deprivation therapy: Long-term regimens (2-3 years) of ADT in high-risk prostate cancer is undoubtable and neccecary. Biochemical progression-free survival can be achieved by using LHRH-antagonists in long-term regimens. Brachytherapy: Alone and its combination with EBRT show high effectiveness concerning progression-free survival. In high-risk group survival rates are significantly lower. Improvement can be achieved by using adjuvant long-term ADT and other systemic therapy. Nowadays the results of such clinical trials are not available. Chemotherapy: As part of combination treatment of non-metastatic hormonal-sensitive high-risk prostate cancer is proved to be effective (increasing progression-free and overall survival), but still rarely used treatment option. Conclusion: Reviews, meta-analyses and phase III clinical trials results show improvement of PFS (and some -OS) when using a multimodal approach UP.379, Figure 2 . (a) The proportion of nerve sparing operations for T3 cancers plotted against corresponding proportion for T2 cancers, for the seven studies in Figure (Figure 1 in stats) . (b) The proportion of T3 cancers among nerve sparing operations plotted against corresponding proportion among non-nerve sparing operations for the same seven studies. Labels denote study numbers (Table 1) UP.379, Figure 1 . Summary Data and Forest Plots of the Relative Risk of PSM With 95% confidence intervals for operations with and without nerve sparing, for each of the two cancer types (T2 and T3) for seven studies (see table 1 ): n denotes the number of operations, r is the number with outcome "positive surgical margin" (PSM) and p = r/n is the proportion resulting in PSM. Studies are listed in increasing order of p for non-nerve sparing operations on T2 cancers. Study 15 did not report PSM outcomes for 15 operations on T3 cancers. To investigate the effects of early administration of dutasteride in patients with detectable serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels after radical prostatectomy (RP). A prospective open-label study, with a cumulative analysis of asymptomatic increase in PSA following RP, was conducted from January 2005 to December 2013. An early increase in PSA level was defined as detectable serum PSA level > 0.04 ng/mL. Patients with PSA level > 0.04 ng/mL were treated with dutasteride 0.5 mg daily. Serum PSA level and biochemical recurrence (BCR) were monitored. We divided the patients into two groups based on the serum PSA response after dutasteride treatment. Results: Eighty patients were included in the study. At the median follow-up of 51.8 months, 56 patients (70.0%) showed a decrease of greater than 10% in serum PSA level, and 24 showed increased PSA levels. Twelve of the 56 patients with PSA response showed subsequently increased PSA. Intergroup differences in preoperative PSA levels, PSA nadir levels, and Gleason score of 6 or less were significant (p=0.028, 0.030, and 0.035, respectively). A multivariate analysis revealed that Gleason score of 6 or less (p=0.018) and PSA nadir levels (p=0.011) were predictive factors for PSA response after early dutasteride treatment in men with increased PSA levels following RP. Conclusions: Early monotherapy of dutasteride showed a decline in serum PSA levels in men with lower pretreatment PSA levels, lower nadir PSA levels, and a Gleason score 6, when the serum PSA was detected after RP. Introduction and Objective: Improved prostate cancer survival leads to longer follow-up and might contribute to increase risk of second primary malignancies (SPM). This study estimates the overall risk of UP.379, Figure 3 . With 95% confidence intervals for operations with and without nerve sparing, and with bilateral compared with unilateral nerve sparing, for six studies (Table 1) : n denotes the number of operations, r is the number with outcome "incontinent" and p = r/n is the proportion incontinent. Studies are listed by increasing order of p for non-nerve sparing operations. Study 9 did not include non-nerve sparing operations and study 1 did not report separate data for unilateral and bilateral nerve sparing. UP.379, Figure 4 . Summary Data and Forest Plots of the Relative Risk of Impotence With 95% confidence intervals for operations with and without nerve sparing, and with bilateral compared with unilateral nerve sparing, for five studies (Table 1) : n denotes the number of operations, r is the number with the outcome "impotent" and p = r/n is the proportion of impotent subjects. Studies are listed in increasing order of p for non-nerve sparing operations. Studies 2 and 9 did not include non-nerve sparing operations, and study 3 did not report separate data for unilateral and bilateral nerve sparing procedures. For each category of operation, the data are consistent with the same risk of impotence in each study, and the last two rows give pooled data across all five studies. Introduction and Objective: To address a major concern driving treatment intervention, we studied incontinence and urinary quality of life (QOL) before and after robotic-assisted radical prostatectomy (RARP). In men with severe lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS), this is the first observational study analyzing short-and long-term urinary outcomes of RARP. Materials and Methods: RARP was performed on 200 patients by 3 surgeons from 2014 to 2017. Men returned preoperative and postoperative self-reported IPSS, urinary QOL, and continence (pad usage) questionnaires, IIEF5. Men with preoperative severe LUTS (IPSS≥ 14; n = 53; 31%) were observed longitudinally for a mean of 4.0 years (range, 1.6-5.2 years) and were compared with men with mild-to-moderate LUTS (IPSS ≤ 13 69%). Results: In men with severe LUTS, baseline average IPSS and QOL scores were 12.2 and 4.0, respectively. Long-term IPSS improved by 30% (3.4 points; P < .001); specifically 59% of patients had IPSS drop to <8, 35% of patients to 8-19, and 6% of patients remained at ≥ 20. The mean QOL scores declined from 4.0 to 2.0 (P < .05). Preoperatively, 72% patients had a poor QOL score of 4-6 compared with only 18% (P < .001) at long-term follow-up after RARP. Overall pad-free status was 80% vs 92%. In men with severe LUTS, RARP significantly improved urinary symptoms and QOL scores with an overall pad-free status of 71%. Specifically, these men should be counseled that RARP confers a significant short-and long-term benefit with regard to relief of their obstructive and irritative symptoms. Clinical Materials and Methods: Mean patient age was 69 years (range 42 to 82). We selected patients presented with low-risk disease: initial PSA <10 ng/ml, clinical stage < T2a, and Gleason score < 7. Patients with intermediate risk disease were also included on a case-to-case basis with initial PSA < 20 ng/ml, Gleason score 7 (basically 3+4), clinical stage T2b or T2c. All patients were treated with low-dose-rate permanent prostate brachytherapy (145Gy). Patients with prostate volume more than 35ml fundamentally received hormonal therapy until prostate volume become less 35ml before brachytherapy. Mean initial PSA was 6.7 ng/ml (range 3.3 to 15.5). Low risk group was 84patients (52%), Intermediate risk group was 79patients (48%). One hundred and thirty eight patients treated with loose seed, 25 patients used linked seed.Biochemical recurrence was defined according to the American Society for Radiation Oncology na-dir+2.0ng/ml definition. Results: Median follow-up was 5 years.Biochemical recurrence presented 3patients (2%), the 3 year and 5 year biochemical recurrence free survival were 97% and 97%. Other cause death occurred in one case, cancer death was not presented.  Introduction and Objective: MRI-guided transurethral ultrasound ablation (TULSA) is a novel modality for minimally invasive whole gland ablation in patients with localised prostate cancer (PCa) (see Figure 1 ). We conducted a multicentre phase 1 study in Canada, Germany and USA showing TULSA to be feasible, safe and well tolerated. Treatment protocol mandated a safety margin of 3 mm within the prostate capsule, anticipating 10% untreated prostate. Of the 30 patients, 55% (16/29) had cancer on repeat biopsy, which was clinically significant in 31% (9/29). Six patients underwent salvage therapy. Here we report on our experience with the 4 salvage prostatectomies (SP) that were performed. Results: SP was technically feasible in all 4 men. A modified Lloyd-Davies position allowed rectal access for an assistants finger to guide the posterior dissection. Extensive dense fibrotic reaction of endopelvic and Denonvilliers fascia was characteristic. Mean operating times, blood loss, and length of stay were 210 minutes, 866 ml, and 3.5 days respectively. There were no perioperative complications. Whole-mount pathology sections showed 2 pT2b and 2 pT3a. Location of disease was compatible with persistent cancer mostly in the untreated peripheral safety region. Postoperative stress urinary incontinence was mild in two pts and moderate in one. All men had erectile dysfunction unresponsive to PDE5i. 2/4 pts had early PSA progression despite SP, requiring radiotherapy (RT) as further salvage. One man had PSA progression despite salvage RT. Conclusions: SP is a salvage option if TULSA fails. Technical difficulty and morbidity are comparable to salvage RP following RT. Further trials with TULSA are underway with 1 mm safety margin, with possibly fewer patients needing salvage therapies. Introduction and Objectives: Progress in different diagnostic and treatment modalities of prostate cancer (PCa) have strengthened support for the use of focal high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU). However, important questions remain regarding candidate selection, treatment, and outcomes. We assessed longterm oncologic outcomes of focal HIFU in a small single-center cohort of low-risk PCa patients. Twenty-two patients with low risk PCa (PSA<10 ng/ml, Gleason score less than 7, or clinical stage cT2b and less) were underwent for focal HIFU ablation (ExAblate 2100 for a prostate device, InSightec) with GE MRI suite and endorectal FUS transducer from March 2009 to January 2010. Among them, 8 patients were available for long term (a median time -7.3 years) follow-up. Desired treatment target (Region of Treatment, ROT) and vulnerable structures (nerve vascular bundles) were marked on acquired magnetic resonance guided (MRg) planning images. Pre-and post-reatment strategy, rate and follow-up schedule was designed at PCa001 and PCa002 studies and described previously; prospective parts of these studies was closed after 6-month follow up. Results: The average patient's age 64 (49-73) years. Median pre-HIFU PSA level and post-HIFU PSA nadir was 7.6 and 3.9 ng/ml, respectively. Biochemical recurrence (BCR, defined as nadir + 2 ng/ml) was observed in 7 (87.5%) cases. Medium time to progression was 18 (3-32) months. In 4 (50%) cases local progression was confirmed by prostate biopsy and after metastatic process exclusion salvage radical prostatectomy (RPE). Generally, surgery after ablation was severe than in naive patients; however, operative characteristics (operative time, blood loss, hospital stay) were comparable with historical cohort. During follow-up 37th CONGRESS OF THE SOCIÉTÉ INTERNATIONALE D'UROLOGIE -SIU 2017 ABSTRACT BOOK time, systemic treatment (hormonal therapy) was prescribed for 5 patients, as a result of distant metastatic progression after prostatectomy (2) and without secondary local treatment (3). Cancer-specific survival (CSS) and overall survival (OS) was both 100%. Conclusions: Despite acceptable results of survival, we found that almost all patients are progressed during follow-up. These data are in contrast with previously published data. However, patients in our series were younger than in historical cohort. We concluded that the use of focal high-intensity focused ultrasound in selected patients represents a strategy combining benefit of active surveillance and radical treatment in patients with low risk PCa. However, this concept should be evaluated in large prospective controlled studies. Introduction and Objectives: MRI-guided transurethral ultrasound ablation (MRI-TULSA) is a novel minimally invasive treatment modality for localized prostate cancer (PCa). A transurethral ultrasound applicator generates a precise image-guided treatment, under the control of real-time MRI thermometry feedback control. The objective of this phase I clinical trial was to determine clinical safety and feasibility of MRI-TULSA for whole-gland prostate ablation as a primary treatment for localized PCa. A prospective multi-centre, single-arm trial was undertaken at 3 sites in Canada, Germany and USA, enrolling patients between March 2013 and March 2014. Inclusion criteria were: age ≥65 years; biopsy-proven PCa (cT1c-T2a) with no previous treatment; PSA ≤10 ng/ml; Gleason score 3+3 (3+4 in Canada only); Prostate size ≤5 cm sagittal length and ≤6 cm axial diameter; Eligible for MRI and general anesthesia. The protocol specified a safety margin of 3 mm from the gland periphery, leaving approximately 10% untreated gland. Primary endpoints were safety and feasibility, evaluated at 1 year. Secondary endpoints were efficacy, based on 1 and 3 year biopsies and PSA response, as well as impact on voiding, erectile, and bowel function scores. Results: Thirty patients were treated. No intraoperative complications, or postoperative incontinence, rectal injury, or fistula occurred. All were discharged on or before post-operative day one. One grade 3 adverse event occurred (epididymitis requiring IV antibiotics). Other adverse events were: hematuria (grade 1 in 13 patients, grade 2 in 2 patients); urinary retention (grade 1 in 3 patients, grade 2 in 5 patients). Heating of the prostatic tissue conformed well to the planned treatment area, and predicted area of cell kill correlated well with non-perfusion on immediate contrast-enhanced MRI. 16/29 patients (55%) had positive 12 month biopsy, with 9/29 (31%) having clinically significant cancer. Median IPSS and IIEF-15 scores were 8/35 and 13/30 at baseline, and 8/35 and 12/30 at 24 months, respectively. Conclusion: MRI-TULSA provides detailed planning, real-time thermal dosimetry, and precise feedback control. It is a safe and well-tolerated procedure for whole-gland ablation of localized PCa. A larger multicenter TULSA-PRO Ablation Clinical Trial (TACT) with reduced safety margins and higher treatment temperature is currently underway. The Association between the Outcomes of Extraperitoneal Laparoscopic Radical Prostatectomy and the Anthropometric Measurements of the Prostate Magnetic Resonance Imaging Permpongkosol S, Aramay S, Vattanakul T, Phongkitkarun S Introduction and Objective: The aim of this study was to determine the association between the anthropometric measurements of the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and perioperative outcomes of extraperitoneal laparoscopic radical prostatectomy (ELRP). From 2008 to June 2016, 86 patients with ELRP were performed preoperative MRI and underwent ELRP for localized prostate cancer by a single urologist (SP). For the anthropometric measurements of MRI, a Two single radiologists (SA and TV) measured prostatic volume, angle between pubic bone and prostate, depth of prostatic apex, curve distance, the angle between the prostate and pubic bone, abdominal wall thickness, work space AP and transverse during surgery, protrusion of the prostate into the bladder, retropubic fat and peri-prostatic plexus diameter. We analyzed the associations between anthropometric measurements and patient demographics, operative time, estimated blood loss, and positive surgical margins (PSMs), complication rate, and postoperative hospitalization. Results: The mean patient age was 69.61 ± 8.30 years. The median of operating time and blood loss was 2.30 (IQR = 2.69; (Q3-Q1) = 6.86-4.18) hours and 725.30 (600; 900-300) ml, respectively. A total of post-surgical complication rate was 1.16 %. The median hospital stay was 6.50 days (4; 9-5). The pathological stage was T2 and T3 was 45.74% and 34.04%, respectively. The rate of PSMs was 18.09% (pT2 and pT3; 6.38% and 9.57%). For the association between the anthropometric measurements of the MRI and perioperative outcomes of ELRP, the angles between pubic bone and prostate gland (angle 1 & 2), were significantly associated with operative time and hospital stay, respectively ( p < 0.05). There are no any correlation between the pelvimetry and positive surgical margin. The findings of the present study suggest that anthropometric measurements of the MRI were related to operative difficulties in ELRP. This study confirmed MRI planning is the keys to preventing complications of ELRP. Introduction and Objective: The concept of active surveillance (AS) of low-risk prostate cancer (PCa) is to treat with curative intent when disease progression occurs. The key to success is selecting suitable PCa patients and to make sure they are monitored regularly. To assist both clinicians and patients, various institution-specific protocols have been developed. To further refine and standardize these protocols worldwide it is crucial not to only study the clinical outcomes but also identify adherence to these protocols. The Movember Foundations' GAP3 cohort includes data of as many as 14,024 patients from 25 established AS cohorts worldwide. Adherence to inclusion criteria of the different AS protocols was assessed by comparing institution-specific recommendations to real-data based results using descriptive statistics. Results: Most protocols recommend clinical risk stratification based on patients' age (n=22), tumour stage (n=21), serum PSA level (n=21) and Gleason score (n=24) as the primary means of refining patient selection. All institutions adhered to the age criterion. However, (very) small deviations were found for five centers regarding stage (mainly T2 instead of T1) and for 17 centers regarding biopsy GS (mainly 3+4 instead of <=6). In total, five institutions adhered to all recommended eligibility criteria. Following initiation of AS, most protocols recommend serial measurement of serum PSA (n=24) and surveillance biopsies in order to identify pathological progression (n=23). Compliance to these follow-up protocols will be presented. Conclusion: Within each of the 25 institutions within the GAP3 cohort adherence to self-formulated inclusion criteria was good. The current findings will need to be further explored and taken into account when developing a realistic evidence-based AS protocol. Introduction and Objective: Tumor lysis syndrome(TLS) is a rare and potentially fatal complication of oncologic treatments. It is characterized by biochemical changes due to rapid tumor lysis of malignant cells, usually after chemotherapy for hematologic malignancies. We report a case of TLS occurred after cabazitaxel therapy for mCRPC. To the best our knowledge, TLS has never been reported after cabazitaxel therapy. We present a case of 77 yearold man developing grade II clinical TLS after a single dose of cabazitaxel (20 mg/m2) for mCRPC. He had received the androgen deprivation therapy but he had become CRPC after 7 months. Thereafter, he had received 13 cycles of 3-weekly docetaxel (70 mg/m2) followed by enzalutamide for 13 months at the previous institution. The computed tomography showed poor defined prostate tumor, multiple liver metastases and pelvic lymphadenopathy, and bone scan showed multiple bone metastasis(EOD2). Results: Cabazitaxel with dexamethasone 1.0 mg once daily was initiated. He received pegfilgrastim (6 mg) subcutaneously on day 2, as the primary prophylaxis for neutropenia. On day 3, he had a fever of 37.8 °C and severe hypotension. Laboratory tests revealed the renal and liver dysfunction (serum creatinine 2.85 mg/dl, potassium 5.7 mmol/l, phosphorus 2.8 mg/dl, UA 11.3 mg/dl, Ca 8.2mmol/l, LDH 2992 U/l, AST 802 IU/l, ALT 572 IU/l ) and severe anemia (hemoglobin 6.1 g/dl). Then He was diagnosed as laboratory and clinical TLS. He was admitted in the intensive care unit (ICU) and treated with hydration therapy (3000ml/day) and the correction of hyperuricemia with recombinant uricolytic agent (rasburicase). After that, UA and electrolyte abnormalities almost resolved after 3 days. He was recovered, out of the ICU on day 6, and discharged from the hospital on day 14. However, he re-hospitalized to our department for severe pain and dyspnea eight days after discharge and died of multiple organ failures in the next day. Conclusion: It is utmost important to assess risk factors for TLS and to perform active prevention to avoid fatal outcomes. It might be beneficial to use rasburicase in patients with established TLS. External  Introduction and Objective: The University of California San Francisco Cancer of the Prostate Risk Assessment-S score (CAPRA-S score) is a unique tool that combines preoperative PSA and pathological parameters to predict biochemical recurrence (BCR) after radical prostatectomy. We ought to validate this tool in a Middle Eastern prostate cancer population. Using the American University of Beirut Medical Center Prostate cancer database (1998) (1999) (2000) (2001) (2002) (2003) (2004) (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) (2015) , we identified 196 men had complete data to calculate a CAPRA-S Score. Kaplan-Meier curves were plotted and compared across the categories of the CAPRA-S score, using the log-rank test. Cox regression models were carried out to determine the ability of the CAPRA-S score (continuous and categorical) in predicting PSA failure. Hazard ratios (HR) and their 95% confidence intervals (CI) were reported. The ability of the cox models to discriminate between PSA failures and non-failures was measured by the Harrell's c statistic. Statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS version 24.0 and STATA version 13.1 for Windows and a p-value <0.05 was considered significant. Results: The mean age was 62 years (SD = 6.01), and 34.9% of the patients developed BCR. The percentage of patients in our cohort with a CAPRA-S score of 0-2, 3-5, and 6-10 (low, intermediate, and high risk) was 34.7%, 33.2%, and 32.1%, respectively. The 5 years Biochemical recurrence free survival rate for low, intermediate, and high risk was 92%, 80%, and 69% respectively. The CAPRA-S c-index for BCR was 0.63 in this validation set Conclusion: In this study, the CAPRA-S score was capable to predict BCR after radical prostatectomy with a c-index of 0.63. This is the first reported study to validate this tool in a population from the Middle East. The low perforance of CAPRA-S in predicting BCR in our population may be attributed to the fact that 30% of cohort is high risk , adding to that the small sample size and retrospective nature of the study. New Semiauthomatic Laparoscopic Suture System for Urethro-Vesical Anastomosis Introduction and Objective: Radical prostatectomy is a challenging operation demanding a high level of surgical expertise and experience. One of the technically demanding aspects of this surgery is the urethrovesical anastomosis. To describe a new device for facilitating the urethrovesical anastomosis at the time of laparoscopic radical prostatectomy Materials and Methods: We have designed a new device to perform the urethrovesical anastomosis in a semiauthomatic way. The set include a 27F cystoscope to facilitate the placement and enhance the quality of 4 double urethrovesical sutures. Stitches are placed with new device able to change both suture needles simultaneously from one to the other jaw introduced through a 12 mm laparoscopic trocar. All 4 sutures are placed at 6, 3, 9 and 12 o' clock position. Knots are performed extracoporally and moved down with a pusher. Results: Performed sutures with plastic and animal models showed that anastomosis were easy to do and were allways symetric placed. Moreover, stitches achieve an excellent aproximation of urethral and bladder mucosa. Extracorporeal knot was easy to perform and move down with a laparoscopic pusher. Average time was less than 5 minutes. A double running suture with barbed unidrectional sutures is the most used system to perform urethrovesical anastomosis at the radical laparoscopic prostatectomy. The average time for this anastomosis is 27 minutes (range 14 to 80). Technical results depend on surgeons skills and experience. A semiauthomatic suture system may help to perform this anastomosis in a more standardized way and consuming less time. UP.390, Figure 1 . Schematic Representation of Magnetic Resonance Imaging-Guided Transurethral Ultrasound Ablation of The Prostate. ECD = Endorectal Cooling Device; UA = Ultrasound Applicator Introduction and Objective: To analyze the prevalence and survival prognosis of patients with prostate cancer (PC) who were previously diagnosed with end-stage renal disease (ESRD), and to determine the risk factors of overall survival (OS) between those with and without ESRD. non-D-TPL ESRD (30.5/17.8/64.5%), dialysis ESRD (8.9/11.4/59.1%), and transplantation ESRD (36.9/ not applicable/100%) groups were significantly different (p<0.001). Multivariate analysis showed that the presence of ESRD, age, body mass index, SEER stage (HR 1.277-5.052), no treatment within 6 months after diagnosis, no surgery, no chemotherapy, no radiotherapy, no hormonal therapy, non-adenocarcinoma pathology, and CGI grade 2 were significant risk factors of OS (p<0.001, all). Introduction and Objective: Incidental Prostate Cancer (IPCa) is detected in 4-16% of patients undergoing TURP either for bladder outlet obstruction or suspected BPH. The vast majority of patients are treated with observation. Nevertheless, the optimal management strategy remains unclear as there is currently no reliable predictive marker for the presence or absence of significant residual disease. Currently, evidence is lacking as to the potential impact of PSA or its derivatives post TURP and their utility as a prognostic marker for IPCa. In this study, we explore post-resection PSA Density after TURP and correlate it to overall survival. The objective is to determine the utility of rPSAD after TURP in predicting overall survival in men with IPCa treated with Observation. We reviewed the histology of 2567 TURPs performed at our institution over a 17-year period from January 1999 to February 2016. Of these, 142 (6%) were diagnosed with IPCa. Variables collected include PSA before and 12 weeks after TURP, resection weight, T-stage, Gleason score and overall survival. Resection PSA Density is defined as the quotient of the difference between pre and post TURP PSA and resection weight (ng/mL/g). Time to follow-up was from date of TURP to last out-patient clinic review or death. Data analysis was with Chi-Square and spearman correlation on SPSS. Results: Of the 142 IPCa, 75 (53%) and 67 (47%) were T1a and T1b respectively; Gleason score 6 or less was found in 105 (74%) and Gleason 7-10 in 37 (26%). Median pre and post TURP PSA were 6.7(0.1-64) and 1.9(0.1-67) respectively. Mean rPSAD was 0.6(0. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] . 102 patients were observed, 21 received EBRT, 12 LHRH and 7 prostatectomy. After median follow-up of 64 months(4-205), 63 died [T1a-27(43%), T1b-36 (57%)] giving an overall survival of 56%. Of 102 patients observed, 92 experienced PSA drop. Of these, 40 (43%) died after mean time of 55 months. At rPSAD cut-off of 0.6ng/mL/g, the proportion of dead patients was 68% compared to 32% with rPSAD >0.6ng/mL/g (p=0.008). Conclusion: rPSAD is a potentially useful predictor of adverse outcomes in patients diagnosed with IPCa after TURP. However, more studies are required to validate our observation. Serum Selenium Level and Prostate Cancer: A Case-Control Study Introduction and Objective: Selenium is a potential chemopreventive agent against prostate cancer. This study sought to evaluate and compare the serum selenium level in men with newly diagnosed prostate cancer and noncancerous patients. Between 2005 and 2006, this prospective case-control study was performed on patients referred to Sina and Imam University hospitals, Tehran, Iran; it included 62 men with clinicopathologically confirmed diagnosis of prostate cancer (case group) and 68 men with no detectable prostate cancer [normal digital rectal examination and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level] or any other malignant disease (control group). The serum selenium level was assessed using Zeeman graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometer (Varian Company, Australia). The mean serum selenium level in the case and control group was 66.3 ± 17.7 μg/l and 77.5 ± 22.5 μg/l, respectively (P = 0.002). Serum selenium was inversely associated with prostate cancer risk. After adjustment for age, body mass index (BMI), and smoking, the odds ratio was 0.16 and 95% confidence intervals were 0.06 to 0.47 (P trendq = 0.001) comparing the highest with the lowest tertile (≥89.3 μg/l). No correlation was observed between serum selenium level and age, BMI, or PSA level. In conclusion, serum selenium levels in prostate cancer cases were lower than in controls, which supports the hypothesis that selenium may protect against prostate cancer. Nerve-Sparing Cryoablation for the Treatment of Primary Prostate Cancer: the Preliminary Report To present a pilot study in which 20 patients treated with nerve-sparing cryoablation were followed for up to 5.5 years. One neurovascular bundle (NVB) was spared on the side opposite the positive biopsy, and two NVBs were spared when indicated and possible. Just before the start of freezing, a 22-gauge spinal needle was placed into Denonvilliers fascia using a transperineal route, and normal saline was injected to separate the rectum from the prostate. Combined hormone therapy was stopped in all patients after cryoablation when it was used. The prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level was sampled every 3 months for the first 2 years and then every 6 months thereafter. Patients were considered to have a stable . The follow-up ranged from 13 to 66 months (mean 40). All patients had stable PSA levels at last follow-up. Potency (defined as an erection sufficient to complete intercourse to the satisfaction of the patient) was maintained in 5 with of 20 patients, 15 were potent with phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors (11) or intracavernosal injection (4). Conclusions: Nerve-sparing cryoablation, in which one or two neurovascular bundle is spared, showed the possibility of preserving potency in most patients without compromising cancer control. These preliminary results warrant further study. Correlation Introduction and Objective: Preoperative Gleason score (GS) obtained from Trans Rectal Ultra Sonography (TRUS) is the most common grading system to evaluate the appropriate treatment for patients with clinically localized prostate cancer. But this method showed upgraded and downgraded results in comparison to Gleason score obtained from radical prostatectomy. The current study aimed to determine clinical or pathological variables to reduce the differences between biopsy and radical prostatectomy Gleason scores. Through retrospective review of 52 patients with radical prostatectomy, this study examined the correlations of preoperative Gleason score with age, prostate volume, PSA level, PSA density, digital rectal exam findings and percentage of positive core needle biopsies across two groups, including patients with preoperative GS≤6 (i.e. group one) and patients with preoperative GS≥7 (group two). The discordance between biopsy GS and radical prostatectomy GS was observed to be 52% in the current study. Among patients with preoperative GS≤6, prostate volume (p value=0.026), PSA density (p value=0.032) and percentage of positive core needle biopsies (p=0.042) were found to be significant predictors for upgrade. There was no significant predictor for downgrade in patients with preoperative GS≥7. Conclusion: Findings of this study revealed that in patients with preoperative GS≤6, smaller prostate volume, higher prostate density and higher positive results of core needle biopsies were associated with upgrade of GS. Therefore, it should be considered when selecting treatment modalities among these patients The PrecisionPoint ™ transperineal access system enables both standard systematic template and targeted transperineal prostate biopsy, using an ergonomic freehand device under local anaesthetic. We present our initial evaluation of this device. Twenty one patients underwent the procedure between April 2016-January 2017. Initially, all cases were performed under general anaesthetic (GA) to allow familiarization with the technique and local anaesthetic (LA) protocol. All patients underwent a pre-procedural multi-parametric MRI scan. 11 were for primary biopsies, 9 were on active surveillance (AS), and 1 was for restaging. In 4 patients, an MRI lesion was targeted cognitively in addition to standard systematic biopsies. Median age was 61 (49-76) years, median PSA 6 (0.96-60) ng/ml with a median prostate volume of 30 (10-102) cc and PSA density 0.17 (0.05-2.4) ng/ml/cc. Histological and oncological outcomes were recorded. Results: Seven procedures were performed under GA, 7 under sedation + LA, and 7 with LA only. A median of 24 (24-33) cores were taken. Of 11 primary biopsies, 3 were positive (27%). Of 10 AS or restaging biopsies, 70% had their disease upgraded. These were 1 Gleason 4+3, and 6 Gleason 3+4. Of these upgraded patients, 3 underwent a Robotic Prostatectomy, 2 proceeded to Brachytherapy, and 2 to hormone radiotherapy. Standard biopsies with cognitive targets were performed in 4 (19%) patients, with 1 Gleason 4+3, 2 Gleason 3+4, and 1 being benign. One patient developed urinary retention, which resolved. No patients developed sepsis. Conclusion: Prostate biopsy using the Precision-Point ™ system is safe and can be performed under local anaesthetic. Our findings are comparable to standard transperineal template biopsies. Results are encouraging that future transperineal freehand MRI-fusion targeted biopsies under local anaesthetic, with systematic biopsy to the rest of the prostate will be possible. Predictive Factors for Biopsy Subgrading in Gleason 6 Prostate Cancer Introduction and Objective: Gleason score in prostate biopsy (PB) is one of the most important factors in deciding how to treat prostate cancer (PC). The corelation between Gleason scores in biopsy and in radical prostatectomy (RP) is weak, which could lead to suboptimal treatment of patients initially defined as low-risk. Evaluate the rate of subgrading of patients with biopsies showing Gelason 6 PC. Identify clinical and analytical factors correlating with subgrading that could be used in regular practice. Compare rates of recurrence in patients initially subgraded. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) . 60.6% of patients had a Gleason > 6 in the RP specimen. Factors correlating with this subgrading were a PV < 50cc (p=0.008) and more than 3 positive cores in PB (p=0.003). The rate of recurrence was 14.4% (excluding the 9 patients who underwent adjunctive radiotherapy). There was no correlation between recurrence and the following factors: subgrading (p=0.981), positive surgical margins (p=0.142), pT staging (p=0.049). Conclusion: In our series, most PC with Gleason 6 in PB are subgraded, with a lower PV and higher number of positive cores being predictive factors for subgrading; this did not correlate with higher rates of recurrence. To better decide the appropriate therapy strategy for patients with localized PC, better clinical and histological factors from PB need to be analyzed to increase the probability of an adequate grading. Introduction and Objective: Acute urinary symptoms are very common complications resulting from prostate brachytherapy for patients with clinically localized prostate cancer. The International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) is frequently used to assess urinary symptoms. However, because of the questionnaire's sole quality of life (QOL) category, it is unknown the detail of urinary health-related QOL. In the present study, we aimed to investigate the urinary health-related QOL influenced by prostate brachytherapy in Japanese patients, using the King's Health Questionnaire (KHQ). Pudendal nerve somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP) has been studied in voiding and erectile dysfunctions. We aimed to evaluate correlation with pudendal nerve SSEP and functional outcome in patients undergoing radical prostatectomy. We retrospectively analyzed data from 31 patients who underwent radical prostatectomy from January 2014 and June 2015, with at least 1 year of follow-up. Patients were divided into 2 groups depending on the presence/absence of incontinence and erectile dysfunction, respectively. Patient demographic characteristics, preoperative evaluations, postoperative outcomes and pudendal nerve SSEP were assessed. Erectile function recovery was defined as question 2 and 3 on the International Index of Erectile Function (IIEF)-5 and continence was defined as using no pads. Results: Patients with/without postoperative incontinence were 18 and 13, respectively. Demographic characteristics and perioperative outcome were similar between 2 groups. Patients with/without postoperative erectile dysfunction were 23 and 8, respectively. Demographic characteristics and perioperative outcomes were similar according to presence/absence of erectile dysfunction. Patients with erectile dysfunction were a significant increase in latency of pudendal nerve SSEP (19.4 vs 17.2 ms, p=0.016). Patients with postoperative incontinence (PPI) were a significant increase in latency of pudendal nerve SSEP (19.6 vs 17.7 ms, p=0.023) Our results suggest that pudendal nerve SSEP can be an effective tool in the evaluation of patients with PPI and erectile dysfunction. The test can be used to provide more definitive assessment of functional dysfunction. Penetrating renal injuries can be challenging to manage due to the unpredictable internal damage caused by the weapon as well as other associated serious injuries. We present our series of penetrating renal injuries and discuss contemporary management. We reviewed prospective urological trauma databases for all patients presenting with penetrating renal trauma between January 2005 and October 2016 in two major urban trauma centers. Patient demographics, clinical characteristics, imaging, management and follow-up data were analysed. Results: Sixty-three patients presented with penetrating renal injuries. The vast majority were male (97%) with mean age 27 years (14-71). The commonest mechanisms of injury were stabbing (87.3%) and gunshot (11.1%). Eleven (17.5%) patients had Grade 2 injury, twenty-six (41.3%) had Grade 3 injury and twenty-six (41.3%) had Grade 4 injury. The commonest associated injuries were thoracic (36.5%), liver (17.5%), splenic (15.9%), gastrointestinal (12.7%) and skeletal (9.5%). At presentation, sixteen (25.4%) patients were haemodynamically unstable. Seven patients required blood transfusion (11.1%). Fifty-two (82.5%) patients were managed conservatively while eleven (17.4%) underwent emergency selective renal artery embolisation. Six patients underwent laparotomy for visceral injuries while their renal injury was managed conservatively. No patients required nephrectomy and there were no mortalities. On follow-up, four (7.3%) patients developed renal artery pseudoaneurysm and one developed renal arteriovenous malformation requiring embolisation. Conclusion: Most patients with penetrating renal injuries can be safely managed non-operatively. Selective renal artery embolisation is an effective option for unstable patients with excellent outcomes. Associated thoracic or visceral injuries requiring operative management are common. Introduction and Objective: In Algeria, penile injuries are mostly due to self-amputation owing to schizophrenic episode or to severe pelvic trauma following everyday life accidents. These injuries are compromising the vital and functional prognosis of patients. Phallic reconstruction is then required to restore physiological functions of the penis and to improve severe psychological outcomes. Here we report the case of a 32-year-old patient, presenting a total amputation of the penis, admitted to the emergency department of Mustapha Pacha Hospital, Algeria, with a serious pelvic trauma due to an accident while handling chain saw. The occasioned laceration extends obliquely from the femoral triangle on the left to the inguinal region on the right. We noticed a decayed scrotum, a complete severance of the right spermatic cord and a total penile amputation flush to pubic symphysis. Results: Due to microsurgical-limited technical facilities, the patient underwent emergency surgery consisted, first, on the reconstruction of the right spermatic cord, the corpora cavernosa and the corpus spongiosum by 5-0 polydioxanone sutures following a macrosurgical approach followed by end-to-end anastomosis (suture) of the urethra. We have then proceeded to urethral cauterization together with the bladder on a 22 Ch Foley catheter that was inserted and maintained for 21 days. After the removal of the catheter, we have observed a regular urethral profile without signs of stricture. The patient referred normal voiding and ejaculating functions but a defective penile sensation and erectile troubles that required physical reeducation and intracavernous injection of Aloprostadil 10 µg for two months. Seven months later, the patient recovered penile sensation and normal spontaneous erectile function. The patient underwent a successful total phallic rehabilitation with a macrosurgical approach that yielded excellent results and allows to regain sexual and urinary functions. That was possible thanks to an early surgical treatment and a precise assessment of the lesions. The  Introduction and Objective: Current surgical treatments in Peyronie's disease are accompanied by complications such as penile shortening, loss of sensation, erectile dysfunction and recurrence of disease. The aim of this study was the evaluation of clinical results of intracavernosal plaque excision in Peyronie's disease. The operation was performed on 35 men. It was consisted of incising the tunica albuginea parallel to the plaque and through this incision, and the plaque was removed from the inside surface without excision or replacing the underlying tunica albuginea by grafts. All patients were evaluated before and periodically within 12 months after the surgery with measurement of penile length, curvature angle in the rigidity phase, and sexual satisfaction. The mean age of patients was 51.4±5.3 years (range 42-59 years). The angle of penile curvature was 25-45° (mean=35°). Thirty patients (86%) obtained a nearly complete straightening of penis. All patients restored their previous penile length without any disorder of sensation within the glans penis and expressed improvement of sexual activity. Conclusion: Intracavernosal plaque excision is a simple, easy and minimal invasive method that does not result in penile shortening, loss of sensation or erectile dysfunction. In properly selected patients, this technique can lead to acceptable elimination of penile curvature and sexual satisfaction. Correlation between Pelvic Fracture and Bladder Injury Due to Blunt Trauma in Hasan Sadikin Hospital Mustafa A 1 , Adi K 2 Introduction and Objective: Prostate cancer is the most common neoplasia in men, and whether treated with surgery or radiotherapy it represents a risk of developing urethral stricture estimated from 1% to 8%. Vesicourethral anastomotic stenosis occurs in the first 24 months following radical prostatectomy; due to high recurrence rates, this condition poses a major challenge for the urologist. In light of the foregoing, an alternative technique is described for open reconstruction of the urethrovesical anastomosis Materials and Methods: A 61-year old patient with prostate adenocarcinoma Gleason 3+4 score 7 pT3aN0M0, was treated with radical prostatectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy with adequate oncological control. He presented with lower urinary tract symptoms, was assessed with cystourethrography and cystourethroscopy and the presence of the anastomotic stenosis was verified. Four times dilatations were performed without improvement and finally he required a cistostomy. Modified Pippi Salle procedure, described for pediatric bladder neck repair, was adapted for urethrovesical anastomosis reconstruction: -Perineal incision and dissection until bulbospongiosus muscle is exposed and sectioned. -Urethral dissection up to penoscrotal junction and proximal stenotic segment section. -Longitudinal abdominal incision and bladder exposure -Anterior bladder inverted U-flap creation-with flap base at bladder neck -and subsequent neotube formation with nelaton 18 Fr catheters. -Neo-tube transposition to perineal space under symphysis pubis and anastomosis with proximal urethral segment Results: Patient has been follow up for 12 months and has evolved satisfactorily, urethral catheter was removed 1 month after the surgery and a 80 % continence was achieved with occasional urinary stress incontinence requiring 1 pad per day. Conclusion: Although the ideal treatment for recurrent UVA strictures remains debatable, our case shows that the urologist must be aware of several treatment options, as the open vesicourethral anastomosis reconstruction technique following radical prostatectomy. At present, there is no report in the literature on the use of the above-mentioned technique in this type of patients. Introduction and Objective: Treatment of recto-urethral fistula associated with pelvic fracture urethral injuries (PFUI) is challenging due to the complexity of this condition. Surgical treatment of such cases involves closure of the fistula and anastomotic urethroplasty. Tissue interposition between urethra and rectum is a key factor for surgical success. Although, omentum and gracilis muscle flaps are the most com- UP.426, Figure 1 . Flap transposition into perineal space beneath symphysis pubis and its anastomosis with distal urethral segment Neotube flap formation monly used flaps, but they require the mobilization of tissues away from the fistula site. This can be associated with harvest complications, longer operative time and surgical difficulties related to flap mobilization to the fistula site. In this study, we have used local tissues flaps as tissue interposition and evaluated the success rate, complications and operative time. Nine patients with recto-urethral fistula associated with PFUI were included in our study. Preoperative evaluation entailed retrograde urethrography, micturiting cystourethrogarphy, urethrocystoscopy and magnetic resonance urethrography to delineate the fistulous tract and soft tissues. Surgical correction of the fistulas involved cystoscopy, inserting guide wire in the fistula, elaborate anastomotic urethroplasty and closure of fistula. After the bulboprostatic anastomosis, flaps from surrounding perineal fat (analogous to Martius pad of fat) (n=5) and one limb of bulbospongiosus muscle (n=4) were used as tissue interposition between urethra and rectum. Postoperative follow up included uroflow, and voiding cystourethrography. Results: Eight of the 9 cases had successful repair of the fistula with wide patent urethra and disappearance of urine leak per rectum. One case required redo surgery. All the flaps were harvested easily with no complications. The operative time for flap harvest and application ranged from 14 to 21 minutes with a mean of 16 minutes. Conclusions: Local flaps use for repair of traumatic recto-urethral fistula is associated with high success rate. Additionally, the harvest of these flaps is easy to do, accompanied with no complications and has short operative time. They do not require high surgical skills for harvest and use. Salvage Introduction and Objective: Buccal mucosal graft urethroplasty (BMGU) has ever been an optimal option for urethral substitution. Nevertheless, no previous reports have explained its efficacy in the salvage of recurrent stricture after skin-inlay urethroplasty. Seven patients with a history of skin-inlay urethroplasty presented with recurrent bulbar urethral stricture between January 2013 and January 2016. Patients' charts were reviewed as well as operative data and outcome. Failure was considered if patients required further instrumentation after re-do urethroplasty. Results: Two patients presented with stones formed on the hairy skin used for urethral substitution. The remaining 5 patients were maintained on regular cystoscopic-guided urethral dilatation to keep urethral patency. In 2 patients, the hairy skin was totally excised and the urethral lumen was reconstructed by a two-stage procedure (Fig. 1) . In another 3 patients, one-sided dorsal onlay BMGU was performed (Fig.  2) . In more 2 patients, ventral onlay BMGU was performed for a more proximal bulbar strictures (Fig. 3 ). In the latter 5 patients, the skin edges were adequately trimmed to ensure the absence of hair follicles. All patients, apart from one required direct vision internal urethrotomy, experienced normal maximal urinary flow rate and patent urethra by retrograde urethrography and urethroscopy over a median follow-up of 6 months. Conclusions: This series extends the use of BMGU to salvage failed skin-inlay urethroplasty whereby all trials of repair were exhausted. Comparison of Outcome of Buccal Mucosal Graft Urethroplasty as Primary Repair versus after Failed Direct Visual Internal Urethrotomy for Short Segment Bulbar Urethral Stricture Introduction and Objectives: This prospective clinical trial has been designed to compare the outcome of BMG urethroplasty for short segment bulbar urethral stricture between patients with previous failed DVIU and the patients who had no history of DVIU. The objective of the study was to determine stricture recurrence, PVR and flow of urine in between two groups. The present study was conducted in the department of Urology, BSMMU between July'15 and February'17. Patients of short segment bulbar urethral stricture between 1.5-3 cm without any previous DVIU were enrolled as study group (n=22) and patients with history of failed DVIU were included as control group (n=22). All the patients were followed upto 12 months after BMG urethroplasty and recurrence of stricture (by RGU and MCU), PVR and maximum urine flow rate (Qmax) in between two groups were compared. The patients included in the study were in the age range of 18-55 years. Most of the patients were between 30-40 years. Mean (±SD) age of the study group was 37.09 (±7.495) and that of the control group was 38.32 (±8.57). The mean (±SD) duration of symptoms of study group was 27.55 (±12.82) months and control group was 28 (±13.02) months. The mean (±SD) length of stricture of study group was 2.482 (±1.09) cm. and control group was 2.75 (±0.29) cm. The stricture recurrence rate was found significantly higher in control group than in the study group (p=0.042). Interestingly, there is significant (p=0.000) increase in stricture recurrence when BMG urethroplasty was done over the age of 45 years. The study group showed highly significant (0.000) decrease in post-operative PVR and significant (0.009) increase in post operative maximum urine flow rate than the control group as was assumed in the hypothesis. The present study propose that BMG urethroplasty as primary repair for bulbar urethral stricture within a length of 1.5-3 cm in younger age group (upto 45 years ) is very effective than BMG urethroplasty after failed DVIU cases. But long term multicentric trial is needed to further comment. Lichen Sclerosus of the Vulva after Male to Female "Penile Inversion" Vaginoplasty Bizic M, Kojovic V, Stojanovic B, Djordjevic M Introduction and Objective: Lichen sclerosus is a chronic cutaneous disorder with predilection for genital skin. In women, lichen sclerosus presents as vulvar discomfort, pruritus, bruising, bleeding, discharge, dysuria, or painful defecation. Diagnosis and treatment of lichen sclerosus is of utmost importance in the prevention of complications such as scarring, adhesions, atrophy, or long-term sexual dysfunction. We present male-to-female transgender patients with vulvar lichen sclerosus developed after penile skin inversion vaginoplasty. From September 2011 to July 2016, seven patients were treated for vulvar lichen sclerosus developed after 11 to 37 months (mean 31 months) following male to female gender confirmation surgery. The age at diagnosis ranged 28 to 57 years (mean 45 years). There was no data or clinical signs of presence of the disease at the time of surgery. UP.426, Figure 2 . Cystourethrography Following Removal of Urethral Catheter Reveals Low Bladder Capacity, Bilateral Bladder-Urethral Reflux And Permeable Urethra Introduction and Objectives: To identify perioperative and long-term complications occurred in pediatric recipients of living-donor renal transplantation (Tx) with assessment of patient and graft outcomes. Forty seven recipients [30 (63.8%) boys] were included retrospectively from May 2009 to December 2012. Extraperitoneal approach was used with extravesical ureteroneocystostomy. Vascular anastomosis was mostly to inferior vena cava and aorta. All patients were placed on prednisolone, mycophenolate mofetil, and cyclosporine or tacrolimus. All complications were reported. Results: Age of recipients was 9.61 ± 3.24 (4-18) yrs. Thirty eight (81%) children were related to donor. Urological causes of end-stage renal-disease (ESRD) were 31.9% [8 (17%) posterior urethral valve, 5 (10.6%) vesicoureteric reflux (VUR), 2 (4.3%) urolithiasis]. Perioperative and long-term complications are presented in Table1. Urine leakage was treated by ureterovesical re-anastmosis (2 patient) or uretero-ureteral anastomosis (2 patients). VUR was detected (VCUG) in 3 patients with recurrent UTI and graft dilatation (obstruction excluded by radioactive renal scanning). Injection of bulking agents was performed in 2/3 patients. Glomerular filtration rate at last follow up was 95 ± 26 (55-188) mL/min/1.73 m2.The graft survival rate was 93.6% (due to irreversible early vascular rejection or renal vein thrombosis) while patient survival rate was 98% (1 patient died due to fulminant sepsis). Conclusions: Meticulous anesthetic, surgical and immunosuppressive protocols, as well as strict perioperative monitoring with a regular follow up program help early detection of Tx complications and limit their effect on graft and patient survival. Comparing Three Data Mining Methods to Predict Kidney Transplant Survival Shahmoradi L 2 , Langarizadeh M 3 , Pourmand G 1 , Aghsaei Fard Z 4 , Borhani A 4 Introduction and Objective: One of the most important complications of post-transplant is rejection. Analyzing survival is one of the areas of medical prognosis and data mining, as an effective approach, has the capacity of analyzing and estimating outcomes in advance through discovering appropriate models among data. The present study aims at comparing the effectiveness of C5.0 algorithms, neural network and C&RTree to predict kidney transplant survival before transplant. To detect factors effective in predicting transplant survival, information needs analysis was performed via a researcher-made questionnaire. A checklist was prepared and data of 513 kidney disease patient files were extracted from Sina Urology Research Center. Following CRISP methodology for data mining, IBM SPSS Modeler 14.2, C5.0, C&RTree algorithms and neural network were used. Results: Body Mass Index (BMI), cause of renal dysfunction and duration of dialysis were evaluated in all three models as the most effective factors in transplant survival. C5.0 algorithm with the highest validity (96.77%) was the first in estimating kidney transplant survival in patients followed by C&RTree (83.7%) and neural network (79.5%) models. Conclusion: Among the three models, C5.0 algorithm was the top model with high validity that confirms its strength in predicting survival. The most effective kidney transplant survival factors were detected in this study; therefore, duration of transplant survival (year) can be determined considering the regulations set for a new sample with specific characteristics. Immunogenicity Materials and Methods: Fresh blood samples were collected from 14 kidney recipients who received infusion and from 13 kidney recipients without infusion who served as controls at the end of the second post-transplantation year. Initially the percentages of CD4, CD25, FoxP3, T cells and CD3, CD8, CD28-T cells were quantified using flowcytometry. Thereafter, the frequencies of IL-10-, IL-17-and IFN-c-producing cells were determined separately using the ELISPOT technique with peptides corresponding to mismatched donor HLA-DR molecules and phytohemagglutinin (PHA). The mean numbers of IFN-c-and IL-17-producing cells in response to PHA were lower in infused patients than in controls (P = 0.02 and P = 0.18, respectively); however, an increased frequency of IL-10-producing cells was observed compared to controls (P = 0.07). Furthermore, the ratio of IL-10/ IFN-c-producing cells was significantly higher in the DBMC-infused group versus controls (P = 0.01). There was a negative correlation between the percentages of CD3? CD8? CD28-T cells and IL-17-producing cells in the infused group (r = -0.539, P = 0.04). The mean levels and the frequency of microchimerism within the first post-transplantation year were also significantly higher in infused patients than in controls (P = 0.007 and P = 0.001, respectively). Our findings suggest that DBMC infusion could partially stimulate the regulatory mechanisms against alloimmune responses in kidney allograft recipients. Predictive Values of Urinary Interleukin 18 and Neutrophil Gelatinase-Associated Lipocalin for Delayed Graft Function Diagnosis in Kidney Transplantation Mojtahedzadeh M 2 , Etezadi F 3 , Motaharinia J 2 , Abdollahi A 4 , mehrsai A 5 , Ziaie S 6 , Saadat S 7 , Pourmand G 1 Introduction and Objective: Delayed graft function is a main complication after deceased donor kidney transplantation that adversely affects graft outcome. Difficulties in prediction and early detection of delayed graft function have hindered the ability to perform proper therapeutic interventions. We investigated whether measuring urinary interleukin 18 and neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin as markers of ischemia reperfusion injury could predict delayed graft function in deceased donor kidney transplant patients. We studied 69 patients undergoing kidney transplantation from deceased donor during early October 2013 to December 2014 at the Urology Research Center, Sina Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences and Tehran, Iran. Serial urine samples at 2, 24, and 48 h after transplantation were analyzed for interleukin 18 and neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin levels. Results: Thirteen patients (18.9%) developed delayed graft function. Urine interleukin 18 to urine creatinine ratio was significantly higher in patients with delayed graft function compared to those with non-delayed graft function, at 2 (P=0.003), 24 (P<0.001) and 48 h (P=0.018) points. The levels of neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin to urine creatinine ratio were significantly higher in the group with delayed graft function at the 24 (P=0.004) and 48 h (P=0.015) points. The receiver-operating characteristic curve analysis suggested that both urinary biomarkers at 24 h after transplantation had better accuracies for prediction of delayed graft function. In multivariate analysis, only urinary interleukin 18 to urine creatinine ratio improved the ability of clinical model for predicting delayed graft function. Conclusion: Urinary interleukin 18 to urine creatinine ratio at 24 h posttransplantation, along with traditional markers such as relative fall in serum creatinine, urine output and other risk factors for delayed graft function, increased the ability to predict delayed graft function. Learning novel cell based anti rejection treatments have been studied by using different stem cell sources. In this study, transplantation of autologous bone marrow derived total nucleated cells is used to improve the cadaver kidney graft function. Eighteen ESRD patients who were candidates for deceased kidney transplantation divided in two groups (group A and B). There was no significant difference among their sex, age, weight and type of dialysis. The two kidney of one cadaver were used for two recipients. Before transplantation, randomly, autologous bone marrow aspiration was done for one recipient. Then the transplantation was done for both of recipients. The total nucleated cells were separated and infused intravenously during and after the transplantation, respectively. In post transplantation, 6 hours diuresis, delay graft function (DGF), creatinine (after 1 week, 2 weeks and 3 months), cyclosporine level (after 2 weeks) were measured in bone marrow treated group (A: 9 patients) and non bone marrow treated group (B: 9 patients). Results: A significant increase in diuresis, significant decrease in DGF, significant decrease after 1 week and 2 weeks and marginally significant decrease after 3 months in creatinine were seen in group A in comparison to group B. Also no significant differences were seen in cyclosporine blood level (2 weeks), and operation time. 2 patients had CMV infection in group B, but none in group A. The transplantation of autologous bone marrow cells in deceased kidney recipient is safe and significantly decreases early graft dysfunction. Further clinical trial is needed to confirm these promising results. Introduction and Objective: The current approach for living kidney donation is to preserve the best kidney for the donor, harvesting the other. Due to the shorter vein and the greater incidence of venous thrombosis in right allografts, left kidneys are frequently elected. However, left arterial anatomy may be complex, rendering the transplantation demanding. For this reason, analysing outcomes after left multiple-artery kidney (LMAK) and right single-artery (RSAK) harvest could aid in decision-making. The inability to meet the needs of patients on the transplant waiting list, with the donation in brain death and the living donor, has led to the development of alternative programs in order to increase the number of donor organs. In our Region, we have implanted the donation in controlled asystole with Maastricht type III donors, that is, those patients who died after cessation of life support treatment (LTSV). The data presented below correspond to patients transplanted with Maastricht type III donor organs. This donation model was launched in February 2015 after the design of a multidisciplinary extraction and management protocol approved by the Hospital Ethics Committee. By the same, the technique of choice of the organ extraction was the regulated laparotomy and aortic cannulation. The actual warm ischemia time should not exceed 60 minutes to accept the kidneys. The number of donors is 22 and the number of recipients is 29. The following variables are analyzed: age, sex, type of renal disease, time and type of dialysis, previous transplants, graft Introduction and Objective: Androgens are essential for the development and growth of the genitalia. They regulate the erectile physiology by multiple mechanisms. Several studies have examined associations among sex hormones' serum levels, erectile function and sex drive. We sought to identify a protocol for using testosterone in men with erectile dysfunction and late-onset hypogonadism (LOH). During a 16-month period, men with erectile dysfunction who presented to the andrology clinic were selected. They underwent n/N (%) The incidence of renal stone disease is on a rise throughout the world and multiple factors contributing to stone formation include environmental, genetic, nutritional, anatomic and metabolic factors. Recently a consistent relationship has been reported in several studies between vitamin D and calcium renal stones, some studies reporting higher while others highlighting lower vitamin D levels causing renal calcium lithiasis. We conducted this study with aim to analyze the exact relationship between vitamin D, hypercalciuria and renal calculi. A case control study was conducted in a high volume tertiary care teaching institute on 98 patients, divided into two groups: Group A/ cases: 55 calcium stone forming patients, and Group B/controls: 44 non stone formers. Various metabolic factors were studied in blood (total and ionic calcium, phosphorous, uric acid, alkaline phosphatase and vitamin D) and urine (calcium, sodium, potassium, uric acid, phosphate). The percentage of vitamin D deficiency and insufficiency along with hypercalciuria between two groups were analyzed and compared. The SPSS 16.0 statistics program was used for the analysis, with a p ≤ .05 being considered significant. Introduction and Objective: Change of stone composition in recurrent urolithiasis is observed in clinical practice. However, determining factors of composition change remain unknown. Our aim was to investigate determinants of composition change in patients of recurrent urolithiasis. A retrospective cohort study was conducted in Chinese patients who suffered from recurrent urolithiasis and received stone analysis from 2002 to 2015 in a tertiary hospital in Shanghai. Stone composition was measured by infrared spectrophotometry. The predictive variables included stone type, recurrence time and recurrence frequency. Stone type was defined according to dominant components of stones. Recurrence time was calculated according to time at diagnoses of initial and recurrent events. The outcome variable was composition change, which was defined as change of dominant components of stones. Potential confounders including age, gender and stone location were included in multivariate logistic regression analysis. Results: Eighty-nine patients, including 65 male and 24 female, were eligible for inclusion in the final analysis. The median age of an initial event was 51 (21~89) years, and stones were located in the upper urinary tract in 80.9% (72/89) patients. Among all patients, 72 had two events, 14 had three events and 3 had more than three events. The median recurrence time was 27.9 (1.4~138.0) months. Stone composition changed in 31.5% (28/89) recurrent patients. Univariate analysis showed the risk ratio of composition change in the patients with a recurrence time of 1-5 years was 0.372 (95%CI, 0.143~0.971; P<0.05) when compared to the others. Multivariate analysis showed the adjusted odds ratio of recurrence time of 1-5 years was 0.258 (95%CI, 0.085~0.779; P<0.05). Stone type and recurrence frequency were not the determinants of composition change. Conclusion: Stone composition changes in almost one third patients of recurrent urolithiasis. Recurrence time is an independent risk factor to predict composition change. Repeated stone analysis should be suggested to patients who suffer from recurrence in less than 1 year or more than 5 years. Introduction and Objectives: For ages hypercalciuria has been known the dominant risk factor for stone recurrence in calcium containing stones. Aim of the present study was to evaluate the frequency of hypercalciuria and hypocitraturia in high-risk stone patients with special regard on recurrence rate and specific metaphylaxis. From 2008 to 2013 104 high-risk stone patients were treated in our clinic. 72 of them underwent metabolic assessment. 70 patients fulfilled the criteria for our retrospective assessment (aged over 16yrs, calcium containing stones). Metabolic assessment included blood chemistry, blood gas analysis and a 24-hours urine collection. Urine analysis included calcium, citrate, oxalate, phosphate, magnesium and uric acid. In most patients specific metaphylaxis was recommended. Recurrence rate was observed during a follow-up period of at least 8 months. Introduction and Objective: The Lumenis High-power Holmium laser (120H) enables the surgeon to control the pulse width as well as a unique modulated pulse mode (Moses), design to enhance stone defragmentation and minimize retropulsion. Moses technology modulates the laser pulse to separates the water (vapor bubble), then deliver the remaining energy through the bubble. Proprietary laser fibers were designed for the Moses mode. Our aim was to compare stone fragmentation with and without the Moses mode and fiber. We prospectively designed a questioner for the urologist to fill immediately after each ureteroscopy in which the Lumenis 120H was used. We compared between procedures with (23) and without (11) the use of Moses technology. We calculated total treated stone volume and density from preoperative Non-Contrast CT. Surgeons ranked the Moses mode in 23 procedures, in comparison to regular mode (worse, equivalent, better, much better). Total laser working time and energy were collected from the Lumenis 120H log. Results: During 4 months, five urologist used the Lumenis 120H in 34 ureteroscpy procedures (19 kidney stones, 15 Ureteral stones, 22 procedures with Flexible ureteroscope and 12 with Semi-rigid). Table 1 summarizes the results of stone fragmentation with and without the Moses mode. Three urologists ranked Moses mode as much better or better in 17 procedures. In two cases, it was ranked equivalent and in 4 cases ranking was not done. Over all stone fragmentation with Moses utilized higher energy in less time to achieve satisfying stone fragmentation, our results demonstrated a trend and did not reach statistical significance (P=0.19). More research is needed to determine the best clinical settings for the use of the Moses technology. sion bilateral ureteroscopic lithotripsy for renal and ureteral stones (group II). In all patients stone fragmentation was completed with holmium: YAG laser and bilateral DJ stent inserted at the end of the operation. Patients were followed at least one month to evaluate clearance of stones, operative times, duration of hospital stay and complications. Stone-free status was defined as no fragments and/or the presence of asymptomatic fragments <2mm in the urinary system. No patient had acute postoperative azotemia. There was no significant difference in pre and post operative serum creatinin level. There was no major complication between two groups. There is no significant differance about urinary tract infection between two groups ( %4 vs %6).There is no difference about analgesic requirement between two groupes. Conclusion: Bilateral same session ureteroscopy is a safe and effective treatment option for patients with bilateral ureteric and/or renal calculi, even with stones in multipl locations. Bilateral ureteroscopic lithotripsy can be considered a treatment option. While most complications are minor, they may be higher than that typically reported for unilateral ureteroscopic lithotripsy. Bilateral DJ stent should be placed in patients undergoing bilateral ureteroscopic lithotripsy for decreasing complications. Endourolgical  From October 1983 to December 2012, 53 percutaneus nephrolithotomy (PNL) 9 antegrade URS and 6 retrograde URS procedures were performed in 52 men and 16 women after urinary diversion, with a mean age of 53.5 years. The urinary diversions were an ileal W neobladder, hemi-Kock pouch, ileal conduit, and rectal bladder in 34, 8, 18, and 8 patients, respectively. The median interval between diversion and stone management was 1.5 years. Success was defined as a stone-free, nonobstructed renal unit at 3 months after the intervention. Follow-up was performed every 6 months with intravenous urography or noncontrast computed tomography for diagnosis of stone recurrence and evaluation of renal morphology. Results: Regarding the percutanouse approach, renal punctures were guided with ultrasonography in 18 patients (29.1%) and fluoroscopy in 44 (79.9) patients. One intraoperative complication (1.6%) and two postoperative complications (3.2%) occurred. All patients with ureteral stones became stone free after one procedure. Auxiliary procedures were needed in 10 (16.1%) patients after percutaneous nephrolithotomy; 6 patients required second session (9.6%) and 3 needed extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (4.8%). One patient with treatment failure in view of large inaccessible calyceal stones after ileal loop conduit underwent open surgery (1.6%), and two with small residual fragments were followed up. Long-term fol-low-up data were available for 55 patients. The stone recurrence rate was 8.06% (5 patients) after a median follow-up of 40 months (range 14 to 132). Recurrent stones were treated with extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy. Regarding retrograde uretroscopy, the overall success rate was 100% (6 patients). No intraoperative or postoperative complications occurred. All patients became stone free after one procedure. No evidence of stone recurrence after long term follows up. Conclusions: Percutaneous treatment of large upper tract stones after urinary diversion offers a high success rate with minimal morbidity. However, regular follow-up after treatment is recommended. Retrograde access in patients with urinary diversion is feasible and safe in most patients with orthotopic neobladder urinary diversion. Predictors of Recurrence after Treatment of Calculi of an Ileal Based Urinary Reservoir: Diversion Technique or Treatment Approach? Introduction and Objective: Recurrence of reservoir stones after treatment is a multifactorial process. Certain types of reservoirs and stone disintegration during its extraction are potential risk factors for recurrence. The objective of this study is to determine the predictors of recurrence after treating calculi of an ileal based urinary reservoir. derwent ileal based urinary reservoirs between 1980 and 2009. Patients who were diagnosed with reservoir calculi were identified. Records were reviewed for patients demographics, diversion details, stone criteria and details of treatment. The cohort was divided into primary (Non recurring) stone formers (group I) and recurrent stone formers (group II). History of stone formation before diversion was assessed. Results: Out of 1965 patients with ileal based urinary reservoirs, 130 developed calculi in the pouch (75 patients in groupI and 55 in groupII) forminga total of 190 reservoir stone episodes. There were 107reservoir stone episodes developing in 74 Hemi-Kock pouches, 49 episodes in orthotopic ileal W-neobladders and 34 episodes in 27 continent cutaneous T-pouch procedures. The mean and median duration from diversion to first stone formation was 60.3 and 52.2 months, respectively. The mean and median post-diversion follow-up period was 212.4 and 207 months, respectively. Baseline criteria were similar among the study groups (P > 0.05) Table 1 . On univariate analysis, recurrent reservoir stone formation was associated with shorter time to first stone occurrence (P=0.000), endoscopic disintegration during first stone treatment (P=0.005) and with Kock pouches (P= 0.031). On multivariate analysis, shorter time to first stone occurrence was an independent predictor of recurrence of pouch stones (OR; 0.978, 95%CI; 0.96-0.98, P; 0.000). There was no significant difference in the stone criteria between first time stones and recurrent pouch stones (P > 0.05). Conclusion: Regardless the type of the reservoir and the treatment technique, earlier stone formation is associated with more propensity of reservoir stone recurrence. A Bibliometric Study of Percutaneous Nephrolithotomy' (PCNL) as Published on Pubmed Over 16-Years (2000-2015) Pietropaolo A, Geraghty R, Somani BK Introduction and Objective: Percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) has been well established over the last 3 decades. However, with the advent of Minimally invasive PCNL (Mi-PCNL) techniques such as micro, ultramini and mini PCNL the indications for PCNL has broadened with more procedures being undertaken then ever before. With this in mind, we wanted to see the publication trends for PCNL as reported on PubMed over the last 16-years. All published papers on 'Urolithiasis' , 'kidney stones' , 'renal stones' , 'percutaneous nephrolithotomy' , 'percutaneous stone surgery' , 'PCNL' and 'PNL' were searched on PubMed over the last 16-years from 2000-2015. There were no language restrictions and all non-English language papers with published English abstracts were also included in our review. While review articles were included, case reports, laboratory and animal studies, and those papers that did not have a published abstract were excluded from our analysis. Data was divided into two 8-year periods, period -1 (2000-2007) and period-2 (2008-2015) . Results: A total of 1715 studies on PCNL were published on PubMed 16 year period [English language -1568 (91%) and Non-English language -147 (9%)]. There was a linear increase in the rate of PCNL over the study period from 18 articles in 2000 to 195 articles in 2015 ( Figure 1 ) (p<0.001). When comparing the two time periods, there were a total of 358 articles published in period-1, which had increased by almost four times (rise of 279%) to 1357 articles in period-2 (p<0.001). The number of English/Non-English language articles in period-1 and period-2 were 316/42 and 1252/105 articles respectively. Published papers on PCNL have risen over the last 8years (both in English and regional languages), highlighting a growing popularity of the modern minimally invasive PCNL techniques for stone disease. A Bibliometric Analysis of Open Surgery, Laparoscopic Surgery, Pyelolithotomy as Published on Pubmed Over a 16-Year Period (2000 -2015 Pietropaolo A, Somani BK Introduction and Objective: There has been a gradual rise of kidney stone disease (KSD) over the last two decades with lifetime prevalence of urolithiasis being 14% (1 in 7). This rise has also seen a substantial increase in minimally invasive interventions for it. We wanted to see the publication trends for 'uncommon interventions (open surgery, laparoscopic surgery, and pyelolithotomy) for KSD' as reported on PubMed over the last 16 years. UP.502, Figure 1 . 37th CONGRESS OF THE SOCIÉTÉ INTERNATIONALE D'UROLOGIE -SIU 2017 ABSTRACT BOOK scopic stone surgery and pyelolithotomy. There were no language restrictions and all non-English language papers with published English abstracts were also included in our review. While review articles were included, case reports, laboratory and animal studies, and those papers that did not have a published abstract were excluded from our analysis. Data was divided into two 8-year periods, period -1 (2000-2007) and period-2 (2008-2015) . Results: During the last 16-years, a total of 331 papers have been published on interventions for KSD, including open stone surgery (n= 87, 26%), laparoscopic stone surgery (n= 209, 63%) and pyelolithotomy (n=35, 11%). While there was a steady decline for open stone surgery and pyelolithotomy (p<0,003), there was a steep rise in laparoscopic stone surgery(p<0,001) ( Figure 1 ). When comparing the two time periods, there were 135 intervention papers in period-1, which had increased to 196 intervention papers in period-2 ( Table 1 ). The increase was seen only for laparoscopic surgery (+116%, p<0.002) while it decreased for open surgery (-11%, p=0.17) and pyelolithotomy (-47%, p=0.002). Published papers on intervention for KSD for laparoscopic surgery has risen over the last 8 years reflecting a rise in volume, training and possibly skills of laparoscopic and robotic surgery. Effect of Body Mass Index (BMI) on Outcome of Stone Free Rate Using a 3rd Generation Lithotripter Introduction and Objective: Fewer studies are available on 3rd generation lithotripter so we wanted to investigate the outcome of ESWL in terms of stone free rates in four different BMI groups according to the WHO classification. Materials and Methods: From January 2014 to January 2016, ESWL was performed in 171 adults of more than 18 years old age. Modulith SL X lithotripter 4th generation Storz medical equipment was used for ESWL. The stone free rates, number of ESWL sessions required, complication rates and auxiliary procedures used were evaluated in a comparative manner. Exclusion criteria consisted of stones of ≥2 cm with longest diameter, pregnant women, urinary tract infection with fever, bleeding diathesis, and malfunctioned kidneys. We did Complete blood count, urine culture, coagulationprofile, ultrasonography andCT scan KUB (Kidney ureter and bladder) for all patients. Non obstructive or non-infected residual fragments of ≤4 mm were considered clinically inconsequential stone fragments and labeled as stone free in our study. We retrospectively reviewed the results of ureteroscopy mediated stone management in children of two age groups. December 2016, 97 children underwent ureteroscopy (URS). Two age groups were made. Group 1 had 33 children aged less than 5 years while group 2 had 64 children of age more than 5 years. Semirigid ureteroscope of size 5/6 Fr was used to visualize ureteral stone and Swiss lithoclast for stone fragmentation. Stone free rate was defined as residual stone fragment less than 3 mm on follow up X ray KUB (Kidney ureter and bladder) after 2 weeks of ureteroscopic intervention. Patients were assessed for stone size, mean operative time, mean hospital stay, stone free rates, re- UP.503, Table 1 . UP.503, Figure 1 . the Cochrane Library in December 2016 according to PRISMA statement. A systematic review and me-ta-analysis conducted with three trials to investigate the outcomes including the length of hospital stay, operation time, hemoglobin decrease, blood transfusion rate, perirenal fluid presence, post operative fever, stone clearance rate, and the need of a second operation. Meta-analyses were performed using fixed and random-effects models, which included tests for publication bias and heterogeneity. The patients whom underwent tubeless PCNL had shorter length of hospitalization, compared to standard PCNLs (mean difference -1.57, 95% confidence interval −3.2 to 0.07, p = 0.06). No significant decrease was detected in hemoglobin after tubeless PCNL compared to standard PCNL (mean difference 0.05, 95% confidence interval −0.03 to 0.13, p = 0.21). There were no significant differences in operation time (p=0.7), perirenal fluid presence (p=0.15), post operative fever (p=0.72), stone clearance (p=0.68), and the need of a second operation (p=0.90). Conclusions: This study showed no significant difference between tubeless and standard PCNLs in children. However, due to the lack of data, the results should be mentioned prudently. Future randomized trials with more sample sizes and longer follow ups are warranted. Tubeless  We comprehensively searched PubMed, Embase, and the Cochrane Library in September 2016 for randomized controlled trials that assessed the efficacy and safety of tubeless PCNL versus standard PCNL in selected patients. The main outcomes were hospital stay, operative time, stonefree rate, hemoglobin decrease, postoperative analgesia, postoperative fever, postoperative pain score and urinary leakage. We did subgroup analyses to assess whether differences in patient and trial characteristics affected outcomes. The review manager 5.2 software was used. UP.521, Figure 1 . UP.521, Figure 2 . Introduction and Objective: We evaluated the continence outcomes in patients undergoing orthotopic neobladder (ONB) diversion following radical cystectomy (RC) using validated pad usage questionnaires and in a subgroup who underwent pelvic floor physical therapy (PFPT). Using our IRB approved database, we identified 1269 patients that underwent open RC from 2002 to 2016. ONB was constructed in 935 (74%) patients, of whom 798 (85%) were male. Beginning in 2012, patients were prospectively followed, completing a validated, pictorial pad usage questionnaire, assessing the number, size, and wetness of pads, as well as catheter use, at follow up visits. Continence was defined as no pad usage, or pads as "almost dry. " A subgroup of patients received PFPT as an intervention to assist their continence. Inter-ventions focused on improving pelvic floor muscle strength, endurance and coordination with functional activities that provoked leaks. Manual (internal and external), visual and surface EMG biofeedback training were incorporated into the treatment, with goals to improve neuromuscular re-education of the pelvic floor. Frequency of visits varied from 1x/week to 2x/month at 1 hour sessions over 4-6 sessions, with reduction in visit frequency to 1-2 time/month post-6 weeks. Patients were also educated in behavioral modifications for bladder re-training, timed voiding and general bladder and bowel health. Results: A total of 175 male patients with available pad usage questionnaires were followed with median age of 67 years and median BMI of 27 kg/m2. Daytime continence rates increase from 59% at <3 months to 92% by 12-18 months postoperatively. Nighttime continence rates increase from 28% at <3 months to 51% by 18-36 months postoperatively. Overall catheterization rate was 13%. 24 patients underwent PFPT during this period, with a median age of 71 yrs. There was no significant difference between groups for age, BMI, or Charlson comorbidity index. Univariate analysis showed there is a significantly shorter median time to first daytime continence in PFPT group compared to non-intervention group (131 days vs 253 days respectively; p=0.03). Kaplan-Meier curves also showed significantly higher daytime continence rates in PFPT group at one year compared to non-PFPT ones (0.75±0.09 vs. 0.58±0.04; p=0.03). Cox regression model showed PFPT patients were 1.6 times more likely to gain daytime continence by one year. There was no significant difference in one-year nighttime continence rates between the groups (0.45±0.1 vs. 0.39±0.04; p=0.26) (figure 1). The main purpose of the study is to describe the results of a contemporary UP.556, Table 1 . Basic Characteristics of the Both Groups Introduction and Objective: Benign prostate hypertrophy (BPH) is a non-cancerous enlargement of the prostate gland, which results in the development of lower urinary tract symptoms that can negatively impact a patient's quality of life. The gold standard treatment for moderate to severe BPH has been trans-urethral resection of the prostate (TURP), however, this procedure is associated with prolonged hospitalizations and increased complications. An alternative to TURP is Greenlight PVP, which is associated with better perioperative safety and reduced length of stay. The objectives of the research were to 1) assess the cost of Greenlight PVP compared to Olympus Bipolar Power Button and TURP; and 2) assess the predictors of total cost. A retrospective analysis was conducted of perioperative hospital costs of patients who underwent Greenlight PVP, TURP, or Olympus Bipolar Power Button from 2013-2015 at the Toronto Western Hospital. This study focused only on costs to the hospital. A multiple linear regression was performed to identify predictors of total cost. The variables included in regression analysis were patient age, type of procedure, inpatient procedure, Charlson Comorbidity Index, and distance to clinic. Results: Two-hundred and three patients received one of the three procedures over the study period. The total cost Greenlight PVP was $2,875 per patient compared to $4,633 for Olympus Power Button, and $4,666 for TURP. The linear regression showed that the Charlson Comorbidity score and inpatient procedure were independent predictors of total cost. Conclusion: Greenlight PVP appears to be a superior economic option when compared to Olympus Power Button and TURP. Publically Introduction and Objectives: Medication is considered an important treatment option for patients with overactive bladder (OAB), with four different drugs approved over the last 10 years including the first non-anticholinergic treatment option, mirabegron. We set out to describe the drug utilization patterns for OAB in Ontario, Canada over the last 15 years. We conducted a repeated cross-sectional study examining quarterly publically-funded prescription claims for OAB medications reimbursed by the Ontario Public Drug Program (OPDP) from January 1, 2000 to June 30, 2016 in Ontario, Canada. Results: Over the 15-year study period, there were 10,131,681 prescription claims for publically funded OAB treatments dispensed in Ontario. The number of OAB medication users per year has increased by 221% over the study period ( Figure 1 ). We report two major changes in prescription patterns for OAB. The first was the rise of newer, more selective anticholinergics Perceived superiority of newer agents in terms of improved dosing regimens and side-effect profiles are likely the reason for these shifts in treatment patterns. Our findings highlight the rapid uptake of novel agents and a major shift in the treatment of OAB. Characteristics  Trends in the Use of Older Overactive Bladder Agents and Uptake of Fesoterodine and Mirabegron in Canada Minhas R 2 , Tadrous M 3 , Elterman D 1 , Gomes T 3 Introduction and Objective: Anticholinergics are first-line pharmacologic agents for overactive bladder (OAB), but have considerable side effects. Two recent additions to the market are an anticholinergic fesoterodine, and mirabegron, a therapeutically novel beta-3 agonist. We conducted a population-based cross-sectional study of outpatient prescriptions for long-acting oral OAB agents dispensed UP.564, Figure 1 . National Dispensing Rate of Long-Acting OAB Agents per 10,000 Population, by Drug to individuals in Canadian provinces between May 2010 and April 2015 to examine the differences in the uptake of the newer agents and their reimbursement through cash, private and public payers. The national dispensing rate of OAB agents increased by 60% from May 2010 to April 2015 (from 924 to 1475 units per 10,000). We observed an increase in the dispensing rate of fesoterodine, solifenacin and mirabegron, but a decrease in that of tolterodine and oxybutynin. Mirabegron was adopted rapidly after Health Canada approval, growing to a rate of 191 units per 10,000 by the end of the study, with its uptake being primarily funded by private payers (72.2%). Conversely, fesoterodine's uptake was minimal (8.3 units per 10,000) prior to its listing on public plans. This increased to 185 units per 10,000 by the end of the study, with the majority (65%) paid for by public insurers. Conclusions: The differences in the uptake and reimbursement of two new OAB agents emphasize the impact of therapeutically novel agents on the prescription rates of older OAB agents with significant adverse effects. Further studies are needed to explain changes in the dispensing rates as more provinces list the newer drugs on their formulary.  Introduction and Objective: Overactive bladder (OAB) harms patients' QOL. The standard symptom score questionnaire for OAB, such as OABSS, is aiming to question the severity of four OAB-specific symptoms (Q1; frequency, Q2; nocturia, Q3; urgency, and Q4; incontinence) but not to assess the QOL specific to OAB-symptoms. We have developed assessment tool to evaluate the QOL (or bother) specific to each of the four OABSS-questions with visual analogue scale (VAS) of a 100-mm line, which was called OABSS-VAS. Aim of this study was to identify each threshold of the OABSS-questions to impact significantly on patient's QOL (or bother) suggested by the OABSS-VAS. We analysed total of 500 female patients who visited our clinic and answered both OABSS (Q1; 0 to 2, Q2; 0 to 3, Q3; 0 to 5, Q4; 0 to 5) and OABSS-VAS questionnaire at the same time. The median age of the patients was 69 (22-94) y.o. In order to identify the significant impact on QOL, we defined greater than 60-mm as the threshold for the VAS-measure. The outcome of the relationship between OABSS-VAS and each OABSS were demonstrated in Figure 1 (black arrows indicate the threshold). It was demonstrated that he threshold of daytime frequency to impact significantly on patients' QOL was identified 8-14 times and that of nocturia was 2 times. It was also demonstrated that the OAB-patients' QOL could be significantly disturbed when urgency occurs "once a day", and also urge incontinence exists even "less than once a week". Introduction and Objectives: UK prostate cancer nursing care is provided by a variety of urology and uro-oncology nurses. The experience of working in multidisciplinary teams (MDT) was investigated in a national study. The study consisted of a national survey with descriptive statistics and thematic analysis. A secondary analysis of a data subset from a UK whole population survey was undertaken (n=285) of the specialist nursing workforce and the services they provide. Data was collected on the experience of working in the MDT. Results: Forty-five percent of the respondents felt they worked in a functional MDT, 12% felt they worked in a dysfunctional MDT and 3.5% found the MDT meeting intimidating. Thirty four percent of the nurses felt they could constructively challenge all members of the MDT in meetings. Themes emerging from open-ended questions were lack of interest in non-medical concerns by other team members, ability to constructively challenge decisions or views within the meeting and little opportunity for patient's wishes to be expressed. Conclusions: Despite expertise and experience nurses had a variable, often negative, experience of the MDT. It is necessary to ensure that all participants can contribute, are heard and are valued. More emphasis should be given to patient's non-medical needs. Did you know? SIU Academy... The endorsed event programme allows approved webcasts from high-quality meetings around the world to be presented and shared on the portal. SIU members span over 100 countries and represent the full spectrum of clinicians and investigators from all the urological subspecialties, including established academic and non-academic urologists, as well as physicians undergoing full-time training in urology. SIU membership gives you an equal voice in this influential organization. We believe that each member can contribute the knowledge and experience needed to forge valuable links between urologists, and between developed and developing nations. By working together, our members carry on the tradition of creating positive change in a changing world. As a new member, you will be a partner in the one urological association dedicated to creating sustainable educational projects and providing and improving urological resources worldwide. Members are able to vote for SIU leadership, organize SIU-endorsed educational activities, become involved in the congress scientific programme, as well as contribute to various SIU Academy programmes. We strive to make each member feel valued, respected, and supported.  
