623910bb603a574db5280f348b409ad580df6708
ASL MRI in early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease: A biomarker suitable for clinical settings? A trend towards associative binding impairment but not delayed recall impairment of explicit memory by healthy aging decliners vs supernormals: Preliminary data Computerized attention test web based (CVST ) as the key to a screening tool for attention and cognition deficits (http:// neurocenter.nl/en_GB) Complement system dysregulation and quantitative EEG changes in Alzheimer's disease e-Poster Effects of physical exercise on Alzheimer´s biomarkers: A systematic review of intervention studies Association of plasma β-amyloid with cognitive performance and decline in chronic kidney disease Peripheral neuropathy as clinical onset in E200K familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease Basal forebrain atrophy is associated with elevated plasmatic homocysteine levels in subjects at risk of Alzheimer's disease Hypothalamic dysfunction is related to sleep impairment and CSF biomarkers in Alzheimer's disease Frequency and risk factors for appetite and eating disturbances in Alzheimer's disease Focal cerebral arteriopathy: A well- characterized cause of stroke in pediatric age
M H Alpsan Gokmen M  Dokdok Y  Kutukcu K  Karaman O  Karadeniz O  Bezdicek M  Cervenkova H  Stepankova B  Schmand H  Buschke T  Nikolai A  Rulseh J  Delbecq M  Straetmans W  Alpherts B  Aldenkamp A  D&apos;elia A  Pisani F  Placidi F  Izzi G  Sancesario N  Manfredi L  Mari N B Mercuri C  Liguori K S Frederiksen L  Gjerum S  Hasselbalch G  Waldemar J  Gronewold O  Todica H.-W  Klafki U  Seidel B  Kaltwasser J  Wiltfang A  Kribben H  Bruck D M Hermann G  Carvalho Monteiro J  Hernandez Cristobal   G  Alvarez Bravo J R Pérez Sánchez C  Serrano González M Calero Lara O  Lerch J  Laczó Z  Nedelska M  Pařízková J  Hort A  Chiaravalloti A  Cimini M  Nuccetelli O  Schillaci R Manso Calderón   Sevillano García A  De Albóniga-Chindurza A  De Felipe  Mimbrera S  García-Madrona C  Anciones F  Acebrón S  Sainz De La Maza C Matute Lozano R  Vera A  Cruz E  Fandiño Benito J C Méndez J  Masjuan 

Anadolu Medical Center  Anadolu Medical Center   Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center  Yeshiva University Charles University in Prague and Motol University Hospital Nyírő Gyula Hospital -National Institute of Psychiatry and Addiction Anadolu Medical Center  Yeshiva University Charles University in Prague and Motol University Hospital Yeshiva University Yeshiva University Yeshiva University Yeshiva University Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center  Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center  Yeshiva University Yeshiva University Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center   Charles University in Prague and Motol University Hospital  Charles University in Prague and Motol University Hospital Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center Anadolu Medical Center   Anadolu Medical Center 
Early diagnosis is very important in Alzheimer's Disease as the pathological process, starts years before cognitive impairment gets attention and the patient seeks medical advice. ASL MRI (Arterial Spin Labeling) is a functional MRI,which is a quick and a relatively cheaper method. Also it is safer as it does not require a radioactive material or a contrast agent injection. Methods: In our study, we used ASL MRI as an early biomarker in patients with cognitive problems. 85 patients were included and 24 of patients had MCI (minimal cognitive impairment), 23 had Alzheimer's Disease, 31 of the patients were diagnosed as having depression and 7 of the patients had subjective memory impairment (SMI). Results: Bilateral parietal hypoperfusion pattern were found statistically significantly more in the AD and MCI group than depression and SMI group (p<0.001). Additionally a difference, which was significant, was found between MCI and AD. Hypoperfusion rates were 67% among MCI and 83% in AD group. Hypoperfusion rate of ASL maps in depressive patients who did not show cognitive deficits according to neuropsychiatric evaluation was 13% which was significantly lower than MCI and AD groups and similar to the subjective cognitive deficit group (SMI) who also did not show any cognitive deficit in Neuropsychiatric tests. Conclusion: This study shows that ASL MRI is quick, cheap and easy to access in a clinic where MRI is avaible. It is a valuable method in early evaluation of cognitive deficits and differentiation of the pathology which causes forgetfulness. We endeavored to investigate if we can find predictors of cognitive decline in healthy aging. Specifically, we wanted to examine Benjamin-Naveh᾽s associative-deficit hypothesis (ADH) in episodic memory: a major factor in older adults' poorer episodic memory is their deficiency in creating and retrieving links between the representation of two mental codes. Methods: Healthy participants were followed with cognitive test measures for four years. Afterward, we aimed to compare supernormals (N=20; (73.9±(SD)7.7 years)) with decliners (N=6; (75.8±(SD)8.0 years)) and we wanted to find out if the decliners will show abnormal rates of cognitive decline in episodic memory and brain atrophy. Measures of brain volumes derived from 3 Tesla magnetic resonance imaging scanner (MRI) were acquired, and an automated system (FreeSurfer) was used for further analyses. Results: Regarding explicit memory measures we found only a trend towards difference based on Mann-Whitney U test between supernormals and decliners in Memory Binding test, an associative binding measure (p=.072, one-tailed), other measures, such as Philadelphia Verbal Learning Test or Logical Memory delayed free recall were not significant (p>.10). Automated segmentation by Freesurfer (version 5.3) did not reveal any groupwise volumetric differences between supernormals and decliners. Conclusion: There is a trend towards significance in associative binding impairment in healthy aging decliners in comparison to supernormals despite non-significant differences in their brain volume. The data are consistent with Benjamin-Nave's ADH. However, these preliminary results need to be taken with caution and replicated on larger samples. The perspective of effective treatment of neurodegenerative cognitive disorders implies an early intervention and therefore a reliable, easy screening tool. Methods: Clinical neurological experience of over 25 years with regards to early detection and evolution of cognitive impairment by computerized screening tools, was extracted out of a private practice database.Determining cut-off scores for pathology. Explanation of mechanisms leading to false positive results. Results: Matching of this screening exam with the M.M.S.E., the neuropsychological testing, imaging and the liquor analysis (beta amyloid, tau -fosfotau protein) was done for all diagnosed cases. A normal CVST score lies between 8 and 13 seconds. With a score above 20 seconds., the attention problems interfere with daily life on a significant manner (e.a. driving). Severely abnormal scores (above 25-30 seconds) are a reliable indicator (a warning sign') for underlying organic disorder: MCI and all variants of beginning cognitive impairment (AD, FLD, PDD , LBD e.g.). This clinical finding pushed us to use the test systematically, as vague complaints of headache, vertigo, fear or depression can be the first symptoms of a degenerative process in a population above 65. Conclusion: 1-The web based CVST is a reliable test for screening attention and memory deficits in first line. Repeating the test over time, gives a consistent and reliable image of the clinical situation and evolution. 2-False positive results are mostly related to anxiety, slowing due to an obsessive behavior, and/or computer-aversion. Background and aims: Complement dysregulation has been related to Alzheimer's disease (AD) and epileptogenesis. Consistently, it has been demonstrated in animal model studies the role of complement system activation in causing both seizures and neurodegeneration. The aim of the present study is to measure the complement factors in AD patients and correlate their levels with quantitative EEG (qEEG) and CSF AD biomarkers changes. Methods: Patients affected by AD pathology were compared to patients affected by other neurological disorders (OND). Both AD and OND underwent a protocol including neurological examination, neuropsychological testing, CSF AD biomarkers analysis, EEG, and quantification of serum complement factors concentrations (C3, C4, C1q, CH50, C1inh). In particular, we correlate CSF, serum and clinical data with qEEG analysis selecting the temporal lobe regions (F7, T3, T5, F8, T4, T6). Relative power of EEG bands (delta, theta, alpha and beta) was considered as reference parameter. Results: We documented the significant reduction of serum C3 levels in AD patients compared to OND (p<0.05). Considering the correlation analysis in the AD group we documented the significant interplay between C1q serum levels and tau/Ab42 ratio (R=-0.61) and between C4 and CSF Ab42 concentrations (R=-0.73). Moreover, we documented significant correlations between lower C1q serum levels and slowing of EEG. Conversely, the reduction of C3 serum concentrations was related to the reduction of faster EEG rhythms Conclusion: This pilot study reported that complement system dysregulation may occur in AD pathology and may be related to a more severe neurodegeneration and to the pathological slowing of qEEG. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose © Background and aims: Physical exercise may ameliorate symptoms of Alzheimer´s disease (AD). Animal studies have suggested this may be mediated through an effect on AD pathology. Therefore, we undertook a systematic review of randomised trials examining effects of physical exercise on validated AD biomarkers. Methods: Studies eligible for inclusion were intervention studies of physical exercise with 1 or more of the following AD biomarkers as outcome measures: a) Aβ1-42, Total-tau and/or Phosphorylated-tau in cerebrospinal fluid; b) 18F-FDG-PET imaging, c) amyloid-PET imaging or d) hippocampal volume measured on MRI in healthy subjects, subjects with subjective cognitive complaints, patients with MCI or AD dementia. Databases searched: MEDLINE, EMBASE, Cochrane Register of Controlled Clinical Trials, PsycInfo and Web of Science. Results: 54205 citations were identified. Of these 7 papers were included, containing 508 participants (252 in intervention group, 256 in control group) (figure 1). Outcome measure was change in hippocampal volume on MRI and AD biomarkers in CSF. Two studies reported an effect of aerobic exercise on hippocampal volume. One study found an absolute increase in the volume of the anterior hippocampus, which was significant compared to the control group. Another study found a detrimental effect of aerobic exercise in CA2/3 and dentate gyrus/CA4 subregions relative to the control group. Figure 1: PRISMA flow chart showing flow of citations in the study The present findings do not support an effect of physical activity on AD biomarkers and subsequently AD pathology. However, evidence is sparse, and therefore a possible effect of physical exercise on AD pathology cannot be ruled out. Further studies applying AD biomarkers in rigorously conducted studies are needed. Decreased β-amyloid (Aβ) clearance from the brain has been suggested to contribute to cerebral Aβ accumulation in Alzheimer's disease. Based on the idea of a dynamic Aβ equilibrium in different body compartments, plasma Aβ levels have been investigated as biomarker candidates for preclinical Alzheimer's pathology, yet with inconsistent results. Since the kidneys are involved in Aβ elimination from the blood, we evaluated how chronic kidney disease (CKD) affects the association between plasma Aβ and cognitive deficits and cognitive decline. Methods: In 28 CKD patients stages 3-5D and 26 control subjects with comparable vascular risk profile from the New Tools for the Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in Chronic Kidney Disease (NTCVD) cohort, plasma total Aβ was determined with a highly sensitive electrochemiluminescence-immunoassay. Cognition was evaluated using a comprehensive battery of ten neuropsychological tests at baseline and 2-year follow-up. Results: Subjects with high plasma Aβ level (above median) demonstrated a significantly worse baseline cognitive performance than subjects exhibiting low Aβ level (summary score of global cognitive performance at baseline z=-0.46±0.76 vs z=-0.08±0.57, p=0.045). Cognitive performance moderately decreased over the 2-year-follow-up in subjects with high plasma Aβ level (Δz=-0.13±0.51), but increased in subjects with low plasma Aβ level (Δz=0.16±0.41, p=0.023). In linear regression analyses, baseline plasma Aβ was significantly associated with cognitive decline both in unadjusted analyses (β=-0.28, 95% CI= -0.55 to -0.01) and analyses adjusted for age (β=-0.27, 95% CI= -0.54 to -0.01). Conclusion: Our results suggest the utility of plasma Aβ level in predicting cognitive decline in patients suffering from CKD. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose e-Poster Background and aims: To report a case of familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (fCJD) with peripheral neuropathy as unusual clinical presentation and a cluster of 8 members with fCJD in Guadalajara, Spain. Methods: A non-diabetic 65-year-old male presented a history of 6 middle-aged family members, in an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, who died of neurological diseases, described as rapidly progressive cognitive and gait impairment. Our patient presented with a history of 4 months characterized by unsteady gait, numbness and paresthesias on both feet. Initial examination evidenced mild gait ataxia, generalized osteotendinous hyporeflexia and distal lower extremities vibratory and tactile hypoesthesia. 2-3 months later, he developed progressive and severe gait ataxia, bilateral appendicular dysmetria, "nocturnal jerks", bilateral hypoacusis, slow and hypometric saccades, decreased visual acuity and lately temporospatial disorientation, visual hallucinations and insomnia that persist daily. Results: Complementary blood tests for potential causes of acquired ataxia and peripheral neuropathy, including onconeuronal antibodies were negative. 2 craneal MRI showed unspecific brain atrophy, including cerebellum, panmedular MRI was normal and EEG was normal . EMG evidenced a mixed and severe sensory-motor neuropathy. Audiometry exam found a bilateral 50% hearing loss. CSF exam revealed a positive 14-3-3 protein. Genetic testing for PRPN gene evidenced the E200K mutation and a polymorphism in the codon 129 methionine/valine, in heterozygosis. Family tree Conclusion: An atypical case of familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, presenting with peripheral neuropathy and having delayed central symptoms, is described. A cluster Spanish family with 7 affected members is reported. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Increased homocysteine plasmatic level (HPL) is recognized as risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD). Basal forebrain (BF) neurons, that are major source of acetylcholine, degenerate early in the course of AD. Recent findings suggest increased HPL lowers the number of BF cholinergic neurons. We aimed to assess the association between HLP, BF and hippocampal volumes in cognitively normal elderly (NC), subjects with subjective cognitive decline (SCD), mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD dementia. Methods: In total 96 subjects; NC (n=11); SCD (n=30); MCI (n=39); AD (n=14) had volumetric brain MRI at 1.5T and blood sampling. Hippocampal and BF volumes were computed using a mask based on cytoarchitectonic map derived from a postmortem brain. MRI scans were timematched with HLP blood sampling. Analysis of variance and multiple linear regression were used to assess mutual associations. : Elevated HPL was associated with lower BF volumes (R2=0.52; p=0.016). Analysis of separate BF nuclei showed associations of HPL with medial septum, vertical limb of diagonal band (DB) (R2=0.25; p=0.01), nucleus subputaminalis (R2=0.38; p=0.04) and horizontal DB limb (R2=0.48; p=0.03). There was no association between HPL and hippocampal volume. Conclusion: The HPL is associated with BF but not with © 2017 European Journal of Neurology, 24 (Suppl. 1), 123-444 e-Poster 127 hippocampal atrophy. This agrees with animal studies showing that hyperhomocysteinemia is associated with reduction in number of BF cholinergic neurons. Our data suggest that increased HPL may be one of the factors contributing to early degeneration of BF during the course of AD. Hypothalamus is a key brain region affected by the Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology and regulating several essential homeostatic functions, including the sleep-wake cycle. We investigated the possible in vivo alteration of the hypothalamus and its correlations with sleep impairment and cerebrospinal-fluid (CSF) AD biomarkers changes in a population of AD patients compared to nondemented elderly controls. Methods: We measured the polysomnographic sleep, the CSF AD biomarkers and orexin levels, and the hypothalamic [18F] FDG PET uptake in a population of AD patients. Results: We documented the significant reduction of hypothalamic [18F]FDG PET uptake in the AD group (n=18) compared to the Control 2 group (n=18) (p<0.01). Moreover, we found the increase of CSF orexin levels coupled with the marked alteration of the nocturnal sleep in the AD group as compared to the Control 1 group (n=15) (p<0.05). Finally, we observed the significant association linking the reduction of both sleep efficiency and REM sleep to the reduction of hypothalamic [18F]FDG PET uptake in the AD group. Moreover, [18F]FDG PET hypothalamic uptake correlated with the higher ratio of total-tau/beta-amyloid42 CSF levels (index of more marked neurodegeneration). Finally, we documented a connection between the hypothalamus and the limbic system in the control group, which was not evident in the AD group. Conclusion: In conclusion, we documented the in vivo dysfunction of the hypothalamus in AD patients, which was correlated with both the impairment of nocturnal sleep and the CSF index of more marked AD neurodegeneration. Our goal is to evaluate the frequency of appetite/eating disturbances in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and to determine the features associated with its development. Methods: A cross-sectional study in 173 consecutive patients with probable AD (NIA-AA criteria) followed-up in a Dementia Unit in Spain (mean age at onset 75.2±6.7 years and mean duration of dementia 3.8±2.0 years, 71.7% women, Mini-Mental State Examination 16.7±6.1). The 12th item in Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) was used to assess appetite/eating disturbances. Results: Overall, appetite/eating disturbances occurred in 44.5% of participants, and in 35.8% were "clinically relevant" [NPI ≥ 4]. These were associated with depression (p=0.042), apathy (p<0.0001), disinhibition (p=0.026), aberrant motor behaviour (p=0.047) and antidepressants use (p=0.013). By domains, 30.6% experienced appetite loss (15% of them coexistent with dysphagia), and it was significantly more prevalent in women, subjects with depression, apathy or antidepressant medication. In contrast, 15.0% presented increase in appetite, change that was more frequent in those individuals with more severe dementia [CDR-3], disinhibition or higher MMSE/year decline. 6.9% had an unusual eating behaviour (e.g. tending to overfill mouth) which was associated with more severe dementia, hallucinations, agitation, multiple drug therapy and rapid progression. Other 6.9% had suffered a change in his/her food preference (e.g. preferring sweet foods more than before) in which a widower status, disinhibition and aberrant motor behaviour were associated factors. Conclusion: Appetite disturbances are frequent in AD, but risk factors for them differ according to the type of appetite/ eating disturbance assessed. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose e-Poster Conclusion: The lack of significant differences in rheological parameters at different subtypes of ischemic stroke shows that the change in blood rheology is a universal pathophysiological mechanism of acute cerebral ischemia. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Table 1 . Blood viscosity in patients with ischemic stroke and control group (* -significant differences between values in patients with ischemic stroke and control group) Figure 1 . Blood viscosity at different shear rates in patients with ischemic stroke in dynamic within 20 days after onset Conclusion: We found long-term preservation of increased blood viscosity at low shear rates in ischemic stroke. Hyperviscosity syndrome is the important pathogenetic mechanism at the level of microcirculation in patients with acute cerebral ischemia. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Figure 1 Frequency of thrombophilia in patients with brain vessels thrombosis Results: The prevalence of acquired risk factors for stroke(arterial hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes mellitus, atrial fibrillation, obstructive sleep apnea, smoking, oral contraceptives, family history) are significantly higher in ischemic stroke patients with non clinically significant stenosis. Eleven patients are with thrombosis (5 intracranial and 6 extracranial) and one with severe extracranial stenoses. Ten of these patients have more than one risk factor for thrombophilia plus dyslipidemia. Two patients are only with thrombophilia. The other 37 patients are with ischemic stroke without clinically significant stenosis or thrombosis. Acquired risk factors and hyperhomocysteinemia present in 34 of these patients. Conclusion: We found that thrombophilia could be a risk factor for severe stenosis or thrombosis in young patients with stroke. Thrombophilic risk factors in patients without thrombosis Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Neuropathological studies of mild cognitive impairment reveal a large load of vascular ischemic brain lesions. Therefore we have explored effect of antioxidant drug meldonium (Mildronat) in patients with vascular cognitive impairment. Meldonium (Mildronat) is a licensed medical drug used widely throughout Eastern Europe and Central Asia for a number of cardiovascular conditions and is the basis of much debate in the world of sports doping. Methods: 120 patients (72 female, 48 male, average age 71.6 years) with vascular cognitive impairment received meldonium 1000 mg i/v for ten days and then continued treatment orally for 6 months. Main clinical manifestations were impaired attention and forgetfulness, psychomotor slowing, impaired executive and visuospatial skills, change in personality, and emotional disturbance. The patient closely followed clinically, with repeated neuropsychological assessment. Results compared with a control group (N=135). Results: The benefits of treatment began to be apparent within the first months. 46 patients showed stable improvement in cognitive performance measures and in daily life. 40 patients trend back to their baseline. 34 patients had no improvement after treatment. There was no case of worsening disease or bad drug bearing. Statistically significant reduction in cognitive impairment was seen in the treated group in the domains of memory, attention and executive functions. Conclusion: It is concluded that meldonium may be recommended for the complex treatment of ischemic disorders of the cerebral circulation, include vascular cognitive impairment. The use appears to be effective and safe. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Background and aims:. Chronic disorders of consciousness (DOC), such as VS and MCS, are diagnosed mostly by clinical examination, that carries high risk of misdiagnosis. New tools may help establish level of consciousness in certain cases, as presented here. Methods: Case. A clinically VS patient A., male, 48 y.o., 2 years after intracerebral hemorrhage (CRS-R=10) showed only reflex movements to stimulation, no environment contact and preserved sleep-wake pattern. It was reported recently that presence of default mode network (DMN) signal on rs-fMRI was correlates with the degree of clinical consciousness impairment (Vanhaudenhuyse, 2010) . Results: On rs-fMRI (3T) we found activation of DMN areas (mPFC, PCC, LIPC, RIPC) ( Fig.1) . We also performed TMS-EEG with calculating Perturbational Complexity Index (PCI) -an independently validated promising consciousness metric (Casali, 2014) , that allows reliable stratification of unresponsive patients with empirical cutoff level for discrimination between the unconscious and conscious states of 0.31 (Casarotto, 2016) . We found out high complexity of the cortical response for the TMS stimuli, with PCI of 0.345 for frontal region stimulation (Fig.2) and 0.424 for parietal region (Fig.3) stimulation which implies the «conscious» state in this patient Conclusion: novel diagnostic techniques may reveal patients with possible higher level of consciousness than seen clinically. Such patients should become subject for further investigation to find out the cause of discrepancy between clinical and neurophysiological results, as well as for intensive rehabilitation interventions. Disclosure: The study is supported by Russian Scientific Foundation grant №16-15-00274. Research Networks have been established since 2007 and are primarily run by Surgical and Anaesthetic Trainees. In the southwest peninsula we have set up the first UK Neurology Trainee Audit and Research Collaborative to deliver clinical studies. Ensuring all trainees have appropriate training is a key requirement; we aimed to ascertain the training need of our network members. Methods: A survey was sent to all 9 neurology trainees in the Peninsula Deanery. It comprised 5 questions to establish trainee clinical research training and experience. Results: Response rate was 100%. Training level varied from ST3-5; 22% had previously completed higher degrees. 40% of trainees had not been involved in clinical research. One trainee had not had formal good clinical practice (GCP) training and none had formal Informed Consent training. Of those who had been involved in research, there had been limited involvement in project design, ethics approval processes, data analysis, manuscript preparation or findings presentation. We identified a training need in our Trainee Audit & Research Network. In order to address this, we have organised formal GCP & Informed Consent training; to broaden the research experience of network members, we are planning our first collaborative research project. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose 1 Neurology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Granada, Granada, Spain, 2 Neuropsichology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Granada, Granada, Spain Background and aims: The change in artistic style and hypercreativity has been described in frontotemporal dementia (FTD) . We present a case of compulsive creation of pieces of arts as the first manifestation of FTD. Methods: A 65-year-old man, administrative and an amateur artist, was admitted to our hospital with diplopia, ptosis and general weakness. He was diagnosed with Myastenia Gravis, and was discharge. During the admission, the patient showed an amazing compulsive behavior: he created 63 songs with a scatological and erotic theme. Additionally, he changed his pictorial style: he used to paint classical scenes (figure 1) but by this time, he only wanted to paint erotic pictures (figure 2). He had not any other symptoms. A neuropsychological test showed an executive dysfunction and a brain MR showed frontal lobes atrophy. Results: Five years later, his family advised that he had an abnormal behavior: disinhibition, impulsive actions and euphoria. His compulsive manner of write songs was worsening: he wrote more than 3000 songs of erotic theme, and performed a big sculpture with a lot of scabrous details that he called "pictorial-sculpture" (figure 3). Finally, the patient was diagnosed with probable behavioral variant FTD, accordingly with the current diagnosis criteria. Conclusion: The most patients with FTD show a diminution in creativity. However, some patients show a hypercreativity in arts; change their artistic style or even start a new creative ability. This lack of limits or transmodal creativity has been described in FTD. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1062 "The metaspirochaetosis is the meningeal process": Neurosyphilis as the driving force of Thomas Mann's Doctor Faustus Background and aims: Thomas Mann's Doctor Faustus is one of the undisputed pinnacles of German literature for its insight on the creative process of an artist; at its core, however, lies the influence of neurosyphilis, one of syphilis' most devastating forms. Several classical composers, such as Smetana, Schumann and Donizetti, were victimized by it; in his novel, Mann offers the case of fictional composer Adrian Leverkühn. Methods: Mann's book, European and American guidelines on syphilis were reviewed. Results: Disease plays a major role in Thomas Mann's oeuvre, from The Magic Mountain to Death in Venice. In Doctor Faustus, however, the correlation is at its closest. The aspiring composer Adrian Leverkühn comes into contact with a prostitute early in the book and develops a "local infection" afterwards. In chapter XXV, Leverkühn describes his encounter with a Mephistopheles-like entity, perhaps an hallucination from secondary meningoencephalitis, who reveals his infection by "our livid Venus, the Spirochaeta pallida", giving him 24 years of unmitigated musical genius inspired by the auditive and visual hallucinations of neurosyphilis. After the disease's latent period, he develops Argyll-Robertson pupils, "which always had the same size, (…) were never changed by differences in light", and a prolonged demential period of ten years before his death, paretic and insomniac. Conclusion: Mann's Leverkühn is a fictional character whose musical brilliance can be attributed to hallucinatory effects of neurosyphilis. Mann's text provides the careful reader clues to the true nature of his aillment, from descriptions of abnormal neurological findings (Argyll-Robertson pupils) to a more florid description of neuropsychological symptoms. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose The neurological disease as a muse of famous writers Background and aims: Some important writers suffered from neurological diseases. We investigated whether their neurological condition could have influenced their artistic production. Methods: Search for relevant links between neurological diseases and literary output of famous writers. Results: Friedrich Nietzsche suffered from neurosyphilis that led him into a deep sadness and introspection, what can be easily realized in his works. When Nietzsche became paretic, according to Freud, it "gave him the capacity[…] of seeing through all layers and recognizing the instincts at the very base'. Guy de Maupassant also had neurosyphilis and there is consent that his creativity was changed as the disease progressed. Robert Sherard, in face of Maupassant's literary leap to fame in 1880, became certain that syphilis could take one to new heights. Lewis Carroll had migraine and experienced visual auras. Some studious rigorously affirm that his visual disturbances were the main influence to create the novel Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, that contemplate descriptions of metamorphopsias, distortions and bizarre characters. Gustave Flaubert was diagnosed with epilepsy, when he decided to isolate himself and dedicate more time to literature. Writing became an "outlet", as he once confessed, to his neurological condition that was cause of so much suffering. Charles Baudelaire had a lefthemisphere stroke and once wrote: 'I claim that inspiration is somehow linked to stroke…'. His aphasia would consecrate the expletive Cré nom and made him reinvent his artistic style. Conclusion: Neurological disease participated of the creativity process of important famous writers, playing a pivotal role in the genesis of eternal literary masterpieces. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Patterns of use of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) differ between developed and developing countries. In the latter, use of second generation AEDs is not common. To study the patterns of AEDs uses in terms of frequencies of use, treatment outcomes, and tolerability. Methods: This is a retrospective cross-sectional study. A total of 360 adult Sudanese epilepsy patients who attended a tertiary neurology clinic in Khartoum city, Sudan between 2006 and 2010 were included. Results: 76.1% of patients (274/360) were classified as drug responsive while 23.9% (86/360) were classified to have DRE. Out of 624 prescriptions, the five most frequently prescribed AEDs were carbamazepine (32.7%), sodium valproate (28.5%), phenytoin & lamotrigine (12.5% each) and phenobarbitone (6.2%). 44.1% (275/624) of prescriptions resulted in sustained seizure freedom for their first use whether as monotherapy or in combination, while treatment failure per individual drug was the reported outcome in 41.1% (256/624). In 12.5% (78/624) of the prescriptions, AEDs resulted in seizure freedom in their initial use. The highest rate of achieving seizure freedom during the first use was reported with phenytoin 63.3% (50/79), valproate 48.3% (86/178), carbamazepine 47.6% (97/204) and lamotrigine 21.8% (17/78). Reported treatment failure rates were: lamotrigine 66.7% (52/78), phenobarbitone 64.1% (25/39), valproate 37.6% (67/178), carbamazepine 28.8% (59/204) and phenytoin 24.1% (19/79). Adverse events were reported with 7.4% of prescriptions while AEDs discontinuation was necessary after 2.7% of prescriptions. Conclusion: First-generation AEDs are still dominating clinical practice in developing countries with comparable outcomes with second-generation agents. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Studying patterns of drug-resistant epilepsy enhances understanding its possible pathogenic mechanisms. To study the patterns of drug-resistant epilepsy (DRE) in a cohort of adult epilepsy patients. Methods: This is a retrospective cross-sectional study. A total of 360 adult Sudanese epilepsy patients who attended a tertiary neurology clinic in Khartoum city, Sudan between 2006-2010 were included. Results: 23.9% (86/360) of patients were classified to have DRE. Out of these 86 patients, 81.4% were found to have a constant resistant pattern while 18.6% were having an alternating pattern. No significant difference in clinical characteristics was found between the two patterns. When considering covariates related to AED therapy, constant pattern patients were found to have a significantly higher previous history of AED therapy (P=0.046). When tested for the duration of seizure freedom achieved, 35.7% of patients with the constant pattern have never become seizure-free in comparison with 18.8% of patients with the alternating pattern (P=0191). Similarly, 50% of patients with the constant resistant pattern failed to respond to 3 AEDs in comparison with 34.3% of patients with the alternating pattern (P=0.684). Five detailed patterns of DRE were recognized: constant absolute resistant pattern (76.7%), constant partial resistant pattern (4.7%), primary responsive pattern followed by secondary absolute resistance (9.3%), primary responsive pattern followed by secondary partial resistance (2.3%) and primary absolute resistant pattern followed by secondary responsiveness (7%). These findings indicate that AED pharmacoresistance is a heterogeneous status. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Background and aims: The aim of the study was to analyze and compare the clinical course, EEG and treatment approaches in children with Gastaut (GS) and Panayiotopoulos syndrome (PS) Methods: We have included 40 patients with PS and 13with GS, treated in the Clinic of child neurology in Sofia, Bulgaria. Results: The children with PS had an earlier age of seizure onset (4y compared to 8y 9m in the cases of GS). Rare seizures (between 2 and 6) predominated in PS (in 65%) while half of the patients with GS had multiple seizures. The seizures were mainly nocturnal in PS (in 80%), while all the children with GS had diurnal seizures and only half of them experienced nocturnal seizures. The most common ictal presentation in PS was nausea and vomiting (in 95% of the cases) while visual symptoms were the main ictal manifestation in GS (visual hallucinations -in 84.6% of the children and visual loss -in 53.8%). The occipital epileptiform activity was the typical EEG feature in GS, but was described in only 57.5% of the patients with PS at the time of the diagnosis. Conclusion: PS is characterized by a typical clinical presentation with rare, mainly nocturnal seizures with leading autonomic symptoms that show good response to treatment. Unlike PS the typical seizures in GS are brief, mainly diurnal and often multiple. Valproate and Carbamazepine are the drugs of first choice in GS and the treatment is usually long lasting due to the high risk of relapses. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1068 Adult phenotype of Dravet syndrome associated with STXBP1 (syntaxin binding protein 1) mutation and good response to cannabidiol treatment G. Alvarez Bravo, A. Yusta Izquierdo, G. Carvalho Monteiro, J. Hernandez Cristobal Neurology, University Hospital of Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Spain Background and aims: We present a case of Dravet syndrome: adult phenotype with a STXBP1 mutation and its good response to cannabidiol treatment. Methods: A 19-year-old woman with history of epilepsy since infancy and poor response to various anticonvulsant therapies. She presented a good psychomotor development until the two years of life, although to the six months had a first crisis which coincided with fever and was followed by motor deficit. Two years later she performed episodes of loss of head tone. From the age of 6, she has generalized seizures more than 10 times a day and from the age of 13 she associates reflexive crises after sound and tactile stimuli. Various genetic-metabolic tests were negative, including the mutation for the SCN1A gene (sodium voltage-gated channel alpha subunit 1). In the last year she has presented marked bradykinesia which impedes walking (FAC 1 according to the gait rating scale -Functional Ambulatory Classifier), mood swings, impulsivity associated with heteroaggressive behavior and visual hallucinosis. Results: We required whole exome sequencing, finding mutation in the STXBP1 gene. We also suggested to initiate treatment with cannabidiol, achieving a considerable reduction in the number of crises in the day and an improvement in the ability to walk (FAC 4). Conclusion: The mutation of STXBP1 gene proved to cause Dravet's syndrome in patients with negativity for the mutation of SCN1A. Our case is special because it presents the recent description of the adult phenotype of Dravet's syndrome moreover it is associated to good response to cannabidiol treatment. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1069 Determination of social phobia, agoraphobia and depression frequency using clinical scales in epilepsy patients I. Midi, K. Agan Yildrim, M.F. Ates Background and aims: Patients with epilepsy can develope psychiatric disorders that decrease quality of life and increase suicide rate. Our study was designed to investigate depression, anxiety, social phobia, agoraphobia of epilepsy patients. Methods: The study was done between September 2015 -September 2016 in Marmara University Pendik Research Hospital, Turkey, Neurology outpatient clinic, among 150 random patients (18-66 years old) and 70 controls with similar age and gender. Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), Liebowitz Social Phobia Inventory (LSPI) and Panic Agoraphobia Inventory were applied to both groups. Results: Among evaluated results, 62,7% of the patients were women and their average age was 34.2±10.9, respectively 33.00±10.2 for controls. Fifty percent of the education level of both patients and control group was primary and middle school. The score of BDI for the patients were 15.18±12.25, respectively 10.87±9.06 for controls, that was statistically significant (p=0.0038). Both patient and control group were compared according to LSPI and subgroup analysis (for anxiety and avoidance), but no statistical significant result was found (p>0.05). Agoraphobia was more common among women and freaquently panic attack occured in closed areas as elevators, tunnels, airplane or subway. Conclusion: Our results showed that depression and agoraphobia were more common with epileptic patients compared to control group and often seen among women. In epileptic patients, psychiatric deficiencies are frequently ignored and not treated properly. It is very important to identify and treat comorbid factors in order to increase patient's quality of life. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Corpus callosotomy (CC) and vagal nerve stimulation (VNS) are palliative neurosurgical methods used in treatment of pharmacoresistant epilepsy in patients with unknown, multiple or epileptogenic zones in eloquent brain areas where no resectable surgery is possible. Methods: We conducted a retrospective research in patients with generalized epilepsy (GE) non responsive to medical treatment in whom either CC or VNS was done. All patients were followed up through one year. The total number of patients was 20, divided in two groups, CC (n=8, mean age 20) and VNS (n=12, mean age 31) group. In the first group all patients, except one who had postencephalitic seizures, had Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS), while in the second one 25% had LGS, 25% had progressive myoclonic epilepsy and 50% had other epileptic encephalopathies. Results: We observed the effect of CC or VNS on frequency of generalized tonic-clonic seizures (GTCS), atonic seizures (AS) and myoclonic seizures (MS) as they were the predominant types. In the CC group a significant reduction in the frequency of GTCS (≥50%) was noted in 57% of patients, 50% showed significant reduction of AS (half of which were seizure free) and 29% of MS. In the VNS group 82% of patients had significant reduction of GTCS, 73% of AS (9% of which were seizure free) and 60% of MS (20% were seizure free). Conclusion: Although the patient number in this study was relatively small, according to our results CC is not an inferior method in treatment of pharmacoresistant epilepsy with expecially beneficial results on AS. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1072 Frequency of post-stroke epileptiform activity -a systematic review and metaanalysis of observational studies Background and aims: Understanding the pathophysiogenesis of temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) largely rests on the use of models of status epilepticus (SE), like the pilocarpine model. After several hours of SE, pilocarpinetreated animals remit spontaneously and go into a seizurefree period, known as latent period, before displaying the spontaneous recurrent seizures (SRSs) that characterize the chronic epileptic condition. Based on this, the purpose of our study was to further characterize the capacity of neurovespina (a new peptide similar to one found in a social brazilian wasp Polybia occidentalis) to prevent SRRs and hippocampal neuronal loss. Methods: During chronic period (fifteen days after SE) animals (swiss mice, n=7) developed a chronic condition determined by SSRs and received daily intraperitoneal injections of neurovespina (doses: 1, 2 or 4 mg/Kg) or saline (control groups) to evaluate the behavioral effectiveness antiepileptic effect. The occurrence of seizures (Racine scale) was evaluated during two weeks (video recorded 9 hours/day). Results: Our results showed that neurovespina reduced the score, time and number of SSRs in all doses when compared to control group and in the highest dose (4mg/Kg), animals have no seizure in the first 5 hours after treatment during all chronic period. Morphological analysis of hippocampal formation shows no significant loss of selective populations of interneurons in areas CA1 and CA3 and in the hilus. Conclusion: These data indicate that Neurovespina has potential for the development of novel drugs for neurological diseases, both to reduce the seizures frequency and to minimize the neuronal damage associated with seizures. Disclosure: This work was supported by FapDF and CNPQ. Cancelled Background and aims: Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation may have anti-epileptic effects, especially in neocortical epilepsy. Continuous thetaburst stimulation (cTBS) seems to be a potent protocol that could optimize safety, tolerablility and applicability based on lower stimulation intensity and shorter duration. Methods: Patients with refractory neocortical epilepsy are treated with a 4-day accelerated cTBS protocol (figure 1) targeted over the epileptogenic focus. Seizure frequency and adverse events are assessed over a 4-week baseline period and 8 weeks of follow-up. Cognitive and psychological testing is performed at baseline and end of follow-up. Results: Subject 1 and subject 2 suffer from epilepsy due to a low-grade tumor in the motor cortex causing focal clonic seizures. Subject 1 also experiences myoclonia of the left leg. Subject 3 has epilepsy with auditory seizures following intracranial hemorrhage in the left temporal lobe. cTBS was well-tolerated and did not induce serious adverse events or seizures. Mild headache occurred in subject 3. No negative cognitive or psychological side effects were noticed. Antiepileptic effects of cTBS varied. Subject 1 experienced a transient reduction in severity of clonic seizures, with complete resolution of myoclonia for 6 weeks. Subject 2 experienced an overall 50% seizure frequency reduction, with most pronounced effect during treatment and initial 4 weeks of follow-up (70% reduction, 3 seizure-free weeks). No marked effect on seizures was identified in subject 3. Conclusion: cTBS appears safe and well-tolerated, even in seizure-prone subjects. Anti-epileptic effects of variable extent were identified. Extensive parenchymal damage at the target site may have interfered with effective stimulation in subject 3. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1076 MERRF presenting with drop attacks due to astatic epileptic crises V. Carvalho 1 , J. Martins 2 1 Porto, Portugal, 2 Neurology, Hospital Pedro Hispano, Matosinhos, Portugal Background and aims: Mitochondrial encephalopathy with ragged red fibers (MERRF) is a progressive mitochondrial disorder characterized by myoclonus, epilepsy, ataxia and myopathy. Drop attacks are seldom recognized as a feature of MERRF. Methods: A clinical case. Results: A 50-year-old male presented to our clinic complaining of repetitive drop attacks. He claimed periodic loss of muscle tone in his lower limbs, with loss of orthostatic posture, without impaired consciousness or trigger. The episodes started 10 years earlier and had worsened, occurring now nearly on a daily basis. His previous medical records were remarkable for Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome, auditory and visual impairment, and surgical removal of neck lipomas. His parents were non-consanguineous. His brother had similar events. His neurological examination was striking for mild cognitive impairment, slow and segmented saccades with limited upgaze, bilateral ptosis, dysarthria, mild proximal muscular weakness, distal hypoesthesia in the lower limbs, diminished reflexes and a wide-based unstable gait. The diagnostic work-up revealed: elevated CK (~1000IU/L); axonal sensory-motor polyneuropathy; bilateral neurosensory hearing loss; generalized cortical atrophy (MRI); abundant bilateral frontotemporal delta rhythm, without paroxysmal activity detected on EEG. Empirical levetiracetam was started, with near-total remission of the astatic crises. MERRF was suspected and a mutation in the MT-TK gene was found confirming the diagnosis. Conclusion: We describe a case of MERRF presenting with drop attacks due to astatic/atonic epileptic events and excellent improvement with levetiracetam. Multisystemic dysfunction with combination of either: epilepsy, cerebellar, visual or auditory impairment, neuropathy, myopathy, cardiac abnormalities and midline lipomas should raise suspicion of this entity. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1077 Cancelled Headache and pain 1 The effects of OnabotulinumtoxinA treatment on the chronic migraine comorbidities of sleep and fatigue A. Blumenfeld 1 , S. Tepper 2 , L. Robbins 3 , A. Adams 4 , S. Silberstein 5 , K. Sommer 4 Background and aims: Chronic migraine (CM) is associated with comorbidities that may exacerbate the condition. This subanalysis of COMPEL addresses effects of onabotulinumtoxinA prophylaxis on comorbid sleep disturbances and fatigue symptoms. Methods: The 108-week, multicentre, open-label COMPEL Study enrolled adult patients with CM in Australia, Korea and the United States receiving onabotulinumtoxinA 155 U with/without concomitant prophylaxis. Primary outcome was reduction in headache frequency per 28-day period at 108 weeks (9 treatments). Sleep disturbances were assessed using the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) and fatigue symptoms using the Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS). Adverse events (AEs) were recorded. Results: Enrolled patients (N=715) had a mean (range) age of 43 (18-73) years and were predominantly female (84.8%, 606/715). Headache day frequency at week 108 (primary endpoint) was significantly reduced from a baseline mean (standard deviation, SD) of 22 (±4.8) days to 10.7 (±6.4) days (P<0.0001). Patient baseline mean (SD) PSQI score was 13.3 (±3.7), which indicated poor sleep quality. OnabotulinumtoxinA treatment significantly improved PSQI mean scores at weeks 24, 60, 84, and 108 (all P<0.0001; Figure 1 ). Baseline mean FSS score of 38.1 (±14.5) was also significantly improved at all time points (P<0.0001; Figure 2 ). Most AEs were mild or moderate in nature; low rates of treatment-related AEs were observed (Table) . Results from the COMPEL Study indicate the effectiveness of onabotulinumtoxinA treatment for reducing headache frequency as well as improving sleep quality and fatigue symptoms up to 108 weeks (9 treatment cycles) in patients with CM. No unexpected AEs were reported. Disclosure: The funding source for this study is Allergan plc (Dublin, Ireland) Background and aims: Case report of a short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with cranial autonomic symptoms (SUNA) syndrome with transient atrioventricular block during attacks. Methods: Female, 39-year-old, affected by arterial hypertension and bening familial hematuria, no history of syncopes or headaches, was admitted to the hospital presenting episodes of severe burning facial pain affecting left nasal and maxillar, shorter than one minute, with ipsilateral tearing and nasal congestion, dizziness and one syncope. During her stay in emergency room she suffers new episode, with syncope. Electrocardiography monitorization showed complete atrioventricular (AV) block during attack, nodal rythm at 20 beats a minute, spontaneously recovered to normal sinus rythm. Normal physical exam. The patient was admitted to Intensive Care Unit, persisting attacks with AV block: an external pacemaker was necessary, changed later by a definitive pacemaker. Results: A cranial tomography (CT) scan showed left cerebellar hemisphere hypodensity, confirmed as chronic left cerebellar infarction by magnetic resonance (asymptomatic). Etiological studies for stroke (CT angiography, hypercoagulability tests, echocardiography) were negative or normal. Indomethacin obtained pain control; lamotrigine rising dose was indicated in order to indomethacin withdrawal, no more episodes with 400mg per day. Conclusion: SUNA syndrome is a quite unusual headache classified into a group of primary headaches called trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias. Diagnosis features of the group includes unilateral pain and local parasympatethic autonomic symptoms. This is the only case in literature in which pain attacks associate AV block, suggesting hyperactivity of the parasympathetic pathway that exceed local response. Left cerebellar infaction could play an etiological role. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1080 Aphasic aura and reversible MRI image in hemiplegic migraine I. Amorim 1 , A.P. Antunes 1 , G. Leal 2 , G.S. Nunes 3 , I. Pavão Martins 4 Background and aims: Familial Hemiplegic Migraine (FHM) is defined by the occurrence of hemiparesis as part of the aura (ICHD-3 Beta). One of the differential diagnosis is an ischemic stroke. We report a case of FHM that was studied during a prolonged migraine attack. Results: A 29-year-old woman, developed an intense headache, associated with aphasia and right hemiparesis. She has been diagnosed with FHM type 2 years before with T376M mutation of ATP1A2 gene, localized in 1q21-23 chromosome. Weakness recovered in 24 hours, but she persisted with an atypical aphasia with fluctuating degree of fluency, ranging from periods of almost no speech or difficulty initiating speech to others of fluent speech with paraphasias. Cranial MRI showed a left cortical hypersignal on the temporo-parietal lobe and cingular gyrus on FLAIR but not on DWI. There were no ischemic lesions. EEG showed no paroxysmal activity. The patient recovered from the aphasia in one month, and she repeated the MRI that was normal. Conclusion: The aura phenomenon has been attributed to cortical spreading depression with vasogenic edema. In this case, the parallel course of symptoms and reversible vasogenic edema supports this pathogenesis. The language disorder was rather atypical for a stroke aphasia, suggesting that the functional impairment is not fixed. This case has unusual features because changes were only observed in FLAIR which is unusual in FHM, where most cases have changes in DWI/FLAIR. The negative DWI excludes ischemic stroke, but FLAIR showed a cortical edema, lead to think in other causes, like FHM. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA, or Wegener granulomatosis) is a rare, systemic disease of unknown etiology, characterized by necrotizing granulomatous inflammation and systemic vasculitis. We are reporting a case of patient with headache as the presenting symptom. Methods: A 54-year-old male, without any related medical history, developed a non-specific, severe and unresponsive to various treatments headache. In the following 2 months, he gradually developed hoarseness and diplopia affecting the left abducens nerve. An ophthalmological examination revealed bilateral papilledema and diffused flame-like retinal hemorrhages, implying the presence of intracranial hypertension. A brain MRI revealed wide-spread fattening and meningeal enhancement of the left hemisphere, and also mild swelling and inhomogeneous signal at the left half of the nasopharynx. An endoscopy of the pharynx revealed the presence of a tumor-like mass in the left half of the nasopharynx. A biopsy showed inflammation with presence of polykaryocyte Langhans giant cells, implying a specialized granulomatous inflammation. The laboratory testing revealed important albuminuria and microhematuria, positive c-ANCA and negative p-ANCA. Results: Having fulfilled three out of four diagnostic criteria of the American College of Rheumatology for GPA, we initiated a steroid treatment with a drastic improvement of headache. During the following weeks, the remaining symptomatology resolved gradually whereas a follow-up brain MRI showed a decrease in meningeal enhancement. Conclusion: Participation of the central nervous system at the initial stage of GPA is an extremely rare condition and occurs in up to 8% of patients. Headache as the sole presenting symptom of GPA is additionally rare and may elude early diagnosis. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1082 Migraine and autoimmunity: How often are autoimmune disorders reported by headache patients R. Barbosa, F. Ladeira, A. Caetano, M. Viana-Baptista Neurology Department, Hospital Egas Moniz, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental, Lisbon, Portugal Background and aims: Although the pathophysiology of migraine is not yet totally understood, a possible role of immunological dysfunction and/or autoimmunity has been reported. The aim of this study was to analyse the frequency of autoimmune disease reported by migraine patients and patients with non-migraine headache. Methods: We review the clinical files of consecutive patients observed in our Headache Ambulatory Clinic between January 2013 and December 2015. Demographic and clinical data, including all the information regarding any diagnostic of autoimmune disorder, were collected. Diagnosis of headache was made based on ICHD3-beta criteria. Migraineurs and patients with headache without migraine features were compared on frequency of the diagnosis of autoimmune disorders. SPSS was used for statistic analysis and a p value of <0.05 was considered significant. Results: 433 patients, 85% female, median age 43 years (18-92, min-max) , 279 (64%) with migraine. Autoimmune disease were reported by 28 (6,5%) patients, 22 (8,6%) migraineurs and 6 (4%) non-migraneurs (p=0,106). Inflammatory Bowel Disease (6 patients), Systemic lupus erythematosus (4) and Psoriasis (4) were the most frequent autoimmune disorders reported. Patients with autoantibodies but without diagnosis were not considered has having autoimmune disease. Conclusion: In our cohort we didn't find a significantly greater prevalence of autoimmune disorders in migraine patients than in patients with other headache types. Studies with more patients with structured questionnaires regarding autoimmune symptoms and conditions, could help clarify the role of autoimmunity in migraine. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Despite its public health importance, there is limited understanding on the epidemiology of migraine, especially regarding its demographic or geographic variation. International consensus on the definition of migraine has evolved over time contributing to heterogeneity seen across studies. This study aimed to systematically identify population-based studies that report prevalence and/or incidence of migraine in the past decade. Methods: A systematic literature review (SLR) was conducted following the 2015 Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic review and Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P). The search focused on English publications of population-based studies on the adult prevalence or incidence of migraine, chronic (CM) and episodic migraine (EM), published between 2006−2016. Sources searched were: Medline, EMBASE and conference proceedings (2014) (2015) (2016) from the American Academy of Neurology, European Academy of Neurology, and International Headache Society. Information was extracted by two researchers independently in parallel and any disagreements were resolved by discussion or independent arbitration by a third reviewer. Results: 1047 publications were retrieved in total (128 of those were identified from conference abstracts, 915 from database searches and 4 from previously published SLRs or meta-analyses). Overall, 56 publications corresponding to 37 unique studies were retrieved ( Figure 1 ). Fifty-five publications reported prevalence and 1 reported incidence only. The 1-year prevalence of migraine ranged from 4.3% to 45.5%. Conclusion: Limited availability of epidemiological estimates in migraine exists. This SLR provides a systematic summary of the available population-based studies reporting prevalence of migraine in the last decade which can form the basis of subsequent meta-analysis for subgroups of interest Disclosure: This study was sponsored by Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland EP1085 Association of migraines with suicidal ideation among immigrants: Experience of the emergency department of a Greek Tertiary Clinic A. Bougea, N. Spantideas, I. Evdokimidis, E. Kararizou Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 1st Department of Neurology, Eginition Hospital, Athens, Greece Background and aims: Suicide represents a significant global public health and social concern, and suicide rates have been increased in patients with migraine. Immigrant and ethno-cultural minorities face mental health challenges associated with suicide behaviours,however, data on painassociated suicidality are lacking. Our aim was to investigate a potential link between migraine and suicidal ideation among immigrants. Methods: We conducted a retrospective study of all visits in our emergency department between 2014-2016. All immigrants completed the questionnaires, including demographics, headaches characteristics, depression and suicidal ideation (Patient Health Questionnaire9). Diagnoses of headaches were made according to International Classification of Headache Disorders-III beta criteria. Multivariable logistic regression analyses were performed to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI). Results: Immigrants represent 22.6% (n=205) of the total number of visits because of headaches (n=5988). Migraineurs reported a higher frequency of suicidal ideation (16.1% [OR]=2.9, 95%[CI] 2.3-3.6; p<0.001), compared of non migraineurs. After controlling for depression score and sociodemographic characteristics, immigrants with migraine had 68% increased odds of suicidal ideation (OR = 1.68; 95% CI: 1.36-2.17) compared with nonmigraineurs.Women with migraine and depression were 2fold more likely to report suicidal ideation [OR =2.46, 46) ] Conclusion: Migraine is associated with increased likelihood of suicidal ideation in immigrants after adjusting fordepression. These findings may further support the need to enforce health authorities for outpatient management for this vulnerable population. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1086 Stroke-like migraine attacks after radiation therapy (SMART) syndrome with cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis Background and aims: SMART syndrome is a rare syndrome characterized by a remote history of cranial irradiation, severe headache and seizures with prolonged and reversible neurological signs and symptoms referable to a unilateral cortical region. The diagnosis relies on brain MRI and exclusion of alternative diagnoses. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis is usually inconclusive. Methods: Case report Results: Eighteen-year-old male was diagnosed with glioblastoma of the right frontal lobe in 2008 (age of 10). After the surgery he was treated with chemo-and radiotherapy (59.4Gy) and recovered completely. In April 2016 he experienced a migraine like headache with numbness and weakness of the left upper limb which spontaneously subsided after 10 minutes. A week later he suffered a severe throbbing headache and paresis of the left upper limb after a night of partying and drinking alcohol. Over 14 days left-sided hemiplegia with left hemispatial neglect and hemianopsia evolved. He suffered several generalized seizures. MRI revealed cortical enhancement over the right hemisphere with spared white matter ( Figure  1 ). CSF analysis revealed pleocytosis (white blood cells count of 12x10^6 with 6x10^6 neutrophils, 4x10^6 lymphocytes and 2x10^6 monocytes). Extensive tests performed to exclude infectious causes were negative. After treatment with verapamil, nimodipine and dexamethasone neurological deficits and headache subsided completely over 8 weeks. Follow up MRI after 7 months showed complete regression. CSF pleocytosis also subsided. Background and aims: Hemiplegic shoulder pain (HSP) affects up to 84% of stroke patients and potentially impacts daily functions for stroke patients. However, no scale has yet been developed specifically for HSP. Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) short form is common to evaluate the worst pain intensity (BPI3) and pain interference in daily life (BPI9). The purpose of this study is to investigate psychometric properties of the BPI for assessing HSP. Methods: Eighty stroke patients were recruited to rate shoulder pain twice, at one-week interval, with BPI and Numerical Rating Scale (NRS). The NRS was used as comparator with BPI to examine concurrent validity using Spearman's rho correlation coefficient (ρ). Test-retest reliability of BPI was analyzed with the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) for determining the degree of consistency and agreement between test-retest. The standard error of measurement (SEM), minimal detectable change (MDC), Bland-Altman limits of agreement (LOA) were the absolute reliability indexes used to quantify measurement errors and determine systematic biases of repeated measurements. Results: Concurrent validity of the BPI was moderate (ρ=0.62-0.72). The ICCs of the BPI3 and BPI9 were 0.88 and 0.86 The SEMs of BPI3 and BPI9 were 0.99 and 0.57. The MDC95 of the BPI3 and BPI9 were 2.74 and 1.58. The Bland-Altman analyses revealed no significant systematic bias between repeated measurements and narrow range of the LOA for the BPI indicated a high level of stability. Conclusion: The BPI demonstrated good concurrent validity and reliability for measuring shoulder pain in stroke patients. Disclosure: This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology (104-2314-B-182-035-MY3) and Chang Gung Memorial Hospital (CMRPD3E0331) in Taiwan. Myofascial pain and musculoskeletal dysfunction F. Devlikamova Background and aims: Myofascial trigger zone [TrZ] are a common cause of musculoskeletal pain. The aim of this study was to evaluate the mechanisms of myofascial TrZ formation and to reveal possible changes in muscle ultrastructure related to myofascial pain syndrome. Methods: Thirty-six patients with myofascial pain syndrome, mean age 38.4 years (SD 9.7), and 12 agematched controls were included in this study. The trapezius and brachioradialis muscles were examined by means of single fiber and concentric needle electrodes and electron microscope. Results: Electrophysiologic studies have revealed significant changes in the shape of the main spike motor unit and endplate potentials: decrease in the duration and amplitude of motor unit potentials, increase in the duration and rise time endplate potentials in myofascial TrZ. The fiber density was increased and mean jitter higher in the TrZ than in control group. The destruction of contractile apparatus involves myofibrils loss and broadened interfibrillar distance. In some parts of muscle we observed total destruction of several sarcomeres. Structure of Z-lines was changed significantly. Autofagosomes in the peripheral part of the cell in sarcoplasma near cellular nucleus were found. Conclusion: The neuromuscular dysfunction in the immediate vicinity of a motor endplate is the anatomical substrate of TrZ, which produced typical characteristic electrical activity. Divergence of myofilaments and Z-line can be associated with citosceletal protein destruction. The presence of autophagosomes associates either with breach of neurotrophic control or with muscle atrophy after exhausting physical activity. All this can be the basis of effective therapy in patients with myofascial pain syndrome. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Cytomegalovirus (CMV) encephalitis is an important opportunistic infection that occurs in HIV patients, especially in patients with CD4 <50/ mm3, but is rarely recognized in other groups. We present a case of CMV encephalitis in a patient in treatment with fingolimod for multiple sclerosis (MS). Methods: 22-year-old woman diagnosed of MS since 19-years-old. In treatment with fingolimod with a lymphocite count always >200mm 3 . She has a medical history of Hodgkin lymphoma (in complete remission since 17-year-old) and migraine with aura. The patient presented in the emergency department (ED) with a severe migraine crisis with prolongued aura. Later began with altered level of consciousness, agressive behaviour and altered speech. At examination was afebrile. Brain CT, basic blood test and lumbar puncture were performed, Results: Blood lymphocite count was 60mm 3 (previous week 380mm 3 ). We began treatment with aciclovir, suspended fingolimod and solicitated DNA detection for herpesviridae despite brain CT and CSF composition were unremarkable and no fever. The patient recovered normal status progressively. CMV DNA was detected in CSF and treatment was switched to galanciclovir i.v and then to valaciclovir p.o. Brain MRI didn't show any new alterations. This would be the first case described of CMV encephalitis in patients with multiple sclerosis treated with fingolimod, since we did not find any publication after a bibliographic search. In cases of encephalopathy in an immunocompromised patient (regardless of the cause), CMV encephalitis should be suspected even in the absence of fever, cerebrospinal fluid composition and neuroimaging without alterations. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Despite the availability of an effective vaccine, measles remains a leading cause of death among children in developing countries. While unvaccinated children are at highest risk of infection and its complications, they can occur even in vaccinated patients. Neurological complications may occur early (acute postinfectious encephalitis) or after years of viral persistence (subacute sclerosing panencephalitis). Methods: Case report. Results: A 19-year-old female patient was diagnosed with a right eye retinitis and started treatment with oral methylprednisolone during 20 days. She had no relevant previous medical history and previously received measles vaccination. Five days after the suspension of corticotherapy, she rapidly developed progressive behavioural changes, global aphasia, right hemiparesis and right homonymous hemianopsia. CSF study revealed mild mononuclear pleocytosis. Brain MRI showed bilateral temporal pole and left temporo-parieto-occipital T2 hyperintensities. EEG revealed a pattern of left hemispheric slowing without periodic complexes or paroxistic activity. Metabolic, immunological, bacteriological and viral studies, as well as the search for paraneoplastic syndromes were negative. She continued having a clinical, imagiological and electroencephalographic worsening without response to antivirals or immunotherapies that included high dosage corticotherapy, plasmapheresis and cyclophosphamide. Brain biopsy revealed intranuclear inclusions in oligodendrocytes compatible with paramyxovirus nucleocapsids. The patient became fully dependent and died a year later due to an infectious complication. Conclusion: This case illustrates a severe atypical presentation of measles encephalitis occurring in a previously healthy vaccinated patient. While the absence of rash history raises some doubts regarding the moment of primary infection, we propose that the retinitis may have corresponded to the primary infection. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Spain, 2 Geriatry, University Hospital of Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Spain Background and aims: Neurological Whipple's disease without previous systemic involvement is not frecuent but can have different clinical presentations. In this way we present an atypical case with frontotemporal dementia syndrome and pseudotumoral neuroimaging. Methods: A 71-year-old male with a 3-month history characterized by mnesic failures and deliriform thought that weeks later had dysphasic language with semantic paraphasias, dysnomia, inability to understand complex orders, confusion between right-left, loss of executive skills and apathy. In craneal MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) presented an extensive lesion in the left temporal region that resembles a high grade glioma. Given this finding and the nonspecific nature of the lesion, a cerebral biopsy was performed reporting the presence of intracytoplasmic inclusions and bacilliform structures free in the neuropilo, compatible with the diagnosis of encephalitis by Troppheryma Whipple, confirmed with positive PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction) in brain tissue. Lesion in the left medial temporal region Results: This clinical case refers a patient with a frontotemporal dementia as a unique clinical manifestation of Whipple's disease, with no prior intestinal involvement, ruled out by duodenal biopsy, which needed three years of antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone and trimetroprin/ sulfametoxazole. He currently presents radiological and clinical stability after five years of follow-up. Conclusion: Our case is exceptional because it shows a patient with Whipple's disease that begins with cognitive affectation with a pseudotumoral neuroimagen without a history of intestinal or systemic infection. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Lyme neuroborreliosis (LNB) is a tick-borne neuroinfection caused by spirochete Borrelia. Our aim of the study was to analyse seasonal variation, symptoms and diagnostics of LNB. Methods: The medical records of 91 patients with confirmed LNB, who were hospitalized at the Department of Neurology, Vilnius University Santariškių Clinics, Lithuania, in the period from 4 September 2005 to 4 September 2015 were analysed. The diagnosis of definite/ possible LNB was made according to EFNS guidelines on the diagnosis and management of European Lyme neuroborreliosis. Results: The mean age was 49±17 years, the male/female ratio was 48/43. One third of the patients had a history of a tick bite, only 10% erythema migrans. The mean annual rate of LNB varied significantly (highest rates in 2009, 2010, 2012, 2014) . Most of the LNB cases occurred in summer and autumn, but 15% of all cases occurred in winter-spring season. Bannwarth's syndrome was the most common (47%) clinical presentation, meningoencephalitis (24%) and meningitis (21%) were frequent also. Mean cytosis -174 cells per mm3 (median:104), mean protein concentration 1,22g/l (median: 0,96). 91% of the patients had positive anti-B.burgdorferi (anti-BB) antibodies test from blood serum or cerebrospinal fluid. 12% had positive anti-Tickborne-encephalitis-virus antibodies. Conclusion: LNB is highly seasonal disease though some of the cases occur in winter and spring. The most common clinical presentation is Bannwarth's syndrome and meningoencephalitis. The co-infection with Tick-borneencephalitis virus must be considered. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Neurology, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2 Pennine Acute Hospitals NHS Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3 Infectious Diseases, Pennine Acute Hospitals NHS Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4 Neurology, Salford Royal Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom Background and aims: Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV) encephalitis is a severe, potentially fatal infection of the brain parenchyma affecting between 1 in 250,000 and 1 in 500,000 each year. Prognosis has been historically poor, but the early institution of therapy can improve outcomes. We audit the management of patients across two hospital trusts; encompassing a Neurosciences centre, Infectious Diseases centre and two District Generals. Methods: Patients with PCR positive CSF results for HSV-1 and HSV-2 were identified and cross-referenced with those clinically coded as meningoencephaltis within a 1-2 year period. Records were audited according to the 2012 guidance. Results: A total of 16 patients were included, (n=10 male, n=6 female) with average age at presentation 63 years. Patients presented with decreased GCS (n=10), headache (n=6), seizure (n=5), collapse (n=3) and focal neurology (n=2). Clinical suspicion of encephalitis was documented on average 32 hours after initial presentation. CT brain was completed in 81% of patients, on average 26.5 hours following initial presentation and 69% of patients underwent MRI brain. Lumbar puncture was performed in 93.8% of patients, on average 16.5 hours following documented suspicion. HSV was identified by PCR in 75% of cases. Acyclovir therapy was commenced in 94% of patients, on average 32 hours after initial presentation. Acyclovir was stopped following negative CSF PCR in 69%, due to clinical improvement in 23% and following self-discharge in 7% of patients. Conclusion: This study continues to identify delays in diagnosis, investigation and the initiation of therapy but also highlights a disparity regarding the decision to stop acyclovir therapy. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1100 Neurobrucellosis: A case of reversible rapidly progressive dementia A. Militão, C. Semedo, R. Matos Neurology, Centro Hospitalar Setúbal, Setúbal, Portugal Background and aims: Portugal is considered a high risk country for brucellosis. About 5% of the cases develop neurobrucellosis with heterogeneous manifestations, usually accompanied by CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis. Methods: Case Report Results: A 81-year-old female was admitted to the neurology ward for rapidly progressive cognitive impairment and frequent falls, causing complete dependency for activities of daily living in 4 months. The patient was afebrile, alert, disoriented with incoherent speech, presented with bilateral extrapyramidal signs and was unable to walk. Head CT and MRI revealed bilateral hippocampal atrophy and moderate leukoaraiosis. CSF analysis showed lymphocytic pleocytosis (25 cells/uL), hyperproteinorraquia and hypoglucorraquia. Despite the absence of relevant epidemiological history, both serum tube agglutination test and CSF polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were positive for Brucella. The patient was started on trimethoprim/ sulfamethoxazole, doxycycline and rifampicin and discharged after 2 months, partly improved. Three weeks later, she was readmitted due to persistent CSF pleocytosis and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole was changed to ceftriaxone. After 3 months, the patient was discharged on trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, doxycycline and rifampicin. After completing 9 months of antibiotic therapy, CSF normalized, extrapyramidal signs disappeared, her gait was normal and she had autonomy for most activities of daily living. Conclusion: In this case, some clinical and imagiological elements could suggest a neurodegenerative etiology. However, its rapidly progressive course requires exclusion of potentially reversible causes of dementia. Neurobrucellosis is a treatable cause of recent cognitive impairment, requiring prolonged antibiotic therapy, and should be considered in the presence of CSF lymphocytic pleocytosis even without fever or suggestive epidemiological context. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: An increase of the incidence of stroke in HIV patients has been reported in recent years. We assessed trends in proportion of HIV infection among patients with stroke in Spain. Methods: Data were obtained from the national minimum basic dataset. All patients hospitalized between 1997 and 2012 with a diagnosis of stroke at discharge were included. Annual proportion of HIV infection and time trends were calculated, stratifying by type of stroke and HIV stage. Independent predictors of HIV infection were evaluated with multivariate logistic regression. Mortality, stay and cost per patient were also analyzed. Results: From a total of 857.371 patients with stroke hospitalization, 2.226 had HIV infection. A 2.3% per year increase of the proportion of seropositive patients was observed, exclusively due to an increase of the ischemic strokes (per year-adjusted OR 1.033, CI 95% 1.018-1.046, p<0.0001) and the asymptomatic stage of HIV infection (per year-adjusted OR 1.076, CI 95% 1.056-1.096, p<0.0001). Factors independently associated with HIV infection were smoking, stimulating drugs consumption and HCV co-infection. HIV infection was associated with a higher mortality (OR 1.81, p<0 .0001), more days hospitalized (median: 11 vs 9 days, p<0.0001) and a higher cost (median: 6.010€ vs 3.781€, p<0.0001). Conclusion: Over the last years, there is an increase in the proportion of HIV-infected patients, mainly asymptomatic, among stroke hospitalizations independently of other vascular risk factors. This finding suggests that HIV infection per se is a specific cerebrovascular risk factor. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose A. Moulignier 1 , J. Savatovsky 2 , O. Godin 3 , L. Assoumou 3 , F.-X. Lescure 4 , N. Valin 5 , R. Tubiana 6 , A. Canestri 7 , P. Roux 2 , C. Lamirel 8 , D. Costagliola 3 1 Neurology, Fondation Ophtalmologique A. de Rothschild, Paris, France, 2 Radiology, Fondation Ophtalmologique A. de Rothschild, Paris, France, 3 Institut Pierre Louis d'Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique, Paris, France, 4 Infectious Diseases, Paris, France, 5 Infectious Diseases, Hôpital Saint Antoine, Paris, France, 6 Infectious Diseases, Paris, France, 7 Infectious Diseases, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France, 8 Fondation Ophtalmologique A. de Rothschild, Paris, France Background and aims: Cerebral small vessel disease (CSVD) is defined by white matter hyperintensities (WMHs), silent brain infarction (SBI) or microbleeds (MBs). cART well-controlled persons living with HIV (PLWHIV) are living longer and add conventional and nonconventional vascular risk factors (VRF), all that might act simultaneously to increase the prevalence of CSVD in PLWHIV. Methods: The ANRS EP51 MICROBREAK (NCT02082574) cross-sectional study, aimed to assess the prevalence of CSVD in treated PLWHIV≥50 years, with controlled viral load for at least 12 months; and to compare this prevalence to that observed in HIV negative controls (HNC) . A logistic regression model was used to assess the impact of HIV on CSVD adjusted on traditional risk factors. Results: 456 PLWHIV and 154 HNC were recruited; median age: 56 and 58 years (p=0.001). All VRF were more frequent in PLWHIV than in HNC (p<0.004), except diabetes. Median CD4 count was 655/mm3. CSVD was detected in 51.5% of PLWHIV and 36.4% of HNC, with an adjusted OR of 2.3 (95% confidence interval: 1.5-3.6). Older age and hypertension were associated with the risk of CSVD. The impact of HIV was different according to age, with ORa of 5.3, 3.7 and 1.0 for age of <54, 54-60 and >60 years, respectively (p=0.022). The proportion of participants with severe CSVD was 19% in PLWHIV and 14% in HNC, with an ORa of 1.6. Conclusion: Prevalence of CSVD is twice higher in middle-aged PLWHIV. HIV is an independent risk factor of CSVD. Besides age and hypertension, HIV is an independent risk factor of CSVD. Disclosure: grant from ANRS Results: Among 661 patients, 10 patients were diagnosed with RV-related meningoencephalitis. Three patients showed positive CSF PCR results, including two with influenza A and one with human parainfluenza 3 virus. The other seven patients showed positive PCR results in the sputum. Six patients had preceding upper respiratory tract infection symptoms before manifestations of CNS infection. Leptomeningeal enhancement was the most frequent finding (70%) observed in MRI. Among the four RV-related encephalitis patients, three were treated with antiviral therapy. All patients completely recovered except one patient who deteriorated despite antiviral treatment Brain MRI of an RV-related encephalitis patient with poor outcome (patient #3) Conclusion: This is the first etiological study of adult RV-related meningoencephalitis in a large CNS infection registry. Clinicians should keep in mind that, although rare, RV can cause acute meningoencephalitis in adult patients. We suggest routinely screening for RV by multiplex PCR testing using CSF or sputum in adult encephalitis patients, even in those without URI symptoms. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1104 Acute haemorrhagic leukoencephalitis after seasonal influenza vaccination E. Sinzobahamvya 1 , S. Borrelli 1 , M.-P. Rutgers 1 , D. Clause 2 , M. Gille 3 Background and aims: To report a case of acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis (AHL) following influenza vaccination. Methods: Case report A previously healthy 70-year-old man presented with acute headache, fever, confusion, and left hemiparesis four days after influenza vaccination (Alpharix ® ). Results: Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed foci of microhemorrhage and extensive demyelinating lesions in the white matter, extending to the corpus callosum and the posterior part of the brainstem. Cerebral spinal fluid examination revealed a mixed leukocytosis with a high protein content. He was first given intravenous ceftriaxone, ampicilline, and acyclovir. Bacterial culture were negative as well as infectious and autoimmune serologies. Despite high dosis of corticosteroids and plasma exchanges, he developed a deep coma with spastic quadriparesis, decerebration signs, Cheyne-Stokes respiration, bilateral myosis, and absent oculo-cephalic reflexes. He died one month later. Background and aims: The objectives of this study were 1) to identify the medicines approved for the treatment of restless legs syndrome (RLS) by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA); 2) to find out about the use of clinical outcome assessments (COAs) in the approval process; and 3) to identify the COAs endpoint positioning. Methods: The EMA and FDA websites were explored to identify all medicines approved for RLS. The PROLabels database was used for labeling claim identification. All corresponding labels were reviewed for endpoint positioning. Results: The agencies approved nine products with RLS indication (representing four INN, i.e., gabapentin, pramipexole, rotigotine, ropinirole) ; four products were approved by the FDA; five by the EMA, including one pramipexole generic. All products were evaluated using the same patient-reported outcome (PRO) measure, i.e., the International Restless Legs Syndrome Study Group Rating Scale (IRLS), which assesses disease severity. All had a similar claim, i.e., improvement in baseline IRLS score. The mean change from baseline in IRLS was a co-primary efficacy endpoint. The other COA used to develop a co-primary efficacy endpoint was a clinician-reported outcome (ClinRO) measure, either a Clinical Global Impression scale of Improvement (CGI-I) or a Clinical Global Impression scale of Illness Severity. Conclusion: The patient's perspective is of paramount importance in the evaluation of medicines approved for RLS. The clinician input is also considered as a valuable endpoint since all evaluations were based on the use of co-primary PRO/ClinRO. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Autonomic disorders are the most frequent and severe symptoms of Parkinson's disease and atypical parkinsonism and a part of differential diagnostics. Methods: Thirty-two patients were enrolled in the study (10 patients with Parkinson's disease (PD), 8 patients with Lewy body dementia (LBD); 8 patients with multiple system atrophy (MSA); 6 patients with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) -by clinical criteria). The control group -10 healthy people without parkinsonism. The Valsalva maneuver was used to evaluate the cardio-vascular autonomic function via blood pressure changes and monitored by photometric method in beat-to-beat mode using NOVA Finapress, Netherlands. Results: In the control group the systolic blood pressure (SBP) fall was 13.6 + -2.1mmHg (p> 0.05); mean in 28 seconds. In PD patients 60.9 + -7.4mmHg (p <0.05), in 45 seconds. In PSP patients 56.0 + -5.2mmHg (p <0.05), in 25 seconds. In LBD patients 59.8 + -8.1mmHg (p <0.05), in 55 seconds. In MSA patients 99.2 + -10.2mmHg (p <0.05), in 30 seconds. Clinical manifestations of cardio-vascular autonomic dysfunction were identified in MSA and LBD patients. The data showed a pathological type of autonomic response to Valsalva maneuver in patients with parkinsonian syndrome by comparison to control group. The pathological responce characterized by the grade of the SBP fall and / or by the length of a cycle, with specific combinations of features for each type of parkinsonism.The clinical manifestations of cardiovascular instability were mainly associated with a length of blood pressure recovery. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1111 Genotype may influence the onset of axial signs in early-stage Parkinson's disease Background and aims: Heterogeneity exists regarding the onset of axial signs in Parkinson's disease (PD). Dysarthria, swallowing disturbance and respiratory muscles dysfunction can be observed in early-onset PD patients. Due to their impact on the outcome and quality of life, evidencing risk factors of these symptoms is essential to optimize the follow-up of our patients. The aim of our study was to assess the association between the genotype and the axial signs. Methods: MAPT haplotypes and COMT polymorphism were tested in 31 PD patients (mean age= 61.4 years±6.5) of the Prodigy-Park 1 cohort with a mean disease duration of 1.1 years (±1.1). Neurological, swallowing and voice and pulmonary function testing evaluations were performed. Results: A valine homozygous polymorphism (n=11) was associated with a significantly higher sniff nasal inspiratory pressure (SNIP) in comparison with methionine homozygous (n=7) and heterozygous polymorphism (n=13) (78%±14.2 vs. 60.9%±19.8 -p=0.02). Regarding MAPT gene, patients with a H1/H1 haplotype (n=21) had a significantly higher severity of their dysarthria assessed by a French adaptation of the Frenchay Dysarthria Assessment (4±2.7 vs. 1.4±2.2 -p=0.02). Conclusion: In early-stage PD, the onset of dysarthria or inspiratory muscle weakness might be associated with the genotype. Dopamine might impact on the ventilatory function and MAPT H1 haplotype could lead to a pseudobulbar palsy. These preliminary results need to be confirmed in a larger cohort to assess the influence of MAPT haplotypes or COMT polymorphism in the other features of the axial signs (such as the swallowing disturbance Curitiba, Brazil, 2 Neurology Service, Hospital das Nações, Curitiba, Brazil, 3 Nuclear Imaging, CETAC, Curitiba, Brazil Background and aims: Secondary parkinsonism due to infectious disorders might present with either generalized or more lateralized symptoms with a acute/subacute evolution. However, documented basal ganglia dopamine depletion in the setting of infectious menincoencephalitis is quite rare. We aim to report the case of an immunocompetent male who had hemiparkinsonism responsive to L-Dopa therapy following cryptococcal meningoencephalitis. Methods: Case report. Results: A 43-year-old Caucasian immunocompetent male was admitted to the hospital with a proved diagnosis of meningoencephalitis, with fever, severe headache, mental confusion and somnolence. CSF analysis disclosed Cryptococcus neoformans. Brain MRI showed images on right basal ganglia compatible with Cryptococcal abscesses, which later evolved to encephalomalacia on the right striatum on a follow-up exam after adequate treatment with amphotericin B and ventricular shunt (Figure 1 -a) . At the time of hospital discharge from the hospital he had developed with left hemiparkinsonism and mild cognitive decline. A brain SPECT with TRODAT-1 (Figure 1 -b) demonstrated moderate reduction of dopamine transporter binding on the right striatum. The patient was treated with levodopa-benserazide 100/25mg thrice daily, with remarkable improvement of the parkinsonian syndrome. Brain T-1 weighted MRI showing right basal ganglia encephalomalacia secondary to the Cryptococcal abscesses (A). Brain SPECT with TRODAT-1 shows moderate reduction of DTA binding on the right striatum and normal binding on the opposite side (B). Hemiparkinsonism secondary to Cryptococcal meningoencephalitis leading to striatum encephalomalacia is a rare etiology of secondary parkinsonism, even more so with documented dopamine depletion. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1115 Acute restless legs syndrome after liposuction surgery, with hypoxic-Ischemic encephalopathy, associated with Pramipexole-induced kleptomania F.M. Branco Germiniani 1 , G. Fabiani 2 , H.A.G. Teive 1 1 Internal Medicine Department, Neurology Service, Curitiba, Brazil, 2 Neurology Service, Hospital das Nações, Curitiba, Brazil Background and aims: Recently functional neuroimaging studies have suggested that RLS can result from dysfunction of the dopaminergic system in the striatum. Our goal is to report a case of acute RLS following liposuction with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, associated with kleptomania induced by the therapeutical use of pramipexole. Methods: Case report. Results: A 40-year-old woman who had previously undergone bariatric surgery underwent liposuction for aesthetical purposes. In the post-operative period of liposuction she presented with somnolence, mental confusion, temporal-spatial disorientation and working memory deficits, later followed by severe and unpleasant discomfort in her lower limbs, which was characterized by pain and severe spasms at rest, particularly at night, with improvement of these symptoms while walking. Brain MRI demonstrated scattered and diffuse nearly symmetrical lesions in the BG and cerebellum suggestive of hypoxicischemic insults. A subsequential MRI suggested that most lesions vanished leaving cystic cavitations on the lenticular nucleus and caudate and brain -tractography analysis showed a reduction in fractional anisotropy. Thus, she was diagnosed with acute RLS, following acute hypoxicischemic encephalopathy after liposuction, and started on pramipexole 0.5mg qid at bedtime. RLS symptoms subsided with normalization of her sleep pattern. However, after 3 months of pramipexole treatment she developed symptoms of kleptomania. Pramipexole was tritated to a lower dose (0.125mg) with resolution of kleptomaniac symptoms. Conclusion: The behavioral changes observed in our patient, including kleptomania, most likely arose from failure of inhibitory pathways involving basal ganglia, prefrontal cortex and limbic structures, and was triggered by the pramipexole treatment, suggesting a impulse control disorder. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1116 Tetrabenazine versus deutetrabenazine for Huntington's disease: Twins or distant cousins? F. Brogueira Rodrigues 1 , G. Duarte 2 , J. Costa 2 , J. Ferreira 2 , E.J. Wild 1 Background and aims: Tetrabenazine is the only FDAapproved drug for Huntington's disease (HD), and deutetrabenazine was recently tested against placebo. A switching-trial from tetrabenazine to deutetrabenazine is underway, but no head-to-head blinded, randomized controlled trial (RCT) is planned. Using meta-research methodology, we compared these molecules. Methods: RCTs comparing tetrabenazine or deutetrabenazine with placebo in HD were searched. We assessed the Cochrane risk of bias tool, calculated indirect treatment comparisons, and applied the GRADE approach. Results: Our evidence network comprised one tetrabenazine and one deutetrabenazine trial, both against placebo. Risk of bias was moderate in both. Tetrabenazine and deutetrabenazine did not differ significantly on motor scores or adverse events. Depression and somnolence scales favoured deutetrabenazine significantly. Conclusion: There is low-quality evidence that tetrabenazine and deutetrabenazine do not differ in efficacy and safety. Importantly these results are likely to remain the only head-to-head comparison between these compounds in HD. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  An observational study of the motor and non-motor effects of deep brain stimulation, intrajejunal levodopa infusion, and oral levodopa in advanced Parkinson's disease B. Bulut, E.N. Tuncer, D. Ince Gunal Neurology, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey Background and aims: Subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation (STN-DBS), continuous infusion of levodopa/ carbidopa gel and oral levodopa are effective treatment for both motor and nonmotor symptoms (NMS) of Parkinson's disease (PD). However, the available studies have focused mainly on the effects of STN-DBS and infusion therapies , there are few specific comparative studies. Methods: In this randomized study, we compared the effect of oral levodopa treated versus intrajejunal levodopa versus subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation (STN-DBS) on the different characteristics of NMS in patients with advanced PD. Results: One hundred and fourteen Parkinson's patients satisfying the UK PD Brain Bank criteria for diagnosis of idiopathic PD participated and assessed using NMS questionnaire (NMSQuest), UPDRS, Hoehn and Yahr classification, Hospital Anxiety Depression Rating Scale (HADs). The results of NMSQ for all three groups were found equal. Porto, Portugal, 2 Newborn screening, Metabolism and Genetics Unit, Human Genetics Department, Dr. Ricardo Jorge National Health Institute, Porto, Portugal, 3 Neurology Department and Neuropathology Unit, Porto, Portugal, 4 Neuroradiology, Centro Hospitalar do Porto -Hospital de Santo António, Porto, Portugal Background and aims: Polymerase gama (POLG) mutations have been described in association with wide a spectrum of phenotypes. Parkinsonism is unfrequently described and usually a late feature in patients with progressive external ophtalmoplegia. Methods: Case report. Results: We describe a 76-year-old gentleman with REMsleep behavior disorder (RBD) since the age of 61, who developed shuffling gait and stooped posture by 63-yearold, and a year later left-hand resting tremor. Personal/ family history were unremarkable. When observed, age 64, he presented hypomimia, left-predominant parkinsonism, camptocormia, short-step shuffling gait and postural instability. He had frontal bossing conferring him a peculiar face, and oversized hands. Levodopa/carbidopa was started with moderate improvement. Brain MRI revealed widespread partially confluent cerebral white matter lesions. An extensive blood/CSF workup was conducted with normal/negative results. Muscle biopsy showed rare ragged-red and COX-negative fibers. EMG excluded myopathy/polyneuropathy. Mitochondrial chain complex activity was normal; however multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions were identified. POLG gene study revealed deletion c.127_132delCAGCAG and point mutation p.G268A(c.803G>C), in compound heterozygosity, already described as pathogenic. Cognitive decline began by 65, and a year later motor fluctuations appeared. Over 12 years there was moderate progression. He now presents cognitive impairment, fragmented pursuit ocular movements (without ophtalmoplegia) and levodopa responsive parkinsonism(video). Conclusion: The reported patient presents a rare phenotype of POLG mutations: late-onset levodopa-responsive asymmetric parkinsonism, with RBD and motor fluctuations, in the absence of progressive ophtalmoplegia and neuropathy. It was the presence of early gait impairment and postural instability associated with subtle facial dysmorphism, which prompted additional investigation leading to the final diagnosis. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Background and aims: Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome(FXTAS) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by a premutation in the fragile X mental retardation 1(FMR1) gene, including as the major clinical criteria tremor and cerebellar ataxia. Retrospective reports show that over 50% of patients have cognitive changes. In fact, those with T2 white matter hyperintensities in the middle cerebellar peduncles (MCP sign)-cardinal radiological sign-are likely to have more severe cognitive deficits. Methods: We present a 59-year-old man with memory and executive impairment, without previous intellectual disability nor family history, and normal physical examination. In the following 2 years he suffered progressive cognitive deterioration with functional disturbance. In addition, partial seizures, tremor and cerebellar ataxia arose. Results: Based on the clinical evolution, cranial MRI was reviewed, evidencing the MCP sign, and genetic molecular test for FMR1 gene was performed, confirming the expansion in premutation range. Considering all results, the definitive diagnosis of FXTAS was established. Conclusion: FXTAS prevalence is estimated about 1 in 3,000 men. Nevertheless, FXTAS is under-recognized and frequently misdiagnosed. Our case is atypical as cognitive impairment without additional features is a rare cause of initial consultation and dementia remained as the predominant feature in early stages. We suggest that this genetic test should be at least considered in cases of unexplained cognitive decline, especially if characteristic white matter lesions on MRI are seen. This case additionally supports that the original diagnostic criteria need to be updated, in order to improve the identification of affected persons due to the expanding phenotypes that are nowadays known. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background: Severe DatScan deficiency is usually correlated with severe motor deficit. Furthermore Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by a variety of NMS of which some might be associated with cardiac sympathetic denervation. Aims: To explore cardiac sympathetic function and clinical non-motor symptoms (NMS) expression in patients with severe DatScan depletion. The relation between the two is unclear. Methods: Patients who underwent a cardiac MIBG scan, DatScan imaging and completed clinical assessment including the NMSScale were retrospectively reviewed in this going on study. DatScan and cardiac MIBG uptake were classified as normal (>2), or mild (1.5>, <2), moderate (>1,<1.5) and severe (<1) reduction. The NMSburden (NMSB) was assigned according to the NMSScale in mild, moderate, severe and very severe (Chaudhuri et al., 2006) . Results: All nine patients presenting with Parkinsonism had severe dopaminergic depletion in the putamen with an uptake ratio<1.0 (mean putamen uptake right 0.6±0.2 and left 0.8±0.3). Three patients showed a moderately reduced uptake on cardiac MIBG (R1 ratio <1.5), five patients showed a mild reduction (R1 ratio <2) and one patient showed normal cardiac uptake (R1 ratio>2). One patient reported mild NMSB, one reported moderate NMSB, three reported severe NMSB and four reported very severe NMSB. Conclusion: In spite of the severe putaminal dopaminergic depletion, the patients expressed a very heterogenous presentation of cardiac MIBG scan and NMSB even in this small sample. This highlights the fact that possibly also PD is rather a complex syndromic condition than a disease. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1121 Long-term effects of safinamide treatment on pain in fluctuating Parkinson's disease patients Background and aims: Safinamide (Xadago ® , Zambon SpA Italy), is a new drug with a dual mechanism of action (dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic). Results of the pivotal trials showed an increase in "ON" time and a decrease in "OFF" time maintained up to two years. This post-hoc analysis investigates the long-term efficacy of safinamide vs placebo on pain in parkinsonian patients with motor fluctuations. Methods: The effects of safinamide on the reduction of concomitant pain treatments and on the items related to pain of the Parkinson's disease Quality of life questionnaire PDQ-39 were investigated using the data from the pivotal Phase III trial 018. Results: The percentage of patients with no pain treatments at the end of two years were significantly lower in the safinamide group compared to the placebo group (61.1 vs 50.9%; p=0.0478), with an average reduction of the individual use of pain treatments by 26.2%. Moreover, safinamide significantly improved the PDQ-39 pain-related items. Conclusion: Safinamide, administered as add-on therapy in fluctuating parkinsonian patient, significantly reduced the number of concomitant pain treatments, maintaining the efficacy up to two years. These results suggest that safinamide may have a positive effect on pain, one of the most underestimated non-motor symptoms of parkinsonism. Background and aims: Corticobasal degeneration (CBD), multiple system atrophy (MSA) and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) consist the Parkinson-plus syndromes. Despite distinct clinical features, differential diagnosis is problematic, particularly in atypical cases or in the early stages of these disorders. The objective of this study was to examine the usefulness of bedside autonomic testing in the differential diagnosis of Parkinson-plus patients. Methods: A total of 51 Parkinson-plus patients were included (17 CBD, 15 MSA and 19 PSP) . Autonomic testing included the heart rate response to breathing (R-R test) and the presence of orthostatic hypotension (reduction of systolic (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) within 1 and 3 minutes of standing from the supine position). Analysis of variance, Kruskal-Wallis and ROC curve analysis tests were used as appropriate. Results: MSA patients differed significantly from the other two groups in the SBP and DBP drop from 0 to 3min and from 0 to 1min when standing from the supine position. There was no difference in the heart rate variability during standing or in the R-R test. SBP difference from 0 to 3min was most potent in discriminating MSA patients (AUC=0.89, p<0.0001, sensitivity 80%, specificity 85.2% for a cut-off point of >20cm H2O BP drop). 1 Neurology, Ibn Sina Hospital, Kuwait; Egypt, Kuwait, Kuwait, 2 Neurology, hopital Laennec, Nantes, France Background and aims: Although Ramadan fasting is not mandatory for patients suffering from chronic disease, many patients are tied to respect it.To our knowledge, no previous studies have analyzed how PD patients manage Ramadan fasting. Methods: Twenty four PD patients (60.4 years, 9 females) seen in the outpatients department of Ibn Sina Hospital (Kuwait ciy) having planned to fast during the 2016 Ramadan were included. They underwent a clinical interview and a neurological examination, including the (MDS-UPDRS), the Hoehn and Yahr staging scale, the (NMSS), the (PDQ-39) and the clinical impression of severity index for Parkinson disease (CISI-PD). Assessments were performed 2 to 4 weeks before Ramadan and 2 to 4 weeks after, 20 patients fulfill the whole fasting period. Results: Mean disease duration was 5.8y with a Hoehn and Yahr score at 1.8. Fourteen patients were treated with a combination of L-DOPA and DA, one patient with DA monotherapy and five patients were treated with L-DOPA monotherapy with a (LEDD) of 820mg (150-1584); 3 patients were treated with subthalamic DBS.6 patients were able to have no drug intakes between dusk and dawn; others patients needed to take 1 or 2 intake of L-DOPA inbetween. Eight patients maintained the same LEDD, 10 decreased it, and 2 increased it .No serious side effects were reported, there were no significant changes after the fasting period in PDQ 39, NMS, CISI. Conclusion: With some adjustments in the treatment, patients with mild to moderate PD appear to manage Ramadan fasting well without serious damage to their health. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: In patients with advanced Parkinson's disease (PD), the continuous delivery of levodopa/carbidopa gel (Duodopa) through a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy with jejunal extension (PEG-J) allows less variability in levodopa concentrations and results in fewer motor complications compared with oral administration. Over the past years, some severe gastrointestinal complications have been described in patients with Duodopa ® . Methods: We report a serious gastrointestinal complication associated with Duodopa ® therapy. Results: A 53-year-old woman with PD began Duodopa ® therapy through a PEG-J due to motor complications, with excellent response to treatment. Three years later she reported loss of Duodopa ® efficacy and worsening of Parkinson symptoms, warranting oral levodopa medication with symptom improvement. A gastroscopy revealed gastrostomy tube erosion through the duodenum wall. Contrast-enhanced computer tomography of the abdomen revealed migration of the jejunal tube through multiple downstream entero-enteric fistula with the distal end situated in the ascending colon. Colonoscopy revealed tube tip entrapment by phybezoar with resistance to mechanical pull by endoscopic snare. Removal of the PEG was performed with proximal cut of the jejunal tube, and 2 days later complete anal exteriorization of the remaining tube spontaneously occurred without any complications. Conclusion: This case illustrates that loss of response to Duodopa ® therapy should alert the clinician to some potentially severe complications and should grant prompt endoscopic examination. Unlike some fatal cases published in the literature, our patient spontaneously expelled the jejunal tube without any complication. We believe that in particular cases an expectant attitude should be considered as an option. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1126 Isolated dystonia caused by ATP1A3 mutation unresponsive to deep brain stimulation M. Di Giovanni, S. Lalli, R. Maggio, A. Cocco, P. Amami, A. Albanese Neurocenter, Department of Neurology, Humanitas Research Hospital, Rozzano, Italy Background and aims: Mutations in the ATP1A3 gene are associated with a wide spectrum of neurologic disorders encompassing rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism (RDP) and alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC). Isolated dystonia has been occasionally reported. The efficacy of deep brain stimulation (DBS) in cases of isolated dystonia with ATP1A3 gene mutations has not been established. Methods: We reported the outcome, after ten years of stimulation adjustments, in a patient with ATP1A3 isolated dystonia who received a GPi DBS implant and then compared the results to all published cases of ATP1A3. Results: Our patient bore a heterozygous de novo missense mutation (c.1250T>C, p.L417P) in the ATP1A3 gene, had isolated dystonia and did not respond to GPi DBS. Overall, seven cases with isolated dystonia were reported and four ATP1A3 dystonic patients have received stereotactic surgery in the GPi; no patient has received surgery in other targets. The mutation found in this case of isolated dystonia has been previously observed in one patient with RDP. Conclusion: We report failure of GPi stereotactic surgery in five patients with ATP1A3, including this observation with isolated dystonia and one case of pallidotomy without mention of parkinsonism. We also confirm clinical and genetic heterogeneity of this condition. ATP1A3 dystonia may possibly represent a case of "surgicogenomics", meaning that such genetic diagnosis may be a negative indication for stereotactic surgery in the GPi. It remains unknown whether DBS in other targets may be efficacious. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1127 Monotherapy with perampanel as an alternative for refractory myoclonus E.D. Diaz Pertuz 1 , J. Pagonabarraga 2 , J. Kulisevsky 3 1 Pamplona, Spain, 2 Neurología, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau , España, Spain, 3 Barcelona, Spain Background and aims: Myoclonus is a sudden, brief, shock-like, involuntary movement. Cortical myoclonus treat is often refractory and requires the use of polytherapy being the dose occasionally limited by the onset of side effects. The aim of this study is to report three patients with drug-resistantre chronic myoclonus that had not improved with clonazepam, levetiracetam and valproic acid, but improved markedly after onset with perampanel. Methods: Three case reports. Patients unresponsive for available drugs for myoclonus were started on perampanel in monotherapy. Patients were video-taped before and after achieving therapeutic full dose with perampanel, and change on myoclonus severity was assessed by the Clinical Global Impression of Change (CGI-C) scale. Results: Two adult patients with myoclonus as a sequelae of hypoxic-ischemic brain injury during the perinatal period, and one young woman with drug-induced myoclonus started treatment with perampanel after conventional politherapy for chronic myoclonus. Global improvement was rated as "much improved" in two patients (CGI-C=2), and "very much improved" in one patient (CGI-C=1). Global improvement was associated with an improvement in daily functionality and recovery of tasks that have been withdrawn because of myoclonus. Two patients experienced improvement at 4mg/day, and one at 6mg/day. During titration phase, three patients experienced dizziness 10-15 minutes after taking the drug, but good tolerance was achieved after 1 month of treatment. Conclusion: Perampanel appears as a good alternative in patients with drug-resistant myoclonus. Based on these anecdotal cases, clinical trials seem promising for further assessing the efficacy of perampanel for refractory chronic myoclonus. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Essential tremor (ET) can have more complex motor features (e.g. ataxia), likewise different non-motor manifestations regarding both cognitive and psychiatic symptoms. The aim of the work was to determine psychiatric disorders and personality pattern in a cohort of ET patients, and to asses relation between motor and non-motor features of ET. Methods: ET patients (101) were examined for the presence of psychiatric disorders accorrding to DSM IV criteria. All patients were evaluated by standardized psychiatric and neurologic battery of tests. Personality profile was assessed by Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory III (MCMI). Results: ET patients (age 49.6±18.6, disease duration 15.6±14.4) were divided in two groups, early onset ET (EOET) and late-onset ET (LOET). Depression (according to SCID-I), and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder (SCID-II) were was the most prominent psychiatric disorders in both groups. MCMI scores above 75, indicating presence of specific personality trait, were found for paranoid personality trait, and for psychotic depression among psychiatric symptoms. Associations between dominant personality characteristics and main clinical and demographic factors showed that narcissism and anxiety were in correlation with ADL (p=0.039, p=0.007) and social burden (p=0.014, p=0.001), whereas major depression was in correlation with social handicap (p=0.002), severity of tremor (p=0.019), ADL (p=0.006), and social burden (p=0.049). Conclusion: Our research confirms that ET is more than a disease of motor system. A significant number of patients suffer from psychiatric disorders, with a high frequency of specific personality disorders. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Wilson's disease (WD) is an inherited disorder of copper metabolism. Gait disturbances may present with both extrapyramidal and cerebellar patterns. Our previous study showed that gait abnormalities are observed in almost 60% of WD patients. The most frequent was ataxic gait (45%) characterized mainly by impaired tandem. So far spatiotemporal gait parameters were not established in WD patients. The aim of our study was to characterise basic objective gait parameters. Methods: We analysed gait parameters in 34 WD patients in comparison with 28 healthy controls. Spatiotemporal parameters: velocity, cycle time, cadence, base of support was assessed using GAITRite walkway system. Clinical neurological assessment was based on Unified Wilson's Disease Score Scale (UWDRS). Results: We examined 16 neurologic and 18 hepatic WD patients, and compared their results with healthy control group. Velocity of gait was lower in neurologic group (p=0.03), and not differ from control group in hepatic subjects (p=0.15). Cadence was decreased in neurologic patients (p<0.0001) as well as in hepatic (p<0.005). Neurologic group had had statistically significant wider base of support (p=0.002) as compare to control group. Conclusion: Our study shows in objective analysis, gait disturbances in WD neurologic patients compared to healthy controls. Notably, subjects with WD demonstrated wider base of support than control group. This is in accordance with our previous clinical observation that impaired tandem gait is common. Although neurologic WD patients presented markedly impaired gait, in hepatic patients we observed decreased cadence. Further analysis on larger group of WD patients is needed to provide insight into gait disturbances. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose D.H. Ertem, N.G. Kocabiyik, D.N. Orken Neurology, Sişli Hamidiye Etfal Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey Background and aims: There are limited researches in literature evaluating the exact relationships between pain, and other comorbid symptoms like mood and sleep in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD). In this study, we aimed to explore the characteristics of chronic pain and its effects on quality of life, anxiety, depression, fatigue, and sleep quality. Methods: Forty one patients with PD and 21 healthy controls matched for age and gender were included. The Unified PD Rating Scale and Hoehn&Yahr stage were used to assess motor disability and disease severity. Patients examined relating to the characteristics of the chronic pain. All subjects completed Beck Depression and Anxiety Inventories, Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire, Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Assessment, Fatigue Severity Scale questionnaires. Results: Twenty eight patients (68%) suffered from chronic pain. Of these, 48% had musculoskeletal, 14% radicular/ peripheral neuropathic, 9% dystonia related, 4% central parkinsonian, 14% headache, and 2% vascular pain respectively. Nine patients (21%) had two or more types of pain. Comparing PD patients with and without pain and their demographical and clinical features and mean quality of life scores, there were not any statistical differences. We found that mean depression, anxiety and sleep quality scores between PD patients with and without pain and control group were not stastically significant. Furthermore, there was not correlation between pain and depression, anxiety, fatigue and sleep quality. Conclusion: There are different pain types co-existing in patients with PD. Despite the previous studies, our findings support that pain does not affect patients' quality of lives and other non-motor sypmtoms such as depression, anxiety, fatigue and sleep. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1132 Subacute hemichorea associating dopamine depletion in basal ganglia and cerebral hemiatrophy C. Estevez-Fraga 1 , J.C. Martinez Castrillo 1 , A. de Albóniga-Chindurza 1 , C. Anciones 2 , F. Acebrón 2 , R. Álvarez Velasco 2 , J.L. Lopez Sendon 2 Background and aims: There are few ethiologies of subacute hemichorea. Common causes structural lesions or nonketotic hyperglycemia. The association with contralateral dopamine depletion or cerebral atrophy is uncertain. Methods: Case report Results: We present a woman aged 57 whose past history included dyslipidemia, diabetes mellitus and depression treated with clonacepam and venlafaxine. She presented to our clinics due to involuntary movements involving right hemibody that appeared gradually over the past 3 months. Neurologic examination disclosed choreic movements affecting right extremities. Movements increased with distraction and disappeared while sleeping. There were neither parkinsonian signs nor limb atrophy. Supraaortic trunk sonography was also normal. Complete blood and cerebrospinal fluid analysis including biochemistry, glucose, immunology and, microbiology were all normal. Genetic analysis of Huntington's disease was negative. MRI showed atrophy of left cerebral hemisphere (figures 1,2). DaTscan (figure 3) was performed disclosing marked reduction of presynaptic nigrostriatal dopamine affecting left caudate and putamen. 10 years after disease onset the patient still has choreic movements affecting right hemibody. We present a patient with right hemichorea with left basal ganglia dopamine depletion and left hemicerebral atrohy of unknown significance. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Axonal degeneration is related to the development of neurologic disability in multiple sclerosis (MS). We studied the correlation between the presence of IgM oligoclonal bands (OB) in the CSF, a biological marker of poor prognosis, and the degree of axonal degeneration as measured by the thinning of retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL). Methods: Fifty-one consecutive patients with a recent diagnosis of RRMS were included (≤ 5 years since first attack) and divided into two groups according to the presence/absence of IgM OB. Sociodemographic and clinical variables were collected and optical coherence tomography (OCT) was performed. Results: Mean age was 37.14 years, 62.75% were women. Median time from first attack to recruitment was 2.18 years (range 0,35-3.89). One-hundred and two OCT explorations were performed, 52 of them belonging to the IgM OB group. In this group, we found a statistically significant reduction on RNFL thickness on the temporal quadrant (59.30µm, SD 13.19 ) as compared to the group without IgM OB (64.49µm, SD 11.81), p=0.03. The examination of those eyes without history of optic neuritis (n=89) showed a thinner temporal quadrant of CFNR in the group with IgM OB (61.88µm, SD 11.81) as compared to the group lacking IgM OB (65.07µm, SD 10.80), without reaching statistical significance (p=0.23). Conclusion: Patients with IgM OB present a thinner CFNR on the temporal quadrant from early stages. This tendency must be confirmed on follow-up studies (ongoing). Disclosure: This research has been funded by the Health Department of the Basque Government The expression of matrix metalloproteinase peripheral profile in multiple sclerosis patients treated with natalizumab: Possible additional mechanisms of natalizumab action Background and aims: Natalizumab (NAT) is a powerful treatment in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients that was designed with a clear mechanism of action (inhibition of α4-integrine, the key molecule of brain homing). Still, approximately a third of treated patients continue to present disease activity due to blood-brain barrier (BBB) damage. In MS, Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs) are involved in BBB disfunction, leading to the perpetuation of neuroinflammation. Objectives: Evaluation of the evolution of a panel of MMPs during NAT treatment in MS patients. Methods: 30 RRMS patients (mean MS duration 10.5 years) treated with NAT (mean duration 21.7 months) and 30 healthy subjects were tested using a Bio-PlexPro™ Human MMP Panel (MMP-1, MMP-2, MMP-3, MMP-7, MMP-8, MMP-9, MMP-10, MMP-12, MMP-13) through Multiplex method. The study had a mean duration of 9 months and the patients underwent clinical, MMP and brain MRI evaluation at the inclusion and at the end of the research. Statistical analysis considered significant values: p≤0.05. Results: NAT decreased the peripheral values of MMPs (in MMP-9 and MMP-3 statistical significance was found). In patients that had relapses before and during the study, values of 8, 9, 10 Background and aims: Vitamin D status is associated with the incidence and prevalence of a variety of neurologic disorders, including multiple sclerosis. Several studies suggest or support that multiple sclerosis has increased prevalence in geographic areas with lower sunlight levels. We aimed to investigate the correlation between vitamin D level and quality of life in patients with multiple sclerosis who were exposed to sunny seasons within one year in western Turkey. Methods: Vitamin D status is associated with the incidence and prevalence of a variety of neurologic disorders, including multiple sclerosis. Several studies suggest or support that multiple sclerosis has increased prevalence in geographic areas with lower sunlight levels. We aimed to investigate the correlation between vitamin D level and quality of life in patients with multiple sclerosis who were exposed to sunny seasons within one year in western Turkey. Results: Of 200 multiple sclerosis patients, 185 (92.5%) had lower vitamin D level. Patients reported no side effects during the study. The increase in Vitamin D level from baseline to 12 months was significant (p<0.0001). The improvements remained significant in all categories of MSQOL-54 after the vitamin D administration (p< 0.001). According to our results, the longer vitamin D use the higher improvement of quality of life. Conclusion: This study showed that the prevalence of vitamin D level is still low in geographic areas with higher sunlight levels, and also, when vitamin D deficiency or insufficiency was corrected, there was indeed a positive effect on quality of life of patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1136 Brief paroxysmal attacks as initial manifestation of multiple sclerosis P.L. Bernsen 1 , M.L. Bernsen 2 1 Harderwijk, Netherlands, 2 Radiology, Rijnstate ziekenhuis, Arnhem, Netherlands Background and aims: Multiple sclerosis (MS) is characterised by a variety of symptoms. Usually these symptoms persist for a longer period. There are, however, reports of patients suffering from repeated paroxysmal events lasting seconds to a few minutes, which may not be recognised as a manifestation of MS. In the literature they are referred to as paroxysmal symptoms or attacks, transient neurological events, and paroxysmal demyelinating events. They consist of brief, frequent and stereotyped attacks which may continue for days to months. The frequency varies from one to thirty times daily. Paroxysmal symptoms are most common early in the course of the disease and may even be the initial manifestation of MS. Methods: Four types of attacks are identified in the literature: painful tonic spasms, dysarthria occasionally associated with cerebellar ataxia, sensory symptoms, and paresis. The attacks are thought to be caused by ephaptic activation of axons within a partially demyelinated lesion in fibre tracts resulting in transverse spreading of neuronal conduction to adjacent anatomical structures. Results: We present the case of a male patient aged 23 years who was seen with a 3-month history of attacks of tingling around his right ear spreading to his neck and sometimes to his right forearm. This was associated with a sensation of loss of use in his left leg. MRI of the brain and cerebrospinal fluid analysis were consistent with a diagnosis of MS. The symptoms quickly subsided after starting a treatment with dimethyl fumarate. Conclusion: MS should be considered in the differential diagnosis of transient neurological events. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Fingolimod is approved in England as a second line treatment for highly active relapsingremitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS). We aimed to evaluate the real world effects of fingolimod in a typical NHS clinical setting (relevant to appropriate prescribing, safety profile and cost-effectiveness). Methods: Retrospective review of the medical records and MRI scans of RRMS patients on fingolimod for a minimum of 1 ear at Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals NHS Trust. Patient demographics, disease duration, Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) and no evidence of disease activity (NEDA) were used as covariates. Findings were compared with FREEDOMS and TRANSFORMS outcomes. Results: 61 patients, followed-up for a mean of 2.7-years were included. The cohort was slightly older (mean age 43 vs. 36), included a higher proportion of females (85% vs. 65-69%), had longer disease duration (12.5 vs 8 years) and was more disabled (median EDSS 4 vs 3) compared with the trial data. At 1 year 81.35% were relapse-free, similar to the trial data. For the whole follow-up period, NEDA was seen in 57.37% of patients, suggesting some expected waning effect. 14.75% of patients discontinued treatment. Logistic regression was performed to ascertain the effects of age, gender, disease duration and disability on the likelihood of patients responding to treatment. None of these was found to be significant predictors. Conclusion: The efficacy of fingolimod mirrored the findings from the pivotal trials in a real world cohort with slightly different demographics. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose A. Carotenuto 1 , V. Bambini 2 , I. Cerillo 1 , G. Arcara 2 , F. Manganelli 1 , R. Iodice 1 1 Naples, Italy, 2 Center for Neurocognition, Epistemology and theoretical Syntax (NEtS), Institute for Advanced Study (IUSS), Pavia, Italy Background and aims: A recent meta-analysis outlined that MS patients could experience poor performances in Social Cognition (SC), defined as "the mental operation underlie social interactions" and specifically in Theory of Mind (ToM, the ability to attribute mental states to oneself and to others). This raises the need to evaluate the impact of SC on Quality of Life (QoL). We performed a crosssectional study aimed at shedding further light on this relationship. Methods: We collected socio-demographic and clinical data from 37 MS patients. They were tested for neurocognition (Brief Repeatable Battery), social cognition (Story-based Empathy Task, further divided in the following subscores: attribution of intentions (SET-IA), emotional states (SET-EA), together with a control condition (SET-CI)), depression, fatigue (Beck Depression Inventory and Fatigue Impact Scale) and QoL (Multiple Sclerosis Quality Of Life-54). Results: SET global score and SET-IA were not related to any clinic-demographic, cognitive and psychosocial features except for disease duration (coeff. Beta -0.34,p=0.04 and coeff. Beta -0.42,p=0.01 respectively). SET-CI and SET-EA scores were not related to any clinicdemographic, cognitive or psychosocial features. Finally, neither physical composite or mental composite scores were related to SET measures. Conclusion: Although ToM abilities might be involved in social activities and be related to QoL, this association did not emerge in our sample. Since ToM is the ability to understand others' emotions and intentions and MS patients could have ToM deficits, they could be not completely aware of their emotions and intentions involved in social context making them not impacting on the self-perception of QoL. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1139 Translating the Parkinson's Disease Sleep Scale (PDSS-2) into 31 languages using a standardized methodology K.R. Chaudhuri 1 , C. Trenkwalder 2 , C. Anfray 3 , P. Bindi 3 , C. Acquadro 4 1 Kings College, London, United Kingdom, Kassel, Germany, 3 Author Collaboration Unit, Mapi Research Trust, Lyons, France, 4 Mapi, Lyons, France Background and aims: The Parkinson´s Disease Sleep Scale (PDSS-2) is a patient self-rating scale comprising 15 items, evaluated on a 5-point frequency scale, which assesses nocturnal disturbances in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. The objectives of this study are to present the method and the challenges of the PDSS-2 translation (originally developed and validated in British English and German) into 31 languages, now widely used in various countries. Methods: In each country, the translation process consisted of: 1) Conceptual analysis of the original PDSS-2 with its developers; 2) Forward/backward translation step; and 3) Test on five PD patients through interviews. An adjusted process was used for countries using a national variant of the same language (e.g., adaptation of the British English version for use in Australia). Results: The translation process did not reveal any cultural issues since most of the concepts assessed in the PDSS-2 are cross-culturally relevant. Most of the difficulties belonged to the semantic, pragmatics and syntactic fields. For instance, the word "night" in item 2 (Did you have difficulty falling asleep each night?) could not be literally translated in eight languages. For contextual and colloquial reasons, the word "evening" was more appropriate in Czech, Danish, French (Belgium, Canada, France), Italian, Latvian, and Slovak. The distinction between "sometimes" and "occasionally" in the frequency scale created a range of queries, solved in collaboration with the developers. Other examples are presented.  In the ORACLE-MS study in patients with a first demyelinating event, cladribine tablets (3.5 and 5.25mg/kg) significantly reduced risk of conversion to clinically definite MS (CDMS) vs placebo. If CDMS occurred in the initial double-blind treatment period (DBTP), patients entered an open-label maintenance period (OLMP) and received interferon-beta 1a. Here, annualised relapse rate (ARR) and lymphopenia during the OLMP of the ORACLE-MS study were assessed. Methods: Participation in the OLMP depended upon the clinical course of the patient's disease in the DBTP. Patients in ORACLE-MS who converted to CDMS during the DBTP entered the OLMP and received subcutaneous interferonbeta 1a (titrated over 4 weeks to 44mcg) 3 times/week. Results: 109 ORACLE-MS patients converted to CDMS in the DBTP and received ≥1 dose of interferon-beta 1a. Disposition is shown in Figure 1 . Median time on interferonbeta 1a was 56.0 weeks. Estimated ARR in the OLMP are shown in Figure 2 . Table 1 ). Table 1 Results: The mean study period for patients receiving CT was 194 weeks; 165 weeks for placebo recipients. Adj-AE per 100PY rates for CT3.5 and placebo are reported in Table  2 . Concerning known events expected with CT treatment, Adj-AE per 100PY for lymphopenia (preferred term) were 7.94 (CT3.5) and 1.06 (placebo), and for system organ class of infection and infestations, 24.93 (CT3.5) and 27.05 (placebo); herpes zoster (preferred term), 0.83 (CT3.5) and 0.20 (placebo). Adj-AE per 100PY for the system organ class of neoplasms, benign, malignant and unspecified were 1.14 and 1.01, for CT3.5 and placebo, respectively. Table 2 Conclusion: The AE profile for CT3.5 as monotherapy has been well-characterised in a pooled population of patients from early to more advanced RMS. Lymphopenia was expected from cladribine tablets' mode of action; herpes zoster was reported more frequently in patients experiencing Grade 3 or 4 lymphopenia; no clustering of types of malignancy, and no malignancies commonly associated with immunosuppression were observed. Disclosure: This study was funded by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. Medical writing assistance was provided by inScience Communications, Springer Healthcare, Chester, UK, and was funded by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. Year-by-year lymphopenia rates in patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis (RMS) treated with cladribine tablets 3.5mg/kg in CLARITY and re-treated in CLARITY Extension Background and aims: CLARITY and CLARITY Extension demonstrated the efficacy of cladribine tablets (CT) in patients with RMS. The most common adverse event was lymphopenia, consistent with the mechanism of action of CT. Here we evaluate whether lymphopenia persists following treatment with CT. Methods: Lymphopenia by grade (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v3.0) for patients who were randomised to CT 3.5mg/kg in the two-year CLARITY study and re-randomised to CT 3.5mg/kg in the two-year CLARITY Extension (N=186) are reported. Patients with Grade 0 lymphopenia (≥1.0×10^9 cells/L) before the first course and Grade 0/1 (≥0.8×10^9 cells/L) prior to administration of all subsequent courses in Years 2/3/4 were included in the analysis, according to re-treatment guidelines. Results: 176 patients were Grade 0 at the start of CLARITY and 167 patients were Grade 0/1 at the start of CLARITY Extension (Table) . By Week 13 in Year 1 and Week 12 in Years 2/3/4, 18-55% of patients developed Grade 2/3 lymphopenia. By Week 48 in each of Years 1/2/3/4, Grade 2/3 was observed in 11-14% ( Figure) . Occurrence of Grade 3 lymphopenia at any time was reported in <18% of patients; no patients had Grade 4 lymphopenia. Conclusion: In patients with lymphocyte counts ≥1.0×10^9/L before the first course and ≥0.8×10^9/L before ≤3 subsequent annual courses of CT, no patients experienced Grade 4 lymphopenia at any time. Approximately 86% of patients recovered to Grade 0/1 by the end of each treatment year. There was no reduction in the proportion of patients recovering towards baseline with additional CT courses. Disclosure: This study was funded by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. Medical writing assistance was provided by inScience Communications, Springer Healthcare, Chester, UK, and was funded by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. Fingolimod 2012 and 2016: How did the profile of patients treated with fingolimod change? A comparison of two noninterventional studies PANGAEA and PANGAEA 2.0 C. Cornelissen 1 , R. Kern 2 , T. Ziemssen 3 1 Nuremberg, Germany, 2 Zentrum für Klinische Neurowissenschaften, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Dresden, Germany, 3 Dresden, Germany Background and aims: Over the years the therapeutic options for multiple sclerosis (MS) increased and treatment guidelines changed. How did this change the profile of the fingolimod-treated patients from 2012 to 2016? Methods: PANGAEA and PANGAEA 2.0 are two noninterventional studies conducted in Germany that recruited patients switching to fingolimod between 2011/12/13 and 2015/16 respectively. Here we compare baseline data from these two studies to demonstrate a change in the profile of relapsing-remitting MS patients that switch to fingolimod. Results: The mean age of patients enrolled in PANGAEA 2.0 was slightly younger (38.4+/-10.7 vs 38.8+/-10.1 years) compared with PANGAEA and higher proportion of patients were younger than 40 years (59.6% vs. 54.1%). Patients in PANGAEA 2.0 have a shorter disease history (7.3+/-6.6 vs. 8.2+/-6.3 years) a similar number of relapses 12 months before baseline (1.3+/-1.0 vs. 1.5+/-1.2), a lower EDSS (2.2+/-1.6 vs. 3.0+/-1.7) and MSSS scores (multiple sclerosis severity score; 3.5+/-2.5 vs. 5.1+/-2.6). 41.9% of the patients in PANGAEA 2.0 had an EDSS score of ≤1.5 at baseline (PANGAEA: 23.3%). The MSSS score of 50.0% of the patients in PANGAEA 2.0 ranged within the first 3 deciles (PANGAEA: 29.5%). 18.2% of the patients in PANGAEA 2.0 were treatment naïve or without any treatment in the previous 12 months (PANGAEA 5.8%). Background and aims: Fingolimod (FTY720; Gilenya ® , Novartis Pharma AG) is approved for the treatment of relapsing MS. As of August 2016, approximately 160,000 patients have been treated with Fingolimod. PANGAEA (Post-Authorization Non-interventional German sAfety study of GilEnyA in RRMS patients) is a non-interventional study, conducted in Germany, to investigate long-term safety, effectiveness and patient reported outcomes in daily practice. Methods: 4229 patients were enrolled into PANGAEA. By Jan 2017 over 300 patients finished the five year documentation period. Here we present safety and adherence data of fingolimod treatment in daily clinical practice for up to five years. Results: Over five years, the yearly mean study discontinuation rate was 12%. 67% of patients who started fingolimod treatment between 2011 and 2013 in PANGAEA are still on drug. 79% of patients who discontinued the study also discontinued fingolimod. Most frequent reasons for study discontinuation (multiple answers possible) were patient's decision (33%) and adverse events (28%). Over five years, the safety profile of fingolimod in real world is comparable to that observed in phase III clinical trials. Common adverse events were reductions in lymphocyte counts, increase in liver enzyme values, upper respiratory tract infections (e.g. nasopharyngitis [9.9%]), and MS related adverse events like fatigue (3.4%) and depression (2.6%). Approximately 45% of the patients experienced no adverse events. 3.9% of all adverse events were rated as serious. The results of PANGAEA support the positive benefit-risk profile fingolimod, demonstrated in clinical trials, with real world evidence data. The frequency/nature of reported adverse events is consistent with previous findings. Disclosure: This study was supported by the Novartis Pharma GmbH, Nuremberg, Germany. Teriflunomide real-world outcomes in the phase 4 Teri-PRO Study: Results from Europe, Canada, and Latin America R. Gold 1 , B. Khatri 2 , K.R. Edwards 3 , S. Cavalier 4 , P. Rufi 5 , K. Thangavelu 4 , M. Benamor 5 , P.K. Coyle 6 Background and aims: Teriflunomide is a once-daily oral immunomodulator for relapsing-remitting MS. Teri-PRO (NCT01895335), a global, phase 4 study in patients with relapsing forms of MS, investigated patient-reported outcomes (PROs), effectiveness, safety, and tolerability associated with teriflunomide treatment in routine clinical practice in the US and rest of the world (Europe, Canada, and Latin America; ROW). Here, we report outcomes for Teri-PRO patients enrolled in ROW. Methods: ROW patients received teriflunomide 14 mg for 48 weeks. The primary outcome was patient Global Satisfaction at Week (W)48, measured using the Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire for Medication (TSQM-V1.4). TSQM scores were measured at baseline (patients switching from a prior disease-modifying therapy [DMT] ), and at W4 and W48/end of treatment. Secondary outcomes included PRO assessments, annualized treated relapse rate, and adverse events (AEs). Results: For ROW patients (n=455), mean (SD) age was 42.9 (10.1) years; time since first MS symptoms was 11.3 (8.9) years. TSQM Global Satisfaction remained high over the study period (mean [95% CI]: W4, 72.3 [70.4, 74.2]; W48, 68.5 [66.0, 70.9] ). In patients switching from another DMT (n=278), mean (95% CI) Global Satisfaction significantly improved from baseline (54.9 [51.9, 57.8]) to W48 (70.4 [67.4, 73.4 ], P<0.0001). Mean treated relapse rate was low (0.23). AEs were reported in 385 (84.6%) patients, and were mostly mild to moderate. Conclusion: High levels of treatment satisfaction with teriflunomide were observed in ROW patients, including significant improvements in patients switching from another DMT, consistent with the full study population. Teriflunomide was well tolerated and safety outcomes reflected those observed in other studies. Disclosure: Study supported by Sanofi Genzyme. There is poor knowledge on current hospitalizations in the multiple sclerosis (MS) population. Our aim is to examine hospitalization causes and outcomes in a MS cohort. Methods: Retrospective study of MS patients admitted to our Centre between August 2009 and July 2015, excluding admissions to establish MS diagnosis. Results: There were observed 308 hospitalizations from 155 patients with MS, mainly women (67.5%), with a median age of 47 (IQR 23). Relapsing-remitting MS was present in 51.1%, the overall median Expanded Disability Status Score (EDSS) was 4.5 (IQR 5) and the median MS duration was 12 years (IQR 10). Infection was responsible for 22.1% of hospitalizations and diseases of the nervous system for 21.4% (including 59.1% due to relapses but also epilepsy, tremor and others). They were followed by diseases of the genitourinary (14%) and circulatory systems (9.7%) and neoplasms (6.8%). A total of 23 hospitalizations (7.5%) required Intensive Care (IC) admission. The length of stay and death rate were higher in patients requiring IC. There were no significant differences in age, gender, MS duration, disease subtype, comorbidities or EDSS in those needing IC. Nine admissions (2.9%) resulted in death. IC admission, secondary progressive MS and increased comorbidities index (Charlson index) were statistically related to fatality. Conclusion: Infections are the most common cause of hospitalizations in our study. Almost 8% of all MS hospitalizations required IC admission. These may be related to longer admission lengths and higher death rates. Mortality may be associated with secondary progressive MS, comorbidities and IC admission. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1148 On the possible role of kappa free light chain index (KFLCi) in the initial setting for the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis I. Crespi 1 , R. Serino 1 , E. Saliva 2 , M. Marchiando 2 , A. Mora 2 , D. Vecchio 3 , C. Comi 3 , R. Cantello 3 , G. Bellomo 1 Background and aims: Diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS) includes clinical and imaging findings to demonstrate lesions dissemination in space and time and to exclude other diseases. The contribution of biochemical assays of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is marginal. However, the kappa free light chain index (KFLCi) has emerged as alternative marker, with high sensitivity and low costs. Methods: 85 patients were enrolled in this preliminary study: 54 had a suspicion of MS (sMS) and 31 of non MS Inflammatory Disease (sNMSID) within the central nervous system. MS diagnosis was based on the 2010 McDonald's criteria (MD). KFLCi has been measured on serum and CSF by nephelometry. Results: 34 sMS patients (63%) fulfilled both the MD criteria at clinical presentation and had a KFLCi above cutoff values (5); all of them were diagnosed as MS. Despite 20 sMS patients (37%) did not fulfill MD criteria, a final diagnosis of MS was confirmed in 13 of them (65%). In the 92% of this latter group, KFLCi was indeed above the cutoff value. About 23% of sNMSID patients fulfilled the MD criteria at the time of rachicentesis and had a KFLCi higher than 5; for all of them a final diagnosis of MS has been confirmed. Despite 74% of sNMSID patients initially did not fulfill MD criteria, MS was confirmed in 26% of them, and KFLCi was indeed above the cut-off value in 86% of them. Background and aims: Differences have been reported in fractional anisotropy, voxel-based morphology, and white matter integrity in the corpus callosum of patients with developmental stuttering. Adult onset acquired stuttering is uncommon; however, case reports have described callosal infarction and neoplasm associated with acquired stuttering. Methods: Case Report Results: A 32-year-old female with polycystic ovarian syndrome presented with fatigue, concentration impairment, and acute headache. Neurological and fundoscopic exam were normal. CSF was normal except for 10 nucleated cells (95% lymphoctyes). Immunological testing was not performed. Opening pressure was 31cm H2O but performed in a flexed position. Non-contrast brain MRI demonstrated multiple ovoid nonspecific T2 hyperintensities in the subcortical and deep white matter. Migraine or possible IIH was suspected and Topiramate initiated. One month later, the patient gradually developed stuttering and stopped Topiramate. Severity of stuttering progressed, and she developed new bilateral lower extremity paresthesias. Severe stuttering and bilateral thigh numbness were noted on neurological exam, but was otherwise normal. Brain and spinal cord MRI demonstrated new T2 hyperintense lesions, including an enhancing 11mm x 8mm lesion in the rostrum of the corpus callosum and a non-enhancing C7-T1 T2 hyperintensity. CSF demonstrated 14 nucleated cells (90% lymphocytes), 10 oligoclonal bands restricted to CSF, elevated IgG index, and normal opening pressure. The patient was diagnosed with MS, started on disease modifying therapy, and speech impairment slowly improved over the following 3 months. Conclusion: Corpus callosal lesions are a common radiographic finding in multiple sclerosis but uncommonly affect language. In rare cases, callosal demyelination may be associated with acquired stuttering. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Neurology, Sultan Abdulhamid Khan Training Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 2 Ophtalmology, Sisli Etfal Training Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 3 Ophtalmology, Okmeydanı Training Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey Background and aims: Radiologically Isolated Syndrome(RIS) has become a popular subject recently with quite number of follow-up and other clinical studies being done. The aim of our study was to assess the role of VEP and SEP as a guiding factor for the conersion from RIS to MS. Methods: 49 RIS patients who were referred our Neurology department between 2011-2015. All of the patients fullfillied the Okuda ciriteria. For the VEP examination the p100 latancy and amplitudes, for the SEP examination the p40 latency and mplitude was analysed. Results: 49 patients were included in this study, the mean time of follow up was 21.8 months. 63% of patients were female. The mean age was 31.2 years. Among the 4 patients with abnormal SEPs, MS developed in 3 of them(75%) over time(p:0.011) VEP and/or SEP was abnormal in 8 patients and MS developes in 4(50%) 8p:0.017). The most important factor for the transformation is the presence of active plaque with increases the risk 8.1-fold. The second important factor seems to be the presence of VEP and/or SEP abnormality, but this factor does not reach statistical significance. Conclusion: In this conversion to MS risk from RIS, VEP-SEP examinations are important and should take its place in the follow-up of these patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: The mode of action of dimethylfumarate (DMF), an immunomodulatory treatment for relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS), has not yet been fully elucidated. While in-vitro experiments suggest effects on pathways essential for immune cell survival, cytokine secretion and oxidative stress response, a proof from human ex-vivo studies is lacking. Methods: Blood samples were collected from twenty wellcharacterized RRMS patients at baseline and after 3 months of DMF treatment and an age-and gender-matched cohort of healthy individuals at 0 and 3 months. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were separated and cryopreserved for flow cytometry and immunoassays. Lymphocyte subpopulations and cytokine patterns were recorded. PBMC were assessed for their response to oxidative stress induced by hydrogen peroxide, their T cell proliferative capacity as well as activation of NFkB and MAPK pathways. Results: After 3 months DMF treatment T cell counts dropped by 31 percent with increasing CD4/CD8-ratio, while other lymphocyte populations were not altered significantly. No change in response to oxidative stress was detected. DMF inhibited proliferation of T cells (CD8>CD4), but this anti-proliferative effect decreased over time. Both ex-vivo and in-vitro treatment with DMF resulted in altered cytokine profiles; specifically secretion of interleukin 4 and interleukin 6 was reduced after 3 months. Longitudinal data on NFkB and MAPK activation in lymphocytes will be presented. Conclusion: This study expands the knowledge on alterations in lymphocyte patterns and translates in-vitro and ex-vivo findings on DMF related immune response and pathway activation into the clinical setting. Disclosure: This study was supported by an Investigator Initiated Trial grant from Biogen. The institution (University Hospital Basel) received in the last 3 years and used exclusively for research support: steering committee, consulting and speaker fees from Actelion, Addex, Bayer HealthCare, Biogen, Biotica, Genzyme, Lilly Background and aims: Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and NMO-spectrum of disorders (NMOSD) are inflammatory disorders of the central nervous system (CNS).The detection of anti-AQP4-antibodies (AQP4Abs) has become an important part of the diagnosis, but in some patients AQP4Abs cannot be detected even if the patients are clinically similar and the diagnosis is the same. This group of NMO/NMOSD patients is called sero-negative. Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) is a surface protein of the myelin sheath in CNS. We investigated if anti-MOGantibodies may play a role as a diagnostic marker for NMO/ NMOSD making it relevant to define a new sero-positive NMO/NMOSD subgroup. Methods: Systematic searches were performed in PubMed, Cochrane library and Scopus for original articles regarding ON or NMO/NMOSD antibodies against MOG were analyzed. Results: We found 158 MOGAbs+ accounting for 16% of NMOSD patents. This group distinguished itself phenotypically from AQP4+ patients by being younger, have a more equal gender distribution, more often being monophasic, with fewer and less severe attacks and better disorder resolution. They could, however, not account for all AQP4Ab-NMOSD patients. Conclusion: MOGAb+ NMOSD patients distinguish themselves phenotypically from AQP4Ab+ patients, but cannot account for all the AQP4Ab-patients with NMOSD. MOGAbs are found in several other demyelating CNS disorders and are thus not specific for NMOSD. It remains to reveal if the presence of MOGAbs is a marker for a distinct underlying mechanism of disorder with phenotypical characteristics comprising multiple of todays established diagnosis. Further research is needed to establish such a potential mechanism, for example to determine the right treatment. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  We conducted a retrospective national representative cohort study on all consecutive treated patients with MS and Glostrup University Hospital. Data on smoking habits was collected on 871 patients (632 women and 239 men). Kruskal-Wallis One Way Analysis of Varians was used and results were adjusted for age at onset, gender, and disease duration. The results showed no significant association between smoking and disease progression measured as change in EDSS score/years of treatment (p=0.196). Smokers (n=236) tended to have a higher initial and final EDSS score (p-value 0.056 and 0.085, respectively). Conclusion: We found no correlation between smoking and disease progression in patients treated with IMT. The results contribute to the still open debate whether smoking affects the progression of MS. The results suggest that smoking cessation may be less important for patients treated with IMT, but further studies are needed. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: To investigate the results of standardised MRI-scans qualitatively and quantitatively, obtained from patients with MS. INSPIRATION, a noninterventional multicentre study conducted in Germany, aimed to validate the feasibility and explore the potential benefits of standardized MRI-acquisition and centralized quantitative MRI-reading in clinical practice for RRMS patients. Methods: INSPIRATION included 253 patients from 15 centers between 05/2014 and 07/2015. MRI and clinical data will be documented over 3 years. Staff at individual sites underwent expert training and standardized sequence implementation. A centralized quantitative MRI-data analysis was performed. The results were reported to the neurologist and radiologist. Results: 99.6% of the obtained MRI-scans passed the quality analysis; <0.03% of scans led to site inquiries or data exclusion. The mean number (+/-SD) and volume (+/-SD) of T2-lesions at baseline was 30.1(+/-2.8)/11033.1(+/-1578.9)mm 3 and that of black holes was 4.0(+/-0.9)/490.3(+/-136.6)mm 3 . The corresponding values after 12 months follow-up were 32.3(+/-3.6)/11479.9(+/-1927.5) mm3 and 4.1(+/-1.1)/488.9(+/-165.2)mm 3 , respectively. Whole brain volume at baseline was 1,142,397(+/-15,988) mm 3 . Brain volume reduction after 12 months was 3,231(+/-1,944)mm 3 (0.28%+/-0.1%). Conclusion: Comparability of MRI-Scans is a central medical need in the management of MS patients. INSPIRATION provides a centralized quantitative MRIanalysis and might improve the comparability of individual MRI-scans in daily clinical routine. The quantification of lesion volumes and visualization of MRI-abnormalities may facilitate neurologists to integrate MRI-data to support patient management. Disclosure: This study was supported by the Novartis Pharma GmbH, Nuremberg, Germany. G. Giovannoni 1 , K. Rammohan 2 , S. Cook 3 , G. Comi 4 , P. Rieckmann 5 , P. Soelberg-Sorensen 6 , P. Vermersch 7 , F. Dangond 8 , C. Hicking 9 Background and aims: The 2-year CLARITY study in patients with RMS allows assessment of HDA definitions for identifying patients with a higher rate of relapse or disability progression. Methods: Placebo recipients in CLARITY (N=437) were retrospectively analysed using two sets of HDA criteria that assessed whether they had experienced high relapse activity ([HRA] ≥2 relapses in the previous year) regardless of prior treatment, or HRA plus treatment nonresponse ([HRA+TNR] ≥2 relapses in the previous year OR ≥1 relapse in previous year while on DMD therapy and ≥1 T1 Gd+ or ≥9 T2 lesions). The ability of these criteria to identify HDA patients among placebo recipients was assessed according to relapse and disability outcomes. Results: ARR was higher in the placebo HRA and the placebo HRA+TNR subgroups than in the overall placebo population and the non-HRA and non-HRA+TF subgroups ( Figure 1 ). Time to first qualifying relapse was shorter in the HRA and HRA+TF subgroups than the overall placebo population and the non-HRA and non-HRA+TNR subgroups. Time to 6-month confirmed EDSS progression (10% of patients) was 110 days for the HRA subgroup (non-HRA patients=330 days), 162 days for the HRA+TNR subgroup (non-HRA+TNR patients=329 days) and 245 days, overall placebo population ( Figure 2 ). The increased ARR and shorter time to EDSS progression highlights the increased risk in patients identified by these HDA criteria. Conclusion: Post-hoc analysis from the CLARITY study showed that HDA criteria based on relapse history, treatment history and MRI characteristics can identify patients with RMS at increased risk of experiencing relapses and disability progression. Disclosure: This study was funded by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. Medical writing assistance was provided by inScience Communications, Springer Healthcare, Chester, UK, and was funded by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. Cladribine tablets in high disease activity (HDA) subgroups from the CLARITY study of patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis (RMS) G. Giovannoni 1 , K. Rammohan 2 , S. Cook 3 , G. Comi 4 , P. Rieckmann 5 , P. Soelberg-Sorensen 6 , P. Vermersch 7 , F. Dangond 8 , C. Hicking 9 Background and aims: In the CLARITY study, treatment with cladribine tablets (CT) vs placebo showed strong efficacy in a large cohort of patients with RMS over 2 years. Patients with HDA are at higher risk of relapses and disability progression. This post-hoc analysis compared the effects of CT 3.5mg/kg (CT3.5) vs placebo in subgroups of CLARITY patients selected using two HDA definitions. Methods: CLARITY patients randomised to CT3.5 (N=433) or placebo (N=437) were retrospectively analysed using two different HDA definitions based on relapse history, prior treatment, and MRI characteristics. Patients were categorised according to whether they had experienced high relapse activity ([HRA] ≥2 relapses in the previous year) regardless of prior treatment, or HRA plus treatment nonresponse ([HRA+TNR] ≥2 relapses in the previous year, or ≥1 relapse in previous year while on DMD therapy and ≥1 T1 Gd+ or ≥9 T2 lesions). Results: In the overall CLARITY population, CT3.5 reduced the risk of 6-month confirmed EDSS progression by 47% vs placebo ( Figure 1 ). A larger risk reduction for CT3.5 vs placebo of 82% was seen in the HRA subgroup and the HRA+TNR subgroup indicating greater responsiveness to CT3.5 in patients identified by these criteria. ARR was lower with CT3.5 than placebo in the overall population and even lower with for the HRA and HRA+TNR subgroups (Figure 2 ). e-Poster Conclusion: In the CLARITY study, patients identified by HDA criteria showed clinical and MRI responses to CT3.5 that were generally better than, or at least comparable with, the outcomes seen in the overall CLARITY population. Disclosure: This study was funded by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. Medical writing assistance was provided by inScience Communications, Springer Healthcare, Chester, UK, and was funded by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. (2015) value was 3.0 (1.5 -6.0) and median MSSS value was 3.4 (1.6 -6.4) for all patients involved in the study. Median MSSS value for paternal transition observed patients was determined to be 1.6 (0.6-2.9) and for maternal transition observed patients was 4.5 (2.1 -6.7); and the difference was significant (p=0.016 ; z=-2.411). Conclusion: This study shows that clinical presentation and progression is more severe in maternally inherited MS cases compared to paternally inherited MS cases. Thus early diagnosis and treatment is important however, larger and more homogenous patient cohorts, prospective controlled studies would be more helpful in deciding treatment options and management. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Muscle and neuromuscular junction disease 1 Ephedrine and 3,4 diaminopyridine responsive myasthenic syndrome in plectin-related epidermolysis bullosa simplex with muscular dystrophy H. Argente-Escrig 1 , N. Muelas Gomez 1 , L. Gomez 2 , M. Türk 3 , C.T. Thiel 4 , R. Schröder 5 , J.J. Vilchez 1 1 Valencia, Spain, 2 Neuromuscular, ISS La fe/CIBERER, Valencia, Spain, 3 Neurology, Erlangen, Germany, 4 Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen, Germany, 5 Institute of Neuropathology, Erlangen, Germany Background and aims: Mutations in the plectin gene causes a variety of disorders, namely: epidermolysis bullosa simplex with muscular dystrophy (EBS-MD), EBS-MD with myasthenic features (EBS-MD-MyS), limb girdle muscular dystrophy type 2Q, EBS with pyloric atresia, and EBS-Ogna. We report an unusual patient with EBS-MD-MyS, who displayed a marked suppression of his myasthenic symptoms in response to ephedrine and 3,4 diaminopyridine (3,4-DAP). Results: A 41-year-old Caucasian male suffered from congenital hypotonia, muscle weakness, delayed motor milestones, and skin and mucous membrane blistering since birth. At the age of 25, he developed progressive symmetrical scapular and peroneal weakness and atrophy. In his early thirties, additional ptosis, diplopia, dysphagia, and fatigue manifested. CK-levels were markedly elevated (2,200-16,000 UI/L). Needle EMG showed a generalised myopathic pattern, and repetitive nerve stimulation studies at 3 Hz depicted a 20% decremental response. MRI showed pronounced fatty replacements of shoulder girdle muscles, the posterior compartment of thighs, and the anterior compartment of his legs. Muscular biopsy revealed severe dystrophic changes and desmin-positive aggregates. Genetic analysis revealed two heterozygous PLEC mutations: one (c.11737del; p.(Arg3913Valfs*30)) leading to a premature translational stop codon, and a second (c.2539-2A>G) residing in the highly conserved spliceacceptor site of intron 21. While pyridostigmine was of no benefit, a combination of ephedrine and 3,4-DAP effectively controlled his myasthenic-related symptoms. Conclusion: To date, no specific treatment is available for any form of plectinopathy. In EBS-MD patients with additional evidence of myasthenia, a combination of ephedrine and 3,4-DAP should be considered as a symptomatic treatment option. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Methods: We studied exercise-induced fatigue in a sample of adult-onset DM1 patients (17males, 9females, mean age 41.6yrs,sd±12.7), through an intermittent-incrementaleffort-exercise; oxidative stress balance blood biomarkers were collected. Motor disability was assessed using a muscle impairment rating scale (MIRS). To test for possible effects of central fatigue, patients have been administered with clinical scales about fatigue, mood and quality of life. Our exercise protocol proved to be easily deployable and well-tolerated. Statistical analysis revealed a significant increase in AOPP in DM1 patients versus controls but no significant differences between oxidative stress balance markers before and after the effort (Fig.2-3) . The occurrence of central fatigue suggests that central activation worsens during motor contractions;centralfatigue score(FSS) was significantly correlated to MVC (r-before: -0.583,p<0.01; r-after=-0.534,p<0.05), and to motor disability (r-MRC =-0.496,p<0.05). Conclusion: Biochemical correlates of oxidative stress represent a viable biomarker for clinical use in, although these markers still need to be validated in larger sample sizes;these results also suggest that comparative studies assessing CNS and muscle involvement are useful to define fatigability profile in DM1. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1162 Towards a definition of fatigability profile in myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) Background and aims: Myotonic dystroph type 1(DM1) is characterized by high fatigability (Kalkman et al. 2005) . Oxidative-stress(Angelini and Tasca, 2012) and central mechanisms (Bray et al.(2012) have been proposed to be possible pathogenic factors.Our aim was to investigate the fatigability profile in DM1, looking specifically at the relationship between self-reported fatigue, objective measures of peripheral fatigue, cognitive performance and gross brain structure. Methods: We studied fatigability profile in a sample of 20 adult-onset DM1 patients (14males, 6females, mean age 41.6 years, sd±12.7) through an intermittent incremental effort (Søgaard et al. 2006) . To test for effects of central fatigue, patients have been administered fatigue severity scale (FSS), cognitive tests and 3T magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. Results: FSS-score was significantly correlated to MVC before and after the effort, (r_before=-0.583, p<0.01,r_ post=-0.534, p<0.05), and to motor disability (r =-0.496, p<0.05); moreover we found a strong tendency trend-tosignificance in the association with baseline-lactate(r =0.378,p=0.057). Out of the six measures of cognitive performance used, 40% (n=8) of DM1 patients had impairment in two or more scores related to attention processes. MRimaging investigations revealed that DM1patients had reduced gray-matter volume in the bilateral prefrontal cortex, consistently with previous studies reporting this area to play a role in the neural regulation of fatigue. Conclusion: These data suggest that fatigue in DM1 is a multifaceted entity, also related to the disruption of fatiguerelated processes in the brain. The tools used in this study may be used as effective means to define fatigability profile in DM1patients. To describe the clinical, laboratory, anatomopathological and genetic findings of a group of patients with RyR1 gene mutations followed at the Neuromuscular Disease Unit of the Neurology Department of Coimbra's University and Hospital Center. Methods: The medical files of patients with confirmed RyR1 mutations were reviewed for demographic, historical and clinical data. Serum creatine kinase, forced vital capacity, electromyography and muscle biopsies were also analysed. Results: Seven patients, three females, from five unrelated families were included. There was no parental consanguinity. The symptoms began in childhood or the second decade of life and were very slowly progressive. All patients acquired independent ambulation but three had a delayed attainment of motor skills. One patient, son a symptomatic patient, was asymptomatic. Five had proximal upper and lower limb weakness and one only proximal lower limb weakness. One patient presented with malignant hyperthermia. The mean value of CK was 1111.25UI/L. The muscular biopsies showed characteristics of central core disease (two), multiminicore disease (one) and centronuclear disease (one). All patients had a molecular study confirming the existence of a pathogenic variant in the RyR1 gene. Conclusion: Our study provides further evidence that RyR1 related myopathies are very heterogeneous.Clinical, histopathological and molecular features are essential to better understand genotype-phenotype correlation. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1164 20 years clinical follow-up in patients with oculopharyngeal muscle disease (OPMD) Background and aims: Oculopharyngeal muscle dystrophy (OPMD) is an autosomal dominant muscle disease. OPMD is clinically characterized by ptosis, eye movement abnormalities, dysphonia and dysphagia. It is caused by an abnormal (GCN) triplet expansion within the PABPN1 gene located on chromosome 14 (14q11.2-q13). Methods: We present a cohort of 18 patients (12 female and 6 male) with OPMD. We performed quantitative Electromyography in all patients and muscle biopsy in 11 out of 18. We also applied MRC score for muscle strength evaluation as well as the EAT-10 (Eating Assessment Tool) which is a self-administered scale for dysphagia evaluation. All patients were genetically defined for PABPN1 gene variants. Main results are shown in table 1. Dysphagia and dysphonia worsened during the course of the disease as well as orbicularis oculi muscle strength; in addition, we observed that either axial muscles or posterior thigh muscles were progressively affected. 10 patients were evaluated with EAT-10 showing a worsening of dysphagia. Conclusion: Our data confirms that, at disease onset, the weaker mimic muscles are the orbicularis oculi. During the OPMD course, it has been found a worsening of orbicularis oculi weakness and of dysphonia and dysphagia with a progressive involvement of proximal limb and axial weakness. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose . Since now only few cases with adult-onset and partial merosin deficiency have been reported. Methods: We describe 5 independent Italian subjects presenting with Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy (LGMD), brain white matter abnormalities, merosin deficiency and LAMA2 gene mutations. Patients underwent complete neurological examination, muscle biopsy, brain and muscle imaging. Results: All patients showed slowly progressive proximal weakness with onset spanning from childhood to adulthood. Creatin-kinase levels were moderately elevated. One patient developed dilated cardiomyopathy. Muscle MRI allowed to evaluate the degree and pattern of muscular involvement in all patients. Brain MRI was fundamental in order to direct and/or support the molecular diagnosis, showing typical widespread white matter hyperintensity in T2-weighted sequences in all subjects; these alterations were associated with signs of central nervous system (CNS) involvement in 3 patients presenting epilepsy (2) and migraine (1) . Muscle biopsy showed heterogeneous patterns ranging from dystrophic to myopathic features; misleading patterns were also detected, leading to the suspect of mitochondrial myopathy and polymyositis. Protein analysis displayed partial merosin deficiency. LAMA2 gene analysis detected 7 different mutations, 6 of which are new. Brain MRI -Axial TSE T2 images (A-B) and axial T2 FLAIR images (C) showing diffuse abnormal hyperintensity involving peri-and sovra-ventricular white matter in three different patients. These cases further enlarge the clinical spectrum of LGMD due to mutations in LAMA2 gene. In our opinion this form is an underestimated cause of LGMD and CNS study, which was fundamental to address the diagnosis, should be included in the diagnostic workup of undiagnosed LGMD. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Congenital Myasthenic Syndromes (CMS) are infrequent inherited disorders, difficult to diagnose, with several clinical features, in which neuromuscular transmission is compromised by different mechanisms. We present a patient with a CMS caused by a mutation in the epsilon subunit of acetylcholine receptor (AChR), who has a surprising clinical response with 4-aminopyridine (4-AP), although not approved in Spain for this use. 4-AP is reportedly effective in refractory cases of CMS. Methods: A 27-year-old female who was diagnosed a CMS when she was 3. She presented generalized weakness and ophthalmoplegia, and she was treated with pyridostigmine, ephedrine, fluoxetine and salbutamol with incomplent beneficial effects. In 2015, a mutation in gene CHRNE was found, after doing a genetic panel. Because of different treatments inefficacy, she was offered an off-label agent, 4-AP. She was treated with oral 4-AP (20mg/day) for up to 10 months. We supposed it could have some effect in prolonging the action potential by blocking potassium channels, and consequently, increasing calcium entry into the nerve terminal. Similar to 3,4-diaminopiridine, it could have positive effects in structural defects of the AChR subunit. Results: She obtained a rapid and extremely good clinical response, which is still mantained, improving her quality of life. Conclusion: MCS have some thoroughly known effective medications, as pyridostigmine or 3,4-diaminopyridine. Nevertheless, in many patients the beneficial effects are incomplet and other therapeutic options are limited because of the abscence of controlled clinical trials. 3-AP could be a symptomatic treatment in some CMS. It is needed to continue researching about such findings. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1168 Still looking for predictors for myasthenic crisis occurrence is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder due to deficiency of the lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase enzyme. On 2006, alglucosidase alfa (rhGAA) was approved as an enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) for Pompe Disease. Efficacy of ERT in LOPD has been well demonstrated. However, only few studies have assessed ERT effects in long-term treated patients and the role of IgG anti rh-GAA antibodies in modulating efficacy of treatment is still incompletely known. Methods: We report clinical and functional findings from 9 LOPD patients treated with ERT for a time ranging between 3 and 9.5 years. Serial measurements of IgG anti rh-GAA antibodies were performed in 7 of them. Results: At the end of observation, respiratory function tests improved or were stable in 66% of cases; the walked distance at 6MWT improved in 75% of the patients up to 54 months, while in the subsequent follow-up (up to 108 months) 63% of them slowly reduced the walked meters. MRC subscore shows stabilization or improvement in 88% of patients.Titers of anti-rhGAA antibodies also in in very long treated patients are only mildly elevated (max 12800). No clear-cut relation between titers of anti-rhGAA antibodies and clinical outcome were observed. Conclusion: Our results confirm ERT long-term effectiveness, though it appears to be reduced over time compared to the first two years of therapy. A specific relation between titers of anti-rhGAA antibodies and response to treatment seems not to exist but it deserves further studies on wider numbers of patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Extensive molecular diagnosis in genetic diseases is vital to confirm clinical diagnosis and to enable genetic counseling and personalized management. Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a rare genetic neuromuscular disease affecting 1/5000 males, due to a variety of dystrophin gene mutations. The first signs and symptoms of DMD include delayed milestones such as walking and talking, and enlarged calves. PTC Therapeutics International Ltd. and the University of Ferrara, Italy, have established a collaboration focused on identifying patients affected by rare genetic disorders through increased genetic testing activities, with an initial focus on DMD. Genetic testing is available to patients throughout European countries, potentially expanding to other regions. Methods: Diagnostic settings include MLPA (MRC Holland) and NGS dystrophin gene sequencing (Multiplicom). Results: Currently DNA from 57 DMD boys was collected. Patients were from Poland (34), Hungary (10), Lituania (5), Romania (3), Russia (1) and Serbia (4). Among the 30 samples analyzed, 7 deletions, 4 duplications, 11 small mutations (8 nonsense) were identified. Conclusion: This collaborative project demonstrates PTC's commitment to expanding awareness of the importance of genetic testing for patients with DMD. The early identification of the underlying genetic mutation is critical to potentially affecting the course of a disease such as DMD as well as the choice of treatment and aids in the setup of appropriate and effective care and follow up. Genetic counselling can also be offered to patients and families with important repercussions on reproductive choices and lifestyle planning (full details and contacts at www.ospfe.it/medicalgenetics). Disclosure: Work supported by PTC Therapeutics International Ltd. Background and aims: Plasma exchange (PE) may be the preferred intervention due to financial considerations in some neuroimmunological diseases where intravenous immunoglobulins could also be applied as an evidencebased treatment. We evaluated the use of PE in a 10-year period in Hungary. Methods: Hungary has a single-payer health insurance system covering the whole population of 10 million inhabitants. In the framework of the Hungarian Brain Research Program we created the anonymized NEUROHUN database from medical reports submitted for reimbursement purposes to the National Health Insurance Fund from all hospitals and outpatient services throughout the country for the ten-year period between 2004 -2013. ICD-10 codes were used for diagnoses. Clinical diagnoses of the patients with PE treatment were analyzed. Results: In this 10-year period 8757 persons were treated with PE in Hungary, of these 5127 had some neurological service use and 2586 were given a neurological diagnosis within 10 days of the PE treatment. The vast majority of PE treatments were applied in 3 major diagnostic groups: diseases of the peripheral nervous system (ICD-10 G60-G64, n= 1415), diseases of the myoneural junction (G70-G73, n=836) and demyelinating disorders of the central nervous system (G35-37, n=278). Conclusion: As in Hungary PE is the preferred method of treatment in Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) and chronic inflammatory demyelinating neuropathy (CIDP), the average annual PE treatments in the G60-G64 diagnostic group suggests that the combined incidence of GBS and CIDP may be not less than 1.4/100.000 inhabitants/year in Hungary -corresponding to values reported from other European countries. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Porto, Portugal, 2 Internal Medicine Department, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Portugal, 3 Neuroradiology, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4 Neurology Department and Neuropathology Unit, Centro Hospitalar do Porto -Hospital de Santo António, Porto, Portugal Background and aims: Hypertrophic pachymeningitis (HP) is characterized by localized or diffuse thickening of the dura mater, with or without inflammation. Different etiologies are recognized, with autoimmune/inflammatory conditions increasingly reported. Aims: Describe a cohort of HP patients with probable autoimmune/inflammatory etiology. Methods: Retrospective study. Patients' identification through a key-word search of MRI reports from July/2008-September/2015. Data collection and analysis of those with an autoimmune/inflammatory etiology. Results: Forty patients with HP were identified, 8 with an inflammatory/autoimmune etiology. Of these, 6 were female, with mean age at clinical presentation of 49.7±12.4 years. Four patients were diagnosed with IgG4-related HP. The remaining were associated with Wegener's granulomatosis (1), sarcoidosis (1), rheumatoid arthritis (RA) (1) and Tolosa-Hunt syndrome (1). In 6 patients PH was the clinical presentation of the underlying inflammatory disease, being only a late manifestation in the patient with sarcoidosis. Presenting symptoms were cranial nerve palsies (3), headache (2), cognitive deterioration (2), lumbar pain (1) . PH was cranial in seven patients and spinal in one. Laboratory findings included hiperIgG4-emia (4), raised ECA (1) and serum positivity for pANCA/MPO (1), FR/ anti-CCP (1) and ANA (1) . Two patients had brain biopsy. Seven patients were treated with corticosteroids, 3 requiring additional immunossupressants. Overall, outcome was good, with only one relapsing. Conclusion: In our series of autoimmune/inflammatory PH there was a higher percentage of IgG4-related disease than reported, probably due to increased awareness of this entity. Clinical presentations were diverse, being brain MRI crucial in establishing PH diagnosis. We highlight the importance of laboratory findings in the final diagnosis, and the good outcome of most patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Neurology , Clinical Hospital Colentina Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2 Internal Medicine, Colentina Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3 Hiperdia, Radiology, Colentina Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 4 Neurosurgery, Clinical Hospital Colentina Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 5 Neurology, Colentina Clinical Hospital Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 6 "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania Background and aims: Spinal dural involvement is one of the least frequent neurologic manifestations of Wegener's granulomatosis (WG). Methods: We report a case of thoracolumbar pachymeningitis in a patient with a 5-year history of WG. A comprehensive search of the English language literature was performed. The differential diagnosis is widely discussed. Results: A 70-year-old female presented with subacute paraparesis accompanied by severe lumbar pain and moderate biological inflammatory syndrome in the absence of fever. At age 65 she was diagnosed WG based on histopathological proven bilateral retro-orbital granulomas and angeitis. Her disease also included pulmonary, rinosinusal,uveal and intracranial dural involvement. The serum titer of proteinase 3 anti-neutrophil antibodies was highly positive. Monthly high-dose cyclophosphamide and corticosteroids applications resulted in remission after 6 months. The MRI scan of the spine showed T11-L3 gadolinium-enhancing dural thickening consistent with WG-related spinal pachymeningitis. The L2-L3 vertebral discus and L3 vertebral body appeared to be mildly involved. Surgical biopsy and decompression could not be performed because of an unexpected fatal cardiac complication probably caused by WG. Axial T2-weighted spine MRI showing dural thickening at L2 level. Sagittal pre-and post-gadolinium T1-weighted spine MRI showing the contrast enhancing spinal dural thickening. Mild signal changes and contrast enhancement are also seen in the cranial region of the L2 vertebral body. Axial post-gadolinium T1-weighted brain MRI showing intraocular and orbital granulomas as well as temporal dural thickening and contrast enhancement. Conclusion: Meningeal involvement occurs in less than 4% of people with WG. Though very rarely described, isolated spinal dural involvement may be the first manifestation of a WG relapse. Considering the lack of pathognomonic features an infectious cause should be excluded prior to therapeutic immunosuppression. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1175 Neurexin-3alpha antibody-associated encephalitis after Plasmodium falciparum malaria A. Costa 1 , A. Silva-Pinto 2 , J. Alves 2 , N. Neves 2 , E. Martínez-Hernández 3 , P. Abreu 1 , A. Sarmento 2 1 Neurology Department, Centro Hospitalar São João, Porto, Portugal, 2 Infectious Diseases, Centro Hospitalar São João, Porto, Portugal, 3 Service of Neurology, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain Background and aims: A new form of autoimmune encephalitis associated with neurexin-3alpha antibodies was recently described in 5 patients. One of them had history of malaria a few months before presentation (not reported). We describe a new case that was preceded by Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Methods: Review of clinical information. Determination of neurexin-3alpha antibodies was performed as reported (Neurology 2016; 86:1-8) . Results: A 57-year-old Caucasian man with no clinical history of interest returned to Portugal after a long stay in Angola. Five days later he was diagnosed with P. falciparum malaria (8% parasitemia) and successfully treated with quinine-doxycycline. Two weeks after recovery he developed fever, somnolence, confusion and abnormal behavior. At examination he was disoriented in time and had inattention, acalculia, and visuospatial difficulties without focal deficits; the general exam was normal. The CSF showed 159 cells (91% mononuclear), protein 2.12 g/ dL, and normal glucose. The EEG was consistent with a severe subcortical encephalopathy without epileptic activity. Brain MRI showed a mild increase of T2/FLAIR signal in the caudate-capsule-lenticulate regions without gadolinium enhancement. Extensive CSF and serum studies were negative for infectious or systemic autoimmune causes. On the 8th day, a clinical diagnosis of post-malaria neurological syndrome was made and a 5-day course of 1g intravenous methylprednisolone was initiated with progressive clinical improvement. CSF and serum samples were then found to be positive for neurexin-3alpha antibodies. Conclusion: The case of this patient suggests that the encephalitis associated with neurexin-3alpha antibodies can develop as post-infectious encephalitis. Recognition of this disorder is important because it responds to immunotherapy. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1176 Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis following Chlamydophila pneumoniae infection S. Dias 1 , L. Azevedo 2 , P. Esperança 1 1 Neurology , Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Central, Lisbon, Portugal, 2 Department of Emergency and Intensive Care, Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Central, Lisbon, Portugal Background and aims: Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis (BBE) is a rare entity characterized by acute ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, altered consciousness, and variable signs of central nervous system dysfunction. It is included in the "anti-GQ1b antibody syndrome" along with a spectrum of disorders with a common immunological profile and variable overlapping features. Most patients have a history of preceding infection and several causative organisms have been described. Methods: We report a case of BBE following Chlamydophila pneumoniae infection. Results: A 30-year-old patient was admitted to the emergency department with a 24-hour history of gait unsteadiness, ascending weakness and psychomotor retardation. She reported symptoms of an upper respiratory infection a week earlier. Over the next few hours she developed blurred vision, worsening paralysis and became increasingly lethargic. Examination revealed a low-grade fever, drowsiness, bilateral external ophthalmoplegia and facial weakness, dysarthria, and tetraparesis with upper limb hyperreflexia. A diagnosis of BBE was considered and she was admitted to an intensive care unit, requiring assisted ventilation. Cerebrospinal fluid studies showed mild lymphocytic pleocytosis and brain magnetic resonance was normal. Serum anti-GQ1b IgG antibodies were positive, confirming the diagnosis, and a positive C. pneumoniae antigen was detected in bronchial secretions and assumed to be responsible for the respiratory illness. She was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin and doxycycline and slowly improved. Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of BBE following C. pneumoniae infection, although this pathogen has been previously reported in cases of MFS and acute isolated ophthalmoplegia. Further studies are needed to clarify a possible causal relationship. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Limbic encephalitis (LE) results in the acute or subacute appearance of a clinical syndrome associating memory disorders, epileptic seizures and / or psychiatric disorders. It may be paraneoplastic or not, pure or associated with an extralimbic involvement. To study the clinical, radiological and immunological profiles of autoimmune ELs associated with anti-neural antibodies in a series of 4 patients. Describe the peculiarities of these EL in our patients and confront atypical situations, not or little reported, to the data of the literature Methods: A monocentric, retrospective study of ALE associated to onconeuronal (ONA) and anti-membrane antibodies. All patients received clinical and neuropsychological evaluation, cerebral MRI, standard EEG, infectious, endocrine and metabolic assessment, ONA and membrane epitope antibody (LGI-1 and Caspr2, NMDA-R and GABAb-R) and finally a primary cancer assessment. Results: Four patients, all men, aged between 48 and 77 (mean=58.7 years) were included. Clinical, radiological, biological and immunological characteristics are described in Tables 1 and 2 Conclusion: The characteristics of ELAs diagnosed in our patients are: 1. Anti-PNMA 2 LE mimicking Gayet-Wernicke encephalopathy 2. Anti-NMDA-R antibodies following HSV-1 encephalitis 3. LE to anti-Yo in a man, mimicking a Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease 4. The presence of at least one second antibody when the 1st antibody has an intracellular epitope These descriptions confirm the clinical heterogeneity of ALEs and may contribute, with the discovery of new autoantibodies, to a better knowledge of these encephalitis. This first work in Algeria on ALEs raises the interest of a more extensive study in order to better characterize them. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1178 Clinical course of LGI1 and CASPR2antibodies associated limbic encephalitis E. Edwards 1 , L. Imbach 2 , A. Lutterotti 3 1 Zurich, Switzerland, 2 Department of Neurology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3 Unispital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Background and aims: Seizures, cognitive impairment and memory loss as well as other central and peripheral nervous system characterize limbic encephalitis. In the past years voltage-gated potassium channel antibody (VGKC-) associated limbic encephalitis has been characterized and further distinct into subgroups. To date only few case reports have shed light to course and treatment of this devastating disease. Methods: We would like to present 8 patients with VGKC associated limbic encephalitis (3 of which have VGKC/ LGI1-antibodies, 3 present VGKC/CASPR2-antibodies and 2 are VGKC positive but lack both LGI1/CASPR2 antibodies). We will present the clinical course and evolution under immunomodulatory as well as anti-epileptic and psychoactive therapy backed by diagnostic follow up through serum/CNS -serology, magnetic resonance imaging and video-electroencephalogram-findings, detailed neuropsychological testings and additional electrophysiological testing. Results: Although the case number is limited we would like to help further differentiate those three VGKC-subgroups formally summarized by VGKC-complex-antibodies. Conclusion: The three VGKC associated limbic encephalitis have distinct patterns of differentiation both in clinical and in diagnostic evaluation. Awareness in clinical presentation as well as serum/CNS -serology, magnetic resonance imaging, electroencephalography and neuropsychological testing can help in early diagnosis and mangement of this devastating disease. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Anti-GAD antibodies have been associated with limbic encephalitis, new-onset type 1 diabetes, Stiff-person syndrome, exaggerated startle, cerebellitis, and refractory epilepsy. Methods: We report a case of a patient with anti-GAD encephalitis including chorea and dystonia. Results: A 38-year-old woman presented with a 4-month history of involuntary movements of the left hand, slurred speech, and gait instability. On examination, we observed nystagmus and round the houses sign, orofacial dyskinesia, dysarthria, cervical dystonia, choreo-dystonic movements of the left upper limb, and mild gait ataxia. Brain-MRI documented a left temporal hyperintensity in T2 sequence. Anti-GAD title was positive in blood (1/3200) and CSF (1/320). The EEG disclosed nine seizures of left temporal origin in 30 minutes, which showed no temporal correlation with the aforementioned involuntary movements, nor other obvious clinical manifestations. The patient was treated with sodium valproate (1800mg/day), and methylprednisolone, followed by IV immunoglobulin. Upon discharge, she maintained mild orofacial dyskinesia, and choreo-dystonia of the left hand. There were no seizures or interictal epileptiform activity on the EEG and the Jerklocked back average (JLBA) analysis of the facial movements showed no cortical correlate. Conclusion: This case of anti-GAD encephalitis presented previously unreported choreo-dystonia, besides electrical temporal seizures. Absence of a cortical correlate of choreodystonia on EEG-JLBA, and movement persistence after resolution of the epileptic activity support a non-epileptic origin of those movements. The association of clinical signs of basal ganglia involvement with subclinical electrical seizures expands the spectrum of anti-GAD disorders. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Background and aims: NeuroBehçet disease (NBD) is the most frequent vasculitis in our country. In presence of inaugural neurological forms, CSF study is systematic because of diagnosis difficulties. Our aim was to describe the immunoelectrophoretic and cytokine profile in NBD. Methods: Criteria of selection: NBD according to the International consensus recommendation (ICR) with definite and probable forms including isolated neurological syndrome suggestive of NBD. Subjects were consecutive patients who referred to Neurological department of Charles Nicolle hospital since 2013. Blood and CSF samples are taken from all patients. Cell counting, protein analysis, immunoelectrophoretic profile with Ig G Index was performed. Cytokines levels were evaluated by PCR. Results: From 26 NBD recruited 17 had an inaugural neurological form of which 15/17 had a parenchymal involvement. The IgG index was increased in only 2 patients (8%). At the Immunoelectrophoresis, the profile was type 1 in 22 patients (81%), type 2 in 1 patient (3.7%) and type 3 and 4 in 4 patients (11%). The study of lymphocyte populations showed an increase of IL-17, interferon gamma and IL10 levels in more than 80% of patients. The profile data in CSF of NBD patients in our study are in line with those found in the literature. Given the limited data on CSF levels of cytokines in patients with NBD, our results showed that cytokines make a pivotal role in pathogenesis of NB, as evidenced by the conjoining increase of pro and anti-inflammatory cytokines in our patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Erythtromelalgia (EM) is a rare vascular peripheral pain disorder in which blood vessels, usually in the lower extremities or hands, are episodically blocked. There is severe burning pain in small fiber sensory nerves and skin redness. Stiff person syndrome (SPS) is a disorder characterized by progressive rigidity, stiffness, which affects the truncal muscles, superimposing by spasms. Chronic pain, lumbar hyperlordosis are common. The Nav1.7 voltage-gated sodium channels antibodies (AB) seems to have a cornerstone effect in EM pathophysiology. Glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) AB evidently are a positive SPS sign. Methods: Under our observation were 6 patients with EM and 3 patients with clinicaly proved SMS. We studied AB against Nav1.7 and GAD in both groups patients and in control group comprising of 34 neurologically healthy donors. Positive labeling by an antibody against the neurofilament protein peripherin was used to identify group IV neurons and axons. Western Blot analysis (WBA) was used to determine comcentration of both AB types in these diseases. Results: Concentrations of AB to Nav1.7 and GAD were considerably increased in all EM with hyperemic and inflamed extrremities and SPS patients characterized by spasms and postural deformities, correspondingly. These results were confirmed both by WBA and using immunohistochemistry. Conclusion: In both cases (EM and SPS) appear as autoimmune neurological disorders with evidence of pathgenetic rol of AB to Nav1.7 in EM and anti-GAD AB in SPS. Immunohistochemistry and WBA showed some correlation to clinical picture of both sufferings and could serve as targets for future therapeutic approaches. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1183 An unusual brainstem encephalitis associated with anti-glycine receptor antibodies: Clinicopathological description D. Lux 1 , G. Kumar 1 , T. Webb 2 , I. Bodi 3 , N. Moran 1 1 Neurology, Kent & Canterbury Hospital, Canterbury, United Kingdom, 2 Neurology and Stroke, Kent & Canterbury Hospital, Canterbury, United Kingdom, 3 Neuropathology, King's College Hospital, London, London, United Kingdom Background and aims: Glycine receptor (GlycR) antibodies are most frequently associated with the syndrome progressive encephalomyelitis with rigidity and myoclonus. Previous reports of GlycR-associated syndromes demonstrated a variable response to immunotherapy. Neuropathological reports are few. The current case is of interest in that it was characterised predominantly by brainstem features without rigidity, responded to immunotherapy and proceeded to post-mortem examination. Methods: A well 64-year-old man presented with external ophthalmoplegia, facial weakness, bulbar dysfunction, hyper-reflexia and myoclonus with onset three days after coryzal symptoms. There was no rigidity, cognitive impairment or seizures. No neoplastic or vasculitic condition was identified. Serum GlycR antibodies were positive. Negative tests included: onconeuronal antibodies; antibodies vs. N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor, voltage gated potassium channel, glutamic acid decarboxylase, and gangliosides; MRI of the neural axis; cerebrospinal fluid analysis; nerve conduction studies. Results: Despite two courses of intravenous immunoglobulin, he had a respiratory arrest and required prolonged invasive ventilation, complicated by fluctuating tachy-bradycardia with intermittent asystole. Following plasma exchange and corticosteroids, he was weaned from ventilation and began mobilising. Ophthalmoplegia and myoclonus completely resolved but bulbar recovery was incomplete. The patient died following severe pulmonary oedema 110 days after presentation. Detailed post-mortem examinations found no significant abnormalities in the brain, spinal cord or heart and no evidence of a malignancy. Conclusion: This case illustrates a GlycR-associated brainstem syndrome with significant autonomic involvement as well as the potential for neurological improvement with immunotherapy. The absence of rigidity was unusual.1 The lack of histopathological change supports previous literature arguing against a destructive pathogenesis of GlycR-associated syndromes.1 Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. Please include following as reference for abstract: 1. Glycine receptor antibodies in PERM and related syndromes: characteristics, clinical features and outcomes. Carvajal-González A et al. Brain Methods: The design of the research was a case study. The four patients included in the current study were evaluated before and after 20 sessions of FES (five days a week, for four weeks). Each patient performed several training tasks in the workstation assisted by the FES device. The following parameters were evaluated: (i) the muscle tone of the flexor muscles of the wrist of the affected upper limb, which was measured according to the Modified Ashworth Scale (MAS); (ii) motor function, measured by the Action Research Arm test (ARAT) , and (iii) the perception of the manual ability of the paretic upper limb by the Manual Ability Measure -16 (MAM-16). Results: There was a favourable decrease in the MAS scores in the four participants after the FES intervention. Likewise, there was also an improvement in the ARAT scores and a significant increase in the self-perception of the manual ability of the upper paretic limb after FES intervention. The application of FES can contribute to manage the spasticity of the flexor muscles of the affected wrist in chronic stroke survivors. In addition, 20 sessions of FES are associated with an improvement in the motor function and the self-perception of the manual ability of the paretic upper limb. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1185 Effect of hiding view of the starting hand position when using a home-friendly treatment for spatial neglect in healthy participants A.S. Champod 1 , G. Haidar 1 , G. Eskes 2 1 Acadia University, Wolfville, Canada, 2 Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada Background and aims: Prism adaptation is an experimental treatment for spatial neglect with limitations preventing its clinical application. Peg-the-Mole (PTM) is a new homefriendly prism adaptation iPad procedure that induced aftereffects in healthy participants. The purpose of this study was to examine whether hiding view of the starting hand position during PTM would increase the magnitude of aftereffects by reducing self-correction in pointing movements. Methods: Sixty healthy participants were randomly assigned to one of four conditions (Goggles: Prism/Sham, Starting Hand Position: Visible/Hidden). After-effects were measured using a proprioceptive and visual pointing tasks and a wheelchair obstacle task. Results: Larger pointing errors were observed in the Prism/ Hidden than the Prism/Visible groups during PTM. Significant Goggles x Starting Hand Position interactions were observed on the visual pointing task and the wheelchair task. The difference in after-effects between Prism and Sham groups on the visual task was larger in the Hidden than the Visible groups (p<0.05). On the wheelchair task, fewer hits on the right side of the course (p<0.05) and a trend for more hits on the left side of the course (p=0.06) were found in the Prism compared to the Sham conditions, but only for the Hidden group. Conclusion: These results suggest that hiding view of starting hand position contributes to induce larger aftereffects by reducing self-correction in pointing movements, which is of clinical relevance considering the relation between after-effects and the improvement in neglect symptoms. Background and aims: Decrements in dual-task capacity may predispose stroke survivors to risk of falls. There is a need to explore whether dual-task training would enhance dual-task performance. The purpose of this study is to compare the effect of single-and dual-task training on gait speed and cognition in stroke patients. Methods: Twenty-six subjects with stroke were randomly allocated to either a single-or dual-task balance group. Both groups received training at progressively increasing task difficulty (60 minutes per session, three times a week, for four weeks). Single-task group undertook balance and gait training. Dual-task group trained balance and gait while simultaneously performing cognitive tasks. All participants were examined walking and cognition under single-and dual-tasking at pretreatment, posttreatment, and 1-month follow-up. Primary outcome measures of walking and cognition were gait speed and composite score of cognitive tasks (serial 3 subtractions, Stroop, and auditory Stroop) under single-and dual-tasking. Dual-task costs were calculated. Results: Both groups showed statistically significant improvements on gait speed under single-and dual-task walking, and reduced gait costs under walking with serial 3 subtractions. Compared to single-task group, dual-task group was significantly reduced more gait speed cost under walking with Stroop task at follow-up. Only dual-task group significantly improved gait costs under walking with Stroop and auditory Stroop tasks at posttreatment and follow-up. Both groups significantly improved composite scores of single-and dual-auditory Stroop task. The preliminary results showed a favorable trend toward dual-task balance training with greater reduced dual-task costs on gait speed. Disclosure: This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology (104-2314-B-182-035-MY3) and Chang Gung Memorial Hospital (CMRPD3E0331) in Taiwan. Neurotransmitters changes after rTMS treatment in patients with secondaryprogressive multiple sclerosis and severe spasticity Background: To improve our knowledge about neuroplasticity changes in patients with spasticity we used proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (H-MRS) of motor cortex before and after navigated repetitive TMS (rTMS) of motor cortex . Introduction: Our aim was to qualify H-MRS technique in assessment of neurotransmitters changes in patients with secondary-progressive multiple sclerosis (SPMS). Methods: Twenty three patients (10 males, 13 females, mean age 44.7±11.47 years) with SPMS and lower spastic paraparesis were enrolled in double-blind placebo-control study. Neuroplasticity changes in motor cortex area were investigated before and after two types of rTMS (20 Hz,n=9; intermittent theta birst (iTBS), n=5) or sham stimulation (n=9). We assessed levels of neurotransmitters using simple voxel proton MRS. Voxel was placed in the senso-motorial region. For assessment spasticity level we used Modified Ashworth Scale (MAS),Subjective Evaluation Spasticity Scale (SESS) before and at the end of rTMS sessions, SESS -2 weeks and 3 months after of rTMS sessions. Results: We did not recognize significant changes in neurotransmitters level in all groups after rTMS. There was only slight increase of lactate level in 20 Hz group. Patients underwent both types of rTMS showed a reduction of spasticity on MAS and SESS in compare with placebo group. Conclusion: Our results indicate no significant changes in neurotransmitters level after rTMS session in comparison with placebo. But we noticed a significant reduction of spasticity on MAS and SESS in both treatment groups. Lack of H-MRS changes can be due to strong neuroplasticity changes in patients with SPMS. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1189 Correlation between cognitive impairment and early functional rehabilitation outcomes after stroke in elderly patients N. Polimac Gorana, R.R. Zaid, J. Kulenovic, A. Amidzic Background and aims: Stroke is among the leading causes of disability and mortality in the elderly and leading cause of hospital admission and prolonged length of stay for patients 65 years and older. Evidence from clinical trials supports the premise that early initiation of rehabilitation influences recovery from stroke. Cognitive impairment, as manifested by low scores in mental status questionnaires, has been correlated with limited functional gains and poor rehabilitation outcome in elderly patients. Methods: Patients and Methods: Our study was prospective and conducted at Neurological department of General Hospital "Prim.dr A. Nakas" Sarajevo during 01.01.2015.-31.12.2015. We included 50 patients older then 70 years hospitalized because of first ishaemic stroke with significant motor impairment which is defined with NIHSS score at admission and at discharge and all of them were included in early rehabilitation program for 2 weeks at Neurological Department. Cognitive status was assessed with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). Results: The majority, 69.2%, exhibited cognitive deficits on admission. There were 9.8% patients with an MMSE score equal or lower then 10 points. Better rehabilitation outcomes were observed in patients with higher admission cognitive status, adjusting for the effect of age, sex and severity of stroke (odds ratio 2.57; 95% confidence interval, 1.2-2.5;p=0,01). Conclusion: Because many rehabilitation techniques require normal cognition and patient cooperation, cognitive status must be considered when determining the rehabilitation aims, establishing treatment strategies and predicting outcome. Better functional outcomes being achieved in cognitively intact elderly stroke patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1190 Action observation training effects on brain structural and functional changes in Parkinson's disease patients Background and aims: To assess brain functional and structural changes following action observation training (AOT) associated with exercises of balance, gait, transfers and manual dexterity in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. Methods: Twelve PD patients were randomized into two groups: AOT-group performed a 4-week training consisting of AO combined with practicing the observed actions; LANDSCAPE-group performed the same exercises combined with landscape-videos observation. At baseline (T0) and week 4 (W4), patients underwent clinical assessments. 3D T1-weighted, diffusion tensor (DT) MRI and functional MRI (fMRI) were acquired. FMRI tasks consisted of hand anti-phase movements and motor imagery of circumstances representing activities of daily living. Clinical evaluations were repeated at 3-month follow-up. Results: At W4 both groups showed changes of the step frequency. The AOT group had an improvement of quality of life at W4 and velocity during manual activities at 3 months. During the hand anti-phase task, AOT-group showed an increased activity of frontal areas and a decreased recruitment of cerebello-thalamo-cortical network, while the LANDSCAPE-group had an increased activity of the thalamus and a decreased recruitment of parietal areas. During the motor imagery task, AOT-group showed a reduced recruitment of the cerebello-thalamo-cortical network and occipital areas, while the LANDSCAPE-group showed an increased activity of motor areas. Only in the AOT-group, functional plasticity was correlated with clinical improvements. AOT-group showed an increased integrity of cerebellar peduncles correlated to cerebellar functional plasticity. Conclusion: The combination between physical and cognitive exercises has the potential to stimulate both functional and structural brain plasticity compared to a pure motor training in PD patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: The role of acute neck pain as a predictor of persistent posttraumatic complaints after mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) is unknown. The aim of this study was to describe the characteristics and course of acute neck pain following mTBI and its relation to persistent posttraumatic complaints and functional outcome. We also studied whether demographic and injury related factors were associated with persistent neck pain. Methods: We analyzed data of 933 mTBI patients (n=162 mTBI patients with acute neck pain and n=771 without acute neck pain) admitted to the Emergency Department (ED), from a prospective follow-up study in three level-one trauma centers (UPFRONT-study). Posttraumatic complaints and resumption of activities were evaluated at six months post-injury using standardized questionnaires. Results: Patients with acute posttraumatic neck pain were more often female (p=0.002) and younger (41 vs. 46 years p=0.002) compared to controls. No differences regarding CT abnormalities were found. Neck pain correlated with headache, dizziness and nausea in the acute phase (p<0.005). Patients with neck pain had more often motor vehicle accidents (p=0.009) and reported more neck pain pre-injury (p=0.012). Also more neck pain and posttraumatic complaints with lower Glasgow Outcome Scale-Extended scores after six months were present. Conclusion: Acute neck pain after mTBI is a predictor for the development of persistent neck pain and posttraumatic complaints six months post-injury. Pre-injury neck pain and motor vehicle accidents are factors predisposing for acute posttraumatic neck pain. This suggest that patients at risk for an unfavorable outcome might already be identified at the ED. Disclosure: This study was funded by the Dutch Brain Foundation (grant no. Ps2012-06). A. Korchut, S. Szklener, K. Rejdak Background and aims: The aim of the study was to investigate the relationship between presence of generalized anxiety at the time of mild head injury and the somatic symptoms occurring 3 months after that incident. Methods: At the beginning using the Generalized anxiety disorder 7-item scale (GAD-7) we evaluated 97 patients consecutively admitted to the Emergency Department because of mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) but without pathology in computerized tomography scan and who did not require hospitalization. Based on GAD-7 they were divided into two groups: patients with a high level of anxiety (above 6 points) and patients with a low level of anxiety (equal or less than 6 points). Next, from primary group of 97 patients we assessed 56 of them regarding 7 somatic symptoms by using three points measurement (from "1 -not at all" , 2 -" a little" to "3 -a lot") during neurological control examination conducted at least 3 months after brain injury. Results: Among the group of patients with a high level of anxiety on admission, 78% of them reported at least one somatic symptom which was assessed on 3 points, from which 50% of them notified at least two symptoms with 3 points. The majority of patients (89%) from the second group with a low level of anxiety did not report the somatic symptoms. Conclusion: GAT-7 scale could be useful as a prognostic tool to select patients after mTBI who are predisposed to develop somatic symptoms , what could be helpful to manage this group of patients Disclosure: Nothing to disclose M. van Den Broeke-Vos 1 , B. Jacobs 2 , S. Coffeng 1 , M. de Koning 2 , M. Scheenen 3 , H. van der Horn 2 , J. Spikman 3 , J. van der Naalt 2 Background and aims: Acute alcohol intoxication (AAI) is associated with a higher risk of mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) in the overall population. However, the incidence and impact of mTBI due to AAI in elderly patients is unknown. The aim of this study was to describe the characteristics of alcohol related mTBI in elderly patients and to determine the mechanism of trauma and outcome. Methods: We analyzed data from 388 mTBI patients with an age of 55 years or older (84 AAI vs. 304 non-intoxicated patients) from a prospective cohort study in three Dutch level 1 trauma centers (UPFRONT-study). Injury mechanism and outcome were compared between groups. Posttraumatic complaints and functional outcome were evaluated after 2 weeks and 6 months using standardized questionnaires. Results: 22% of the elderly mTBI patients was intoxicated with alcohol. There was no significant difference in intracranial traumatic CT findings, Glasgow Coma Scale at admission, frequency of hospital admission and Glasgow Outcome Scale Extended compared to controls. Injury Severity Score was higher in the non-intoxicated group (8.5 vs 6.6 p=0.036). Falls were the most common trauma mechanism and even more common in the AAI group (94% vs. 72% p=0.000). Patients with AAI mTBI reported less posttraumatic complaints after 2 weeks (p=0.010) and 6 months (p=0.044). Conclusion: One in five injuries in our aged mTBI patients was alcohol related and most injuries were due to falls. For clinical practice, it might be necessary to focus more on alcohol and fall prevention strategies in the older population to reduce the incidence of mTBI. Disclosure: This study was funded by the Dutch Brain Foundation (grant no. Ps2012-06). Neurological complications of regional anesthesia: Two cases illustrating a broad spectrum F. Antunes, I.R. Marques, M. Rodrigues, C.S.S. Guarda, M.D. Grunho Background and aims: Regional anesthesia procedures are associated with a 1-4/10.000 neurological complication rate. Such complications are varied, and include intracranial hypotension, transient Horner syndrome, myelopathy or radiculopathy. We report two cases that illustrate this broad clinical spectrum. Results: Case 1: A 31-year-old female patient developed, during cesarean section under epidural anesthesia, symptoms indicating rostral spread of local anesthetics (arterial hypotension and left upper limb paresthesiae). After surgery, a left Horner's syndrome was noted. Head CT with CT Angiography was normal. The clinical picture resolved within six hours. Case 2: A 68-year-old female patient submitted to a knee arthroplasty under combined spinal and epidural anesthesia (L3/L4) remained with a flaccid monoparesis and hypoesthesia of the left lower limb with a D7/8 hemisensory level on the left. Spinal MRI revealed an extensive myelopathy, with ischemic features, occupying the left half of the dorsal and lumbar spinal cord. Recovery was poor and the patient maintained the deficits at discharge. Conclusion: In Case 1 the sympathetic pathway to the eye was transiently compromised because of the rostral spread of the anesthetics. In Case 2 the exact pathophysiological mechanism remains unknown, but imaging features suggest a venous infarction. These two cases remind us that regional anesthesia is not without risk. The pathophysiological mechanism and clinical presentation of its complications are numerous, ranging from self-limited disorders with a very good prognosis (Case 1) to severe ones with major sequelae (Case 2). Neurologists should get acquainted with these complications as they may be called upon to manage them. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Since the introduction of the vaccination against poliovirus, poliomyelitis has become a disease virtually eradicated in developed countries. In 2016, the National Spanish Institute of Epidemiology reported 60 cases of pediatric patients with acute flaccid paralysis or rhombencephalitis, identifying in 5 of them non-polio enteroviruses. Methods: 63-year-old male patient, consulted with acute onset of occipital headache, fever and general discomfort. Successively, dysphonia, dysphagia and cervical weakness were added. Neurological exploration revealed bilateral ptosis, dysphonia, severe weakness for cervical flexoextension, generalized hypoactive myotatic reflexes, flexor plantar reflexes and normal sensory examination. He presented a rapid progression to severe asymmetric proximal weakness of superior limbs with respiratory distress secondary to bilateral phrenic paralysis requiring admission in the intensive care unit. Conclusion: This is a case report of a patient with poliolike disease. Sometimes it is not possible to identify the etiological agent. Nevertheless, it is an entity to remember in the differential diagnosis of acute flaccid paralysis even in adult patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  V. Tsymbaliuk 1 , V. Medvediev 1 , R. Vasiliev 2 , O. Rybachuk 2 , V. Kozyavkin 3 , N. Draguntsova 4 , V. Background and aims: To examine NeuroGelTM with xenogenic neural crest stem cells (NCSC) implantation on rat's hind limb motor function recovery after experimental spinal cord injury. Methods: Animals: outbred albino rats. Experimental groups:1-spinal cord injury only (n=16); 2 -spinal cord injury +immediate homotopical transplantation of NeuroGelTM (n=20); 3 -spinal cord injury+analogous transplantation of NeuroGelTM in association with adult mouse NCSC (n=12). Group 3 consisted of 12 animals, respectively, -subgroups 3m and 3f. Model of injuryleft-side spinal cord hemisection at Т11; duration of observation -28 weeks; ipsilateral hindlimb function indicator (IHL FI) determination -the BBB scale. Results: Significant differences between the group 2 and group 1 IHLFI noted during period of 2th-28th week (p<0.001), between IHL FI of the group 1 and group 3during the whole observation period (p≤0.02). The maximum prevalence of group 3 IHL I over the group 2 IHLFI pointed at 24thweek (p=0.055). Significantly (p<0.05) difference between IHL FI of the subgroup 3m and group 2 was found at the 5th-16th week, between IHL FI of the subgroup 3m and group 3f -during period of the 1st-6th week. Significant difference between the subgroup 3f and group 2 IHL FI was not observed, the maximum value of its difference was found at the 3rd-4thweek. Conclusion: NCSC xenotransplantation generally changes the function recovery dynamics, conditioned a trend towards potentiation of the NeuroGelTM positive effect on the course of the spinal cord injury; efficiency of this influence significantly depends on the sex of recipient organism. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Soft surfaces offer unstable supporting area that may alter walking characteristics of patients with impaired walking ability such as those with spinal cord injury (SCI).Therefore, this study aim to investigate spatiotemporal gait characteristics of 15 ambulatory participants with SCI who walked with (n=8) or without (n=7) a walking device while walking on hard and 3inches thickness soft surfaces. Methods: The participants were assessed for their demographics, SCI characteristics, and spatiotemporal gait parameters while walking over a 10-m walkway of hard and soft surfaces. Findings of each surface were compared using the paired simple t-test. Results: Walking on a soft surface attributed obvious effects on step length and cadence of participants who did not use a walking device (p<0.05). However, for those who used a walking device, walking on soft surface significantly affected only in walking cadence (p<0.05). The different effects of soft surfaces on walking characteristics of those who walked with or without a walking device may suggest the contribution of upper limb functions when they encountered a challenging task as that seen in those who used a walking device. The findings may suggest the risk of falls for these individuals when they participate in a different surface from that commonly used in rehabilitation settings. Thus the incorporation of soft surfaces during walking training may promote rehabilitation outcomes for the patients. Disclosure: This study was supported by funding support from the Research and Researchers for Industries or RRI and the Improvement of physical performance and Quality of life Research groups, Khon Kaen University, Thailand.  Background and aims: Cervical spondylotic myelopathy (CSM) is a common, underdiagnosed and potentially debilitating disorder, with significant clinical heterogeneity. Despite its prevalence, delayed or misdiagnosis of CMS is still frequent nowadays. Results: Case 1: A 61-year-old female was observed for a right foot drop, with numbness, and was given the diagnosis of diabetic neuropathy. She presented to us one year later having developed a left foot drop plus weakness and numbness in both hands. Neurological examination revealed hyperreflexic quadriparesis with right side predominance, bilateral Hoffmann and Babinski signs, hypoesthesia and hypopallesthesia of hands and lower limbs, with sensory level at D6. Spinal MRI showed severe spinal stenosis with myelopathy at C5-C6 level. The patient underwent cervical laminectomy and, at one-year follow-up, exhibited partial recovery of strength. Case 2: A 76-year-old male presented with a one-year history of progressive stepwise left limbs weakness, at first confined to the lower limb, and hence attributed to lumbar radiculopathy. Neurological examination uncovered bilateral upper limbs and torso fasciculations and hyperreflexic left hemiparesis with Babinski sign. Cervical MRI revealed spondylotic myelopathy at C3-C6 levels. Six months after cervical laminectomy, there was only a mild left crural paresis remaining. Conclusion: These two patients' atypical presentation of CSM incited a lengthy diagnosis and late referral to surgery. Given the lack of pathognomonic symptoms, identification of CSM requires a high index of suspicion. It is imperative to keep improving the awareness of the disorder, especially regarding unusual presentations, since early diagnosis and treatment limits disease progression and prevents irreversible neurological impairment. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: This case study examines longterm biomechanical changes caused by a total disc replacement in a 34-year-old female patient after traumatic incomplete spinal cord injury C5/C6 and cervical myelopathy, AIS D sub C5. Methods: 10-year follow-ups. First MRI was done prior to surgery. Clinical, radiological (X-rays, CT, MRI, myelography of the spine), electrophysiological examinations (Somatosensory and Motor Evoked Potentials SSEPs/MEPs, NLG, EMG) were acquired yearly because of fluctuating neurological symptoms. Results: After implant the patient showed slight problems with bladder function and hypoesthesia in the complete left leg. 9 months later intermittent pain in the cervical spine and a worsening of bladder function occurred. CT scans, X-rays and myelography proved an osteophyte level C5/6. Slight protrusions within presurgical MRI level C4/5, C6/7 became more prominent. Heterotopic ossification in the level of implant and disc protrusions were progressive and finally diagnosed as disc bulging in 7-year follow-up report for MRI. SSEPs were normal, MEPs showed a slight increase of the resting motor threshold of the left leg. NLG/ EMG was regular. The 10-year follow-up report showed further aggravation of the clinical parameters. Conclusion: Heterotopic ossification in the level of implant and disc herniation in the adjacent spine segments were detected at least 9 months post implantation with progression in the further time course. Altered biomechanical stress due to the implant could be responsible to these secondary changes beyond age-related degenerative alterations. Longterm biomechnical effects of implantation should be taken into consideration and should lead to further research implant improvement with regard to material and biomechanics. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Spinal arteriovenous fistula (SAVF) is a rare cause of myelopathy, frequently misdiagnosed as myelitis. Our aim is to describe a case of SAVF, summarizing the main features of this pathology to help future early diagnosis. Methods: A 57-year-old male was hospitalized for paresthesia and stiffness in both legs: the symptoms started a year before, after he had undergone bone marrow transplantation for an acute myeloid leukemia, successfully treated with fludarabine and busulfan. Over the past two months the symptoms worsened quickly. Neurological examination showed hypopallesthesia, hypertonia and hyperreflexia in both legs, Babinski sign on the left and hypoesthesia under D12 level. Results: An EMG showed a mild axonopathy in both legs. A longitudinally extensive dorsal myelopathy from D7 to D12 segments was detected at a spinal MRI scan. We first postulated an inflammatory disease, supported by mild increase of CSF proteins. A steroid therapy was started, but after two days the symptoms worsened, resulting in severe gait disturbances. At this point the hypothesis of SAVF was formulated and confirmed by MRA scan, which evidenced a spinal venous congestion, and eventually by a spinal DSA. We promptly started a mannitol therapy to reduce the edema with benefit, while the patient was waiting for surgical intervention. Conclusion: Although SAVF is a rare condition, it should be considered in the differential diagnosis of longitudinally extensive myelopathies. This is much more worthy as steroid therapy may result in symptoms worsening. Spine MRA scan should be performed in the setting of longitudinally extensive myelopathies. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1204 Spinal cord ischemia syndrome due to anterior spinal artery occlusion: A case report C. Örken, S. Yasaroglu, D. Süer Background and aims: Spinal cord ischemia is a rrare disease compared to cerebral ischemia because of the rich anastomotic vessels of the spinal cord. Acute spinal cord ischemia syndrome represents <1% of all strokes. Diagnosing the occlusive vascular lesions of the spinal cord is challenging and there is a need to clear the aetiology. Methods: 60-year-old female presented with severe pain starting from the right hip extending to the right leg spreading to the left leg and abdomen. Her medical history revealed diabetes, hypertension and lomber disc hernia. At the admission she had flaccid paraplegia on both limbs. Analgesia was present under T10 level, plantar responses were indifferent Results: The cranial, cervical, thoracic and lomber MRI showed no findings of a mass or myelitis. In the thoracal segments increased T2 signals were seen on the anterior spinal cord from T5 to conus medullaris. Thoracal disc protrusion was seen on T3-4 level. The patient was diagnosed with spinal cord ischemia syndrome and was treated with acetylsalicylic acid and LMWH . Owl-eye sign seen on T10-T11 level Thoracal disc hernia seen on T3-T4 level and increased T2 signals seen below T5 level e-Poster © 2017 European Journal of Neurology, 24 (Suppl. 1), 123-444 Conclusion: Spinal cord infarcts are usually present with acute radicular pain, radiating caudally, combined with paraplegia, paresthesia and sphincter dysfunction. The aetiology includes aterosclerotic and aortic pathologies, trauma or emboli. Fibrocartilaginous emboli resulting from a herniated disc is also an important cause of the spinal infarct which is seen in our case. Gold standard diagnostic tool is the spinal MRI. Spinal MRI is also used to exclude other pathologies of the spinal cord. Increased T2 signals in the cord, owl-eye sign on axial sections is typical. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP1205 Catastrophic arachnoiditis following posterior fossa aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage. A. Zarkali 1 , G. Kumar 1 , L. Flores 1 , M. Crocker 2 , S. Harikrishnan 1 Background and aims: Arachnoiditis is a rare complication of subarachnoid haemorrhage(SAH) with less than 30 cases reported. It commonly presents following a posterior fossa aneurysm, with haemomyelia being the proposed trigger of the inflammatory response. Methods: We present a case and review the literature. Results: A 55-year-old right-handed carpenter, presented with three week history of sudden onset band-like thoracic chest pain, followed by progressive numbness and weakness of both legs and micturition difficulty. Three months prior, he had a spontaneous SAH secondary to two posterior inferior cerebellar artery aneurysms;these were clipped and he made a complete recovery. Examination showed myelopathy with a T9 sensory level and urgent MRI showed extensive arachnoiditis of the cervical, thoracic and lumbar spine with cauda equina compression. He was transferred to a neurosurgical unit and had an attempted laminectomy and drain insertion; weakness worsened significantly postoperatively. Two subsequent courses of IV methylprednisolone had no effect and he was left with spastic paraplegia, incontinence and T6 sensory level. Conclusion: Post-SAH arachnoiditis is rare, with no consistent approach to treatment and variable outcomes reported. Most cases, as in our patients, follow posterior fossa aneurysms. Given the significant time delay following the initial SAH, this important diagnosis can be missed in the early stages. Unfortunately in our patient, neither surgery or immunomodulatory treatment altered the disease course, however early intervention may lead to better outcomes. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) and pulsed corticosteroids are both efficacious first choice treatments in CIDP. Each has its own benefits. IVIg has a fast mode of action usually leading to improvement within 6 weeks of treatment. Alternatively, corticosteroids can lead to long-term remission, defined as sustained improvement after stopping treatment. As fast improvement and long-term remissions can both be regarded as equally important, we hypothesized that combining IVIg and pulsed corticosteroids will lead to a higher rate of improvement, faster improvement and more frequent long-term remission in CIDP compared to treatment with IVIg or corticosteroids alone. Methods: We started a prospective open-label uncontrolled feasibility study with a convenience sample of 20 probable or definite CIDP patients according to the EFNS/PNS criteria. Patients are treated with 3-weekly pulses of IVIg (2g/kg in first week followed by 1g/kg) and 1000 mg intravenous methylprednisolone during an 18-week period. Primary outcome is the number of patients in remission at 1 year after start of treatment. Results: So far, the OPTIC protocol was initiated in eighteen patients. Thirteen completed treatment period, in two treatment was adjusted because of adverse events (toxicoderma, diverticulitis) and two patients are still being treated. One patient discontinued treatment because of a myocardial infarction. Fourteen of sixteen patients improved to a level that further treatment was regarded unnecessary. During a median follow-up of eight months off treatment, eight patients are currently in remission, five experienced a relapse and one died from a cause unrelated to CIDP or treatment. , characterized by adult onset paucisymptomatic sensory axonal neuropathy, chronic cough and gastroesophageal reflux. Non responsible gene has been identified but linkage to chromosome 3p22-p24 has been notified. We present 3 cases from the same family with hereditary sensory neuropathy with cough and gastroesophageal reflux. Methods: We identify 3 brothers (2 females, 1 male), aged between 43 and 52 years. All of them refer chronic cough of unexplained etiology beginning in young-adult life and at least one of them symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux without response to proton-pomp inhibitors. Only the eldest presents paresthesias and painful cramps in lower extremities. Results: Electroneurogram demonstrates the existence of axonal sensory neuropathy of variable severity in the 3 siblings. A molecular study is performed after obtaining DNA from peripheral blood samples. The technique involves the expansion of 4 microsatellites located on chromosome 3p (D3S2403, D3S2336, D3S2466 and D3S1266). The three patients share a haplotype of 3 of these markers located in the 3p22-p24 region. Conclusion: We consider of great interest to contribute 3 new cases that share haplotype of 3 of the 4 markers that previously had been associated with HSN1B. Symptoms derived from sensory neuropathy are mild and appear later than cough or gastroesophageal reflux. Therefore it could be an underdiagnosed entity. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: A rapidly progressive demyelinating polyneuropathy has previously been described in the context of severe renal failure in individuals undergoing continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD). However, literature searches identified only three case reports demonstrating a clear temporal relationship between commencing CAPD and rapid onset of severe demyelinating polyneuropathy, and none following haemodialysis. We describe another case of polyneuropathy following CAPD that is also supported by ultrasound imaging. Methods: Case report and literature review. Literature search using Ovid and Pubmed databases. Results: A 28-year-old male became anuric with end stage renal failure (ESRF) due to staghorn calculi. He was commenced on CAPD but developed severe sensory loss in hands and feet within one month of starting treatment. This was followed by severe proximal and distal weakness affecting all limbs. He became unable to walk or care for himself. Neurophysiology showed absent sensory responses and slowing of motor responses. Cerebrospinal fluid was acellular with raised protein. Ultrasound demonstrated diffuse swelling of the median nerve and nerve roots ( Figure. 1). To the authors' knowledge, this is the first description of nerve ultrasound findings in such a patient. There was improvement of proximal but not distal weakness, and improved disability following intravenous methylprednisolone, five cycles of intravenous immunoglobulin and switching to haemodialysis.  We describe a further case of a severe demyelinating polyneuropathy associated with CAPD, with ultrasound imaging. This may represent a subtype of chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (CIDP). We postulate an immune mediated mechanism triggered by a peritoneal reaction. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: The aim of the study was to investigate the biomechanical characteristics of skeletal muscle contraction rats with diabetes and exposure to the drug "Cocarnit." Methods: The study were conducted on 30 white nonlinear laboratory rats, which were divided into 3 groups of 10 animals each. Group 1 rats were used as control. In rats of the second and third groups were induced type I diabetes by administration of streptozotocin (STZ) (65mg/kg, i/р). Rats in group 2 was administered saline, and rats 3rd group -Cocarnit (1mg/kg, i/p, complex of nicotinamide, thiamine pyrophosphate, cyanocobalamin and adenosintriphosphate sodium) (company World Medicine) during 9 days. To determine the basic parameters of the dynamics of skeletal muscle contraction in rats was performed modulated stimulation of isolated nerve bundles on anesthetized rats with simultaneous detection of force reduction tibia muscle with discrete control changes its length under constant external load. Results: It was established that diabetic neuropathy results in suppression of skeletal muscle contraction dynamic parameters due to time delay realization of muscle efferent stimulation; increasing delay realization of efferent stimulation with increasing time of active muscle; suppression of speed-power parameters muscle contractions within the studied time range; violation of the time correlation between the level of efferent activity flowing to the muscles and their realization in muscle system. Cocarnit restoried biomechanical characteristics skeletal muscle of rats with diabetes. Conclusion: Obtained results indicates that the consequence of diabetic neuropathy is nerve conduction abuse that cause accurate positional movements violations and Cocarnit restored investigated biomechanical parameters Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) or massively parallel sequencing detects the precise order of nucleotides within a DNA molecule. NGS is more effective than traditional sequencing methods, such as Sanger sequencing, when several genes are involved. Targeted NGS is starting to be used in diagnostics for disorders caused by several genes. About 100 genes may cause hereditary neuropathies. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most frequent hereditary neuropathy with a prevalence of 40-80 per 100,000 in Norway. Giant Axonal neuropathy is a rare form of hereditary neuropathy with autosomal recessive inheritance caused by mutations in the gigaxonin gene (GAN). Methods: A 7-year-old girl with progressive neuropathic features and corkscrew curly hair was investigated. Nerve conduction velocities were in the axonal range. She was previously diagnosed as CMT type 2. Results: NGS revealed compound heterozygous GAN mutations. Some of her clinical features were also indicative of the diagnosis. Conclusion: Giant axonal neuropathy is progressive and may cause severe functional deficits, later symptomatology from the central nervous system and reduced life expectancy. One of the GAN mutations was novel. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Foot drop is frequently due to peroneal nerve compression. The nerve is vulnerable to external forces, including persistent postures, because its superficial position at the neck of the fibula. We present two clinical cases of foot drop in which the study revealed a tumoral cause. Methods: Patient 1: A 55-year-old woman presented with repeated falls, distal hypoesthesia in her lower left limb and progressive left foot drop. She had impaired foot dorsiflexion, weakened plantar flexion, abolition of the ankle reflex, and hypoesthesia in the lateral leg, dorsum of the foot and heel. Patient 2: A 31-year-old woman presented with a foot drop that had evolved over 3 months. She had severe impairment of left foot dorsiflexion and toe extension, gastrocnemius and peroneal atrophy, and a diminished ankle reflex. Results: Patient 1: An electroneurogram (ENG) revealed damage of both left common peroneal and posterior tibialis nerves. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of popliteal fossa showed multiple adenopathies suggestive of a lymphoproliferative disorder with extrinsic nerve compression. The final diagnosis was a non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Patient 2: The ENG revealed damage of the left common peroneal nerve. MRI of the lower thigh showed an area of thickening of peroneal nerve, which was later revealed to be a neurofibroma. Conclusion: Despite usually having a benign cause, foot drop with atypical features should prompt an adequate work-up. Attention should be paid to findings suggesting associated deficits of other nerves such as decreased ankle jerk. Our cases highlight that tumours should be considered among the possible etiologies. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: In a previous study we demonstrated that in patients with chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP), aerobic exercise led to a significant increase in aerobic capacity of 11% and following unilateral resistance exercise muscle strength increased significantly by 14% in trained extremities and 4% in non-trained extremities. In this one-year follow-up study we evaluated whether muscle strength and aerobic capacity was preserved despite discontinued formalized exercise. Methods: In our previous study, fifteen CIDP patients performed 12 weeks of aerobic exercise on ergometer bike and 12 weeks of unilateral resistance exercise of muscles at the knee and elbow. After participation no scheduled training was initiated. We performed a one-year follow-up test with measurement of isokinetic muscle strength by dynamometry and evaluation of aerobic capacity by determining maximal oxygen consumption velocity. Results: Ten out of fifteen patients from the initial study participated. Combined isokinetic muscle strength (cIKS) had changed insignificantly with -3.4±17.6% and -2.9±14.7% on the trained and non-trained side, respectively. Aerobic capacity had decreased by 14.8±9.5% (p=0.002). Compared to baseline before exercise cIKS had increased 15.6±20.5% (p=0.04) on the trained side whereas on the non-trained side the difference was only 3.0±12.9% (ns). Aerobic capacity had changed only 1.6±13.8% (ns). During the one-year follow-up only two patients had performed regular aerobic exercise, and one patient had performed regular resistance training. Background and aims: We report a patient presenting with facial asymmetry due to isolated unilateral trigeminal motor neuropathy. Results: A 40-year-old woman presented with progressive facial asymmetry, left hemifacial numbness and pain for the last month. She denied past history of head or facial trauma, dental procedures, diabetes herpes-zoster or other infections, as well as systemic symptoms. On neurological examination it was disclosed left temporal and masseter muscle atrophy, left deviation of the mandible on opening of the mouth, and mild poorly-defined left hemifacial hypoesthesia. Electrophysiological study confirmed the diagnosis of pure motor trigeminal neuropathy, with chronic neurogenic potentials in the atrophic muscles. Trigeminal sensory fibers were normal on blink reflex and facial laser-evoked potential. Facial and cranial MRI revealed atrophy and fatty infiltration on left masticator muscles (figure 1) and regular thickening of the affected fifth cranial nerve at its origin in the anterolateral surface of the pons, extending to cisternal portion and Meckel´s cave (figure 2), which suggested an inflammatory lesion. Blood and cerebrospinal fluid studies were negative for autoimmune and infectious diseases. Clinical picture remained stable over 9 months of followup. Facial MRI coronal. Fat infiltration on left masticatory muscles Cranial MRI, T2 3D DRIVE HR, reformatted images along the trigeminal nerves. Thickening and hyperintense signal on apparent origin (white arrows), cisternal segment (black arrows) and Meckel's cavum (gray arrows) of the fifth cranial nerve. Trigeminal neuropathy is usually characterized by motor and sensory involvement. Reviewing the literature we found that 16 similar cases have been reported. As described in some other patients, sensory symptoms were referred in spite of isolate motor involvement on neurophysiology investigation. There is a wide array of possible etiologies for this neuropathy, however in most of the cases, no apparent cause is found. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Pembrolizumab is a monoclonal antibody approved for treatment of metastatic melanoma and non-small cell lung cancer. We report a case of acute bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome as a possible adverse effect to Pembrolizumab. Results: A 77-year-old man presented with progressive paresthesia and numbness in fingers and hands for the last month. Five months before he had started treatment with Pembrolizumab 2mg/kg IV every three weeks for metastatic melanoma. He denied similar symptoms on the past. He rejected recent repetitive manual activity, distal edema or arthritis symptoms. On neurological examination it was disclosed bilateral positive Phalen sign and hypoesthesia in median nerve territory. Nerve conduction studies confirmed severe bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, without signs of peripheral neuropathy. Bilateral carpal infiltration with betamethasone dipropionate and levobupivacaine was performed, with major symptomatic and electrophysiological improvement over the following week. Pembrolizumab treatment was continued and three months later he remains clinically well, with continued neurophysiological recovery. Conclusion: This is the first report of bilateral carpal tunnel as an adverse reaction to Pembrolizumab. One of the possible mechanisms could be a bilateral tenosynovitis of the wrist, as this condition has been reported as an uncommon adverse reaction to this drug. In our patient we found a segmental demyelization, in a local prone to nerve compression, as the most probable explanation. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: To describe a patient with Lewis-Sumner Syndrome (LSS) characterized by a long follow-up, a relapsing and benign course and atypical cranial palsies. Methods: A 49-year-old male consulted because of sudden diplopia and right upper limb weakness the previous 6 months acutely worsened. On physical examination he had an incomplete third cranial nerve palsy of the on right side, a subtle proximal weakness and hypoesthesia in that upper limb, the rest of the neurologic exam being normal. Results: All of the complementary exams and laboratory tests were normal (blood cell count, routine biochemistry, immunology including autoantibodies such as anti-GQ1b, GM1, infectious serology and cerebrospinal fluid. The thorax film revealed a new right diaphragmatic elevation that resolved with time. The electrophysiological study showed persistent multifocal conduction block. The patient had a spontaneous complete recovery after two weeks. During his evolution he suffered six relapses coinciding with fever and different infectious diseases. In some relapses he showed new cranial nerves involvement: right reversible diaphragmatic elevation, right hypoglossal palsy, right facial palsy and right trigeminal involvement. After all episodes the recovery was complete. Conclusion: LSS is an asymmetric sensorimotor neuropathy, considered as a variant of chronic inflammatory demyelinating poliradiculopathy. Clinically, it is characterized by predominant upper limb impairment and electrophysiologically it shows a persistent multifocal conduction block. We present a patient with 20 years follow-up LSS characterized by multiple cranial nerve involvement, among which, X and XII nerve palsies have not been described in the literature yet. Background and aims: Peripheral neuropathy due to vitamin deficiency may have a misleading clinical presentation and mimic Guillain-Barré Syndrome. We present 3 cases of rapid onset peripheral neuropathies with potential vitamin deficiency context. Methods: We identified 3 patients aged from 28 to 31 years old presenting with subacute 4 limbs sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy with potential vitamin deficiency context : a woman who had gastric by-pass with postsurgery vomiting and 65kg weight loss, a woman with depression, anorexia and 25kg weight loss, and a man with alcoholism, recent vomiting and 3kg weight loss. Results: Electroneuromyography showed 4 limbs sensorimotor non length dependent neuropathy, with demyelinating features without official criteria. Cerebrospinal fluid study was normal. Immunologic and infectious study were negative. We found B1 and B9 vitamins deficiencey for 2 of 3 cases, which was considered as a cause with clinical and electrophysiological slow improvement after supplementation. For the third case, only B9 vitamin deficiency was found and we considered it as an acute demyelinating polyneuropathy complicating an old axonal polyneuropathy. Slow improvement was observed after intravenous immunoglobulins treatment. These 3 cases have a common history of potential vitamin deficiency. We discussed both inflammatory and carential etiologies but neither electroneuromyography nor cerebrospinal fluid study brought a clear answer. Conclusion: B1 vitamin deficiency is a cause of rapid onset neuropathy needing quick treatment. It is important to know when to think about it but also search for other diagnosis with specific treatment. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. Background and aims: Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) represents a heterogeneous group of symmetric classical sensorimotor, pure motor, sensory ataxic and Lewis Sumner form. The aim was to exame relationship between different factors (gender, age at disease onset, course and severity of disease, CSF protein level, comorbidities and treatment procedure) and clinical outcome of different forms. Methods: This retrospective study included 48 CIDP patients classified in 4 groups in relation to clinical form. Results: The classical form had 39 patients, pure motor 5, Lewis Sumner 3 and one had sensory ataxic form. Majority of patients with classical form had relapse remitting course (69.7%), while 30.8% of patients had progressive course. Stable remission in this group was achieved in 61.5% cases, improvement in 30.8%, and in 7.7% of patients disease continued to progress. Logistic regression analysis showed that all risk factor included in the study are in correlation (positive or negative) with clinical outcome of classical form, but none of this correlation was statistically significant. Highest predictive value had disease severity (r=-0.285), treatment with IVIG (r=0.27) and CSF protein level (r=-0.228). Only one patient with motor form had progression after treatment onset, this was female patient with MGUS IgM, high CSF protein level, progressive course and most severe form of the disease. Conclusion: Considering all risk factors through specific score based on predictive value of each factor, we can predict clinical outcome of classical form of CIDP with high statistical probability (88.5%). Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Descriptive study of an Algerian cohort of anti-ganglioside antibody neuropathies: Clinical, electrophysiological and immunological aspects A. Djellaoui 1 , N. Attal 2 , E. Attal 1 1 Neurology, Ait Idir Hospital, Algiers, Algeria, 2 Immunology, Institut Pasteur Algérie, Algiers, Algeria Background and aims: Anti-ganglioside antibody (AGA) neuropathies are dysimmune, rare and heterogeneous neuropathies. These AGAs are attracting increasing diagnostic interest, especially since the emergence of the concept of "nodo-paranodopathies" To study the association between neuropathic syndromes and AGA in our patients and to analyze these results in the light of recent concepts. Methods: A retrospective, descriptive monocentric study in the EHS Ait-Idir neurology department in collaboration with the immunology department of Pasteur Institute of Algeria. All patients had acute or chronic peripheral neuropathy, associated with, at least, one anti-ganglioside antibody. Results: Ten patients were included. Multifocal motor neuropathy was the most frequent phenotype. The others phenotypes were pure axonal and motor forms of the Guillain-Barré syndrome, sensory ataxic neuropathy, an "overlap syndrome" between MMN and MADSAM and an ALS syndrome. The most frequent AGAs were anti-GM1 (80%) and anti-GD1b (70%). The most frequent association was anti-GM1 and anti-GD1b. An association between AGA and onco-neural antibodies was encountered in one patient. Our series includes characteristic forms, rarer and exceptional phenotypes. Undetectable antibody levels are the likely consequence of the involvement of different epitopes of nodal and paranodal region. The concept of "nodopathies" seems, at present, more appropriate to characterize these neuropathies and thus explain some "misleading" aspects. Conclusion: This first study in Algeria highlights the phenotypic and immunological heterogeneity of neuropathies associated with AGA. The recent discovery of new antibodies targeting the antigens of the Ranvier node allows us to solve certain nosological difficulties. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose e-Poster Background and aims: Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (CIDP) is a chronic disabling disease that often improves with immune therapy. Several variants of CIDP were reported but their frequency and relation with CIDP remains unclear. Methods: We implemented a web-based database to collect data from Italian patients with CIDP to determine the frequency and characteristic of these variants, the diagnostic criteria used, the possible evolution into typical CIDP, and their response to therapy. Results: By January 2017 we included 319 patients with CIDP and variants (197 men, 122 women), aged 18-86 years (median 58) with a mean disease duration of 7.8 years (range 0.5-38). Based on clinical symptoms, CIDP was defined as typical in 88% and atypical in 12%. The diagnosis of CIDP fulfilled EFNS/PNS criteria in 81% of the patients while nerve conduction studies (NCS) were not diagnostic in 12% or available in 7%. CSF studies were diagnostic in 81% of the patients, nerve biopsy in 50% and imaging (US or NMR) in 56%. Two supplementary diagnostic criteria including a relapsing course were present in 77% of patients with non diagnostic NCS (clinical CIDP). Improvement after one or more therapies was reported by 88% of treated patients with a positive response to IVIg in 74%, steroids in 51%, plasma exchange in 60% and immune suppressant in 36% without differences according to the fulfillment or not of EFNS/PNS diagnostic criteria. Conclusion: This multicenter study provided useful information on the natural history, course, diagnosis and response to therapy in patients with CIDP and variants. Disclosure: Kedrion Biopharma srl, Italy supported the cost of the Database. I received travel supports to attend Scientific Congress from CSL Switzerland and Kedrion Italy. Background and aims: Pompe's disease is a clinically heterogenic disorder of autosomal recessive inheritance caused by an alpha-glucosidase (acid maltase) deficiency. There are 3 age dependent phenotypes; a rapidly progressive infantile form that is usually fatal within the first year of life, and a slowly progressive juvenile and adult variant. Onset at adult age may vary from the second to sixth decade. Patients may present with a proximal myopathy of the limb girdle type and fatigue. In a later stage a considerable number of patients develop respiratory failure. Methods: We report on a 61-year-old patient suffering from severe hypersomnolence since 6 months.During the night he would wake up several times. His wife noticed that his breathing was slow when asleep. He had no complaints of breathlessness or exercise intolerance Results: A polysomnography showed frequent awakening, reduced baseline oxygen saturations, and periods of hypopnoea. Following a bronchoscopy he developed acute respiratory failure with severe hypercapnia. He needed mechanical ventilation for a month and was finally discharged from the hospital with nocturnal non-invasive ventilation. Extensive investigations were normal except for a mildly increased creatine kinase and an alpha-glucosidase deficiency. Pompe,s disease was confirmed by DNA testing. Conclusion: The diagnosis of adult onset alpha-glucosidase deficiency must be considered in patients with unexplained respiratory insufficiency. In our patient this was masked by excessive daytime sleepiness due to nocturnal hypoventilation. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Results: There were 23 females (88.46%) in the study group; the mean age was 52.35±10.76 years. There were 9 patients that met RLS criteria (34.62%) in the study group and 2 patients (7.69%) in the control group (p<0.05). In the study group, the severity distribution of RLS was: mild -1 case, moderate -8 cases. In the control group there was one case with mild severity and one with moderate severity. There was no excessive daytime sleepiness in any of the patients. However, 69.23% of the patients from the lupus group had the ESS score between 6-10, in comparison with 46.15% in the control group (p<0.05). Higher global PSQI scores were found in the study group. Background and aims: To test perceptual processing in two sleep disorders, both a group of 23 insomnia disorder (ID) and a group of 19 obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) patients were compared with 19 age-matched healthy controls (HC). Methods: All the participants performed a visual search task in which they had to detect the presence/absence of a target (letter T) embedded in the 50% of trials into a set of distractors (letters Os, Xs, or Ls). Target's salience and distractors' numerosity were manipulated as independent variables, whereas accuracy and reaction times (RT) were recorded as dependent variables. Results: Data generally confirmed the typical effects of visual search. Moreover, both ID and OSA patients reported significantly slower RT in comparison with HC. Interestingly, RT increased as expected with age in HC, whereas no correlation between age and RT was found for both ID and OSA patients. Conclusion: Our results demonstrate the existence of a perceptual deficit occurring in both ID and OSA patients, consisting in a harder extraction of relevant visual information from noise. Finally, for both clinical groups the effect of age is hidden by the overwhelming effect of the disorder. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Frequently DOA patients exhibited excessive daytime sleepiness leading to abnormal functioning during the day. Therefore, cognitive impairment might be observed in this subjects, but a comprehensive evaluation of this patients has not been performed. Accordingly, the aim of this study is to assess neurocognitive functions in DOA patients through a complete neuropsychological evaluation and to compare their performance with that of healthy controls. Methods: 69 patients (62.3% male and 37.7% female, mean age 32.8±14.1) with a diagnosis of DOA and 31 healthy controls matched for sex, age and education have been evaluated by means of a complete neuropsychological assessment battery. Results: A significant impairment in Corsi block tapping test and Attentive Matrices (which respectively investigate visuo-spatial short term working memory and visual selective attention) was found in DOA patients in comparison to healthy controls. Additionally, significant correlations between percentage of N1 and Corsi block tapping performance (r=-0.418, p<0.022), Attentive Matrices and number of awakenings (r=-0.403, p=0.027) and sleep efficiency (r=0.374, p=0.042) were found. Conclusion: A deficit in visuo-spatial working memory and in selective visual attention have been found in DOA patients. Moreover, our results suggest that sleep disruption, objectively assessed by PSG recordings, could explain the neurpsychological deficits. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Non 24-hour sleep-wake syndrome is a circadian rhythm sleep disorder (CRSD) characterized by the inability to maintain a stable circadian rhythm that became progressive longer; this lead to impossibility to fall asleep at the desired time. The majority of cases remain idiopathic, while few studies demonstrated CRSD associated to hypothalamic lesions. The role of melatonin and pineal gland on sleep structure is still debating, since sleep disorder as well as lack of consequences on sleep structures has been reported after pinealectomy. We present the case of a 14-year-old girl with a wide pineal cyst and severe CRSD. Methods: Prolonged polysomnographic recording, brain MRI, actigraphy, 24-hour melatonin serum curve and endorectal temperature measurement were collected. Results: Brain MRI examination disclosed a 20mm pineal cyst without evidence of acqueductal or mesencephalic compression. The prolonged actigraphy demonstrated a free-running disorder with total inversion of sleep-wake cycle. Polysomnographic recording and endo-rectal temperature profile were within the normal. Melatonin curve showed blunted nocturnal peak (max 82ng/L, mean nightime 68.5), normal total quantity of melatonin secretion (AUC 1118.5ng*h/L), and a shape suggesting higher morning levels of melatonin. Evening administration of melatonin up to 14 mg was able to restore the normal sleepwake cycle.  C. Falup Pecurariu 1 , A. Enache 1 , L. Duca 2 , C. Fotescu 1 , O. Falup-Pecurariu 1 , V. Monescu 3 , S. The CRSD associated to melatonin secretion impairment were restored in our patient after melatonin administration. We speculate that the compression on the normal pineal parenchyma exerted by the cyst, may decelerate melatonin secretion with a slower return to basal concentration, leading to progressive sleep cycle advance. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Multidisciplinary Bern Sleep-Wake-Centre was founded in 1982 and is a tertiary sleepcentre. Database is a useful tool in rare diseases for a better characterisation, evaluation, treatment, and research in the field. For over 25 years, patient data are collected in the Bern sleep database (BSD). In Bern, one of the main research and clinical areas always has been narcolepsy. Aims: We aimed to set-up a new tool for sleep research including the development of predictive models to further assist clinicians in their diagnosis or treatment decisions. Methods: BSD has been transferred into an application designed to support data capture and management for research studies. New BSD contains 13 forms/instruments with 720 potential items in total. Descriptive statistics has been executed. Results: Patients: The total number of patients was 8543. Mean age was 49.0 years. Annual inclusion of new patients is continuously increasing since 2011 from 600/year to 1050/year in 2015. Diagnosis: Diagnosis included sleep apnoea (N=5537), insomnia (N=476), narcolepsy (N=157) and excessive daytime sleepiness not otherwise specified (N=590). The annual number of new narcolepsy diagnosis maintained stable from 2000 to 2015 (10 to 15/year). Tests: Data from 6500 polysomnographies, 1445 MSLT, 1823 "Bern sleep-wake-questionnaires", and 2375 actigraphies are included. Data about narcolepsy and narcolepsy-borderland are currently under evaluation and will be presented. The BSD is a unique database, including longterm data and will serve as a research tool for clinical sleep studies, validation of (new) diagnostic criteria or questionnaires, and the development of predictive models. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Ageing and dementia 2 EP2001 COMAJ (Early-Onset Alzheimer's disease cohort): Two-year follow-up A. Maureille, A. Rollin Sillaire, Y. Chen, F. Pasquier Background and aims: Before 60, Early-Onset Alzheimer's disease (EOAD) is still the first cause of dementia. Atypical phenotypes are more frequent than in the elderly and disease course may be faster, and remains misunderstood. We aimed to describe clinical, neuropsychological, medical-social, autonomy and imaging courses of EOAD (onset before 60) patients on two-year follow-up. Methods: All the patients of the prospective cohort COMAJ between the 01/06/09 and the 01/05/14 with probable or certain EOAD according to the NIA and IGW criteria were included, except those with autosomal dominant AD. Demographic data, vascular risk factors, APOE4 status, history, neuropsychological, medical-social, autonomy and MRI data were collected, according to a standardized protocol. Results: 94 patients were included (women: 62%, mean age: 57.4±3.3 years, diagnostic delay 3.8 (2.2) years); 56% of the patients showed a typical amnestic phenotype, 44% were depressive, 62% were APOE4 carriers. APOE4 carriers were significantly more amnestic than the noncarriers (75.5% vs 36.3%, p=0.0007). Mean MMSE was 19.7 (5.7) at diagnosis, 14.1 (7.8) at inclusion and 9.8 (7.8) /30 on two-year follow-up. Mean Scheltens score was 1.8 at baseline and 2.5 two years later. Loss of autonomy was severe: only 8.5% (n=8) of the patients were working at baseline, none on follow-up. A daily help was required in 76% (n=71) of the patients at baseline, in 91% on two-year follow-up, with 26% living in institution at this time. Conclusion: This large cohort provides information on the progression of the disease at early age, highlighting the severe and fast cognitive impairment. Disclosure: Fund : Labex DistALZ EP2002 Asymptomatic carotid stenosis might worsen cognitive functions in hypertensive patients P. Mineva 1 , V. Tsoneva 1 , D. Talalaev 2 1 Trakia University, Stara Zagora, Bulgaria, 2 Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria Background and aims: Systolic arterial hypertension (SAH) in midlife is a risk factor for cognitive impairment (CI) but the relationship of asymptomatic carotid stenosis (ACS≥50%) to CI is still a matter of debate. The aim of this epidemiological study is to estimate the significance of ACS≥50% for CI in hypertensive and non-hypertensive persons without signs and symptoms of stroke or TIA. Methods: A total of 500 volunteers, aged 50-79 years, were enrolled and followed-up for cognitive performance. CI has been defined as a score between 24 and 27 of MMSE. A battery of additional neuropsychological tests has also been conducted. Results: Multiple logistic regression analysis has shown that ACS≥50% attributes to CI (OR=10.7; 95%CI: 3.36-34.14; p=0.0001) only in hypertensive patients with SAH but not in normotensives. Logistic regression analysis has revealed that the abnormal scores of neuropsychological tests (MMSE, DFS, DBS and VF) are significantly associated with ACS≥50% (OR 2.121; 95%CI: 1.048-4.292; p=0.036). The strongest relationship has been established between ACS≥50% and DBS (OR 10.818; 95%CI: 1.165-100.439; p=0.037). CI has presented as an executive dysfunction and decline of attention, verbal fluency and working memory. Conclusion: ACS≥50% might be attributable to CI in patients with SAH. This suggests a complexity of a large and small artery dysfunction, caused by both atherosclerosis and hypertension, underlying the CI pathogenesis. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Late-Onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) is a multifactorial idiopathic pathology caused by clinical, environmental and genetic factors. Hence its etiology is still unkwown. We aimed to evaluate the main environmental, clinical and biological factors associated with this disease. Methods: We enrolled 97 LOAD patients (diagnostic criteria: DSMIV and NINCDS-ADRDA) and 284 controls. Data concerning clinical and biological parameters, life style and dietary habits were collected. Biostatistical analysis were conducted on SPSS.v20.0. Results: After binary logistic regression, we noted that factors significantly associated with LOAD risk were hype rhomocysteinemia(OR=5.47;p=0.001), high total cholesterol levels (OR=6.78, p<0.001), high chlorine levels (p=0.034), decreased C-reactive protein and total thyroxine (T4) levels (p=0.042;p=0.046, respectively) hypocalcaemia (OR=2.6,p=0.038), hypovitaminosis-B12 (OR=5.4, p<0.001), hypovitaminosis-D (OR=5.48,p=0.001) smoking (OR=4.49;p=0.001), hypertension (OR=6.78, p=0.002), Diabetes (OR=4.89, p=0.003) and Chronic Kidney Diseases (OR=4.69, p=0.001). We also noted that high education level(OR=0.10, p=0.002), urban habitat(OR=0.30;p=0.032), currently or formerly active professional life (OR=0.20; p=0.016), consumption of fish (OR=0.21;p=0.012), olive oil (OR=0.18; p=0.015), curcuma (OR=0,10; p=0,026), coffee(OR=0,20; p=0,021) and black chocolate (OR=0.10; p=0.015) seem to decrease LOAD risk. Conclusion: Our results support the hypothesis of cognitive reserve, which stipulates that the brain with cognitive reserve, ensured by an active social life and a high level of education, may protect against cognitive decline. It seems that a healthy life style and dietary habits mentioned above are recommended to prevent LOAD. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2004 Antibodies against glial derived antigens in Alzheimer disease may reflect hippocampal demyelination and memory loss E. Papuc 1 , K. Rejdak 2 1 Lublin, Poland, 2 Neurology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland Background and aims: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is known to exhibit well characterized pathologies including the extracellular accumulation of amyloid plaques, intra-axonal presence of neurofibrillary tangles and glial hypertrophy. Nevertheless the nature of myelin pathology in AD has not been well studied. Recent studies on animal models of AD, revealed however focal demyelination within beta amyloid plaques in hippocampus. Thus we decided to assess humoral response against proteins of myelin sheath in AD, in hope to find an early biomarkers of memory loss and neuropathological process characteristic for the disease. Methods: We assessed antibodies levels against proteins of myelin sheath: myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG), myelin basic protein (MBP), myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG), proteolipoprotein (PLP) in sera of 26 AD patients and 26 healthy controls, using commercially available ELISA system (Mediagnost, Germany). Results: In the AD patients subgroup significantly higher titers were observed for all types of assessed IgG autoantibodies compared to healthy control subjects (anti-MOG, anti-MAG, anti-MBP, anti-PLP). For IgM antibodies, among AD patients we observed higher titers for majority of investigated autoantibodies (p<0.05), with exclusion of anti-MAG IgM antibodies (p>0.05). The study provides the evidence for the significantly increased production of autoantibodies against proteins of myelin sheath in AD. These results can be of importance in the light of emerging data from animal models of AD, indicating early demyelination of hypocampal region. Further studies on larger population are necessary to confirm whether these autoantibodies could serve as early biomarkers of AD in humans. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: It has been well known that the apolipoprotein E(ApoE) ε4 allele is a strong risk factor in Alzheimer's disease and occurs at an increased frequency in dementia with amyloid pathology. However The clinical significance of the ApoE ε4 allele in Parkinson's disease dementia(PDD) with synucleinopathy has been a subject of debate. PDD is one of the second most common subtypes of dementia in Korean population. The ApoE allele frequencies were evaluated in Korean patients with probable PDD diagnosed by the MDS task force criteria for the diagnosis of PDD in this study. Methods: Forty patients (20 PDD and 20 age matched healthy controls) participated in the study. The ApoE genotype was determined by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and allele specific hybridization using the ApoE typing test kit. (DNA extraction: Wizard Genomic DNA purification kit (Promega), Polymerase chain reaction : Commercial INNO-LiPA (Line Probe Assay) ApoE test kit) Results: The ApoE ε4 allele frequency in the PDD group was 35% and was significantly higher than those of normal controls (15%) (p< 0.05). The ApoE ε4 carrier frequency in the PDD group was was 60%, and also significantly higher than those of normal controls (30%) (p< 0.05). The ApoE ε3 allele was the most frequent genotype in Korean population generally in this study. Conclusion: These results that the elevated ApoE ε4 frequency in the PDD with synucleinopathy in which the overall brain neuritic plaque burden was low, indicates that ApoE ε4 might contribute to neurodegeneration through mechanisms unrelated to amyloid processing Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Madrid, Spain, 3 Neurology, Fundacion Jimenez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 4 Neurology, Hospital Infanta Elena, Madrid, Spain, 5 Neurology, Hospital Rey Juan Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 6 Neurology, Rey Juan Carlos Hospital, Mostoles, Spain, 7 Secugen SL, Madrid, Spain Background and aims: The sortilin-related receptor 1 gene (SORL1) encodes a protein involved in the trafficking of amyloid precursor protein. Some SORL1 variants have been associated with increased risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD), and potentially pathogenic mutations have been reported in a few early-onset autosomal dominant AD cases. We report screening for SORL1 mutations in a Spanish cohort of cases with dementia of the Alzheimer type (DAT). Methods: We screened for SORL1 mutations in 124 familial (44 early-and 80 late-onset) and in 15 early-onset sporadic DAT cases recruited from a referral memory clinic. Mutations found were reviewed in genomic databases, further screened for in a control population of 200 elderly subjects, and analyzed for potential pathogenicity with prediction programs (PolyPhen2 and SIFT). We also searched for segregation in the families with available siblings. Results: Nine different potential pathogenic changes were found in ten probands (7%). Four changes had not been previously described: Trp848Ter, Arg1702Met, Gly1871Val, and splice site variant. Another five were considered very rare or rare variants (Glu270Lys, Gly852Ala, Asn1809Ser, Asp2065Val, and Ala2173Thr). After screening for these changes in the control population and available siblings, correlation with the disease (presence in at least 1/200 controls and/or no segregation) was ruled out in seven of the mutations. The change Trp848Ter and the splice-site change remained potentially pathogenic, although the study of segregation was very limited. Conclusion: SORL1 mutations are present in 7% of our familial DAT cohort but in most cases could not be correlated with the disease process. University, Tokyo, Japan, 2Department of Neurology, Japanese Red Cross Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan Background and aims: The purpose of this study was to determine whether in patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), white matter lesions (WMLs) are associated with cognitive dysfunctions and the behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) at initial presentation. Methods: We retrospectively selected 73 patients with probable AD without medical history of clinical stroke. As WMLs, periventricular hyperintensity (PVH) and deep and subcortical white matter hyperintensity (DSWMH) were rated using the Fazekas scale (range, 0 to 4) on MRI imaging at initial visit. We analyzed the relationships between WMLs and clinical features including the presence of silent brain infarcts (SBIs) in basal ganglia, complication such as hypertension and scores of the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI). Results: Of all patients, PVH ≥ 2 (severe PVH) was found in 13 patients and DSWMH ≥ 3 (severe DSWMH) was found in 23 patients. Using multivariate analysis, severe DSWMH (OR 41.8 ; 95% CI 6.9-100< ; p<0.001) was independently correlated to severe PVH. Hypertension (OR 5.9 ; 95% CI 1. Background and aims: Subjective cognitive complaints (SCC) and hippocampal atrophy are potential markers of earlystage Alzheimer´s disease (AD). The aim of this study was to assess the relationship between hippocampal volumes and specific SCC and to compare it to standard, routinely used memory tests. Methods: Ninety seven non demented older adults (30 with amnestic mild cognitive impairment, 8 with non amnestic mild cognitive impairment and 59 cognitively healthy older adults) underwent comprehensive neuropsychological testing, 1.5T brain MRI scans with quantitative volumetry using FreeSurfer package to measure estimated total intracranial volume (eTIV) along with adjusted right and left hippocampal volumes, and were administered a 10-item yes/no questionnaire to evaluate SCC in the last 6 months. Spearman's correlation was used to correct for non-normal score distribution. Subjects with significant vascular changes or depression were not included. Results: We found significant correlations of both hippocampal volumes with with the total SCC score (rR=-.19 and rL=-.22) and several items: "Difficulties with recalling past events" (rR=.-31and rL=-.34), "Feeling of memory change" (rR=-.25 and rL=-.24) items. Left hippocampal volume correlated with "Worse memory in comparison to peers" (r=-.18) and "Subjective limitation in daily activities" (r=-.21) items. Auditory Verbal Learning Test -learning (trials 1 to 5) and delayed recall correlated with left hippocampal volume (both rs=.21). All ps' were <.05. Conclusion: Specific SCC reflect hippocampal atrophy equally well as standard memory tests in non demented older adults and should be taken into account when identifying individuals in early-stage AD. Background and aims: Family history is an important risk factor for dementia, but the importance of age at onset and sex of the affected parent, as well as underlying mechanisms, are uncertain. Methods: From 2000-2002, we assessed parental history of dementia in 2087 non-demented participants of the population-based Rotterdam Study (mean age 64 years, 55% female). We investigated risk of dementia (until 2015) in relation to family history, adjusting for demographics, cardiovascular risk factors, and known genetic risk variants. We furthermore determined the association between parental history and markers of neurodegeneration and vascular disease on MRI. Results: During a mean follow-up of 12.2 years, 142 participants developed dementia. Parental history was associated with risk of dementia independent of known genetic risk factors (hazard ratio, 95% confidence interval: 1.67,1.12-2.48), in particular when parents were diagnosed at younger age (HR,95%CI <80years: 2.58,1.61-4.15 versus ≥80years: 1.01,0.58-1.77). Accordingly, age at diagnosis in probands was highly correlated with age at diagnosis in their parents <80 years (r=0.57,p=0.001), but not thereafter (r=0.17,p=0.55). Among 1161 non-demented participants with brain MRI, parental history related to lower cerebral perfusion, and higher burden of white matter hyperintensities and microbleeds. Dementia risk and MRI markers were similar for paternal versus maternal history. Conclusion: Parental history of dementia increases risk of dementia, primarily when age at parental diagnosis is <80 years. Unexplained heredity may in part be attributed to cerebral hypoperfusion and small-vessel disease. We found no evidence of preferential maternal compared to paternal transmission. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Cerebrovascular diseases 3 EP2014 Prevalence of spasticity in patients with ischemic stroke in the internal carotid artery territory -pilot results of the national SONAR registry Background and aims: The main aim of the study was to provide estimate of the incidence and prevalence of spasticity following stroke in the internal carotid artery territory for the regional stroke centers in the Czech Republic; the secondary goal was to identify predictors for the development of spasticity. Methods: In a prospective cohort study, 256 consecutive patients with clinical signs of central paresis due to a firstever stroke were examined in the acute stage. All of the patients had primary stroke with carotid origin and paresis of the upper and/or lower limb present longer than 7 days after the stroke onset. All patients were examined between 7-10 days after IS. The degree and pattern of paresis and muscle tone, the Barthel Index, baseline characteristic, and demographic data were evaluated. Spasticity was assessed using the Modified Ashworth Scale (MAS). Results: Out of the 256 patients (157 males; mean age 69.9±12.4 years), 115 (44.9%) patients developed spasticity during the first 10 days after stroke onset. Eighty-three (32.5%) patients presented with mild neurological deficit (modified Rankin Scale 0 -2) and 69 (27.0%) patients were bedridden. -024. Conclusion: Spasticity was noted in 44.9% patients with neurological deficit due to first-ever stroke in carotid territory in the first 10 days after stroke onset. Severe spasticity was rare. This study was partially supported by the Czech health Background and aims: Increased common carotid artery intima-media thickness (CCA-IMT) is associated with an increased risk of stroke. We studied the relationships between CCA-IMT and stroke risk factors in the population of Republic of Moldova. Here we present preliminary results of the National State Programme joined to International Project "Primary Stroke Prevention". Methods: The included subjects were examined according to a pre-established International Protocol of risk factors' estimation, which included non-invasive measurements of average CCA-IMT from left and right side (B-mode ultrasonography), questionnaire, clinical and laboratory examination. Results: In this study were enrolled 300 subjects, among which 180 (60%) were women and 120 (30%) men (age 49.91±14.5 years). We found significant associations between CCA-IMT and several clinical and laboratory variables. CCA-IMT significantly correlated with systolic (r=0.43, p=0.00) and diastolic (r=0.34, p=0.00) blood pressure, body mass index (r=0.40, p=0.00), abdominal circumference (r=0.46, p=0.00), glycated haemoglobin (r=0.24, p=0.00), total cholesterol (r=0.14, p=0.01), LDLcholesterol (r=0.20, p=0.00), HDL-cholesterol (r=-0.18, p=0.00) and fibrinogen (r=0.24, p=0.00). Conclusion: Increased thickness of intima-media of the carotid artery is associated significantly with other traditional risk factors for stroke. Thus, CCA-IMT can be considered an early common integrator of the effects of multiple risk factors on the arterial wall. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Neuroimaging studies have demonstrated that after stroke a number of areas in the contralesional hemisphere show increased activity when patients move their affected hand (Rehme et al., 2012) . While some studies suggest a supportive role of these regions during stroke recovery (Lotze et al., 2006) , others point to a maladaptive role (Nowak et al., 2008) . Methods: We here tested the functional relevance of activation changes in contralesional M1, dorsal premotor cortex (dPMC) and anterior intraparietal cortex (aIPS) in early subacute stroke patients. Activity was assessed by fMRI and subsequently disturbed using trains of 10Hz rTMS time locked to hand motor tasks. Motor performance was measured using a 3D motion analyser system. Imaging data were analyzed using SPM8. Results: Online-TMS over the individual fMRI maxima led to differential effects on motor performance. TMS interference with contralesional M1 and dPMC normalized movement fluency in patients showing higher activation during paretic hand movement. Moreover, TMSinterference with contralesional aIPS led to an increase of tapping amplitude and peak velocity across the patient group. Conclusion: In conclusion, online-TMS over higher activations of M1 and dPMC improved patients' motor fluency, whereas online-TMS over aIPS improved spatial aspects of movements. Thus, the present results suggest a disturbing influence of all examined regions on different features of movement kinematics already during the first days after stroke in mildly to moderately affected patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2018 Background and aims: In the last years, many efforts have been made to increase thrombolysis rates. Media campaigns, prenotification systems and hospital reorganization have been developed with varied success. Anyway, thrombolysis rates are still low. Studies addressing elegibility in patients excluded from reperfusion therapies because of exceeded therapeutic window are scarce. Methods: Patients attended in the Emergency Department with a final diagnosis of stroke or TIA from November 2013 to January 2015 were included. Data on PD, treatment applied and exclusion criteria for thrombolysis (if present) were recorded. A descriptive analysis of the reasons for exclusion from thrombolytic treatment was performed Results: 382 patients were included. 197 (51.57%) had a PD>3h. One received rt-PA (0.51%). 196 were excluded. 104 of them (53.06%) were asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic at arrival, 22 (11.22%) became asymptomatic before treatment decision, 18 (9.18%) were excluded because of CT findings, 13 (6.63%) because of poor functional status and 3 (1.53%) showed INR>1.7. 36 patients (18.36%) would have been eligible if the therapeutic window hadn't been exceeded. 29 (14.8%) had a PD>4.5h, 6 (3.06%) because of inhospital delays and one (0.51%) because of unknown onset. Conclusion: Most patients arriving after the first three hours do it asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic, or symptoms resolve spontaneously before thrombolitics are administered, but some of them would have been treatedwith prognostic implications -with a sooner arrival, as would some of those excluded because of CT findings. Still many patients remain untreated only because of an exceeded therapeutic window. They should be the target for future campaigns. Background and aims: Paradoxical embolism from pelvic deep vein thrombosis (DVT) has been suggested in several studies as a mechanism of ischemic stroke in patients with patent foramen ovale (PFO) and cryptogenic stroke. Performing a pelvic magnetic resonance venography (MRV) as part of an inpatient diagnostic evaluation has been recommended. Methods: Adult patients with ischemic stroke and PFO who underwent pelvic MRV and lower extremity (LE) duplex ultrasound as part of the diagnostic evaluation were included in this single-center retrospective observational study, between 2006-2015, to determinate DVT prevalence as a possible source of paradoxical embolism. Results: Of 81 patients with ischemic stroke and PFO (male sex 57%, median age 55 years), 49 were diagnosed with cryptogenic stroke (male sex 55%, median age 50 years). Deep vein thrombosis imaging study was performed in 80% of patients, 95% with LE duplex ultrasound and 51% with pelvic MRV. DVT prevalence in cryptogenic stroke patients was 8.2% (4 patients), 3 of them had LE thrombosis (6.1%) and 1 had pelvic DVT (2.0%). All these patients had a normal hypercoagulability testing. There was no significant difference in the prevalence of pelvic DVT in patients with PFO and non-cryptogenic stroke. Conclusion: Our results differ from those of the PELVIS Study (20% pelvic DVT prevalence) and are similar to more recent studies which find a lower prevalence of pelvic DVT in patients with PFO and cryptogenic stroke. We think routine inclusion of pelvic magnetic resonance venography in the diagnostic evaluation of this subtype of patients cannot currently be recommended and needs further investigation. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2021 Endovascular treatment of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis Background and aims: Anticoagulation is the standard treatment for cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST). However, neurological condition may worsen during anticoagulation especially in cases with extensive thrombosis. Endovascular treatment (ET) may be considered in these selected cases. The aim of this study was to report our experience with ET in severe cases of CVST. Methods: In this retrospective case series, we report the clinical and radiological outcomes of 11 CVST patients treated with endovascular methods at our institution between July 2010 and February 2016. Results: The mean age (10 female, 1 male) was 28 years (17-45). All patients received intravenous heparin initially. The most frequent indication requiring ET was worsening or no improvement in mental status despite treatment. Mean GCS before ET was 11.2±0.6. Balloon venoplasty was used in six patients, suction thrombectomy in five and stentretriever thrombectomy in one. All patients received local intrasinus thrombolytic therapy with t-PA (5-40 mg). Clinical stabilization or rapid clinical improvement observed within 1-3 days of ET. Patients' mean GCS reverted to 15 at discharge. Discharge modified Rankin scale (mRS) scores were 1 in seven patients, 2 in one and 3 or over in three. Eight patients scored below 2 at one month and nine patients scored below 1 at long-term follow-up (6-48 months). Conclusion: Although there are no randomized controlled trials, ET may be considered in carefully selected cases with more severe clinical condition, with worsening or no improvement despite anticoagulation. Randomized controlled trials are required to provide the evidence of endovascular treatment effect in CVST patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Aim of study -reveal association between vWFR polymorphisms and age of atherothrombotic stroke (ATS) and lacunar infarction (LI) occurrence. Methods: We examined patients with uncomplicated ATS and LI. Type of stroke in all patients was verified by clinical, neuroimaging and laboratory investigation. Patients were distributed on 2 subgroups: I -18-60 years in men, 18-55 years in women, II-from 61 years in men/55 years in women till 74. Genetic tests to detect с.3550С>T and T(-5) C polymorphisms into gene coding vWFR alpha-chain were performed. Confidence interval (CI) of frequencies was detected using angular transformation, relative risk (RR) was calculated by usual formula. Results: Polymorphism frequencies are shown in tables 1 and 2. Presence of с.3550С>T mutation predispose to stroke in younger age -RR for ATS was 2.1 (95%CI 1.6-2.9), RR for LI -2.0 (95% CI 1.1-3.6). Such mutation results in vWFR activity increasing. Presence of T(-5)C polymorphism predispose to ATI in younger age with RR 2.1 (95%CI 1.5-2.9) and there was no frequency difference in LI subgroups. T (-5)C polymorphism is connected with increased density of vWFR upon platelet surface. Background and aims: Fabry disease (FD) is a rare inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism that results from the deficient activity of the lysosomal enzyme alphagalactosidase A (AGAL-A). Genetic screening studies have revealed over 600 variants in the galactosidase alpha (GLA) gene. The p.A143T variant is a genetic variant of unknown significance (GVUS), with its associated phenotype ranging from classical FD to healthy unaffected patients. Some authors however deem this variant non-pathogenic. The aim of this case report is to describe the case of a 16-year-old male with multifocal white matter lesions on brain MRI performed in the diagnostic workup for episodic headaches, who was diagnosed with Fabry disease. Methods: Available demographical, clinical and ancillary investigations were reviewed. Results: A 16-year-old male presented with episodic headaches and an MRI that showed multifocal punctate to patchy white matter lesions ( Figure 1, 2 and 3 ). Past medical history revealed a period of absence-like episodes at the age of 10, with normal EEG. The diagnosis of FD was suggested upon the finding of significantly reduced plasma AGAL-A activity (0.62µmol/L or 13% of normal; normal range ≥1.65µmol/L) and genetic investigation confirmed the presence of a hemizygous missense variant in the GLA gene (p.A143T). Baseline assessment of systemic involvement showed only a discrete proteinuria. Conclusion: A diagnosis of FD should be considered when finding asymptomatic extensive cerebral white matter lesions in a young patient. Furthermore, the causative p.A143T mutation can be associated with a more severe subclinical phenotype than has been reported to date.  One-year mortality of severely disabled patients is high. But as the functional outcome is improving in one year after the stroke and mortality rate is significantly lower in patient groups started on oral anticoagulants, these patients with unfavorable stroke outcome at time of discharge should not be denied oral anticoagulants for secondary stroke prevention. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Central Venous and Sinus Thrombosis (CVST) is a rare and under-diagnosed type of cerebrovascular disease which is more prevalent in young women and often correlated with a pro-thrombotic state; only three case reports have correlated it with use of erythropoietin, two of which as treatment for chronic kidney disease. Our aim is to report a second case of erythropoietin use as doping as contributing factor for CVST. Methods: Case report, with review of the pertinent literature. Results: A 38-year-old female professional cyclist without prior history presented to the emergency room after two episodes of seizure in the same afternoon. Her physical examination was unremarkable. The head CT scan without contrast showed no abnormalities. As blood analysis demonstrated a globular volume of 50.35% and hemoglobin of 17.39g/dL, cerebral venous thrombosis was suspected and brain MRI was performed, which showed thrombotic occlusion of the superior sagittal sinus and superficial cortical veins, such as the left vein of Trolard. She admitted to the use of erythropoietin as doping, which was associated with her hemogram alterations. Treatment with warfarin was initiated while in the hospital, and follow-up consultations showed complete clinical recovery. A new MRI performed six months after the initial presentation showed recanalization of the venous structures. T2-weighted brain MRI demonstrating the area of venous infarction caused by the thrombosis Coronal slice of a T1-weighted brain MRI demonstrating the occlusion of the superior sagital sinus after the injection of gadolinium-based contrast Comparative coronal slice of a T1-weighted brain MRI performed five months afterwards demonstrating recanalization of the superior sagittal sinus Conclusion: In the investigation of patients presenting with seizures and pro-thrombotic states, such as use of erythropoietin, cerebral venous thrombosis should always be considered. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2028 Memory impairment due to bilateral fornix infarction: Characterisation and follow-up Background and aims: The fornix is an important structure regarding consolidation of new data into long term memory. Methods: We report the case of a patient with bilateral fornix infarction, and the results of a 7-month follow-up with neuropsychological evaluation. Results: A 68-year-old woman had a scheduled, endovascular intervention on a non-ruptured aneurysm of the anterior communicating artery. There were no immediate complications. On the next day, topographic disorientation, repetitive, and digressive speech were noticed. Brain-MRI showed an acute infarction of both anterior fornix pillars, more pronounced on the right side, with a below-centimetre parietal injury. Neuropsychological evaluation documented a severe anterograde memory deficit, involving verbal, visual, and topographic components, with normal working, autobiographic and remote semantic memories testing. Seven months later, the patient maintained a considerable functional impairment (examples, not being able to memorize new routes, unable to read books due to difficulty in remembering elements of the story line), but a substantial improvement in verbal and visual anterograde memory tests. Conclusion: To our knowledge, a single case with a similarly extended and detailed cognitive follow-up was published, referring to a patient with subarachnoid, intraventricular and intracerebral haemorrhages. In our case, MRI showed a clear anatomical and etiologic definition of the fornix injury, which allowed a more accurate cognitive assessment, and follow-up. These revealed a significant improvement regarding verbal and visual episodic memories. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose The effect of alpha-lipoic acid supplementation on anthropometric indices and food intake in patients experienced stroke: A randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial Background and aims: Stroke as a devastating condition is a major cause of death worldwide and accountable for long time disability with high personal and social cost in adults. Metabolic syndrome and obesity are well known risk factors of coronary artery disease, stroke, and mortality. Alpha-lipoic acid (ALA) is an eight-carbon, sulfurcontaining compound with antioxidant properties which reduces body weight, changes other anthropometric indices and regulate food intake by suppressing appetite and increasing metabolism This study was designed to evaluate the possible effects of ALA supplementation in patients with stroke. Methods: In this randomized, double blind, placebocontrolled clinical trial, sixty-seven patients with stroke were randomly allocated to two groups (taking a 600 mg ALA supplement or placebo daily for 12 weeks). Weight, waist circumference, energy, carbohydrate, protein and fat intake were meatured and body mass index was calculated before and after intervention in this study. Dietary intake and statistical analyses were carried out using N4 and SPSS16 software, respectively. Results: Primary features were similar in the intervention and placebo groups (p<0.05). After the intervention period, waist circumference (p<0.001), energy, carbohydrate, protein and fat intake (p<0.001) decreased significantly in ALA group compared with placebo. While and no differences were observed in weight (p=0.26) and BMI (p=0.56) in ALA supplementation group compared with placebo. Conclusion: Results of this trial indicated that 12 weeks supplementation with 600 mg alpha-lipoic acid has beneficial effects on anthropometric indices (weight, body mass index, waist circumference) and food intake (energy, carbohydrate, protein, and fat) ) in patients with stroke. Disclosure: Isfahahn university of Medical sciences supported this research.  Background and aims: Intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) after treatment with intravenous recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator (rtPA) for ischemic stroke can occur in local relation to the infarct, as well as in brain areas remote from infarcted tissue.Remote intracerebral haemorrhage (rICH) is ICH post thrombolysis in brain regions without visible ischaemic changes. To date, it is proposed possible influence of cerebral amyloid angiopathy which may contribute to rICH. Methods: We report a case of 67-year-old gentleman, with history of metastatic non small cell lung cancer to bone, unknown cerebral metastasis, presented with sudden onset of slurred speech and mild hemiparesis. Clinical evaluation revelaed Left Middle Cerebral Artery infarct with aphasia and mild right hemiparesis. Urgent CT Bran and CT Angiogram of the Circle of Willis and Carotid Arteries showed Left M1/ M2 junction occlusion. Patient was given intravenous rtPA at the dose of 0.9mg/kg and he underwent endovascular therapy. The procedure was uneventful. Results: Noted dropped in Glasgow Coma Scale from 15 to 3 after 1 hour post procedure. Urgent CT Brain done showed large right cerebral haematoma with midline shift and early hydrocephalus. Patient eventually passed away. CT Brain on admission CT Angiogram CT Brain post IV Thrombolysis Conclusion: rICH is an uncommon complication of intravenous thrombolysis that increases the risk of poor neurological outcome and mortality. In this case, in view of relatively young patient with no significant cardiovascular risk factors (diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia), there maybe a possibility of microcerebral metastasis that was not seen in the plan CT Brain done on admission, which potentially may account for rICH. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2031 Abdominal diameter index as a predictor of early neurological deterioration in acute ischemic stroke Background and aims: Delirium is an acute cognitive disorder that affects between 10% and 48% of patients after stroke and it associated with worse outcome. Depression can precede, coexist or follow the episode of delirium. It was suggested that these two syndromes could share common pathophysiological mechanisms including monoamine transmission and inflammatory reaction. The link between delirium and depression can be seen only in certain populations such as postoperative patients. We aimed to determine association between pre-stroke depression symptoms and risk of post-stroke delirium. Methods: We recruited patients with stroke or transient ischemic attack admitted within 48 hours from symptoms onset. We assessed delirium on a daily basis during the first 7 days of hospitalization. Diagnosis of delirium was based on DSM-5 criteria. We assessed pre-stroke depression symptoms using depression item from Neuropsychiatric Inventory. Results: We included 606 patients (median age: 73, 53% female). We diagnosed delirium in 171 patients (28.2%). In logistic regression, we compared upper quartile of depression score to other quartiles. On univariate analysis, higher score of depression was associated with increased risk of delirium (OR 1.58, 95%CI: 1.04-2.40, P=0.03). However, after adjustment for possible confounders: age, atrial fibrillation, diabetes mellitus, stroke severity, prestroke cognitive decline, pre-stroke disability, pneumonia and urinary tract infection, this relation did not remain significant. Conclusion: Pre-stroke depression symptoms are not an independent predictor of delirium in the acute phase of stroke. Disclosure: The Leading National Research Centre of Medical Faculty of Jagiellonian University funded the collection of data for the study. Background and aims: Cognitive impairment is a wildly recognized risk factor for delirium. Patients with impaired cognition might have more severe delirium due to diminished cognitive reserve. However, it is not clear how pre-existing cognitive impairment is related to other features of delirium including duration, symptoms fluctuations and change in cognition. We aimed to determine association between pre-stroke cognitive impairment (PSCI) and features of post-stroke delirium: symptoms severity and fluctuations, duration and change in cognition. We assessed delirium on a daily basis during the first 7 days of hospitalization. Diagnosis of delirium was based on DSM-5 criteria. To assess PSCI we used Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in Elderly. We used measures based on Cognitive Test for Delirium and Delirium Rating Scale-Revised-98 to assess severity and fluctuations of delirium symptoms. Severity measures included: mean score, peak score, sum of scores. Fluctuations were measured as a change in delirium scores. We calculated change in cognition as a difference between two Montreal Cognitive Assessment scores (done on day 1-2 and day 7-10). Results: We included 610 patients with stroke or transient ischemic attack. We diagnosed delirium in 171 patients (28%). Among them 60 (35.1%) had PSCI. Patients with PSCI scored worse in all delirium severity measures. There was no difference in delirium duration, symptoms fluctuations and no difference in change in cognition during delirium episode between patients with and without PSCI. Conclusion: Pre-stroke cognitive impairment is associated with the severity of post-stroke delirium but not with delirium duration, symptoms fluctuations and change in cognition. Disclosure: The Leading National Research Centre of Medical Faculty of Jagiellonian University funded the collection of the data for the study. Background and aims: The purpose of this study is to assess the effectiveness of acupuncture treatment on cerebral vasospasm after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (aSAH). Methods: A double-blind, randomized placebo-controlled trial of acupuncture was conducted. Thirty-two patients with aSAH who had undergone aneurysm clipping or coil embolization within 96 hours of onset were enrolled. Participants received combined therapy consisting electroacupuncture and intradermal acupuncture or sham acupuncture, once a day for 2 weeks. The incidence of delayed ischemic neurologic deficit (DIND), angiographic vasospasm, TCD vasospasm and vasospasm-related cerebral infarction were evaluated for 2 weeks. After 2 weeks or at discharge, mortality and rate of subjects who recovered mRS were also examined. Serum nitric oxide (NO) and endothelin-1 (ET-1) concentration were measured. Results: The incidence of DIND was not significantly different between two groups. The incidence of angiographic vasospasm in the treatment group was lower than the control group. The incidence of vasospasm-related cerebral infarction in the treatment group was lower than the control group. The percentage of subjects who recovered as mRS ≤ 2 at 2nd flow up (4 weeks or discharge) was higher in the treatment group than in the control group. For both serum NO and ET-1 level, there was a significant difference during 2 weeks only in non-vasospasm group, not in vasospasm group. After 2 weeks' intervention, there was a significant increase in the level of NO in the treatment group. Conclusion: Acupuncture had a tendency to improve the incidence of DIND, angiographic vasospasm, vasospasmrelated cerebral infarction and functional recovery. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Inflammatory cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA-ri) is a rare form of meningoencephalitis, presenting with encephalopathy in the majority of patients (74%). Even with imunossupressive therapy, the mortality rate is 33%. We present a case that had a benign presentation with transient symptoms and a full spontaneous recovery. Results: A 62-year-old-man with a history of hypertension presented in the emergency room with a transient episode of spreading left hemisensory disturbance lasting few minutes. Brain CT scan disclosed a right temporoparietal hypodensity. Brain MRI showed a right temporoparietal white matter lesion, hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences and multiple bilateral corticosubcortical microbleeds in T2*. ApoE genotype was ε4 /ε4. A diagnosis of probable CAA-ri was assumed. Given that the patient remain assymptomatic since admission, a conservative approach was adopted, and steroid therapy and biopsy was postponed. One month later, the patient remained assymptomatic and the MRI showed an almost complete reversion of the temporoparietal lesion while the microbleeds were stable. He remained assymptomatic the following year. Conclusion: The presented case is consistent with a probable CAA-ri. The presentation with mild, transient and reversible symptoms suggests that this entity might be underdiagnosed. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Predicting early clinical deterioration (ECD) in patients with acute spontaneous supratentorial intracerebral hemorrhage (ASSICH) and secondary intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) is a very important and relevant in modern angioneurology, that can help the practicioners choose optimal treatment approaches to improve its efficacy. The aim was elaboration new statistical model for predicting early clinical deterioration (ECD) in patients with ASSICH and secondary IVH. Methods: 69 patients (mean age 64.4±1.5 years) were studied during first 24 hours after clinical onset of the disease. Clinical examination included vital signs verification and evaluation by National Institute of Health Stroke Scale, Glasgow Coma Scale, Full Outline of UnResponsiveness (FOUR). Early clinical deterioration was verified in patients with decrease FOUR score ≥1 during 24 hours from the beginning of the disease. Severity of IVH was verified by IVH score (IVHS) using parameters of computer tomography. Secondary IVH volume (IVHV) was calculated by formula: IVHV (mL)=e˄(IVHS score/5). Elaboration of prognostic model was made by logistic regression and ROC-analysis. Results: Out of 69 patients, 19 (27.5%) had ECD. The model with the largest AUC (0.98) was: β=0.04*(systolic blood pressure after 1 hour from admission (mmHg))+0.17 *(IVHV(mL))+0.87*(dislocation of transparent partition of the brain (mm))-15.94 ( fig.1 ). Percent Concordant=94.8. The cut-off value of β>-1.06 predicts ECD with sensitivity=87.5% and specificity=95.2%. Background and aims: Identification of vital prognosis in patients with acute spontaneous supratentorial intracerebral hemorrhage (ASSICH) with secondary intraventricular hemorrhage (SIVH) is a very important and relevant in modern angioneurology that can help the practicioners to improve treatment approaches. Therefore the aim was elaboration of new multivariate statistical for predicting ELO after ASSICH with SIVH using clinical and paraclinical parameters. Methods: 69 patients (mean age 64.4±1.5 years) were studied during the acute period of disease. Clinical examination included evaluation by National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS), Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), Full Outline of UnResponsiveness score (FOUR). Severity of SIVH was verified by the different scores: IVH, Hemphill-ICH, mICH-A, mICH-B, ICH-GS using clinical parameters and parameters of computer tomography. Intracerebral hemorrhage volume (ICHV) and secondary IVH volume (IVHV) were calculated by formulas: ICHV=(a*b*c)/2 and IVHV (mL)=e˄(IVHS score/5). Elaboration of prognostic model was made by logistic regression and ROC-analysis. Results: Out of 69 stroke patients, 13 (18.8%) had died. The model with the largest AUC was: β=-0.09*age (years)+0.17*(NIHSS score at admission)+0.13*(IVHV (mL))-1.37. Percent Concordant=95.6. Elaborated model characterized by higher AUC (0.99) ( fig. 1 ), than used in routine clinical practice standard scores: Hemphill-ICH (0.74), mICH-A (0.81), mICH-B (0.74) and ICH-GS (0.60). The cut-off value of β>-2.18 predicts ELO with sensitivity=91.7% and specificity=92.9%. Background and aims: Acquired stuttering is a rare and poorly understood condition, the majority being of ischemic etiology. It has been described in both dominant and nondominant hemispheric lesions and in all lobes except the occipital. Methods: We describe a case of an acquired stuttering as stroke presentation. Results: 38-year-old right-handed woman, recently diagnosed with hypertension, without history of development stuttering, presented in our hospital with sudden and recurrent episodes of speaking difficulty, with progressive worsening in the past two weeks. Repetitions and prolongations were noted, occurring on grammatical as well as on substantive words, in all positions of the words in the sentence, consistent across every speech tasks (reading, singing), and rarely paraphasias. The remaining neurological examination was unremarkable, except for mild attention deficit. Brain CT was described as normal. Electrocardiogram was unremarkable. Cervical and transcranial ultrasound was compatible with distal middle cerebral artery occlusion. Blood and cerebrospinal fluid investigations were normal, as well as the echocardiogram. Cerebral MRI and MR angiography revealed an acute ischemic lesion affecting the left fronto-parieto-temporooccipital cortex and lenticulocapsular region, terminal internal carotid and anterior cerebral arteries stenosis, and middle cerebral artery occlusion. Conventional angiography confirmed the previous described and showed evidence of collateral circulation, compatible with a unilateral moyamoya pattern. Conclusion: We describe a case of a large ischemic lesion presenting only with acute stuttering and rare paraphasias, with the further investigation revealing a moyamoya syndrome. Although frequently attributed to functional disturbances, we emphasize the need to investigate a structural cause in acquired stuttering. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose There are less data concerning factors affecting the long-term and functional outcome. The aim of our study was to determine the prognostic value of ICH baseline parameters for 3-month functional outcome of ICH. Methods: 89 patients with nontraumatic ICH were included in the study. Evaluated parameters were age, neurological status characterized by National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS), hematoma volume measured using 3D Slicer, presence of intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) and hematoma location categorized as lobar, deep brain (including basal ganglia and thalamus), brainstem and cerebellar. The outcome of interest was 3-months functional outcome classified as good (modified Rankin Scale (mRS) 0-2) and poor (mRS 3-6). Results: A binomial logistic regression was performed. Of the imputed variables were only NIHSS and age statistically significant. Increasing age and NIHSS score were associated with poor outcome. HR for poor outcome was 1. Porto, Portugal, 5 Neurosurgery, São João Hospital Centre, Porto, Portugal, 6 Neurology, Centro Hospitalar S. João, Porto, Portugal Background and aims: Middle cerebral artery (MCA) ischemic stroke has high morbidity and mortality related to cytotoxic edema mass effect. RCT favored better functional and mortality outcome with decompressive craniectomy (DC) in a selected group of patients. We describe the experience of our center. Methods: Retrospective analysis of clinical charts from every patient with MCA ischemic stroke who underwent DC at our center from January/2006 to October/2016. Results: Thirty-seven patients were included (average 49 yo): 57% with DC until 48h of symptoms. At 12 months, mRS distribution was: 1 -2.9%; 2 -5.7%, 3 -22.9%, 4 -40%, 5 -5.7%, 6 -22.9%. The 31% who could walk unassisted were younger (40 vs. 53, p=0.034) and had lower GCS score at admission (11±3 vs. 13±2, p=0.038). Mortality was lower for those with smaller infarction area at admission (68% of survivors had <1/3 MCA territory vs. 44.4% of those who passed away, p=0.046). Only younger age was a positive predictor of mRS≤3 [OR=1.07 (IC95% 1.003-1.133)]. Prognosis was not different according to time from symptoms to surgery (average 54h) or incidence of surgical complications. Conclusion: Our DC patients had the prognostic benefit described in previous studies of DC vs. best medical therapy, with lower mortality and 31% walking unassisted at 12mo. Surgical complications did not impact outcome, favoring the safety of the procedure. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Introduction: Post-event pathophysiological processes are known to influence neurologic status after acute ischemic stroke (AIS) but it is uncertain if genetic factors affect early outcome. Hypothesis: Early neurological change after AIS is influenced by genetic variants. Methods: AIS patients were prospectively enrolled at Jagiellonian University in Krakow, Poland. Early change in neurological status was assessed by NIHSS scores taken within 6 hours of stroke onset, and after 24 hours, using ΔNIHSS24h=NIHSS6h-NIHSS24h. Genotyping was generated for common variants, imputing up to 4 million SNPs. A GWAS was performed using the model: ΔNIHSS24h =ΔNIHSS6h-NIHSS24h, age, sex, SNP, PCA1-2. The population was analyzed through overall statistical analysis taking into account population mixing (MANTRA). Results: 111 patients (ages 32-95, 47% female) were found to have an NIHSS6h score of 6 (IQR 10) and ΔNIHSS24h score of 2 (SD 5). One novel locus influenced ΔNIHSS24h with genome-wide significance ( Figure) : rs11670808 in an intron of NLRP11 (chromosome 19) was identified. NLRP11 encodes NLR family pyrin domain containing 11; a part of a subfamily of proteins called NALPs. NALPS are a subset of the CATERPILLAR protein family, a large family of inflammation regulators. NLRP11 is involved in cell signaling by inflammasomes, complexes that activate caspase 1 and in turn pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-18 and IL-1β. Conclusion: In our population of AIS patients, we found a genetic locus that influences early neurological change after AIS. This gene has been shown to be implicated in inflammatory processes, particularly in activation of proinflammatory cytokines. Replication in an independent cohort is ongoing. Disclosure: This study is funded by a grant from the NIH, and also a training grant from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.  Background and aims: Restless legs syndrome (RLS) in patients with Parkinson`s disease (PD) occurs more frequently than in general population. It is caused by hypofunction of diencephalic-spinal dopaminergic tracts leading to changes in excitability of the spinal segmental apparatus with development of sensory-motor disorders. Aim: To investigate the neurophysiological features of RLS in PD. Methods: We investigated somatosensory evoked potentials (SEPs), blink reflex (BR) and sympathetic skin response (SSR). 82 patients with PD aged 40-70 years were examined: 36 with RLS (1st group) and 46 -without RLS (2nd group). 30 healthy individuals were included in the control group. Results: SEPs study revealed that in the 1st group, the interpeak intervals (IPI) N9-N13, N11-N13 were significantly shorter and the IPI N13-N20 was longer as compared with 2nd group. A significant increase in the amplitudes N20-P23 and N13-P18 was also revealed in the 1st group, which reflects sensitization processes in patients with RLS. SSR study revealed prolonged latent period and an increase in the peak amplitude in the 1st group and positive correlation between the severity of RLS (according to International RLS Severity Scale) and SSR latency. Trend to hyperexcitability answers of BR was observed, which reflects insufficiency of the inhibitory mechanisms at the segmental level and deficiency of suprasegmental descending control in PD patients with RLS. Methods: A total of 28 patients with pure lower motor neuron syndrome, suspected ALS or possible ALS were recruited into the study. Navigated TMS (NBS eXimia Nexstim) included measurement of resting motor threshold (MT), central motor conduction time (CMCT), cortical silent period (CSP) duration and paired-pulse stimulation with measurement of short-interval intracortical inhibition (SICI) and intracortical fascilitation (ICF). Also we mapped cortical representation of musculus abductor pollicis brevis and analyzed the size of muscle representation and the weighted size. Results: After extensive investigations and clinical followup during 6-12 months 9 patients were diagnosed with ALS mimic syndromes (multifocal motor neuropathy, Kennedy's disease, Hirayama's disease), 19 patients were eventually diagnosed with ALS. There was a significant reduction in SICI (p<0.001) and CSP duration (p<0.001) in ALS patients compared to patients with ALS mimic syndromes. The weighted size of muscle representation was significantly smaller in patients with ALS (p<0.05), although the size of muscle representation was not significantly different. There was no significant difference in CMCT, MT and ICF across the groups. Conclusion: A reduction in SICI and CSP duration (indicative of motor cortex hyperexcitability) and decrease in the weighted size of muscle cortical representations may be considered as diagnostic biomarkers that distinguish ALS from mimic syndromes. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Orthostatic tremor (OT) is characterized by a high-frequency tremor of the leg muscles during stance, resulting in an unsteady feeling. Although an increasing number of publications on OT reflect a growing scientific interest in the disorder, pathophysiology is still not understood. Treatment options are limited and often not satisfactory. A systematic literature search on primary OT is lacking the literature. Methods: Here we review data of a total of 617 primary OT-patients, retrieved after a systematic search in Pubmed (583 individual patients from 45 case reports, 20 case series, and 7 therapeutic trials) and from a questionnaire-based study in Dutch OT-patients (n=34). Results: Overall, 67% of primary OT patients is female; mean age at onset is 57 (17-81) years. Six percent (22 of 390 cases) has a positive family history for OT. Mean delay to diagnosis is 7.7 years (n=268). A substantial number of patients reports falls. Quality of life is affected. Clonazepam is the most prescribed drug, but is not always effective. Trials report a possible positive effect of gabapentin. Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has shown a positive effect in 6 out of 7 patients. Conclusion: Primary OT can be disabling and is underrecognized. The most effective treatment remains uncertain, with some evidence for gabapentin and clonazepam. DBS provides an alternative for drug-resistant and disabling OT, although long term effects are still uncertain. Increasing attention for OT will probably shorten the delay in time to diagnosis and possibly lead to development of better treatment options. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose. Background and aims: To determine comparability of two recommended recording montages of median somatosensory evoked potentials (SEP), as SEP are part of multimodal EP which may becomean outcome measure in multicentre clinical trials. Methods: 81 patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis (MS)(mean age: 37.5y, median EDSS: 2.0) and 49 healthy controls (HC) had median SEP recordings with highresolution EEG. Two standard montages were extracted : M1 (C3'/C4'-Fz, C7-Fz) and M2 (C3'/C4'-C4' /C3', C7-EP contralateral). N20 and N13 latency, N20-P25 amplitude and central conduction time (CCT) were independently evaluated by two neurophysiologists (VB, MH) blinded to diagnosis using EPMark. Nine artifactual curves (4%) were excluded. Results: To determine the physiological effect of montages and not the effect of uncertainty in rating, 12 curves (5%) with a N20-latency difference >2 msec between montages were excluded. In HC, N20 and N13 latencies in M1 were significantly (p<0.05) longer than in M2 (mean difference: 0.17 and 0.39msec). In MS patients, only N20 latency differed (0.21msec). Differences in CCT (HC: 0.19, MS: 0.21 msec) were not significant. Amplitudes were 40% and 41% smaller in M2 compared to M1 (p<0.001). Conclusion: N20-latency is significantly later in Fzcompared to ipsilateral C'-reference independent of group, most likely due to injection of a frontal positivity. This difference is 2-6x smaller than variability in HC and thus clinically not relevant. The much higher amplitude favours Fz-reference. However, in clinical trials both montages may be employed in parallel as the technicians' routine is important in achieving standardized follow-up assessments. Disclosure: VB received a travel grant from the European Academy of Neurology (EAN). The study was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNF; grants 33CM30-140338 and 326030_128775). Many studies documented the presence of small fiber neuropathy (SFN) in different neurological diseases, such as Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Fabry disease (FD). Laser-evoked potentials (LEPs) are an emerging neurophysiologic technique to evaluate small fiber involvement, even if no clear data are available concerning their sensitivity, compared to skin biopsy. Methods: We recruited 34 patients (age 56.2±13.2): 10 ALS patients (5 M, 5 F), 10 FD patients (10 F) and 14 patients with diagnosis of acquired small fiber neuropathy (6 M, 8 F), in order to evaluate LEPs sensitivity. All patients had previously undergone skin biopsy (from thigh and lower leg, using a 3mm punch), disclosing decreased epidermal nerve fiber density. LEPs were carried out using a Nd-YAP laser (1340nm) by stimulating hand, foot and face skin surface. Results: 74% of patients showed abnormalities of LEPs, respectively 80% in ALS, 60% in FD and 79% in other SFN, with absent LEPs (40%), decreased amplitude (33%), increased latencies (20%) or both (7%). Comparing face, hand and foot, A-δ LEPs were more often abnormal recording from foot (41%). Interestingly, C fibers in the trigeminal territory showed the highest abnormalities (50% of patients). Conclusion: LEPs showed a good sensitivity in evaluating SFN. Our findings of a higher involvement of C fibers rather than A-δ in SFN deserve a better characterization. However, this study needs to be extended to a larger number of patients, before drawing any definite conclusion. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Active denervation was found more frequently in T-PSM than in the RA (80% vs 65%, p<0.05). Increasing age was related to more severe denervation in the RA (p<0.01). Duration of symptoms, Creatine Kinase levels, sex, initial symptoms (upper limb, lower limb or bulbar), degree of denervation and Revised ALS Functional Rating Scale score were not associated with RA and T-PSM denervation. Conclusion: T-PMS EMG is recommended for the detection of active denervation in patients with ALS. In case of normal EMG in RA, T-PSM must also be tested. On the contrary, absence of active denervation in T-PSM is rarely associated with active denervation in RA. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Contact heat-evoked potentials (CHEPs) provide a means of assessing functional impairment of small nerve fibres and the spinothalamic pathway. The aim of this study was to investigate the impact of physiological and test variables on CHEPs latency and amplitude parameters, and to determine the applicability of the method for diabetic neuropathy (DN) patients. Methods: In 30 DN patients and 70 healthy subjects, standard CHEPs were tested at wrist and ankle (C6, C8, L4 and L5 dermatomes) using two algorithms: "basic" with temperatures ranging from 35º to 50ºC and "intensive" from 42º to 52ºC). Latencies and amplitudes of N2/P2 response, together with tolerability of the thermal stimuli were (semiquantitatively) evaluated. Results: CHEPs were largely well-tolerated and responses could be evoked in most of the individuals tested. Latencies were shorter and amplitudes higher at the wrist compared to the ankle, as they were when applying the intensive algorithm compared to the basic one. The differences between the C6 and C8 dermatomes (as well as between L4 and L5) were not significant. Amplitudes decreased with age, while latencies increased slightly with age and height. At group level, reduction of amplitudes constituted the major difference between healthy controls and DN patients. Conclusion: CHEPs are an efficient and well-tolerated method of functional testing of pain-related tracts both in healthy controls and DN patients. Age, height, testing algorithm and the area tested need to be considered in the interpretation of the results. Reduction of amplitudes appears to be the most prominent abnormality in DN patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Background and aims: We aimed to to evaluate somatosensory evoked potentials of the tibial nerve (SSEPt) in correlation with timed 25 foot walk test (T25FW) and MRI findings in patients with first symptom of multiple sclerosis (MS). Methods: In 120 MS patients (mean age 32.2±8.7 years, 84 females), EDSS, T25FW, brain and spinal cord MRI and SSEPt were performed. P40 latencies and N22a-P40 interlatency were analyzed and zscore for each latency was calculated and combined into SSEPt zscore. MRI was analyzed for the presence of brainstem and cervical spinal cord lesions. Background and aims: Anatomical variations in the innervations of intrinsic hand muscle are well known as Martin-Gruber anastomosis (MGA), spread from the median to the ulnar nerves in the forearm. This anastomosis predominantly consists of motor axons, with rare sensory contribution. Although anatomical studies have shown that a crossover of sensory fibers is not rare in Martin-Gruber median-ulnar anastomosis, it has been electrophysiologically described only in rare subjects. The aim of our study was to investigated the frequency of sensory fibers in MGA. Methods: In order to demonstrate the presence of sensory fibers in MGA, we stimulated the median nerve at the elbow and recorded the antidromic sensory potential from ulnar innervated digit (5th finger), using surface electrodes. Results: A total of 113 arms were analyzed with presence of motor MGA. Sensory MGA were present in 35 arms (30.9%). There were 59 left hands with motor MGA, of which 15 (25.4%) were with sensory MGA, and 54 right hands with motor MGA, and 20 (37%) of them had sensory MGA. There was no a significant difference between the presence of sensory fibers depending on the right or left hand (p=0.56), or the sex (p=0.49). The presence of sensory fibers in MGA median-ulnar anastomosis by electrophysiological study is not rare. Knowledge of the anatomical variations relating to the innervation of the hand has great importance, especially with regard to physical examination, diagnosis, prognosis and surgical treatment. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2065 Self-rated health and sense of coherence in multiple sclerosis patients Background and aims: The prevalence of uremic polyneuropathy varies between 60 and 100% and remains a major disabling feature in the life of uremic patients. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the function of small-diameter A-delta nerve fibers, in the hands of hemodialysis patients. Methods: A total of 38 randomly selected patients treated three times weekly with hemodialysis were evalueted. The control group consisted of 38 age-matched healthy subjects. The mean age of hemodialysis patients and healthy subjects did not diffeer significantly. The function of A-delta nerve fibers was measured by cutaneous silent period (CSP). CSP was elicited by nociceptive electrical square pulse stimulation using bipolar electrodes at the palmar distal tip of digit II, stimulating median nerve fibers. Recording electrodes were placed over thenar muscles in the standard the position as for median nerve motor conduction study. CSP onset and end latency, and the difference between the two latencies -duration of CSP (muscle acttivity suppression), were calculated. Results: The mean CSP onset latency in hemodialysis patients with and without arteriovenous fistula was markedly longer compared with the control group (p<0.0001). The same relationship was found for CSP end latencies. CSP duration did not demonstrate any difference between the two groups. CSP onset latency was obseerved in 12/38 (32%) hemodialysis patients. Conclusion: The evaluation of CSP is a useful method for detecting the function of A-delta fibers. The delayed CSP onset latency observed in 1/3 of hemodialysis patients reflects the impairment of the afferent conduction of A-delta fibers. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Methods: This is a descriptive study that prospectively recorded data of 20 consecutive patients who met lvPPA criteria: word retrieval and sentence repetition deficits, phonologic paraphasias, sparing of single word comprehension and motor speech, absence of frank agrammatism and predominant left posterior perisylvian or parietal atrophy on MRI and/or hypoperfusion or hypometabolism on SPECT or PET (Gorno-Tempini ML et al, 2011) at the Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Spain (mean age at onset 73.1±4.9 years, mean duration of dementia 3.8±2.3 years, 55% women). The Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) was used to assess BPS. Results: At least one BPS occurred in 100% of lvPPA participants, the median NPI score was 34 (range:10-86), with a median number of 5 symptoms per patient. The most frequent symptoms were anxiety (80%), depression (70%), apathy (70%) and sleep disturbances (60%), followed by agitation (50%), disinhibition (50%), appetite/eating abnormalities (45%), irritability (40%), aberrant motor behaviour (40%), hallucinations (35%), delusions (25%) and euphoria (10%). It is remarkable that 7 of 9 patients with appetite/eating abnormalities showed hyperphagia. Background and aims: Subjective Memory Complaint (SMC) is a possible prodrome of Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia. Objective impairments in SMC may be revealed by in-depth neuropsychological evaluations. Hereby, we analysed in SMC subjects complex visuo-constructive performances and their relationship with basic cogntiive functioning in order to detect subtle impairments and possible correlation with working memory and executive performances. Methods: Thirty-seven SMC subjects (10 male; age=67.27±5.53 years; education=12.86±3.29) were enrolled. All participants completed a detailed neuropsychological battery. A combined quantitative and qualitative scoring approach was used to analyse Clock Drawing Test (CDT) and Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure (ROCF) performances. Correlations between CDT/ROCF and other cognitive scores were explored. Results: Twenty-five subjects presented with a subjective memory disorder (i.e., no objective cognitive deficit), while 12 subjects showed objective impairments at memory, executive and/or visuo-constructive tasks. Statistical analyses highlighted significant correlations between the number of "omitted elements" at both CDT and ROCF tasks and working memory abilities (i.e., Digit Span backward). Additionally, the number of "distortion" (i.e., element incomplete but placed properly) at the ROCF task was correlated with attentional/executive (i.e., Trial Making Test B) performances. Conclusion: In this study, we provided evidence in SMC subjects of impairments at non-memory tasks including complex visuo-constructive tests. These were crucially affected by working memory and attentional/planning deficits. Our results suggest the importance of a careful cognitive assessment of non-memory domains in case of SMC in order to obtain a better diagnosis and make prediction of the possible evolution. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2068 Brain wave entrainment using alpha frequency binaural beats on adolescent swimmers Background and aims: Binaural beats combined with music therapy and mental training skills were more effective in increasing α waveswas suggessted to improve anxiety in swimmers. Aim: The effect of brain wave entrainment in swimmers using binaural beats set at alpha range was investigated. EEG and reaction time were measured before and after sessions of relaxation techniques, music therapy and mental training with and without binaural beats. Methods: 11 adolescent elite swimmers(4 females , 7 males) were subjected to 18 sessions of mental training skills including relaxation techniques, positive thinking and imagery. 7 swimmers were randomly assigned to group I and received sessions of binaural beats and music therapy and the other 4 to group II receiving just music therapy.( both groups were blind to the music type)EEG and reaction time was measured pre and post the sessions. A written conscent was taken from the parents prior to the study. Results: There was a significant EEG waves change during the relaxation time (p=0.05) and positive thinking phase (p=0.05) The EEG frequencies significantly decreased (both qualitativly and quantitiativly) in swimmers included in group I( with the beats) than those in group II. In addition to this statistically significant improvement in the reaction time in their performances observed in group I, which was significantly shorter (p=0.01) compared to group II. Conclusion: Relaxation techniques and binaural beats added to music may have a positive effect on atheletic performance of swmmers Disclosure: Nothing to disclose For PDD, MDS-UPDRS Part II (Motor Experiences) was inversely associated with anxiety (ρ=0.0372) and dysphoria (ρ=0.0162) total scores, but not with other symptoms (ρ>0.07). Also for PDD, MDS-UPDRS Part III (Motor Examination) was inversely associated with anxiety (ρ=0.0339) and dysphoria (ρ=0.0157) total scores, but not with other symptoms (ρ>0.07). No behavioural symptoms were associated with MDS-UPDRS scores for patients with DLB (ρ>0.10). Association of anxiety scores with MDS-UPDRS Part III in Parkinson's disease dementia. Porto, Portugal, 2 Neuroradiology, Centro Hospitalar do Porto -Hospital Santo António, Porto, Portugal Background and aims: Foreign accent syndrome (FAS) is a rare motor speech disorder where the affected person speaks in an accent different from their mother tongue. FAS may be organic, with or without structural lesions, or functional and the distinction might be difficult. Methods: We report two similar FAS cases with presumed different etiologies. Results: A 27-year-old Portuguese woman presented with an acute motor aphasia and right motor deficit secondary to a left M1 occlusion. She was treated with thrombectomy, maintaining distal M2/M3 occlusion. After the procedure, she gradually recovered all deficits. Her speech was normal beside presenting a foreign spanish accent. The patient had recently started having spanish lessons. Head-CT after 24 hours revealed a left insular and lenticular/capsular infarction. The foreign accent spontaneously resolved after a week. A 36-year-old Portuguese woman presented with a facial asymmetry mimicking a left peripheral facial nerve palsy after spending a week at London. She gradually developed a left motor deficit with gait impairment, visual symptoms and started talking with a foreign accent perceived as english. She also presented a left hand postural tremor that disappeared with distraction maneuvers. Brain MRI and CSF study was normal. Assuming a functional cause, she started sertraline, speech therapy and psychotherapy with partial improvement. During follow-up she had a normal speech for a year while on homeopathic medications. Recently she reappeared at consultation with a minor foreign accent, evident when on stressful situations. Conclusion: These two cases highlight different features of functional and organic causes of foreign accent syndrome and possible treatment approaches.  Background and aims: Anti-NMDA receptor (anti-NMDAr) encephalitis is a recognized cause of rapid onset encephalopathy with wide phenotypic variability. The clinical presentation includes psychiatric manifestations, memory impairment, seizures, movement disorders, autonomic instability and somnolence. The cognitive profile of these patients is yet to be clarified. Methods: We performed a retrospective review of clinical and neuropsychological data (Dementia Rating scale-2, DRS-2) of six patients with anti-NMDAr encephalitis followed at Centro Hospitalar do Porto. Results: Three males and 3 females were included. The first manifestation of the disease occurred between age 8 and 26. None of the patients had an underlying neoplasm. The cerebral MRI had persistent lesions in two patients. Five patients had cognitive evaluations at two different time points (the gap between evaluations varied from 4 months to 4 years). In the acute/subacute phase, one patient scored 135 on DRS-2, while the remainder 4 scored between 63 and 120. Affected domains included attention, language, memory and executive functions. The 4 patients with severe cognitive impairment presented with severe acute psychosis (n=2) and seizures (n=2). Two of these patients were younger than 18 years. In 3/4 patients a follow-up evaluation was performed that showed significant cognitive improvement (DRS-2 125 to 134). Conclusion: This case series confirms the presence of significant dysfunction in different cognitive domains in the acute/subacute phase of anti-NMDAr autoimmune encephalitis. All patients with follow up evaluation showed substantial cognitive improvement, although some deficits persisted. Cognitive dysfunction was more frequent in patients presenting with psychiatric symptoms or seizures. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Methods: We enrolled 36 subjects: 16 with amnestic MCI (aMCI) and 20 healthy controls (HC), matching them for sex, age and educational level. Neuropsychological evaluation included tests to evaluate cognitive status, memory, reasoning, visuo-spatial, attention and executive functions. Two test were used to investigate ToM: the "Reading the Mind in the Eyes" (RME), to evaluate affectiveToM, in which subjects had to guess the emotion or thinking of a person whose eyes are shown in a picture; the "Faux Pas Recognition Test", to evaluate both cognitiveToM and affectiveToM, through the presentation of stories containing faux pas. Results: In RME we observed lower scores in aMCI than in HC. In the other tests, aMCI showed performances below normal only in memory tasks. Conclusion: Available data regarding the impairment of ToM in patients with MCI are inconsistent: some studies show a generic dysfunction, rather than a specific deficit of cognitiveToM or affectiveToM; others studies exclude alterations. The results of this study show that a deterioration of affectiveToM is possible in aMCI; this assumption requires further confirmation on a larger sample because it could have important clinical and prognostic implications. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Limbic encephalitis (LE) is a heterogeneous group of disorders caused by autoimmunity directed against components of the central nervous system involved in cognition and behavior. Methods: We present the clinical, immunological, imaging and neurophysiological characteristics of 11 patients that presented to the cognitive neurology clinic with complaints regarding memory impairment and/or behavioral changes and were diagnosed with definite or suspected LE during the years 2012-2016. Results: Median age was 57 years (42-69), 100% women. Initial manifestations included subacute cognitive decline (9), seizures (4), depression and behavioral disorders (4). The median MMSE score was 24/30 (range 19-30). Auto antibody seropositivity was depicted in 7 patients. The immunological profile included: VGPC (1), GAD 65 (1), LG1 (1), NMDA (2), anti-Yo and anti Ri (1), anti TPO (2) and anti-amphiphisin (1) antibodies. MRI depicted characteristic findings in 4 patients. Six patients had normal MRI and in one patient a lacunar strokes were depicted. CSF with lymphocytic pleocytosis was found in 4 patients. Eight patients were treated by immunotherapy (IV steroids, plasmapheresis, Imuran). Four patients underwent complete recovery or partial improvement following therapy. The treatment course of one patient was complicated by perforation of the lower esophagus. She eventually died from sepsis. One patient was diagnosed with adenocarcinoma of lung. Her symptomatology resolved following surgery. Conclusion: LE has to be considered in patients with atypical presentation of cognitive deterioration as early diagnosis and treatment may improve the cognitive outcome. Nevertheless, as the experience with these patients is relatively scarce, treatment should be closely monitored. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Demographic and clinical data were collected by review of records. 12 month outcome was categorised based on Engel classification. Fisher exact testing was used to test association between EEG findings and surgical outcomes. Results: 43 patients were included, with a median age of 41 years (21-63). 22 were female and had left sided lobectomies. 18 (42%) had history of febrile seizures, 41 (95%) had MRI abnormalities, most commonly hippocampal sclerosis (34, 79%). Good (Engel class I) outcome was observed in 29 (69%) patients at 12 months. Videotelemetry was available in 38 (88%) patients. Interictal epileptiform discharges (IED) were present in 35(92%), 25 (71%) of whom had a good outcome; all 3 patients with non specific interictal activity had good outcome (p=0.55). 22 of 35 (71%) of those with ipsilateral IED had good outcomes, compared to 3 of 4 with bilateral IED (75%, p=1.00). Features of the ictal rhythm including dominant frequency (theta versus delta), lateralisation (ipsilateral versus non lateralised and bilateral), timing (early versus delayed) and localisation (anterior temporal/ sphenoidal versus mid or posterior temporal) did not show significant association with outcomes Conclusion: In this population of lesional temporal lobe epilepsy, interictal and ictal EEG findings did not show significant association with surgical outcomes. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  We describe the long-term follow-up of a patient with A3243G/tRNALeu mutation presenting with recurrent focal SE, mostly occurring during SLEs. Neuroimaging, EEG and SLE treatment are discussed. Results: This 29-year-old patient carries the mtDNA A3243G/tRNALeu mutation. The mother died at 40 years during SE associated with SLE. The patient suffered photosensitive epilepsy since 17 years. Since 23 years he presented recurrence of 7 episodes of occipital SE (elementary visual hallucinations, oculo-clonic seizures) with hemianopia mostly associated with lactic acidosis and stroke-like occipital lesions. SE was refractory to iv lorazepam, diazepam, phenytoin and levetiracetam. SE was effectively treated with iv high-dosage Midazolam. In one episode Propofol was used during SE and the patient suffered multiple organ failure (Propofol infusion syndrome-PRIS). Conclusion: We report a MELAS patient with recurrent occipital SE and SLEs. SE recurred with an increasing frequency over the years. Midazolam infusion is a first-line drug in SE treatment. Based on the occurrence of PRIS in our patient and evidence of mitochondrial toxicity induced by Propofol this drug should be avoided in patients with mitochondrial encephalopathy. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: The main aim of this study was to evalute the association of sudden, unexpected falls and temporal lobe epilepsy Methods: We have retrospectively analyzed data of all patients who underwent presurgical evaluation for drugresistant temporal lobe epilepsy in our center since 2005. The patient was included only if (1) there was anamnesis of sudden, unexpected falls, (2) patient underwent long-term ECG monitoring, which did not reveal cardiac arrhytmia, (3) patient underwent surgery and was categorized as completely seizure-free after surgery, (4) the falls dissapeared after surgery completely. The interictal and ictal ECGs of these patients were compared to ECG of control group. There were age-and gender-matched patients in control who underwent surgery for drug-resistant epilepsy and were seizure-free since surgery. Results: We identified 15 patients (7 females, 8 males) treated with temporal lobe epilepsy who reported sudden unexplained falls which completely disappeared after surgery. When analyzing ictal EEG, we identified higher tendency to ictal tachycardia in comparison to control group. No patient had ictal asystolia. No statistical significant differences were found when analyzing interictal EEG. Conclusion: It seems that suden unexplained falls could be rarely associated with temporal lobe epilepsy. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Epilepsy has become a rising problem and usually the first signs of epilepsy are shown in school, and hence teachers are usually the first to notice it. Objectives of tihis study was to assess the knowledge attitude and practice of primary school teachers on Epilepsy in Omdurman, Khartoum Methods: This is a cross-sectional descriptive institutional study. Over a period of a week 152 questionnaires were distributed among 15 schools in the area of Abu Siid and South Omdurman, with 10 questionnaires in each school Results: All the teachers who took part in this interview had heard of epilepsy before. The overall knowledge evaluation of teachers concerning epilepsy was reasonable with 47% having good knowledge, 50% having satisfactory knowledge, and only 3% having poor knowledge. Sadly only 15% had taken a training course on how epileptic kids should be managed. Thankfully around 75% acknowledged that epilepsy wasn't contagious and 70% would allow their kids to play with epileptic kids, reflecting positive attitude towards epilepsy. Around 40% had good management skills Results of causes of epilepsy by the teachers 1)Symptoms of epilepsy 2)Type of treatmemnt Conclusion: While many teachers had positive views about epilepsy, some negative views still persist. Furthermore, most teachers received no formal training on epilepsy. Given the potential impact that teachers' practice and knowledge can have on children with epilepsy, further research in this area is needed. Overall, there was a generally positive attitude towards epilepsy and good knowledge on epilepsy but there were also significant deficiencies in terms of epilepsy management Overall Knowledge Evaluation Disclosure: University of Khartoum, Faculty of Medicine, Community Medicine department EP2085 A retrieval-related evoked potential in the parahippocampal gyrus by a short-term memory task F. Farias Serratos 1 , K. Kawai 2 , N. Kunii 3 , N. Saito 3 1 Research, Hospital Regional de Alta Especialidad del Bajío, León, Gto., León, Mexico, 2 Neurosurgery, NTT Medical Center Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 3 Neurosurgery, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan Background and aims: Working memory (WM) is conceived as short-term memory (STM) applied to cognitive tasks, as a multi-component system that holds and manipulates information, and as the use of attention to manage STM. Different models of WM suggest a mechanism by which a persistent spiking at cellular level could be used to hold various items. Some of these models focus on WM in the medial temporal lobe (MTL). Our purpose is to present the case of a retrieval-related evoked potential (RREP) in the parahippocampal gyrus after Gamma Knife (GK) radiosurgery and its implication on WM. Methods: We performed this study in a patient with seizure since 2 y.o. In 2006 she was received GK for left temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE), it was not favorable. 3 years later we performed intracranial electroence phalography (iEEG) and surgery (left transsylvian selective amygdalohippocampectomy). Wada test showed right dominance (memory function). We used trapezoid electrode-sheets ("T" shape), inserted on the parahippocampal gyri (Fig 1) . The patient performed two tasks whereas we recorded electrocorticogram (ECoG), picture naming task and memory task. We confirmed diagnosis of MTLE by video EEG, ECoG, MRI, CT scan, PET and SPECT. Results: There was a large negative deflection ranging from 400 to 700ms (Figure 2 ). The peak latency was around 600ms. Currently 6 years later she is seizure free (Engel I). Among the causes of epilepsy, 68.4% thought that it is a psychiatric condition, 34.2% a degenerative disease, 28,9% an hereditary condition and a 21.1% secondary to an infection. About how to diagnose a patient, just a 23.7% considered that the anamnesis could be enough to set the diagnosis, being more likely in those who attended more patients (p=0.05). Only 60.5% considered history important for the diagnosis and a 52.6% considered necessary a positive EEG. 28,9% considered important the laboratory exams. Only a 36,8% recommended adding folic acid to pregnant woman and only 39.5% considered possible breast-feeding. The mean number of drugs known were of 2.08, being phenobarbital the most recognized. Conclusion: The main areas that needed to be addressed in the education of care providers are the origin of epilepsy and its causes, how to diagnose a patient and how to proceed during pregnancy and patient education. Background and aims: Epilepsy is one of the most frequent conditions in developing countries. The higher frequency is associated with infections, perinatal complications and traumatic brain injury. Its management is harder because of the difficult access to complementary exams and the low availability of drugs. Methods: Two neurologists evaluated 150 patients complaining about possible seizures in five different hospitals of the West region of Cameroon among 6 days in December 2016. We registered epidemiological and clinical data. Results: We included 93 patients, 52.7% of whom were female. Mean age was 23.6 years (range 0-78). The relevant prior medical history was: cognitive delay 18.5%, prior CNS infections 15.2%; febrile seizures: 8.6%; perinatal complications 7.6%. Mean age of onset of seizures was 11.9 years old. Frequency of seizures was daily 5.1%, weekly 14.1%, monthly 31.1% and free of seizures 26.9%. The type episodes suggested a focal onset in 35.6%. We performed EEG to 21.5% with positive findings in 41.7%, which change treatment in 47.8% of cases. Initial treatment was phenobarbital 53.8%, carbamazepine 38.9%, phenytoin 6.4% and valproate 3.8%. We started a treatment in 15.8%, increased in 29.0%; changed in 13.2%, decreased in 5.3% and stopped in 3.9%. Conclusion: We succeeded in making a diagnosis in a high percentage of the patients despite the lack of resources. The management is complicated and the very few diagnostic and therapeutic resources represent a challenge to the clinician. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: The semiological description of seizures is complicated to comprehend in words. To improve the communication between epilepsy patients and providers, 24 seizure images were developed by experts. This tool can be used during obtaining the patient's history. The objective of this study was to validate 24 seizure images before implementing into practice. Methods: We included patients with epilepsy, persons who witnessed seizure episodes such as family members of epilepsy patients, care givers, and participants without preexisting knowledge of epilepsy. Participants completed the questionnaire evaluating 24 seizure images twice within 36 hours. The participants were explained to choose one of the 2 items that best described each seizure image. The validity was assessed using one proportion z-test. Test-retest reliability was assessed by interclass correlation coefficient (ICC). Results: For the initial analysis, 32 participants were included in the study. Beside two images, the proportion of correctly recognized seizure images was significantly higher than 0.7. The proportions of the two seizure images (image 9: dystonia and image 17: myoclonus) were 0.78 (95%CI 0.63-1.00) and 0.56 (95%CI 0.40-1.00). ICCs for seizure images are also high (range from 0.86 to 1.00) except for the images 9 and 17. Conclusion: The seizure images were proved to be valid and have a high test-retest reliability. However, two images (images 9 and 17) should be revised in order to improve the validity of this tool. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Epilepsy is polyetiology disease. The significance of various etiological factors varies in different age periods. The most important etiological factors of symptomatic partial epilepsy are brain dysgenesis, mesial temporal sclerosis, brain tumors, vascular malformations, neurocutaneous syndromes (Tuberous sclerosis, angiomatosis entsefalotrigeminalny), trauma, Rasmussen's Syndrome. Objective: To study the etiology of symptomatic partial epilepsy in childhood and adolescence in the Siberian region. The study and dynamic observation involved 882 patients (463 boys and 419 girls) with epilepsy and epileptic syndromes. The form of epilepsy and epileptic syndromes and the etiology of symptomatic epilepsy refined during neuroimaging (magnetic resonance tomography of the brain) and functional methods of investigation (EEG with standard functional tests, video monitoring). Results: Among the etiological factors of symptomatic partial epilepsy was a statistically significant superiority (p <0.05), perinatal hypoxic-ischemic lesions (26.4%); second place is occupied by congenital abnormalities of brain development (15.9%); 8.96% were head injuries, almost the same (8.46%) -perinatal traumatic injury -Intracranial hemorrhage. Prenatal and other infectious brain damage amounted to 6.22%; hydrocephalus occurred in 3.73%; vascular pathology -2.24% of cases. Less incidence of brain tumors (1.49%), chromosomal abnormalities (1%), hereditary neurocutaneous syndromes (0.75%) and congenital errors of metabolism (0.5%). In 14.2% of cases, the etiology of symptomatic partial epilepsy are not verified. Conclusion: Among the etiological factors of symptomatic partial epilepsy in the Siberian region in childhood dominated by perinatal hypoxic-ischemic injury in adolescence -head injuries, mesial temporal sclerosis, and infections of the central nervous system. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Cobalamine's (B12) importance for maintaining healthy nerve cells is well known. Though wide-ranging references study neuro-psychiatric complications caused by B12 deficiency, only a very few focus on EEG abnormalities and their involvement in lateonset seizures. Purpose: Brain rhythm analysis of B12 mildly deficient elderly patients and correlation with seizures. Methods: We evaluated the QEEG of 186 patients (mean age 73 years) with B12 gray zone levels 200-400pg/ml for the last two years. A matching healthy control sample was included. All the patients were submitted to brain imaging and EEG follow-up every 3 months. Results: QEEG parameters of 72 (38.7%) patients were characterized by pronounced theta rhythms in the frontotemporal regions and alpha3/alpha2 frequency ratio reduction. An increased of paroxysmal activity was observed in 26 patients and 4 of them presented seizures. After B12 supplementation EEG abnormalities subsided. Conclusion: Mildly B12 deficiency in elderly patients causes EEG rhythm alterations. Late onset seizures occur in 5.5% of them. Considering that treatment necessity of mildly deficiency is usually underestimated, QEEG analysis is a reliable method for epileptiform activity evaluation Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Characteristics of one of them have already been published. We prospectively gathered demographic and clinical characteristics. Results: We identified 4 patients (2 females, 2 males) out of 4742 (0.08%) attended during inclusion period, with diagnosis of IN. Mean age at onset was 35.7±17.4 years (16-58). All of them presented tenderness over the infraorbital notch. Possible secondary causes were appropriately ruled out. Three patients suffered a burning or dull background pain, that was rated as moderate (6.3±1.5 (5-8)) on a verbal analogical scale (VAS). In two cases, lancinating exacerbations with variable frequency and rated as severe (8-9 on VAS). Regarding temporal pattern, in two patients we observed spontaneous remissions, one of them achieved a sustained response to pregabalin, and the last case has been refractory to multiple therapies. Conclusion: Idiopathic Infraorbital Neuralgia is a quite uncommon disorder. Temporal pattern and response to treatment are variable in our series. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose , "Sant'Elia" Hospital, Caltanissetta, Italy, 2 Caltanissetta, "Sant'Elia" Hospital, Caltanissetta, Italy, 3 Ne, "Sant'Elia" Hospital, Caltanissetta, Italy, 4 Neurology, "Sant'Elia" Hospital, "Sant'Elia" Hospital, Italy Background and aims: Migraine is a common, multifactorial, disabling, recurrent, hereditary neurovascular headache disorder. Attack often begin with warning sign (prodromes) and aura (transient focal neurological symptoms) whose origins thought to involve the hypothalamus brainstem and cortex. Methods: We present the clinical case of a 46-year-old man suffering from childhood by migraine with aura. He had a family history of migraine and was not affected by chronic disease. He reported too memory impairment and loss of attention at work. So we planned blood tests, EEG, MRI with contrast and angiography sequences, neuropsychological and thrombophilia screening tests. Our patient had never performed neurological finding. Results: The thrombophilic tests showed polymorphism with mutations in heterozygous, precisely FIIG20210A, MTHFR (C677T), MTHFR(A1298C) and the haplotype e2/ e3. Neuropsychological tests performed (MMSE, MOCA, Frontal Assessment Battery, ADL, IADL). They showed slight deficit of short term memory and semantic memory evocation. B-vitamin biomarkers, routine blood test, EEG, and MRI scan were normal. Conclusion: Migraine with aura is more common in women than in men. Our case is interesting because it raises questions that are important for future research. There is a difference between men and women affected from migraine with aura for the risk of ischemic stroke? The study of thrombophilic polymorphisms is useful in patients with migraine with aura? Mild memory disorders in patients with migraine with aura are predictive of cognitive decline in elderly? In this aspect, there may be a difference between men and women? Disclosure: Nothing to disclose We evaluated self directed sTMS therapy for migraine on an anonymous cohort of patients in Plymouth, UK. Methods: An anonymous questionnaire was sent to patients in receipt of the eNeura Spring Total Migraine System (TMS). The questionnaire was administered by our pharmacist. Patients were informed about the device from the headache clinic. Patients contacted eNeura Inc. to provide therapy. The device was not prescribed and was loaned by eNeura for a three month free trial period. Results: 20% (8/39) had a significant response to sTMS therapy over 3 months. 6/8 (75%) were able to return to everyday activities with sTMS therapy. Median length of migraine history was 6-7 years receiving a median of 6 treatments prior to sTMS. 70% (27/39) did not respond to sTMS therapy over 3 months. Side effects were reported in 15% (6/39) and were headache and neck pain, as validated in sTMS safety publication. Conclusion: sTMS does not appear to be effective for the majority of migraine sufferers in our study (70%). However for 8/39 (20.5%) of patients, sTMS was found to be of significant benefit. Identifingy factors that predict response to sTMS and a local cost benefit analysis require further work. Disclosure: Patients received a three month free trial of the eNeura Spring Total Migraine System (TMS) from eNeura Inc. Pseudotumor cerebri related to Behçet's disease Background and aims: The association of pseudotumor cerebri (PS) and Behçet's disease (BD) is extremely rare. Herein, we present the clinical and laboratory features of five patients with BD who were diagnosed as having PS. Methods: We retrospectively reviewed 448 patients with Neuro-BD who were managed at Istanbul Faculty of Medicine between 1985 and 2015. Patients who fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for BD and PS were identified. Results: Five patients fulfilled both criteria. The presenting symptom was headache in four of the patients. Only one patient presented with blurred vision. Four patients had papillary edema. There were no other pathologic findings in the neurologic examination. None of the patients had any parenchymal lesions. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure was high in all patients. CSF cell counts, protein and glucose levels were normal. Only one patient had oligoclonal bands in the CSF. After the diagnosis of PS, three patients were treated with high-dose and two patients with low-dose methylprednisolone. All of the patients were treated with azathioprine, two with acetazolamide, and one with topiramate. Starting from the 15th day of treatment, all of the patients showed clinical improvement. In the longterm follow-up, one patient had headache with recurrent oral aphthous ulcers. A relapse with parenchymal involvement was observed in one patient 16 months after PS. Conclusion: PS should be considered in patients with BD who present with elevated intracranial pressure in addition to cerebral venous sinus thrombosis and aseptic meningitis. Physicians should keep in mind that the pattern of neurologic involvement in patients with BD may change. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Patient-completed screening tools may aid diagnosis of orofacial pain in non-specialist centres. We aimed to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of patientcompleted screening tools in a hospital-based cohort of patients referred for orofacial pain. Methods: Prior to first appointment at a hospital facial pain clinic, patients were prospectively assigned Oregon Health & Science University (OHSU, n=152) or painDETECT questionnaires (PD-Q, n=254). The main outcome was the diagnostic accuracy of the OHSU and PD-Q compared to clinical diagnosis made by senior staff; blinded to questionnaires and validated by an independent clinician. Results: 88 / 139 (63%) patients were correctly diagnosed by the OHSU, and 172 / 251 (69%) were correctly identified by the PD-Q to have neuropathic pain components. The OHSU had sensitivity of 0.48 (95% CI, 0.33-0.63) and specificity of 0.86 (95% CI, 0.78-0.93) to diagnose temporomandibular joint disorder, and sensitivity of 0.84 (95% CI, 0.69-0.93) and specificity of 0.59 (95% CI, 0.48-0.69) to diagnose trigeminal neuralgia. The PD-Q had an area under the receiver operating characteristics curve of 0.65 (95% CI, 0.58-0.73). Patients with a second clinical diagnosis were more likely to be diagnosed incorrectly by the OHSU (p=0.006) and PD-Q (p=0.002). The OHSU and PD-Q have poor diagnostic accuracy when applied to a hospital-based cohort of patients with orofacial pain. Such patient-completed screening tools should be revalidated in non-specialist centres, prior to research or clinical applications. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) has been described as a rare complication. Methods: A 31-year-old woman developed severe orthostatic headache with nausea within one day after a minor head trauma. After several days, she additionally experienced headache while lying down. The patient was on an ethinylestradiol vaginal ring and was smoking for 6 months. There was a family history of venous thromboembolism. Results: Initial brain CT was normal. After the patient started experiencing headache while lying down, a cerebral MR venography demonstrated superior sagittal and left transverse sinus thrombosis ( fig.1 ). Contrast-enhanced brain MRI also demonstrated signs of severe intracranial hypotension ( fig.2) . A prothrombotic disorder could not be identified. Anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin was started and a lumbar epidural blood patch was performed. Although the headache in the recumbent position improved, the orthostatic headache remained present. A full-spine MRI with intrathecal gadolinium demonstrated an epidural CSF collection from C6 to D9 level, most prominent at level D7-D8 ( fig.3) . A targeted blood patch was performed at this level after which the headache subsided. MRI after 4 months demonstrated complete resolution of the CVST and signs of intracranial hypotension. MR venography demonstrating thrombosis of the superior sagittal sinus. A coronal projection also demonstrated thrombosis of the left transverse sinus (not visible in this image). Contrast-enhanced brain MRI demonstrating the signs of severe intracranial hypotension with meningeal enhancement and bifrontal hygroma. Transaxial section the full-spine MR obtained after intrathecal gadolinium contrast administration. Gadolinium contrast is clearly visualized left posterolaterally to the intradural space, demonstrating a cerebrospinal fluid leak. This case demonstrates the pitfalls in diagnosing intracranial hypotension with CVST. Orthostatic headache progressing into headache on lying down as well is a red flag. Imaging should be performed urgently to rule out subdural haematoma and cranial venous thrombosis. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2100 Background and aims: Headache is so common in the general population that most physicians should have a good knowledge about the management. While most patients are self-managed or managed in primary care, the most complicated patients are often referred to neurological outpatient clinics. Thus, all physicians working with neurology should have a good knowledge about headache. There is limited focus on headache in the curriculum at the four medical schools in Norway. Furthermore, approximately 50% of all residents in Norway have graduated from abroad. The national five-year training program in clinical neurology has no mandatory headache program. Therefore, knowledge and expertise in headache management must be acquired during the everyday clinical neurology training. The objectives of this survey were to investigate whether residents acquire the necessary knowledge about headache, and to evaluate experience in, and attitudes towards headache management. Methods: The study was conducted as a questionnaire survey among all residents in neurology at all the 17 neurological departments in Norway. A contact person at each department had the responsibility for distributing and collecting the forms. Results: All the 17 neurological departments participated, and the responder rate was over 70%. Residents answered questions about knowledge, attitudes and experiences related to headache management. Barriers to adequate headache treatment were investigated. The use of treatment guidelines and the International Classification of Headache disorders were examined. Finally, a comparison of the status of various neurological diseases was done. The results are currently being analysed and will be presented at the meeting. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Medication overuse headache (MOH) affects 1-2% of the population, and 30% of the patients in tertiary headache centers. It most commonly affects people with a previous primary headache disorder, most commonly migraine or tension type headache. Medication overuse results in the chronification of the primary headache, causing further disability and decreased quality of life. MOH represents a therapeutic challenge and even after successful treatment recurrence rates can be as high as 40%. Methods: A comprehensive treatment program, consisting of acute medication withdrawal, preventive pharmacological treatment and lifestyle intervention was applied to 18 patients (15 women; mean age 40.8±14.2 years) suffering from MOH. The clinical characteristics of the headaches were recorded. Headache-related quality of life was measured using the Comprehensive Headache-related Quality of life Questionnaire (CHQQ) before and after the treatment program. Results: After the treatment a significant reduction of the number of headache days, headache severity and analgesic consumption was observed. The CHQO score of MOH patients, which was somewhat lower at baseline than in episodic migraine, also showed a significant increase. Conclusion: We found significant improvement of the headache characteristics and quality of life of MOH patients completing the treatment program. Further investigations are necessary to evaluate the long-term efficacy on a bigger sample size to evaluate, if in-, or outpatient withdrawal is more effective, and follow the patients for a longer period to examine, if the results remain stable over time. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Background and aims: Headache is a frequent clinical entity in neurology attesting to various pathologies. His postural character is almost pathognomonic of intracranial hypotension (ICH), a rare cause of chronic headaches often misdiagnosed. Thinking about it is necessary in order to avoid severe outcomes. The aim of this case illustration is to emphasize the severity of this pathology due to her multiple complications. Methods: We report a case of a patient with ICH diagnosed twelve years after the beginning of his symptoms, after developing several complications of his disease. Results: This MJ patient was 51 years old. He suffers from nasal polyposis operated with ethmoidectomy. One year after his operation, his started complaining about orthostatic headache and developed epileptic seizures leading to status epilepticus twice. His MRI shows diffuse pachymeningitis with negative etiological investigations. MJ had an intractable epilepsy despite antiepileptic drugs. He was operated five years later of chronic subdural frontal hematoma without traumatic context. Finally, MJ had recently a third status epilepticus due to a cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. The diagnosis of ICH with all his complications was then retained. In front of this case and knowing the clinical history of endonasal surgery of our patient, we realized a CT of facial bones was performed. It showed an old ethmoidal breach. A surgical treatment is planned. Conclusion: Our case shows the importance of considering ICH as an etiology of uncommon headaches in order to avoid harmful complications. Endonasal surgery may be the alarm sign leading to thinking about it. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2105 Therapeutic use of cannabinoids -dose finding, effects and pilot data of effects in chronic migraine and cluster headache Background and aims: Aim was to verify therapeutic effect of 19% THC (bedrocan) + <0.4% THC, 9% CBD (bedrolite) in both prophylaxis and acute treatment of chronic cluster headache (CH) and migraine (M). Step 1-we performed a dose finding observations in 48 chronic M volunteers, during 4 test--retest of THC+CBD. Starting dose was 10mg/orally. Step 2-M (n=370) and CH sufferers (n=190) volunteered the prospective observation. Entry criteria were: normal examines, normal elctrocardiogram. After a 10-days washout period, M sufferers were randomly assigned to a 3 months-treatment with 25mg/day amitriptyline or THC+CBD 200 mg/day in 200 ml 50% fat emulsion. CH received THC+CBD or 480mg/day verapamil. One-month follow-up was provided. Two hundred mg THC+CBD were also administered as acute treatment. Rescue treatment was 6 mg/s.c. sumatriptan. Results: Therapeutic dose was 200mg THC+CBD inducing 55% pain decrease. Doses lower than 100mg induced 0% relief. Pilot data refer to 79 M and 48 CH. In M THC+CBD prophylaxis induced 40.4% benefit versus 40.1% amitriptyline-evoked pain relief. In CH, THC+CBD prophylaxis induced scant decrease of severity and number of attacks. Acute THC+CBD decreased attack pain -43.5% in both M and CH who had an history of M when children. Relief was 0% in CH without M history. Adverse effects were drowsiness and inattention. These effects and decrease (range -70%-100%) of stomach ache, colitis and musculoskeletal pain strictly related to female sex, p>0.0001. Conclusion: Discussion Cannabinoids may be a prophylaxis for M and an acute treatment for CH in case M occurred during childhood. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Objective was assessing neuropsychiatric profile in PwPD with chronic pain in Siberian region. Methods: 798 PwPD are registered in movement disorders electronic database of the Siberian region. 348 nondemented PwPD were included (mean age: 65.2±6.3 years; PD mean duration: 6.8±5.8 years; H&Y stages 1-4, women:men=167:181), divided into two groups (homogeneous by gender, stage, age): I-176 PwPD with chronic pain, II-172 without. Clinical assessments were conducted using the UPDRS, H&Y Scale, MoCA-test, Beck depression inventory II, Hospital anxiety and Depression Scale(HADS-A), Apathy Scale, PD Sleep Scale, Epworth Sleepiness Scale, Parkinson's disease Questionnaire 39(PDQ-39). Chronic pain was analyzed by structured interview questionnaire. Results: Pain was reported by 176(50.6%) participants, with 128(72.7%) reporting moderate severity or worse. The majority of PwPD had musculoskeletal pain(129 cases or 73.2%), 2(1.1%)-radicular pain, 46(26.1%)-dystonic pain, 24(13.6%)-headache. PwPD with chronic pain had higher values anxiety vs. without pain(6(4;8) vs. 10(9;12),p<0.0001), the same in depression (15(11;20) vs. 20(16;27),p<0.0001). Pain intensity correlated statistically significant with anxiety(r=0.56, p<0.001), Beck depression score(r=0.52, p<0.001), apathy (r=0.51, p<0.001) and health related QoL(r=0.49, p<0.001), but not with measures of disease severity(H&YS). Moderate correlation was between pain intensity and L-dopa equivalent daily dose(r=0.39, p<0.001), UPDRS(r=0.46, p<0.001), lower sleep efficiency (r=0.43, p<0.001). Conclusion: Musculoskeletal pain is the most common type of pain in PwPD. Disrupted sleep continuity, mood disorders, low QoL are associated with pain in PwPD. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Mitochondrial dysfunction in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases is widely investigated and mounting evidences support its contribution in early phases of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Here we present the unprecedented association of ALS and Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON), a maternally inherited mitochondrial disease due to complex I dysfunction. Methods: We describe two Caucasian women affected by a sporadic form of ALS both carrying the m.11778A>G mitochondrial DNA mutation. Results: Case 1 was affected by LHON since 26 years of age. At 73 she developed progressively worsening hyposthenia of the right lower limb, rapidly spreading to the right arm and then to the left lower limb. Bulbar signs occurred in 10 months and the patient died 18 months after onset. Case 2 was an asymptomatic carrier of the LHON mutation. At 71 years of age she presented a bulbar onset of disease with progressive dysphagia and dysarthria. At 72 she developed proximal paresis predominant on the left side. She died 22 months after onset. A complete clinical workout confirmed the diagnosis of ALS. Genetic testings (FUS, SOD1, TDP43 and c9orf72) were negative. El Escorial criteria for definite ALS were fulfilled for both. Conclusion: This is the first report on a clinical association of ALS and LHON. While this association is most probaly due to a chance co-occurrence of two rare diseases, the particularly aggressive course of ALS may suggest a synergistic interaction and further support the role of mitochondrial dysfunction as key in the pathogenesis of ALS. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  No cognitive or behavioral deficit emerged during the follow-up period, and quality of life main value (SEIQoL) remained high (73%, range: 69%-77%). Patients did not develop clinical depressive or anxious symptoms during time, except one subject who manifested depression mood in the post-surgery period as a reaction to the paucity of assistance received from the family. Conclusion: Psychological and cognitive profiles remained non-problematic through time independently of the progression and severity of the disease. The surgical procedure and the lack of clear functional benefits did not affect the patients' perceived Quality of Life which remained high. In our opinion, this result can be explained with the strict clinical follow-up and psychological support given to the patients who felt especially involved in a research project and particularly cared by the specialists involved in the project. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Intraspinal stem cells (SCs) transplantation represents a new therapeutic experimental approach for Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). Given the potential iatrogenic risk and the high costs, SC clinical trials usually recruit a small number of patients; hence, objective measures of safety and effectiveness are mandatory. We present the results obtained from our neurophysiological and neuroradiological protocol applied during a phase I clinical trial with human foetal neural Scs transplantation. Methods: Spinal cord MRI (1.5 Tesla) with fiber tracking study, and transcranial magnetic stimulation derived from the bilateral FDI and tibialis anterior muscles were performed pre and post-surgery in 18 ALS patients recruited in a phase 1 clinical trial with hNSCs transplantation into the cervical and spinal cord. Central motor conduction time (CMTC), Motor Evocated Potential (MEP) amplitude and CSP duration, were calculated. In addition, we applied during the surgery a standard neurophysiological protocol including Somatosensory Evoked Potential obtained by stimulation of posterior tibialis and median nerve, and MEP with transcranial electrical stimulation. Results: No patient manifested any clinical side effects during or after surgery. Amplitude and onset of cortical and radicular MEP such as CMTC did not change during and following surgery. MRI showed no modification of spinal cord morphology and DTI values. Conclusion: The results obtained from neurophysiological and neuroimaging techniques are equally reliable to monitor the possible short-term side effects by surgery. Therefore, we believe future Phase II Clinical Trial could make use of neurophysiological tests only in the short-term monitoring of surgery because easier to perform, and cheaper. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Oxidative stress (OS) is considered as one of the most challenging hypothesis in pathogenesis of ALS. The aim of this study was to contribute to the understanding of what extent there is involvement of OS in ALS. We assessed biomarkers of oxidative stress -Advanced Oxidation Protein Products (AOPP) and total thiol content (SH) in CSF of 24 ALS patients and 20 controls. Thirteen patients presented with the spinal form of the disease, while the remaining eleven patients had bulbar form. Results: CSF AOPP levels were higher than those in control group (CG), while SH groups showed lower values compared to CG (p<0.001). When different clinical presentations were compared, AOPP values were higher in patients with bulbar compared with patients with common spinal manifestation (p<0.001). There were no differences in SH group's levels among different clinical forms. Significant negative AOPP and the SH group correlation was confirmed in ALS patients (p<0.01), especially in bulbar group (p<0.01). Significant mild correlations between tested parameters and functional rating scale and index of disease progression were recorded for both of tested parameters in spinal form of ALS (p<0.01), and were more pronounced for the levels of SH groups. Conclusion: The data support that OS is involved in the patophysiology of ALS. CSF AOPP level may serve as useful biomarker of damage to the brain stem motor neurons. Neither AOPP nor SH groups in CSF of ALS patients can be used as certain biomarkers to assess disease progression. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose e-Poster Background and aims: Hirayama disease(HD) is a rare myelopathy, occurring predominantly in males with onset in the teens. Methods: Case report Results: Here we present a 17yo Caucasian female patient who developed the first signs of HD at 10.5y of age. Prior to onset she had experienced a growth spurt and grew about 8 cm. At the age of 12y more obvious weakness of the hands, predominately on the left side, developed. Weakness increased in cold weather and the hands were often cold and sweaty. No sensory deficit was noticed. Neurological examination at age 13y revealed marked weakness (MRC 2 to 3-) for extension of the index and middle fingers bilaterally and for abduction of the left thumb. Additionally, there was weakness (MRC 3+ to 4) for extension of the ring and little fingers bilaterally, for abduction of the right thumb, and for abduction and adduction of the left fingers II-V, and flexion of the left fingers II-V. Postural tremor and poly-mini-myoclonus of the fingers on extension could be seen. There was marked wasting of the right thenar and mild wasting of other intrinsic hand muscles. The disease further progressed over the next years and the typical clinical, electrophysiological and neuroimaging signs of HD were found. After this period -and achievement of her final height, no further progression was noticed. Conclusion: Pediatric neurologists should be aware of HD, which can also occur in girls in early adolescence. Prognosis of HD in females is fair and not at variance from males. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2112 Mitochondrial disorder may mimic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis at onset J. Finsterer 1 , C. Stöllberger 2 Background and aims: Mimicry between mitochondrial disorder (MID) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) fades away with disease progression and development of mitochondrial multi-organ-disorder-syndrome. If the arising multio-organ involvement is mild, MID still may be misinterpreted as ALS. Methods: Case report Results: A 48 years old male developed slowly-progressive weakness, wasting and fasciculations initially on the left upper limb, which spreaded to the shoulder-girdle and the lower limbs. Since he additionally developed tetraspasticity, bulbar involvement, and electrophysiological investigations were indicative of a chronic neurogenic lesion, he was diagnosed as ALS. Re-evaluation by muscle biopsy because of features incompatible with ALS, such as hyperhidrosis, thyroid dysfunction, hyperlipidemia, and sensory involvement, revealed morphological features indicative of a MID and a combined complex-II/III defect. A MID was suspected since combined complex-II/III defect has not been reported in patients with ALS. Conclusion: MID may mimic ALS at onset of the disease and may start as a mono-organ disorder to turn into a multiorgan disease after long-term progression. A combined complex-II/III defect may manifest with bulbar involvement. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose L. Giaretta, V. Pegoraro, C. Angelini Background and aims: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a rare, progressive, neurodegenerative disorder caused by degeneration of upper and lower motoneurons. The effects of exercise and rehabilitation in patients with ALS are still debated. A moderate and regular exercise is supported in the treatment of many neuromuscular diseases. We previously conducted microRNAs studies in ALS patients and we observed differences in myomiRNAs levels in spinal versus bulbar onset. In this study we analysed the role of circulating myomiRNAs after physical rehabilitation Methods: We measured muscle specific microRNAs (miR-1, miR-206, miR-133a, miR-133b) by Real Time PCR in 19 ALS patients (12 male, 7 female). We analysed the levels of these microRNAs in serum collected before (T0) and after (T1) a period of 6-8 weeks of rehabilitation Results: We observed a general down-regulation of all miRNAs studied after rehabilitation. In our population myomiRNAs decreased in a similar manner in male and female patients, therefore no gender effect was found. On the contrary the age of patients under study was found to be relevant: patients under 55 years old have a more marked decrease in myomiRNAs levels than patients with older age. Conclusion: We have found that microRNAs are an important tool to monitor rehabilitation in ALS patients and suggests a positive effect of the treatment. There seems to be a more pronounced decrease in myomiRNA levels in patients with younger age in this motoneuron disease after physical rehabilitation. Further study are needed to correlate circulating microRNAs with muscle atrophy and to confirm age differences. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: The aim of this study was to determine the efficacy and tolerability of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) in subjects with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) Methods: Forty subjects with ALS were randomly assigned to two groups, which received either subcutaneous G-CSF (5 μg/kg/q12h) or placebo for 5 days. The subjects were then followed up for 3 months using the ALS Functional Rating Scale-Revised (ALSFRS-R), manual muscle testing, ALS Assessment Questionnaire-40, and nerve conduction studies. CD34+/CD133+ cell count and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) levels were evaluated at baseline. Results: The rate of disease progression did not differ significantly between the two groups. The reduction in ALSFRS-R scores was greater in female subjects in the G-CSF group than in their counterparts in the placebo group. There was a trend toward a positive correlation between baseline CSF MCP-1 levels and the change in ALSFRS-R scores in both groups (Spearman's ρ=0.370, p=0.070). Conclusion: With the protocol implemented in this study, G-CSF is not a promising option for the treatment of ALS. Furthermore, it may accelerate disease progression in females. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in the C9orf72 gene has been associated to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia. The association of multiple sclerosis (MS) and ALS with C9orf72 expansion was described before in four subjects. However, C9orf72 is not associated with increased risk of MS. Inflammatory pathways related to NF-κB have been linked to ALS and MS, and appear to be important in C9orf72-ALS patients. Results: A 42-year-old woman presented with progressive bulbar symptoms for 9 months. Past familial and personal medical history were unremarkable. Neurological examination disclosed severe spastic dysarthria, atrophic tongue with fasciculations, brisk jaw and limb tendon reflexes, and bilateral Hoffman sign. Brain MRI revealed bilateral, multiple periventricular and juxtacortical changes, configuring a MS-like pattern. Some of them showed gadolinium enhancement. Needle EMG sampling confirmed chronic neurogenic changes involving cranial-innervated muscles. Blood tests were unremarkable. CSF was normal, with no oligoclonal bands. Visual and somatosensory evoked potentials disclosed no abnormalities. Six months later, brain MRI was performed and no new demyelinating or gadolinium-enhancing lesions were identified. Genetic screening revealed a C9orf72 expansion. Conclusion: This sporadic bulbar-onset ALS, with C9orf72 expansion, revealed white matter abnormalities on brain MRI suggestive of MS. As no clinical manifestation of MS was identified, a diagnosis of radiologically isolated syndrome would be considered. We speculate that these demyelinating lesions might facilitate expressivity of C9orf72 expansion, through NF-κB activation. This plausible association may lead to the identification of a therapeutic target in this subgroup of C9orf72-ALS patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: ALS causes the fast degeneration of both upper and lower motor neuron. Many mechanisms have hypothesized to participate in pathogenesis while concurrent presence of ALS and other diseases including multiple sclerosis, frontotemporal dementia and myasthenia gravis has been described. Methods: We present a case of ALS in a patient who had already dermatomyositis diagnosis. Results: A 69 years old man was admitted to our department with a five-month history of dysarthria and swallowing difficulty. The patient had a dermatomyositis diagnosis established fifteen years ago, based on both clinical features and biopsy. He was treated with MTX and methylprednisolone initially. The last two years MTX dose was 5mg weekly as patient was asymptomatic. After clinical deterioration MTX dose increased to 25mg weekly. On first assessment to our department he presented right foot drop, fasciculations in arms and legs, bilateral Hoffman sign and hyperreflexia. MRI brain showed no signs of intracranial pathology. Blood tests were normal, while lumbar puncture revealed increased neurofilament. Electrophysiological studies showed presence of fibrillations, positive sharp waves and fasciculations. New clinical control further revealed muscle weakness, unilateral positive Babinski sign and tongue fibrillations. Biopsy didn´t show any signs of active inflammatory myopathy. Eventually ALS diagnosis was set and the patient started treatment with riluzole. Conclusion: To our knowledge this is the first time that dermatomyositis and ALS are present to the same patient. Further studies are required to establish a potential connection between inflammatory myopathies and ALS. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Methods: Objects of the study were the plasma of 12 patients of SMA type 2 and 1200 sensory ganglions of 10-12-day chicken embryos cultivated for 3 days. Control explants were cultivated in a nutrient medium of standard composition. We have added blood serum of 2 type SMA patients to cultural medium in 600 test dishes.The agent RGPU-260 in concentration 10-7 or 10-5 М was added to the culture medium on the plates together with blood serum in a part of experiments. The data were processed with STATISTICA 68.0 and Student's t-test at p=0.05. Results: The blood serum of 12 patients with SMA, type 2, at dilutions of 1:2, 1:10, 1:50 completely blocked the growth of neurites of sensory ganglia. With further dilution of 1:100, the blood serum did not affect the growth of neurites. The cultivation of explants of spinal ganglia in the growth medium containing the blood serum at a dilution of 1:70 and RSPU-260 (10-5 М), revealed positive elimination of inhibition of neurites by the serum. Conclusion: There was no inhibition of neurites by the blood serum with RSPU-260, which increases the activity of endothelial NO-synthase, in concentration (10-5М). Thus, the model conditions revealed neuroprotective effects of NO system, apparently mediated by the change of activity of endothelial NO-synthase. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Hirayama disease (HD) is a slowly progressive benign motor neuron disease that affects the distal upper limb. The gradual onset, progressive course of the disease, and isolated motor neuron involvement may mimic early stage of the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Results: A 25-year-old woman presented with evident weakness and hypotrophy in her left arm (more pronounced in the hand) with muscle cramps caused by cold temperature, which slowly progressed for 8 years (Fig. 1) . Nerve conduction study revealed signs of damage of the left ulnar nerve with velocity reduction at the elbow joint. Needle electromyography revealed signs of moderate active denervation and fasciculation potentials only in the muscles innervated by the ulnar nerve. Signs of reinnervation were also found at the cervical segments, which are typical for anterior horn disfunction. MRI of the cervical spine was unremarkable. ALS was diagnosed. Later MRI revealed spinal cord flattening and T2-hyperintensity at the C5-C6 levels in neutral position (cervical lordosis was normal and epidural space was not enlarged); in flexion position, displacement of the posterior dura was visualized (Fig. 2) . T2-hyperintensity focus was revealed intramedullary at the same level in the left anterior horn (Fig. 3) . Thus HD was diagnosed. Background and aims: Parkinson's disease (PD) patients are affected by hypophonia, dysprosody and dysarthria that worsen with disease progression. The influence of levodopa on the quality of speech is inconclusive, and no data are available for late-stage PD (LSPD). Methods: LSPD patients (Schwab and England ADL Scale (SE) ≤50 or Hoehn Yahr (HY) Stage >3 (MED ON)), underwent a levodopa challenge with a supra-maximal dose (150%). Before and after levodopa intake, each participant performed several vocal tasks selected from the European Portuguese version of the Frenchay Dysarthria Assessment version 2 in order to assess: respiratory support for speech, voice quality, voice stability, voice variability and speech rate. Motor performance was evaluated by the MDS-UPDRS part III. All voice samples were recorded using a tabletop unidirectional microphone and analyzed by a speech and language therapist blinded to patients' therapeutic condition using the Praat 5.1 software. Results: Twenty-four of the twenty-seven LSPD patients included in the study succeeded in performing the voice tasks. Clinical characteristics are detailed in Table I . A positive correlation was found between disease duration and voice quality (R=0.8; p<0.05) and variability (R=0.793; p<0.05). Levodopa significantly improved the MDS-UPDRS-III score (20%), with a beneficial effect on axial signs with the exception of speech, but no improvement was found by means of automated analysis (Table II) .  Speech is severely affected among LSPD patients. Although levodopa still had some effect on motor performance, no improvement was found on speech neither by means of a clinician rating scale nor by automated analysis. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Case report of autoimmune haemolytic anaemia (AIHA) secondary to apomorphine. Well-Known entity related to L-dopa and rarely cause by apomorphine. Methods: A 62-year-old patient with idiopathic Parkinson disease (IPD) of 10 years of evolution treated with L dopa/ carbidopa/Entacapone (375/93,75/600mg per day) and continuous subcutaneous infusion of apomorphine began in June of 2015 (6.5 mg/h during 12 h; total daily apomorphine: 78 mg) maintaining low disability in Schwab & England Scale (90%). In November 2016 was admitted to hospital by hemodynamic angina secondary to severe anaemia (haemoglobin 6.9mg/dl). The haematological studies conclude that presents an AIHA. After ruling out autoimmune diseases, infections or neoplasms associated, the aetiology was interpreted as pharmacological, withdrawing levodopa/carbidopa/entacapone, and starting therapy with methylprednisolone, immunoglobulins, and rituximab. Three weeks later a severe anaemia persisted requiring transfusion; consequently, we finally removed apomorphine and added levodopa/carbidopa, with what the haemoglobin level improved. Results: Haemoglobin levels after 3 months since the withdrawal of apomorphine were normal so that we attach to this drug cause AIHA. The literature reviewed, shows only 1 case secondary to apomorphine after 6 months of treatment, in our case the AIHA occurred after 17 months. Conclusion: The apomorphine infusion is a therapy used for EPI, with favourable clinical outcome and safe use, even though there are described range of adverse effects. In spite of the rarity of this complication, it must be recognized, because of may compromise the patient's life. The apomorphine in this case should be suspended valuing other therapies for advanced IPD. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: A 44-year-old male has been followed for myoclonic dystonia (DYT11) due to a heterozygous pathogenic mutation in the epsilonsarcoglycan gene (SGCE, NM_003919.2:c.1114C>T). At the age of 44, the patient developed diabetes mellitus type 1, and therefore insulin regimen was started. At each administration of subcutaneous rapid insulin, he reported symptoms' relief, which persisted throughout the insulin effect. We wondered whether the symptom improvement were due to either the reduction of glucose levels or to an insulin-mediated effect. Methods: After insulin injection and for the next 3.5 hours, a videotape of clinical symptoms along with capillary blood glucose determinations was carried out. Myoclonus was evaluated with the Unified Myoclonus Rating Scale (UMRS). Results: As reported in Figure1, symptoms clearly improved few minutes after insulin injection. Symptoms remained stable for about three hours, when myoclonus progressively reappeared. We did not find any correlation between UMRS total score and capillary blood glucose levels, while the correlation with time from insulin injection resulted significant (Spearman's rho=-0.629, p=0.038). Conclusion: At our best knowledge, insulin-mediated improvement of myoclonus has never been reported. Even though the brain has been considered a former non-classical insulin responsive tissue, it is now recognized as an insulin sensitive organ. In the brain, insulin might exert neuromodulating effect. Albeit these considerations are theoretical, this is the first report arguing for a possible direct insulin effect on myoclonic symptoms. This intriguing association could open new perspectives for treatment of myoclonus or, at least, for myoclonus due to SGCE mutations. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Speech impairment occurs in Wilson's and Parkinson's diseases (WD and PD) and may manifest as dysphonia (due to worsening of larynx muscles control) and dysarthria (due to worse control of airways and oral cavity resonance qualities). In the «source-filter» model human speech apparatus is considered as consisting of independent sound source (larynx), linear filter (oro-and nasopharynx, nasal passages, oral cavity), and emitter (mouth). The objective of the research was to study speech impairment in PD and WD, utilizing digital spectral voice analysis. Methods: Speech was recorded digitally with 16kHz quantization rate while counting from 1 to 30. Calculations were performed using scripts in R language. Spectral analysis was performed on 50ms samples, with step between samples being 10ms; samples which contain speech were detected automatically. For each sample we estimated voice fundamental frequency (FF) using cepstral analysis, and evaluated results for presence of irregular fast FF changes, voice interruptions, and periods of absent FF while vowel pronunciation. Using conventional spectral density estimation, we calculated frequencies F25 and F75, for which intervals [200Hz;F25] and [200Hz;F75] contain 25% and 75% of power in the range [200Hz;4000Hz] respectively. Results: We studied 29 PD and 35 WD patients. Disturbances of voice production were found in 20 PD patients (69.0%) and 25 WD patients (71.4%). Number of F25-F75 clusters less than 5 (which reflect disturbance of articulation) was found in 8 PD patients (27.6%) and in 18 WD patients (51.4%). Conclusion: Spectral analysis is a useful tool for speech assessment in PD and WD. Disclosure: Part of the research on Wilson's disease was done while the visit to the Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology (Warsaw, Poland), which was funded by the EAN Clinical Fellowship program. Tyrosine is an aromatic amino acid important in the synthesis of catecholamines, thyroid hormones and melanin. Hereditary tyrosinemia type 3 is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by deficiency of 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate-dioxygenase (HPD), the second step in the tyrosine catabolism pathway that may result in elevated plasma tyrosine concentrations. The affected patients have neurologic dysfunction: ataxia, tremor, seizures, mild psychomotor and mental retardation. Treatment consists of a diet low in tyrosine and phenylalanine. Methods: 54-year-old man with arterial hypertension and obstructive sleep apnea who presented from childhood cephalic, lips and limbs tremor. His parents were consanguineous. His father was diagnosed with essential tremor and his brother had mental retardation and general tremor. In the last years our patient presented hypersomnia, generalized slowness of movement, ataxia and worsening tremor. He also had decreased verbal fluency and apathy. Clinical signs and symptoms were compatible with a tremoric hypokinetic syndrome with cognitive impairment and depression. Results: Tests showed: elevated tyrosine concentrations (plasma: 553 micromol/L, urine: 0.91 mmol/g), moderate cognitive impairment (neuropsychological-tests) and mutation in homozygosis in exon 8 of the HPD gen (c.479A>G)(p.Try160Cys). Cranial magnetic resonance imaging and DaTSCAN were normal. We started diet and symptomatic treatment.  We present the first described case of hereditary tyrosinemia type 3 that was presented clinically as an atypical parkinsonism syndrome. We emphasize the importance of thinking in this disorder if we have a patient with essential tremor and parkinsonism symptoms, especially if they were started from infancy and there are other family members with these symtoms. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Six Opal monitors (APDM Inc.) consisting of a 3-axis accelerometer and gyroscope were placed on the two wrists and ankles, trunk and chest. Mobility Lab software (APDM Inc.) was used for data analysis. The Wilcoxon signed rank test was performed to compare gait parameters in the conditions. Results: The total duration of the ITUG-test, stride length, and stride velocity improved in BON compared to NON state (Table1). The gait rhythmicity and the time proportion of double support were similar in the two conditions. Bilateral stimulation significantly improved the trunk velocities during gait, the turning duration, and the turn peak velocity. The RON -but not LON, condition improved the parameters of turning. Turn-to-sit time was shorter in BON than in NON state, but their difference was not significant.  Background and aims: Vascular parkinsonism (VP) is a nosology the clinical picture of which is not clearly delineated. Objective of our investigation was to study all the clinical manifestations of the patients with VP. Methods: 12 patients (5 women/7men, aged 65-80 years) were investigated using UPDRS, Tinnetti scale and MoCA. Diagnosis of VP was based on the presence of multiple lacunes on brain MRI along with lower-body parkinsonism. All the patients were receiving L-Dopa (500-1000 mg/day). Results: In all patients most prominent symptom was gait disturbance-start hesitation, freezing and festination. There was prominent hypokinesia and rigidity in legs as opposed to hands. 7 patients had rigidity of axial muscles. 5 patients had mild postural tremor in hands. There was no gaze palsy detected. 10 patient have mild cognitive impairment. Response to L-Dopa was poor in all the cases. All women patients experienced attacks of severe and very painful dystonic spasm of leg muscles with enormous hypertonia of leg extensors, so that it was impossible to perform passive flexion. Spasm lasted from 10 min up to 1 hour and repeated several times a day and at night. No such phenomena was observed in male patients. In all 5 patients gabapentin 900-1600 mg/day effectively reduced attacks of painful dystonia. Conclusion: Painful leg dystonia can be regarded as a characteristic symptom of vascular parkinsonism. Dystonic attacks are not related to L-Dopa wearing-off and can be effectively controlled with gabapentine. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: The p.A53T point mutation in the α-synuclein gene is a rare cause of autosomal-dominant Parkinson's disease (PD). The classical phenotypes include PD, PD with dementia (PDD), or dementia with Lewy bodies. However, data available on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers in p.A53T carriers are largely lacking. Our study aims to measure CSF levels of beta-amyloid1-42, total-tau, and phospho-tau181, in A53T PD and nonmanifesting carriers. Methods: A total of 9 CSF samples were analyzed: 7 A53T PD patients and 2 asymptomatic p.A53T carriers. All participants underwent a detailed diagnostic assessment, including clinical (MDS-UPDRS), neuropsychological investigations (MOCA, GDS), brain MRI scans and CSF biomarker analysis. Results: The phenotype of symptomatic carriers was variable, with 3 patients manifestating typical motor parkinsonian symptoms without cognitive involvement, 2 PDD patients with initial motor symptoms and later onset cognitive decline, and 2 patients exhibiting an atypical frontotemporal dementia (FTD)like phenotype prior to parkinsonism onset. CSF Aβ42 levels were marginally decreased only in 2 PDD patients. CSF total-tau level was elevated in both FTD phenotype patients, but was normal in the remaining A53T carriers (5 symptomatic/2 asymptomatic), regardless of their cognitive profile. Phospho-tau181 were within normal limits. Brain MRI scans were normal in all subjects, with the exception of the 2 FTD phenotype patients who demonstrated frontotemporo-parietal atrophy. Conclusion: p.A53T carriers demonstrate an heterogeneous CSF biomarker profile which could correlate with their variable degree of motor and cognitive deterioration. Further investigations are required to test the predictive performance of CSF biomarkers in this rare genetic PD cohort. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Recent studies suggest that alterations of the cerebello-thalamo-cortical network are responsible for tremorogenesis in essential tremor. The middle cerebellar peduncle (MCP) represents a key connection in this network as it conveys afferent fibers from the cerebral cortex to the cerebellum. We report a case series of patients with lesions of the middle cerebellar peduncle (MCP) having different tremor characteristics. Methods: We analyzed quantitatively the tremor of 116 patients with brainstem and/or cerebellar lesions and here we report the results of 5 patients with MCP lesion of different causes (1 patients with acute stroke, 1 with subacute stroke, 1 with multiple sclerosis, 1 with postinfectious ADEM, and 1 patient with fragileX tremorataxia syndrome (FXTAS). Tremor was measured by biaxial accelerometry. Center frequency, frequency dispersion and tremor intensity were calculated. In 4 patients, control measurements were performed to assess the evolution of tremor. Detailed analysis of the MRI-data were performed by a neuroradiologist. Results: Pathologic tremor was detected in 3/5 patients (60%). Tremulous patients had acute stroke/MS-shub or FXTAS. Their tremor had low intensity, low centerfrequency (2 Hz), whereas tremor of FXTAS-patient had higher intensity and a center-frequency of 5 Hz. Frequency dispersion was low in both categories. Acute patients presented a complete tremor recovery in cca. 4 weeks, whereas the FXTAS patient's tremor worsened. Background and aims: Huntington's disease (HD) is an inherited, progressive disease, characterized by combination of motor, cognitive and psychiatric symptoms. It is caused by an expanded trinucleotide CAG repeats in the HTT gene. Methods: We performed neurological examination of 65(100%) patients with HD. 45(69%) subjects were genetically tested for CAG repeats in the HTT gene. Results: Age of the patients was 21 -69 (47±9.3) years old; the age of the onset of HD was 18 -65 (41.5±8.1). 56(85%) patients had positive family history and 9(15%) did't know all information about their relatives. Neurological examination revealed choreiform hyperkinesia and cognitive impairment in 65(100%) patients. Distonic hyperkinesis was observed in 41% cases; hypotonia in upper and lower extremities in 40%; coordination disturbances in 37%, piramidal signs in 29%, dysarthria in 17%. 2(3%) patients had predominance of marked cognitive impairment and 1(1.5%) akineticorigid syndrome in the onset of HD. Juvenile form was diagnosed in 1(1.5%) patient. The age of the onset was 18 years old; clinical signs included predominance of marked cognitive impairment and cerebellar ataxia, light choreiform hyperkinesia. Genetic testing of 45 HD subjects revealed expansion of CAG repeats from 39 to 66 in the HTT gene. Conclusion: The most of patients (95%) had tipical nevrological manifestation of HD. Only 4(6.1%) subjects presented atipical signs with dificulty of diagnostics. Significant reverse correlation between the age of the onset of HD and the number of trinucleotide CAG repeats in the HTT gene was determined (r=-0.846, р<0,01). Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is well studied in the treatment of primary generalized dystonia and was approved by FDA in 2003 as a humanitarian device exemption. DBS has been also used in the experimental treatment of secondary dystonia. Methods: We retrospectively reviewed all cases of generalized dystonia treated with pallidal DBS from December/2005 until January/2016. We collected and analysed clinical data. Results: We selected 14 patients, 6 with primary and 8 with secondary dystonia. The median of improvement in Burke-Fahn-Marsden (BFM) score at 12 months was 59.9% (22.9%-90.0%) in primary and 43.6% (18.0%-54.0%) in secondary dystonia. The median of improvement in Dystonia Disability Scale (DDS) at 12 months was 48.1% (33.3%-85.2%) in primary and 20.3% (12.0%-50.0%) in secondary dystonia. 6 patients have long-term follow-up (>5 years). 3 of them have primary dystonia and sustained benefit in BFM (55%-90%) and DDS (50%-85%). The other 3 patients have secondary dystonia and heterogeneous results: 1 with PANK2 had sustained benefit at 5 years (BFM: 17%; DDS: 18%), 1 with perinatal anoxia improved after neurostimulation disconnection and 1 with iatrogenic dystonia from neuroleptics had improvement of 96% in BFM and 100% in DDS. Conclusion: Our patients with generalized primary dystonia, similar to the existent literature results, had good response to DBS, sustained at long-term. Secondary dystonia group is heterogeneous, had lower median benefit and highly variable results at long-term. However, some of these patients had improvements in quality of life not always well translated by the existent formal scores. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Parkinson's Disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disease in which genetic and environmental factors are synergistically involved. Lrrk2 gene mutations are responsible for the majority of inherited cases of PD. We investigated the alterations of striatal medium spiny neurons (MSNs) activity and the neuronal vulnerability to mitochondrial dysfunction in a genetic mouse model carrying the G2019S knock-in (KI) mutation. Methods: Excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) were recorded by patch-clamp experiments. Striatal dopamine (DA) release was measured by constant potential amperometry. Neuronal vulnerability to rotenone, a complex I inhibitor, was tested by measuring the progressive reduction of striatal field potential amplitude (FPA). Results: In KI mice, we showed reduced striatal DA levels by 49% (p<.05). We found that the DA-D2 receptor agonist quinpirole markedly reduced spontaneous (31%,p<.05) and evoked EPSCs (38%,p<.05) in KI but not in control mice. The CB1-endocannabinoid receptor antagonist blocked this effect. The rotenone-induced loss of the FPA was markedly enhanced in KI compared to control mice (24%,p<.05). This detrimental effect was counteracted only in KI mice by the application of quinpirole, through the inhibition of the cAMP/PKA pathway. Conclusion: The G2019S mutation is associated with an altered striatal DA and glutamate transmission. In KI mice, the DA-D2R activation was able to reduce striatal glutamate release through a CB1R-dependent mechanism and limited rotenone-induced neuronal dysfunction, via the inhibition of cAMP/PKA intracellular pathway. Neuroprotective strategies targeting DA-D2R could counteract the synergistic effect of genetic and environmental predisposing factors in patients carrying this mutation. Disclosure: This study was supported by Ministero della Salute (RF-2011-02349806) "Mitochondrial targeting in LRRK2-associated parkinsonism (PARK8)" Hereditary spastic paraplegia type 11 and 22q11 duplication syndrome in a single family J. Martins 1 , R. Martins 2 , J. Silva 3 , I. Alonso 3 , J. Pinto Basto 4 , P. Rendeiro 5 , J. Leal Loureiro 6 , M. Magalhães 1 1 Neurology, Hospital Santo António, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2 Department of Neuroradiology, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3 Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal, 4 Molecular Diagnostics and Clinical Genomics , CGC Genetics (Centro de Genética Clínica), Porto, Portugal, 5 Cytogenetics Laboratory, CGC Genetics (Centro de Genética Clínica), Porto, Portugal, 6 Neurology, CHEDV, Feira, Portugal Background and aims: Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) type 11 is a rare autosomal recessive form of complex HSP with thin corpus callosum. The 22q11 duplication syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder, characterized by developmental delay, intellectual disability, dysmorphias and wide intrafamilial phenotypic variability. Methods: Case report. Results: The index case is a 36-year-old man with a term birth and normal developmental milestones during childhood with early learning difficulties. At the age of 23, a rapid progressive spastic paraparesis appeared. Brain and cervical MRI were both normal. Neither of his nonconsanguineous parents showed similar symptoms. They had 10 children. One older female sibling (patient 2) also had paraparesis, more severe, with younger age of onset (4 years) and by the age of 15 she needed walking assistance. Brain MRI revealed white matter changes with thin corpus callosum. Another female sibling (patient 3) had intellectual disability with learning difficulties, but normal motor skills. On examination, the mother (patient 4) and three children had a dysmorphic appearance with hypertelorism and low implantation of ears. Genetic studies revealed a pathological variant in SPG11 gene in the index case and patient 2; and a pathological variant in chromosome 22 (22q11 duplication) in the index case, patients 2, 3 and 4. Conclusion: The occurrence of two rare inherited conditions (one autosomal dominant and other autosomal recessive) in the same family is, beyond unlikely, responsible for phenotypic variability and also for diagnostic challenge. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Transcranial sonography (TCS) is an inexpensive non-invasive safe method used for early diagnosis of Parkinson's disease (PD). We aimed to explore TCS to evaluate cerebral atrophy, accompanied by cognitive decline in PD patients. Methods: 100 patients with PD underwent TCS and neuropsychological evaluation included Mini-Mental State Examination, Frontal Assessment Battery, Parkinson's Disease-Cognitive Rating Scale. Results: According to neuropsychological testing PD patients were divided into three groups -cognitive-intact, with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and with dementia. These groups differed on the following TCS parameter: substantia nigra (SN) hyperechogenicity (Kruskal-Wallis H=15,61;p<0.001), third ventricle width (H=23,92; p<0.001), and frontal horns of the lateral ventricle width (H=9,41;p=0.009). Pairwise comparisons revealed that cognitive-intact group differed (p<0.001) from the MCI group and from dementia group in an average size of SN hyperechogenicity and third ventricle width. In addition, a cognitive-intact group differed from dementia group in frontal horns of the lateral ventricle width (p=0.003). The MCI group differed from dementia group only in third ventricle width (p=0.016). Thus, we concluded that only the third ventricle width is a good marker of cognitive impairment in PD patients. We established that the optimum threshold separating III ventricle width allows detecting atrophic changes in the brain, accompanied by cognitive impairment calculated with ROC-analysis was ≥7.4 mm, AUC=0,78 (95% CI 0.68-0.89), p=0.001 testified that identified neuroimaging marker has a good informative value. Conclusion: These findings suggest that TCS may be sensitive to cognitive changes in PD with optimal threshold division III ventricle width of 7,4 mm. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Acquired hepatocerebral degeneration is a debilitating neurological disorder characterized by parkinsonism, ataxia and other movement disorders, which may accompany various forms of advanced liver disease. Results: 58-year-old man with past medical history of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis with portal hypertension, progressively developed apathy, bradyphrenia, mild cognitive impairment and language disorder. Neurological examination revealed a palpable spleen, dysarthric speech, left resting tremor, asymmetric rigidity and a buco-lingual chorea. Blood test revealed an elevated AST, ALT, GGT and ammonia. Investigation also included a Brain CT and EEG that were normal. The MRI demonstrated increased T1 signal within the pallidal nuclei which may be associated with a toxic-metabolic disorder. The patient's diagnosis was an acquired hepatocerebral degenration and he refused liver transplantation. Conclusion: Acquired hepatocerebral degeneration is an important differential diagnosis of movement disorders with MRI T1 hyperintensities in the basal ganglia. Portosystemic shunting leads to accumulation of toxins such as ammonia that are bypassing the first-pass elimination by the liver. Evidence suggests manganese plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of this disease. They are no proven pharmacological therapies, although liver transplantation is helpful in some patient. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Background and aims: This study evaluates the significance of the blood neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) in the different courses of multiple sclerosis (MS); relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS), secondary progressive MS (SPMS), primary progressive MS (PPMS) and optic neuritis (ON). The NLR is measured in relation to relapse and remission and Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS). Methods: 382 patients suffering from RRMS (n=138), SPMS (n=30), PPMS (n=55), CIS (n=19) or ON (n=140) and 813 healthy controls (HC) were included. Complete blood count, demographic, and clinical data from MS patients were evaluated retrospectively. The NLRs were calculated and compared for all participants by Student's t-test. Logistic regression models were constructed for EDSS ≥ 4,0 as outcome and age, gender, NLR, C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), erythrocyte distribution width (ERYDRW) and disease duration as predictor variables. Results: The NLR is significant higher (p<0.001) in MS and ON patients compared to HC. Patients in relapse had a significant higher NLR (p<0.005) than patients in remission, but no difference in the CRP, ESR, ERYDRW and EDSS. No variance in NLR was found between RRMS and progressive MS patients and neither between SPMS and PPMS patients. No significance was found between any of the predicting variables and an EDSS score ≥4.0. Conclusion: MS and ON patients have a significantly higher NLR than HC, indicating the occurrence of chronic inflammation. NLR may be a marker of disease activity, because of the significantly higher NLR in patients with relapse compared to patients in remission. This needs confirmation in future trials. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Pharmacy, Hospital Alvaro Cunqueiro, Vigo, Spain, 2 Vigo, Spain, 3 Neurology, Hospital Alvaro Cunqueiro, Vigo, Spain, 4 Neurology, hospital Alvaro Cunqueiro, Vigo, Spain Background and aims: New oral disease modifying therapies (oDMT) for relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) are available. The aim was to assess patient adherence to oDMT: dimethyl fumarate (DMF) and teriflunomide (TE) in comparison with classic injectable therapies (iDMT). Methods: RRMS patients switched from iDMT (interferon --beta-1a/1b/glatiramer acetate) to new oDMT between June 2015 and March 2016 in Hospital Alvaro Cunqueiro were recruited. Adherence, measured by medication possession ratio (MPR) and expressed in%, was compared for oDMT versus iDMT. Adherent patient was considered if MPR≥90%. Results: 38 patients were swittched from iDMT to DMF (n=20) or TE (n=18). Women: 87.8%, mean age (±SD): 39.2±8.5years; mean disease duration: 6.0±5.0 years; median EDSS (range): 2[0-6.5]; annualized relapse rate (ARR): 0.7±0.8. 66.7% patients were switched from interferon-beta and 33.3% from GA. Prior mean treatment duration (SD): 423.4±167.2 days. The main reasons for change were inefficacy (59.4%) and intolerance (40.6%). 5 patients stopped oDMT (1 patient due to pregnancy, 3 patients due to GI intolerance and 1 due to lymphopenia). Mean oDMT duration: 166.5±59.3 days. MPR to iDMT=85.2% vs. MPR to oDMT=98.1% (p< 0.001). No MPR differences between oDMT were observed. iDMT adherence among patients who switched to TE was 83.4% and 85.7% in patients switched to DMF (p>0.05). Adherence >80% was observed in 70% of patients on iDMT and in 100% on oDMT. Conclusion: Patients on oDMT present better adherence than those previously treated with iDMT. These changes may have an important impact on disease control. More real-world data are necessary to evaluate long-term adherence to oDMT. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2149 Spinal cord lesions are frequently asymptomatic in relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis. A retrospective MRI survey F. Granella, E. Tsantes, E. Siena, G. Borgonovo, E. Curti Background and aims: Spinal cord (SC) lesion load is well known as a negative prognostic factor in multiple sclerosis (MS). Nevertheless, there is no consensus about MRI follow-up, mainly because new SC lesions (SCLs) are thought to be more likely symptomatic than brain ones. The aim of the present study was to investigate the impact of asymptomatic active SCLs, defined as new/enlarging T2 or gadolinium positive (Gd+), on SC MRI activity in a cohort of MS patients. We retrospectively investigated all available SC MRI scans of clinically isolated syndrome and relapsing remitting (RR) MS patients referred to a single Italian MS centre, analysing those with active SCLs, both symptomatic and asymptomatic, collecting also clinical data since previous SC MRI or disease onset in case of first examination. Brain MRI data were also included. Results: We analysed a total of 340 SC MRI scans from 230 patients. We found asymptomatic active SCLs in 31.2% of scans. At multivariate analysis, compared to symptomatic, asymptomatic active SCLs were associated with an older age at disease onset ( Methods: Patients received 2 courses of alemtuzumab 12 mg (baseline: 5 consecutive days; 12 months later: 3 consecutive days) in CARE-MS I or CARE-MS II, and in the extension as-needed alemtuzumab for relapse/MRI activity, or another disease-modifying therapy per investigator discretion. We performed a pooled analysis to determine conversion from RRMS to SPMS in alemtuzumab-treated patients through 6 years. The definition of SPMS onset was as published by Lorscheider et al. (Brain 2016; 139:2395-405 Background and aims: Disturbances of the hypothalamopituitary (HPA) axis are supposed to modulate activity of multiple sclerosis (MS). We hypothesised that the extent of HYP damage may determine severity of MS and may be associated with the disease evolution. We suggested fatigue and depression may depend on the degree of damage of the area. Methods: 33 MS patients with relapsing-remitting and secondary progressive disease, and 24 age and sex-related healthy individuals (CON) underwent 1H-MR spectroscopy (1H-MRS) of the hypothalamus. Concentrations of glutamate+glutamin (Glx), cholin (Cho), myoinositol (mIns), N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) expressed as ratio with creatine (Cr) and N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) were correlated with markers of disease activity (RIO score), Multiple Sclerosis Severity Scale (MSSS), Depressive-Severity Status Scale (SDSS) and Simple Numerical Fatigue Scale (SNFS). Results: Cho/Cr and NAA/Cr ratios were decreased and Glx/NAA ratio was increased in MS patients vs CON. Glx/ NAA, Glx/Cr, and mIns/NAA were significantly higher in active (RIO 1-2) vs non-active MS patients (RIO 0). Glx/ NAA and Glx/Cr correlated with MSSS and fatigue score, and Glx/Cr with depressive score of MS patients. In CON relationships between Glx/Cr and age, and Glx/NAA and fatigue score were inverse. Conclusion: Our study provides the first evidence about significant hypothalamic alterations correlating with clinical outcomes of MS, using 1H-MRS. The combination of increased Glu or mIns with reduced NAA in HYP reflects whole-brain activity of MS. In addition, excess of Glu is linked to severe disease course, depressive mood and fatigue in MS patients, suggesting superiority of Glu over other metabolites in determining MS burden. Disclosure: This work has been supported by Project APVV-14-0088/ 2014 and Grant VEGA 1/0287/16. Background and aims: In a phase 2b study, subcutaneously administered ofatumumab significantly reduced the cumulative number of new gadolinium-enhancing lesions during weeks 4-12 by ≥90% versus placebo in patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis (RMS). Here, we present the adaptive design features of the two ongoing, double-blind/ double-dummy, identical design phase 3 studies of ofatumumab in RMS (ASCLEPIOS I [NCT02792218] and ASCLEPIOS II [NCT02792231]). Methods: Patients (N=900, each trial) will be randomised to subcutaneous ofatumumab 20mg every 4 weeks or oral teriflunomide 14mg once daily. The primary endpoint is to demonstrate the superiority of ofatumumab over teriflunomide on annualised relapse rates. If both studies meet the primary endpoint, data will be combined to assess the key secondary disability-related endpoints. Results: A pre-planned analysis of blinded data will be performed to: 1) re-assess sample size, increasing to a maximum of 1250 patients per study; 2) declare 'end of study' when each study is powered to 90% for primary and to ≥80% for the combined analysis of key secondary endpoints (≥90% for 3-month confirmed disability worsening endpoint). The study duration is flexible, but capped at a maximum of 30 months in individual patients. Statistical analysis methods adequate for a study with flexible duration will be applied (e.g. Cox regression and negative binomial models with offset). The sample size and study duration adapt according to the activity of the study population to provide sufficient power. Conclusion: An adaptive design with flexible study duration ensures minimum patient exposure to the doubledummy treatment that is required to address the scientific objectives. Disclosure: This study was funded by Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. Detailed disclosure of each author will be included in the poster. Background and aims: Netrin (NTN)-1, a secreted lamininrelated protein, is known to affect axonal guidance and neuronal cell migration, but also blood-brain barrier integrity and inflammation. Two preliminary studies reported altered serum NTN-1 levels in multiple sclerosis (MS), however associations with longitudinal clinical and MRI data have not been investigated. We aimed to assess serum NTN-1 in MS and controls with respect to disease, disease activity, and temporal dynamics. Methods: We included 79 MS patients (clinically isolated syndrome CIS n=32, relapsing-remitting MS RRMS n=47; age mean±SD 33.9±8.8 years) and 30 non-inflammatory neurological disease controls (age mean±SD 37.1±10.2 years). Serum samples were drawn in all subjects, in patients during two gadolinium (Gd)-enhanced 3T MRI examinations (initial contrast-enhancing Gd+ n=47, non-enhancing Gd-n=32; reference Gd-n=70; median time-lag 1.4 (IQR 1.0-2.3) years). Clinical data of patients were recorded. Serum NTN-1 was assessed by ELISA (Cusabio, China). Results: Serum NTN-1 levels were similar in CIS, RRMS and controls, and Gd+ and Gd-patients. Among patients with MRIbased signs of disease activity, those who experienced an apparent clinical relapse within 30 days prior to sampling (n=8) showed decreased serum NTN-1 levels compared to clinically non-active Gd+ patients (n=39; p=0.041). Serum NTN-1 levels showed no temporal dynamics in the MS patients and were unrelated to clinical data. Conclusion: Our study cannot confirm any MS specific changes of serum NTN-1 levels and they appear not sensitive to MS disease activity as evidenced by contrast enhancing lesions on MRI. NTN-1 changes during clinical relapses may deserve further examination. Disclosure: This study represents a sub-study supported by the Austrian Federal Ministry of Science, Research and Economics (core-study named 'BIG-WIG MS' (Bildgebung, Immunpathogenese, Gesundungsfaktoren -Wien, Innsbruck, Graz -bei Multiple Sklerose'; 'Neuroimaging, immunopathogenesis and salutogenic factors in MS -a collaborative effort of the universities of Vienna, Innsbruck and Graz')). Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2 Istanbul, Turkey, 3 İstanbul, Turkey Background and aims: Evidence suggests that multiple sclerosis (MS) has a two-stage progression rate before Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) 6. In this study, we challenge the hypothesis that postulates a uniform progression rate of patients with MS between EDSS 3 and 6 despite disparate progression rates before EDSS 3. Methods: We included patients with definite MS with a follow-up duration of at least one year. Demographic and clinical data including time to EDSS 3 and time to EDSS 6 were collected. We subgrouped the cohort according to their time to EDSS 3 and compared the rate of disability progression between EDSS 3 and 6 using Cox logistic regression. Results: Of 876 (617 females, 259 males) patients, the ratios of MS subtypes were as follows: RRMS: 81.3%, SPMS: 9.8%, PPMS: 5.7%, and RPMS 3.2%. The most frequent symptoms at onset were sensory, optic neuritis, and sensory-motor in 19.3, 11.3, and 17.7% of patients respectively. After a mean follow-up duration of 8.8±7.1, 33.9% of patients reached EDSS 3 and 13.8% EDSS 6. Kaplan-Meier estimates of the mean time to EDSS 3 was 17.1±0.7 and the mean time to EDSS 6 was 28.8±1.8. We found nearly identical disability progression rates between EDSS 3 and 6 irrespective of time to EDSS 3 (Log rank test: p= 0.4) ( Figure 1 ). Figure 1 Conclusion: Our study confirms previous studies that suggest similar disability accumulation rates between EDSS 3 and 6 in patients with disparate progression rates between EDSS 0 and 3. Disclosure: This study was sponsored by Neuroimmunological Society, Turkey. Methods: This is a prospective, observational, multicentre patient registry from 41 Spanish multiple sclerosis (MS) hospital units. Relapsing MS patients on GA 40 mg/ml treatment were recruited and will be followed for a maximum of 5 years. All patients' visits were performed as per daily clinical practice. Results: During the first six months of the registry 970 patients were recruited (664 females, median age 44 years). Mean age at diagnosis of the disease was 36 years (range 28 to 42) and time from diagnosis to registry recruitment was 8 years. The majority of patients (n=757, 78.4%) had previously been treated with other immunomodulatory/ immunosuppressive drugs before entering the study. Prior therapies included GA 20 mg/ml (60.4%), interferons (31.3%) and other drugs (8.4%). Main reasons for switching from other therapeutic options were mainly induced by adverse events (19.2%) or lack of response (16.5%). Additional baseline characteristics included a mean EDSS of 2.0 the year prior to participation in the registry, and an annualized relapse rate of 0.4. The vast majority of patients (n=684, 70.5%) showed no relapses during the 12 month period before entering the registry. Conclusion: The baseline data from the 970 patients included in the Spanish GA 40 mg/ml registry indicate that the population is characterized by low disease activity (low relapse rate, lesion load, and mild disability scores). Disclosure: This research has been supported by TEVA pharmaceuticals Background and aims: The result of inflammatory and neurodegenerative processes in Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is axon and myelin breakdown. The paraclinical examination methods (MRI and an examination of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)) are an important part of the diagnostic process. An increasing number of studies deal with CSF and serum levels of biomarkers and their role in MS. We hypothesized that the level of interleukin-8 (IL-8) could be different in MS patients than in controls. In the second step we hypothesized that the blood-brain barrier is damaged in the early stages of MS. Methods: CSF and serum levels of IL-8 were assessed in 102 patients with newly diagnosed MS meeting McDonald's revised diagnostic criteria and in 102 subjects as a control group. We then correlated these results with Q-alb, oligoclonal bands and light chains. Results: Levels of IL-8 in CSF were significantly higher in MS patients than in controls (Mann-Whitney U test, p<0.0001). Spearman's correlation analysis proved a significant correlation between levels of IL-8 and Q-alb, IL-8 and oligoclonal bands, IL-8 and light chain lambda. Conclusion: Based on our results, we hypothesized that IL-8 could partially come from the periphery, and that IL-8 could penetrate through the damaged BBB. This may be the reason that IL-8 is increased in CSF and decreased in serum in patients with MS. On the other hand, there were general opionions that the IL-8 is produced de novo in the CNS. The results also confirm the presence of inflammatory processes in the early stages of MS. Disclosure: This work was supported by the Institutional support of the Research Organisation -Ministry of Health, Czech Republic, RVO -FNOL 2016 Background and aims: Once-daily fingolimod (Gilenya ® , Novartis Pharma AG) is a sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor modulator approved for relapsing MS treatment. Continuous collection and analysis of real world effectiveness and safety data is key to making accurate treatment decisions. The objective is to describe basal characteristics and effectiveness of fingolimod in patients with relapsingremitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) followed for ≥12 months in routine clinical practice in Spain. Methods: Fingoview is a multivariate pool analysis of two observational, retrospective chart review, multicenter studies MS SECOND LINE GATE and MS NEXT, conducted in specialized MS centers in Spain, between November 2014 and December 2015. Pool analysis was prospectively planned. Both studies included patients of both sexes, ≥18 years, diagnosed with RRMS, treated with fingolimod according SmPC and followed up for ≥12 months after treatment initiation. Results: Fingoview included 988 patients (70 naïve, 252 post-natalizumab, 666 post first-line injectable DMTs), 68.9% female, mean(SD) age: 40.44(9.1) years (Table 1) . After 1, 2, 3 years of treatment mean annual relapse rate decreased by 76.5%(mean: 1.19 to 0.28), 82.4%(0.21) and 86.3%(0.16) compared to the year prior to fingolimod (all p<0.0001) (Figure 1 ). At 12 months, 89.6% of patients had stable or improved EDSS which was maintained in 84.4% of patients at 24 months ( Figure 2 ). New/enlarged T2 lesions, gadolinium-enhancing lesions on T1 or radiologically disease free will be discussed.  R. Milo 1 , J. Reznik-Zoref 1 , O. Hegedish 2 , S. Kertzman 3 1 Neurology, Barzilai Medical Center, Ashkelon, Israel, 2 Psychology, Haifa University, Haifa, Israel, 3 Psychiatry, Beer Yaakov, Israel Background and aims: Cognitive impairment commonly affects Multiple Sclerosis (MS) patients and may have a dramatic impact on their quality of life, performance at work and social life. We aimed to assess the ability of specific computerized real-time cognitive tests to predict disability progression at 1 year after initiating immunomodulatory treatment for MS in comparison with the predictive value of the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS). Methods: Fifty three Relapsing-Remitting (RR) MS patients (F=42, mean age 36.02±9.25, mean EDSS 2.18±1.27) who started immunomodulatory treatment with glatiramer acetate or interferon beta preparations underwent cognitive evaluation using a computerized real-time battery of basic neuropsychological tests ("CogScan"; Anima Scan LTD), which includes: Finger Tapping Test (FTT), Simple Reaction Time (SRT), Choice Reaction Time (CRT), Immediate and Delayed Memory for Pictures, Words and Faces and Digit Running Test (DRT). EDSS scores were recorded every 3 months. Univariate logistic regression analysis was conducted for each predictor and the most robust predictor was analyzed by Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC). Results: At 1 year, 9 patients (17%) had 3-months sustained disability progression. Baseline EDSS could not predict disability progression, while assessment of simple cognitive functions yielded four statistically significant predictors: Standard deviation (SD) in both FTT and DRT, accuracy and latency in the DRT. The DRT-I SD showed the best predictive value for disability progression. Conclusion: Baseline cognitive assessment, especially slow and highly variable performance on the DRT, but not baseline EDSS, can predict the progression of neurological disability after one year of immunomodulatory treatment in RRMS. Disclosure: This study has been partially supported by research grants from Teva pharmaceuticals, Merck-Serono and Medison, Israel. Oxidative stress plays an important role in multiple sclerosis (MS). We evaluated the effect of coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10), a compound with marked antioxidant effects, on MS-related laboratory and clinical outcomes. Methods: We analysed serum and clinical data from 60 relapsing-remitting MS patients (age42.3∓8.9years;female 70%). Data were collected after 3 months of CoQ10 dietary supplementation (Skatto ® , ChiesiFarmaceuticiSpA, 200mg/ day) and during additional 3 months either before or after CoQ10 supplementation (no-CoQ10 status). Treatment with subcutaneous high-dose interferon beta-1a was maintained during the study period (Rebif ® , Merck Serono SpA, 44microg/week). Laboratory outcomes included markers of free radical scavenging activity, oxidative damage and neuroinflammation. Patient-reported outcomes included questionnaires for cognition, fatigue, depression, pain and headache. Clinical outcomes included occurrence of relapses and EDSS variations. Results: Regression models adjusted for age, gender, disease duration, duration of interferon beta-1a treatment and EDSS were used. Patients receiving CoQ10 supplements had a 0.6 mg increase in uric acid (Coeff=0.556;95%CI=0.179-0.933;p=0.004), compared with no-CoQ10 status. After receiving CoQ10 supplements, patients presented with improved cognitive scores on the MS neuropsychological questionnaire (Coeff=6.472; p=0.016) , and with reduced pain on the visual analogue scale (Coeff=-1.899;95%CI=-3.608--0.189; p=0.029). Conclusion: Restoring an appropriate oxidative balance with CoQ10 dietary supplementation in combination with disease modifying treatment may be responsible for an improvement in patient-related outcomes such as cognition and pain. In the long-term, it is possible to hypothesize that a reduction in oxidative stress might exert positive effects on the disease course of MS. Future studies on larger populations and with longer follow-up are required to confirm present findings. to the year before treatment mean ARR was reduced from 0.35 to 0.1 (Wilcoxon; p<0.001); ARR reduction was significant (p<0.001) also in all subgroups: naïve, switchers for intolerance or inefficacy. The percentage of patients with active MRI was reduced from 34.5% to 14.8% (p<0.001). The analysis of ARR reduction in switchers from DMT for inefficacy could be biased by higher ARR before DMF; in fact, in these pts, ARR during DMF treatment was 0.175 whereas it was 0.04 in switchers for intolerance (Wilcoxon; p=0.012). DMF was well tolerated, 5% of patients discontinued for GI symptoms, 0.3% for flushing and 2.7% for lymphopenia. Conclusion: Our data confirm the efficacy and safety of DMF as first line treatment for naïve pts or switchers from DMT for intolerance/mild inefficacy. Here we describe the design of the PASS study, which will further evaluate the necessary duration and appropriate safety monitoring conditions, including incidence of adverse events of special interest (AESI), after alemtuzumab treatment in RRMS patients under conditions of real use. Methods: PASS is an international, prospective, multicentre, observational study. Duration per patient will be 10 years under the protocol amendment approved in US, currently under review by EMA. Inclusion criteria: patients with RRMS, having initiated alemtuzumab for the first time ≤8 weeks before enrolment. Target enrolment: 5000 worldwide (67% in Europe). Primary endpoint: incidence of AESI, defined as serious infection, pneumonitis, malignancy, and autoimmune-mediated conditions. Secondary endpoints: descriptive statistics on the natural history of incident AESI; relative risk of AESI in alemtuzumab-treated versus non-alemtuzumab-treated MS patients (external comparison cohort); potential associations between risk factors and incidence of AESI; incidence of AEs and SAEs; demographic and clinical characteristics of patients, and description of alemtuzumab utilization patterns. Results: Enrolment is currently ongoing. Results will be reported following study completion. Conclusion: The PASS study will evaluate the long-term safety profile of alemtuzumab treatment in patients with RRMS under real conditions of use. Disclosure: Sanofi. There are controversial results about its influence on long-term disability progression. We investigate here the correlation between the number of smoking years and of packets-year accumulated at diagnosis with disability later on. Methods: MS patients who accepted to complete a selfadministered questionnaire (98%) about their exposure to tobacco were randomly selected. We also collected clinical and demographic variables from our database. Results: 134 MS patients (69% women, 31% men). Mean age 40.32 (18-65) years. Mean duration of disease 10.45 (10-42) years. 35% smokers, 38% never smokers and 27% former smokers. A very significative positive correlation was found between the number of smoking years and packets-year accumulated at diagnosis and disability at the moment of the study (p<0.01) or disability during the first nine years after diagnosis (table 1) . A statistically significant difference in time to reach EDSS 3.0 was found between smokers and non smokers before diagnosis of the disease (p<0.05). (Figure 1 ). Table 1 . The table shows the correlation between the number of smoking years and packets-year accumulated at diagnosis and the disability as measured by EDSS in the first nine years after diagnosis and at the moment of the study. We found a significative positive correlation in each moment analyzed. Figure 1 . This figure shows that smoker patients before the MS diagnosis reach EDSS 3.0 before non smoker patients. We found a statistically significant difference (p<0,05) between groups. Conclusion: MS patients who had smoked before the diagnosis of the disease had a more severe disease course and a faster disability progression rate (Figure 2 ). 3) days after stopping fingolimod. Blood tests were available in 33 patients for the first and in 30 patients for the second and third time point. Leukopenia was defined as ≤3500, lymphopenia as ≤900, neutropenia as ≤1300 cells per microliter. We included age, fingolimod treatment duration, mean interruption before therapy switch, lymphocyte count at therapy switch and previous immunomodulatory regimens into our analysis to determine potential influencing factors of immune cell recovery. Results: All patients showed a drop of lymphocyte count under fingolimod with no relevant leukopenia or neutropenia. Three months after treatment discontinuation 6 patients, while six and twelve months later still 5 patients showed decreased lymphocyte levels. Four out of these 5 patients received rituximab as a follow-up treatment. 44% (4 out of 9) patients that switched to rituximab showed a prolonged lymphocyte recovery. Lymphopenia at start with rituximab and pretreatment with mitoxantrone seemed to be contributing factors to a prolonged lymphopenia. Conclusion: We observed lymphopenia in 16.7% of patients 1 year after discontinuation of fingolimod. Successive treatment with rituximab, low lymphocyte count at therapy switch, and pretreatment with mitoxantrone might contribute to a prolonged immune cell recovery. This should be considered when changing treatment regimens. Disclosure: The institution (University Hospital Basel) received in the last 3 years and used exclusively for research support: steering committee, consulting and speaker fees from Actelion, Addex, Bayer HealthCare, Biogen, Biotica, Genzyme, Lilly, Merck, Mitsubishi, Novartis, Ono, Pfizer, Receptos, Sanofi-Aventis, Santhera, Siemens, Teva, UCB and Xenoport; support of educational activities from Bayer HealthCare, Biogen, CSL Behring, Genzyme, Merck, Novartis, Sanofi-Aventis and Teva; royalties from Neurostatus Systems GmbH; grants from Bayer HealthCare, Biogen, the European Union, Merck, Novartis, Roche, the Swiss Multiple Sclerosis Society and the Swiss National Research Foundation. Background and aims: Ocrelizumab has been studied as a treatment in multiple sclerosis (MS), rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). This report reviews pregnancy outcomes in women treated with ocrelizumab. Methods: This analysis included women who received ocrelizumab (20-2000 mg) in clinical trials of MS, RA or SLE. Two methods of contraception were required during the trials and for 1 year/48 weeks after the last ocrelizumab infusion or until B cells repleted, whichever was longer. An embryo/foetus was considered exposed to ocrelizumab if the last infusion occurred within 3 months of conception, during pregnancy or if the date was unknown. Results: This analysis included 46 women (15 MS, 10 SLE, 21 RA) who reported 48 pregnancies (15 MS, 11 SLE, 22 RA) between 2008 and 14 September 2015. Among patients with MS, seven pregnancies with foetal ocrelizumab exposure ended in one healthy term baby and four elective terminations; two pregnancies were ongoing at the time of analysis. Seven pregnancies without foetal ocrelizumab exposure ended in two healthy term babies; one infant born at 34 weeks' gestation with nasopharyngeal neoplasm, jaundice, respiratory disease and low birth weight; two elective abortions; and two ongoing pregnancies. One pregnancy with unknown foetal ocrelizumab exposure ended in elective termination. Additional pregnancy outcomes in patients with SLE and RA will be reported. Conclusion: Considering the prevalence of MS among women of reproductive age, pregnancy outcomes in treatment-exposed patients are important to understand. Pregnancy outcomes in ongoing ocrelizumab studies will continue to be assessed and reported.  We analyzed data and findings in medical records of TAMG patients including age at onset, sex, autoantibodies against acetylcholine receptors (AChRs), type of clinical symptomatology. We evaluated used therapies, clinical status at the last examination and prognosis of TAMG. Results: Out of 2168 MG patients we found TAMG in 129 patients (6.0%), 49 men and 80 women. The mean age at disease onset was 51.7 years. We found positive titer of anti AChR antibodies in sera of all TAMG patients, except one. In 78 patients (63.4%) remission or significant improvement by immunotherapy and surgical treatment was achieved. MG was no primary cause of death for the last 20 years. 94 patients had benign and 35 malignant thymoma. Six patients with malignant thymoma died on thymoma dissemination, four out of them had MG in remission. Conclusion: Both, MG severity and biological characteristics of thymoma, determine TAMG prognosis. Early diagnosis and optimal treatment of TAMG are crucial for favorable prognosis. Key words: myasthenia gravis, thymoma, epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment, prognosis Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a autoimmune disorder of the neuromuscular transmission and has not a known association with autonomic dysfunction.There are however rare reports of MG coexisting with autonomic failure.We therefore conducted this study to evaluate autonomic functions electrophsiologically in patients with MG and find out subclinical autonomic disturbance. Methods: This study comprised 29 autoimmune MG patients who were followed at Istanbul University Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty Neurology Department. Baseline characteristics for each patient were recorded. Sympathetic Skin Response (SSR) and R-R Interval Variability (RRIV) was carried out. The tests were performed two times for patients who were under acetylcholinesterase inhibitors:at the end of the longest period of time may be drug-free and an hour after taking the drug. The results of patients were compared with age and gender matched 30 normal subjects. Results: There was no significant difference between the patient and the control groups' SSR results. The RRIV increased in both groups during hiperventilation as expected, but the rise was better in the control group (p=0.006). Valsalva ratio was lower in the patient group (p=0.039). The SSR results were compared prior to drug intake and afterwards; amplitudes of SSR were lower thereafter drug intake (p=0.030). There was no significant difference in SSR values according to the daily total dose of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors; but as much as time goes by after drug administration prolonged SSR latencies were obtained (p=0.043). Conclusion: This study suggests that MG patients have a subclinical parasympathetic abnormality and piridostigmine has a peripheral sympathetic cholinergic noncumulative effect on these autonomic tests. Disclosure: Our study was granted by Istanbul University | Scientific Research Projects Unit. F. Nazari 1 , S. Nafissi 1 , F. Sinaei 1 , Y. Nilipour 2 1 Neurology, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, 2 Mofid Children Hospital, Shahid Beheshti university of medical sciences, Tehran, Iran Background and aims: glycogen storage disease type 3 (GSD-III) is a rare inherited metabolic disorder caused by glycogen debranching enzyme deficiency in liver, skeletal and cardiac muscles. Different pathogenic mutations of the AGL gene have been reported so far. Here, we report distinct clinical and genetic data of Iranian GSD-III patients. Methods: clinical and laboratory data of 5 patients with GSD-III were recorded. Genetic analysis was performed to identify the causative mutations. Results: Three of patients had typical liver involvement in childhood and one was diagnosed 2 years after liver transplantation for cirrhosis of unknown etiology. One of our patients presented with preferential involvement of skeletal muscles with an unusual pattern. All patients had homozygous mutation of AGL gene including 5 novel mutations: c.378T>A, c. 1183C>T, c.3295T>C, c.3777G>A, c.2002-2A>G. Conclusion: This is the first comprehensive report of patients with GSD-III in Iran. We have reported 2 uncommon clinical presentations and 5 novel mutations. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: A pair of twins (female and male) presented with muscle hypotonia of unknown genesis in the neonatal period. The father of the twins was diagnosed with Becker muscular dystrophy with first symptoms appearing at age 20. The purpose of the request was to perform molecular genetic analysis to test for hereditary muscular dystrophy. Methods: To address this issue, Next Generation Sequencing (NGS)-gene panel analysis for muscular dystrophies was performed, followed by targeted carrier testing and segregation analysis. Results: NGS-gene panel analysis of the twins DNA revealed a likely pathogenic variant and a variant of unknown significance (VUS) in the DMD gene. The detected variants had no known allele frequency and both variants have not yet been described in association with dystrophinopathies. The male twin was a hemizygote for the missense VUS c.5601A>C; p.Gln1867His, which results in the substitution of an amino acid at a highly conserved position in vertebrates. In the female twin the analysis revealed the variant identified in the brother, c.5601A>C; p.Gln1867His, and in addition the likely pathogenic frameshift variant c.79dupG; p.Ala27Glyfs*5, both in a heterozygous state. Subsequent testing of the parents showed that the symptomatic father was a hemizygote for the frameshift variant, the healthy mother was a heterozygous carrier of the missense VUS. Conclusion: Based on the molecular genetic testing results of all family members we assume that both previously unreported DMD variants c.5601A>C; p.Gln1867His and c.79dupG; p.Ala27Glyfs*5 are most likely causative for the muscular dystrophy in the family. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2179 Cancelled EP2180 MicroRNAs and imaging phenotypes of trasportinopathy (limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 1F) V. Pegoraro, E. Pinzan, L. Giaretta, C. Angelini Background and aims: We report muscle histopathological, ultrastructural and radiological features of a large Italian-Spanish family with autosomal dominant LGMD, previously mapped to 7q32.2-32.2 (LGMD1F). Transportin-3 (TPNO3), which was found by NGS to be the causative gene in LGMD1F, is suggested to mediate the nuclear inport-export. The non-stop mutation identified in this family encodes for a longer protein which is expected to be unable to move to the nucleus. Clinical phenotype penetrance in this family correlates at 92% with mutation presence. Methods: We collected serum microRNAs, clinical history, muscle biopsies histopathology of one LGMD1F kindship. Biopsy of two affected patients mother and daughter was studied (in the daughter two consecutive biopsies at 9 and 28 years and in the mother at 48 years). MicroRNA expecially miR-206 was several fold up-regulated in the doughter that hard relates at 92% with mutation presence. Results: The daughter has a severe clinical course and the fiber atrophy was more prominent in the second biopsy at 28 years. The mother has a relatively compromised histopathology and many small muscle fibers, and autophagic changes by acid-phosphates stain. Immunofluorescence against desmin, myotilin, p62 and LC3 showed accumulation of myofibrils, ubiquitin binding proteins aggregates and autophagosomes. Ultrastructural analysis revealed myofibrillar disarray, vacuolar changes, granular material and dense subsarcolemmal bodies deriving from cytoskeleton-myofibrillar proteins. We hypotize that the pathogenetic mechanism in LGMD1F might lead to disarrangement of desmin-associated cytoskeletal network.  Background and aims: Mutations in three known collagen type VI genes (COL6A1, COL6A2, COL6A3) are responsible for a spectrum of myopathies, that range from the mild Bethlem myopathy to the more severe congenital Ullrich muscular dystrophy. Not all those patients have mutations in collagen VI. Recently, mutations in COL12A1 have been reported to cause myopathies similar to those caused by mutations in collagen VI. To date, nine patients with collagen XII mutations have been reported: six patients from 3 families with Bethlem-like myopathies and 3 patients with a more severe congenital form. We report a case of a patient with a novel mutation in collagen XII causing a phenotype resembling Ullrich muscular distrophy. Methods: We decribe a one-year-old portuguese boy, who presented with profound axial hypotonia from the first month of life. The boy has a marked kyphoskoliosis, pectus excavatum, retrognathy, ogival palate and cryptorchidy. His mother had had a previous gestaton, with oligoamnios and spontaneous abortion at 20 weeks. Results: We identified two rare variants in COL12A1 gene. One of them is a truncating mutation (W2332X) and the other one is a missense variant (C2739R) which is predicted as deleterious by CONDEL and GERP values. Conclusion: We report a mutation in the collagen XII gene causing a Ullrich muscular dystrophy phenotype. This expands the spectrum of collagen XII mutations, that can lead to a wide spectrum of phenotypes ranging from severe Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy-like forms to intermediate forms to milder Bethlem-like myopathies, similar to what happens with collagen VI mutations. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2182 Serum vitamin D value is reduced in patients with myotonic dystrophy type 1 H. Takada, S. Kon, Y. Oyama, T. Kimura Background and aims: Recently, vitamin D deficiency in patients myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) was reported. Vitamin D deficiency is responsible of a secondary hyperparathyroidism or adverse effect of muscle strength in proximal muscles. The aim of this study was to investigate vitamin D deficiency state in DM1. Methods: Forty-five genetically diagnosed DM1 patients with stable condition over three months (17 females and 28 males) were participated. The mean value of age was 47 years, and the number of CTG repeat (CTGn) was 1095. Serum level of 25-hydroxyvitamin D (OHD), 1,25dihydroxyvitamin D (OH2D), intact parathormone, Ca, and P were examined. Bone density was measured by dualenergy X-ray absorptiometry method. Body mass index (BMI) was calculated. Subjects were divided into two group according to motor disability, and data in each group were compared. Results: OHD value was 10.8±5.7ng/ml (mean±SD). Markedly reduced OHD less than 10 ng/ml was observed 58% of patients. Whereas, OH2D was 46.6±17.2pg/ml and only 7% of patients showed low value. High value of parathormone was recognized in 9%. Hypocalcemia was in 4%. There was positive significant correlation between OHD and BMI, and negative correlation between OHD and parathormone or age. There was no significant correlation between OHD and CTGn. No evaluated items except for BMI indicated significant difference between the ambulatory group and the wheelchair or bedridden group. Background and aims: Congenital myopathies are a clinical and genetic heterogeneous group of early onset muscle diseases. Mutations in HACD1 gene cause congenital centronuclear myopathy in dogs and have been recently described in one consanguineous Bedouin family with congenital myopathy that improved with age. We report herein the second family with congenital myopathy due to HACD1 mutations. Methods: Clinical data were collected from the family members. Skeletal muscle biopsies were performed in two patients. The HACD1 mutation was identified by nextgeneration sequencing. Results: The proband is a 28-year-old woman with facial and limb-girdle muscle weakness, that was born from consanguineous Caucasian parents. At birth, she presented with severe hypotonia that gradually improved. Muscle biopsy at 10 years of age revealed myopathic features with increased variation in myofiber size, type-1 fibers predominance, and slightly increased internal nuclei. The younger sister had similar clinical and histopathological findings. The mother and maternal grandmother had a slowly progressive proximal muscle weakness since childhood but, after neurological evaluation, surprisingly, also the father showed the same clinical picture. A novel homozygous variant in HACD1 gene (p.G213A) was detected in all the affected members. Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the second report on human mutations in HACD1. Our data highlight the implication of HACD1 in human pathology. Moreover, the long term follow-up of the affected individuals, revealed a mild and slowly progressive course, even at advanced age, which constitutes an important finding for patients' counseling. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Different phenotypes have been recognized caused by mutations in dysferlin gene (DYSF): limb-girdle muscular dystrophy 2B, Miyoshi myopathy, and distal myopathy of anterior tibialis. Dysferlin is a large protein involved on plasma membrane repair. Recent evidence suggests that dysferlin deficiency could affect cardiac muscle, leading to cardiomyopathy. We aim to identify a subclinical myocardial involvement in patients with molecular confirmation of dysferlin deficiency. Methods: We conducted an observational prospective study of patients with molecular diagnosis of dysferlinopathy. Ten patients were enrolled and were subject to cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) on a standard 1.5 Tesla clinical scanner with cine imaging for left ventricular volume (LVV) and ejection fraction (EF) calculation, and late post-gadolinium enhancement imaging (LGE) to assess for myocardial fibrosis. Results: There was a slight predominance of male gender (60%). Mean actual age and age at diagnosis was 44.80 and 26.60 years, respectively. CMR revealed an average LVV of 147,5mL and average EF of 63%. One patient presented with severe dilated cardiomyopathy (LVV 329 mL and EF 29%). LGE imaging showed focal intramyocardial fibrosis in 3 patients (30%), two of these were asymptomatic. None of the clinical and laboratory parameters (functional status, CPK levels and molecular study) correlated with LGE. Conclusion: Evidence of subclinical cardiac involvement in dysferlinopathies is increasing, although its real impact remains to be assessed. Phenotypic correlations were not able to yield any clinical predictor of LGE presence. Further studies are needed to evaluate the prognostic significance of subclinical findings detected by CMR. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  The efficacy of non-invasive positive pressure ventilation for myotonic dystrophy type 1 in short and long-term K. Yoshida, Y. Aburakawa, Y. Suzuki, K. Kuroda, T. Kimura Background and aims: Myotonic dystrophy is characterized by muscle and multiple organ dysfunctions. Respiratory failure related to life expectancy. However, there are few reports that examine the efficacy of noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) for myotonic dystrophy. We investigated the efficacy of this with blood gas analysis. Methods: We recruited patients admitted to our hospital for myotonic dystrophy type 1 since 1993, using with NIPPV. We investigated the changes of blood gas analysis before and after that and longitude effects. Results: There were 82 patients and 7 patients had been used NIPPV. The causes were one patient in CO2 narcosis, one patient with pneumonia and 5 in the sensation of dyspnea. The mean of the partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO2) before NIPPV is 59.0 Torr, the partial pressure of arterial oxide (PaO2) is 66.8 Torr, the Base excess (BE) is 4.3, and pH is 7.35. After NIPPV, the mean of PaCO2 is 54.9 Torr, PaO2 is 75.0 Torr, BE is 4.1, and pH is 7.35. Four patients continued NIPPV after 1500 days. After 1500 days, the mean of PaCO2 is 50.5 Torr, PaO2 70.8 Torr, BE is 2.0 and pH is 7.36. There was no significant difference between before and after NIPPV including after 1500 days. All case improved the symptom of dyspnea. Conclusion: This study showed no adverse effect of NIPPV in myotonic dystrophy type 1. The tendency of decreasing BE might show improving respiratory acidemia with NIPPV. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Successful Trainee Clinical Research Networks have been established since 2007. Our network in the peninsula, the SOuthwest Neurology Audit and Research Group (SONAR) is the first such Neurology trainee network in the UK. To enable development of cohesive collaborative working of the network we designed an audit which would be deliverable across three neurology centres within the peninsula. Methods: We audited management of suspected acute meningitis and meningococcal sepsis against national guidelines within a 4-week period in December. A standardised anonymsed data collation tool was used across the three centres and results were analysed at one centre. Results: All 9 registrars on the rotation contributed to audit methodology design and data analysis; seven contributed cases (from all three centres). Ten cases were included in the audit, 6 (Exeter), 3 (Plymouth) & 1 (Truro). Our audit highlighted deficiencies in timely senior review, delivery of antibiotics and steroids, inappropriate administration of acyclovir and delay in lumbar puncture. This was SONAR's first collaborative project and demonstrated that as a group of trainees we can successfully conduct a project across multiple hospital sites. We plan to extend the scope and ambition of our future undertakings. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: An Emergency Department (ED) neurologist has to deal with a plethora of diseases and symptoms, from the discomfort-causing benign ones to those posing a threat to the patient's life. We present a summary of the cases examined in our ED during 6 months in 2016. Methods: We reviewed the logs from the Neurology ED from January 1st to June 30th 2016 and assessed the number of cases, the diagnoses and the percentage of patients admitted in the Department of Neurology for monitoring and treatment. Results: A total of 7255 were examined by the ED neurologists, with an average of 39.86 patients per 24-hour shift. 1476 patients (20.34%) were admitted. Ischemic stroke (12.72% of total, 62.53% of admitted), transient ischemic attack (1.65% of total, 8.13% of admitted) and hemorrhagic stroke (1.16% of total, 5.69% of admitted) were the most common diagnoses. Out of the patients who weren't admitted, 1.020 (14.06%) had various types of headache, 954 (13.15%) vertigo and dizziness and 529 (7.29%) non-epileptic loss of consciousness; 1122 (15.47%) of the examined patients did not to have a neurologic cause for their presentation to the ED. Conclusion: Poor referral and unnecessary presentation to the ED for diseases which can be managed in an outpatient setting significantly increase the workload for the ED neurologist and lead to inappropriate use of hospital resources. Better triage and systematic analysis of the ED logs can improve the quality of the medical care for real emergencies. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Background and aims: To investigate the data of MG distribution in Georgian territory -special with diversity of physical-geographic conditions. Methods: Epidemiological aspects were studied in cities' and villages' population of East-and West-Georgia with various landscape areas. We used data of Georgian statistic department to calculate standard data. Investigation of epidemiologic aspects of MG conducted according to following data: sex, place of birth, place of living during disease manifestation, age of a patient during first signs of disease. We used for statistical evaluation SPSS 11.0. Results: 365 MG patients were from 1931 to 2015: 55.8% -female, 44.2%-male, ratio 1.3/1. Age during the first signs of MG from 1 to 79, from that in 83.6% between 16-60 years, until 40 years in 61.1% of women, 43.5% -men. The highest index of disease manifestation was 16-30 years in women, and 36-50 in men. The prevalence of MG per 100 000 in whole Georgian territory was -3.1; Eeast-Georgian -3.4, West-Georgian -1.9, in Tbilisi -5.5, in city population -4.0, village population -1.5. According to physicalgeographic areas MG is mainly distributed -in lowland and hilly regions, and practically not revealed in mountains' region. It should be noted, that lowland and hilly regions of Georgia are featured with dry climate and elevated mineralization of soil and underground waters. Conclusion: The revealed higher prevalence of MG in cities' and some physical-geographic regions of Georgia confirm the opinion of several environmental factors has a high role in development of the disease. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose H. Kleban, S. Likhachev Background and aims: Significant differences in prevalence of cerebrovascular diseases (CVD) in the world are caused by variability of risk factors in different populations. The aim of study was to estimate the prevalence of risk factors of CVD and their influence on development of acute vascular events. Screening of the open population of persons aged 40 to 59 years and dynamic monitoring after 1.5 and 3 years residing on the territory of one of districts of Minsk to identify risk factors of CVD. The following endpoints were evaluated: new cases of stroke, TIA or heart attack. Results: 276 individuals were examined: 199 women (72%) and 77 men (28%). Mean age was 53±5.7 years. The most common risk factors in men were overweight, hypertension and smoking, in women -overweight, hypertension and hypodynamia. 1.5 years after screening dynamic observation of 270 patients was carried out, 71 patients -3 years after. Six patients refused dynamic observation. During the observation, one case of stroke, one case of TIA and three cases of heart attack were recorded. Stroke and TIA was reported in women, and all cases of heart attack -in men. It was found out that all patients had a BMI ≥26, four of them suffered from not correctable hypertension, four -were burdened by family history of hypertension. The findings indicate the need for in-depth study of CVD risk factors in specific populations and carrying out educational work among the population, which will contribute to the improvement of stroke prevention. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Results: At least one BPS occurred in 93.2% and 98,3% of AD participants evaluated in NOC and UD, the median NPI score was 48 and 36, with a median number of 4 and 6 symptoms per patient, respectively. The most frequent symptoms were depression (64.7%), anxiety (63.3%) and apathy (60.6%). In multivariate analysis, patients referred to DU had a higher risk of "clinically relevant" agitation [NPI ≥ 4] (OR:2.3, p=0.012), depression (OR:2.0, p=0.015), anxiety (OR:1.7, p=0.047), euphoria (OR:5.9, p=0.003), apathy (OR:2.9, p<0.001), disinhibition (OR:2.6, p=0.003), aberrant motor behaviour (OR:2.6, p= 0.001) and appetite/ eating abnormalities (OR:1.8, p=0.024); and a lower risk of night-time behaviour disturbances (OR:0.29, p<0.001) than those attended at NOC. Conclusion: In general, BPS are commoner in AD patients assessed in DU. That fact could be explained due to the diagnosis challenge that supposes the coexistence of affective symptoms in early stages and the management difficulties that involve hyperactive/frontal symptoms in all the stages of dementia. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Anxiety is a common PD nonmotor symptom. It's important that anxiety isn't simply reaction to the PD diagnosis instead a part of the disease itself, caused by changes in the brain chemistry. Estimates show that 25-45 percent of PwPD experience anxiety disorder [Joseph H. Friedman,2016] . Assessing PwPD anxiety profile is needed in Siberian region. Methods: 798 PwPD are registered in movement disorders electronic database of the Siberian region. 269 PwPD were studied. Patients were clinically associated using neurologist-administered rating scales and self-administered questionnaires. Clinical assessments were conducted using the UPDRS, H&Y Scale, MoCA-test, Beck depression inventory II, Hospital anxiety and Depression Scale(HADS-A), Apathy Scale, PD Sleep Scale, Epworth Sleepiness Scale, Questionnaire for Impulsive-Compulsive Disorders in PD-Rating Scale(QUIP-RS), Bristol stool scale, Scale for Outcomes in PD for Autonomic Symptoms, Sniffing Stix Test, EuroQoL (EQ-5D), 39-item PD questionnaire (PDQ-39). Results: Anxiety (65 men, 85 women) was diagnosed in 55.8%: 29.0% subclinical (78 PwPD: 40 women, 38 men), 26.8% clinically significant (72 PwPD: 45 women, 27 men). HADS-A score was negatively correlated with QoL scales and positively associated with apathy score (r=0.300, p<0.0001), depression severity (r=0.436, p<0.0001), QUIP-RS score (r=0.321; p=0.004), sleepiness (r=0.205; p=0.005), cognitive impartment (r=0.203; p=0.005). HADS-A scores weren't associated with onset age, illness duration, H&Y Stage, UPDRS scores. Generalized anxiety disorder, panic/ phobic disorder, social phobia, agoraphobia, obsessivecompulsive and anxiety disorder not otherwise specified have been all identified in PwPD. Conclusion: Anxiety can be even more disabling than the PD movement symptoms. It's important to recognize and treat it. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: We report a case of Acute Necrotising Encephalopathy Syndrome in an adult, and review the associated literature. Methods: Case report. Results: A 19-year-old man developed a febrile illness with cough, headache and progressive ataxia. On day 5 he collapsed without loss of consciousness, was incontinent of urine and subsequently unable to stand. Neurologically he was fully alert with signs of a spastic tetraparesis, however within one hour his GCS deteriorated to 8 and intubation was necessary. A Chest X-ray demonstrated consolidation throughout the left lung, and pneumococcal antigen was identified from urine. MRI brain demonstrated striking high-signal abnormalities involving the basal ganglia, midbrain and brainstem. CSF was unremarkable. The case met clinical and radiological criteria for Acute Necrotising Encephalopathy Syndrome (ANEC). The subsequent clinical course was in keeping with this diagnosis, with a prolonged period of spasticity and extrapyramidal signs associated with hyperpyrexia and deranged liver enzymes. There appeared to be a positive response to repeated plasma exchange and he fully recovered by 5 weeks. Conclusion: ANEC is a rare para-infectious encephalopathy initially identified in East Asian children, but now recognised to occur throughout the world and occasionally in young adults. It can be distinguished clinically and radiologically from Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis (ADEM), its main differential diagnosis. The pathology also differs from ADEM, involving a 'cytokine storm' rather than inflammatory infiltration. We discuss the features of ANEC, its diagnostic criteria and proposed treatment. Although rare, this condition is almost certainly underdiagnosed, and earlier recognition may lead to more effective treatment. 1 Neurology, Hospital Prof. Doutor Fernando Fonseca, Amadora, Portugal, 2 Neurorradiology, Hospital Prof. Doutor Fernando Fonseca, Amadora, Portugal Background and aims: CLIPPERS was first described in 2010, comprising a subacute condition with brainstem clinical signs, punctate and curvilinear pontine enhancement on brain MRI and T lymphocytic infiltrate on histopathology. Clinical response to corticosteroids is observed, with frequent relapsing after treatment discontinuation. New clinical and imagiological presentations have been reported ever since, broadening the spectrum of CLIPPERS. Methods: Case Report: A 47-year-old woman, with antecedents of in situ breast cancer in remission, presented with a 4-week history of progressing brainstem signs and symptoms. On neurological examination, hypoesthesia on the second territory of right trigeminal cranial nerve was first noticed. During the following month, the patient additionally developed ocular motility abnormalities and gait ataxia. Brain MRI disclosed multiple T2/FLAIR hyperintense lesions involving the pons, medulla and cerebellum. Subsequent MRI showed de novo bi-hemispheric hyperintensities involving the subcortical white matter. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed CD19 lymphocitic pleocytosis, with no immunophenotypic atypia or evidence of B-cell monoclonality. Extensive differential diagnosis was excluded, making the diagnosis of CLIPPERS the most probable according to the established criteria. An optimal response to high-dose corticosteroids was observed, as expected in this entity. Three months after the first relapse, the patient remains assymptomatic and steroid free. Results: NA Conclusion: We report a case presenting with the clinical and neuroimaging features of CLIPPERS, according to recent literature. CLIPPERS is a diagnosis of exclusion, therefore a broad differential diagnosis must always be first considered. We underline the importance of a strict clinical and imagiological surveillance of these patients, in order to prevent incorrect diagnoses. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2198 Cancelled EP2199 MMP9 index as possible diagnostic marker of Neuro-Behçet's disease Background and aims: Neuro-Behçet's disease (NBD) is a neuroinflammatory disorder occurring in 5-30% of patients affected by systemic Behçet's disease (BD). NBD patients often show clinical and magnetic resonance (MRI) features "multiple sclerosis (MS) like" that make necessary a differential diagnosis from MS. Methods: In this study we collected cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and serum samples of 11 NBD and 21 relapsing remitting (RR) MS patients undergoing the diagnostic lumbar puncture. We measured the CSF and serum concentration of 18 soluble factors (MMP9, CXCL10, CXCL13, OPN, GM-CSF, TNF alpha, IFN gamma, IL-1 alpha, -1 beta, -2, -4, -6, -8, -10, -12p40, -12p70, -17, -23) by Milliplex. Results: We found that NBD and RR-MS patients significantly differ about MMP9 content both in CSF and serum: NBD patients have a concentration of MMP9 lower in CSF (p=0,002) and higher in serum (p<0,0001) than RR-MS ones. By determining the ratio between CSF and serum MMP9 concentration and normalizing it versus CSF/ serum albumin ratio, we defined the "MMP9 Index"; this parameter results significantly lower in NBD samples than RR-MS ones (p<0,0001). Furthermore, we detected a different CSF chemoattractant environment: higher IL8 amount in NBD and a higher CXCL13 amount in RRMS. In conclusion, with this study we defined the "MMP9 index", that, if validated on an independent group of patients, could be proposed as a possible biomarker helpful to exclude the diagnosis of MS or to confirm the suspicion of NBD, especially in the cases of NBD positive for oligoclonal bands (OCB) (30% of NBD patients). Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Natalizumab (NTZ) is a highly effective treatment for Relapsing-Remitting Multiple Sclerosis (RRMS), albeit associated with an increasing risk of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) in patients on treatment for over 24 months and who are seropositive for the JCV virus (PsJCV). NTZ is administered intravenously every 4 weeks, but clinicians have been extending infusion intervals in the attempt of reducing PML risk. This study aimed to evaluate the safety of extending interval dosing (EID) of NTZ from 4 to 5 weeks in our clinical practice. Methods: We performed EID on clinically stable RRMS NTZ-treated patients with PsJCV (index ≥ 0'9) and >24 infusions. A retrospective review of all cases undergoing EID was conducted in 2016. Age, sex, disease duration, total NTZ-treatment time, clinical relapses, lesion load and EDSS progression were analyzed and compared with those occurring in the same group of patients in the year before EID. Background and aims: Neuromyelitis Optica (NMO) is an astrocytopathy associated with anti-aquaporin 4 antibodies, classically characterized by severe relapses of optic neuritis (ON) and longitudinally extensive myelitis with poor recovery. Methods: Case report Results: Thirty seven-year-old black woman admitted in 2010 for paroxysmal dysesthesia involving progressively the right lower limb, torso and homolateral upper limb and lower left limb, in the previous three months. Neurological examination showed lower limbs hypopalesthesia. MRI disclosed heterogeneity of C1-C4 spinal cord signal, with T2 hyperintense areas, without T1 hypointensity, mild spinal expansion and mild enhancement after gadolinium, suggesting a demyelinating or tumoral lesion; brain MRI was normal. CSF cytochemical analysis, oligoclonal bands and screening for infectious/systemic autoimmune diseases were unremarkable. Symptomatic remission under pregabalin. In 2012, right ON, with compatible MRI, without new brain lesions and normal spinal exam (disappearance of the signal change previously described). In the following months, left ON and right ON, without recovery of right eye vision after methylprednisolone. Despite an initial negative investigation (anti-AQ4 and anti-MOG antibodies), anti-AQ4 IgG were detected at this stage. Clinical stability was achieved with AZA and PRD for three years. Recently, area postrema syndrome (poor therapeutic compliance), with total recovery with methylprednisolone, without new MRI lesions. Spine MRI: heterogeneity of C1-C4 spinal cord signal, with T2 hyperintense areas, without T1 hypointensity, mild spinal expansion and mild enhancement after gadolinium. Brain MRI was normal. MRI performed 11 days after methylprednisolone for area postreme syndrome without new brain lesions and normal spinal exam. We present a case of NMO spectrum disorder with anti-AQ4 IgG with a mild clinical presentation: paroxysmal symptoms associated with spinal cord lesion with atypical behavior -spontaneous resolution without subsequent atrophy. The expanding NMO phenotype includes mild ON and myelitis as manifestations, highlighting the importance of systematic screening for anti-AQP4 IgG. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Background and aims: Knowledge of the characteristics of stroke in children is necessary for the diagnosis, treatment and preventive care. Undoubtedly, in pathogenesis of stroke an important role plays immunological mechanisms. Objectives: to study the immunological and autoimmune reactivity of children after stroke. Methods: 74 children examined, 44 aged under 3 years in the acute and chronic phases of stroke and 30 healthy children at the same age. The levels of cytokines were detected by immunoenzyme method using commercial test kits "Vector-Best" (IL-1beta, IL-10). The sensitivity of the method was 2-30pg/mL. We analyzed the ANCA (Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies) level to evaluate the general condition of the vascular system. Results: The main pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1beta levels in main group increased significantly (P<0.001) reaching an average level of 103.3±0.9 pg/mL, while in the control group, averaged 29.9±1.8 pg/mL. The level of IL-10 in the main group was slightly reduced (12.9±1.0), but the difference was not reliable (P>0.001) compared to the control group. ANCA level was 0.962±0.056 standard units, which is 3 times higher than in the control group and indicates the inflammatory process in the intima. Conclusion: Immune reactions and related local inflammation involved in the pathogenesis of stroke and infarct changes in human brain tissue. Not only the excess releasing of proinflammatory cytokines like IL-1beta, but the deficit of anti-inflammatory cytokines like IL-10 plays important role in the development of inflammatory response. High levels of ANCA and IL-1beta has an unfavorable prognosis for a disease course. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Guillain-Barré syndrome, Miller-Fisher syndrome (MFS) and Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis (BBE) comprise a spectrum of the same immune-mediated disease, entitled anti-GQ1b antibody syndrome. While they are typically monophasic, a limited number of recurrent cases has been reported, usually similar to the inaugural episode. Methods: Case report. Results: A 63-year-old male presented with diplopia, unsteadiness, dysesthesia and dysphonia, following a respiratory tract infection. He had prominent truncal and appendicular cerebellar ataxia, generalized areflexia and nearly complete ophthalmoplegia. He also developed mild tetraparesis, distal proprioceptive deficits, nearly abolished vibration sense, left blepharoptosis, right relative afferent pupillary defect and bulbar palsy. A left Babinsky sign was noticed. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed and were irrelevant. Electromyography exhibited low amplitude sensory nerve action potentials, F-waves' chrono-dispersion in the median nerve and abolished H reflexes. He was diagnosed with MFS and he underwent immunoglobulin therapy, with favorable outcome. Six years earlier, following mixed pollen extract immunotherapy, he developed ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, areflexia, with altered mental status and diminished vibration perception in the left side of his body. Anti-GQ1b antibody was noticeably elevated. Electromyogram revealed a sensory-motor polyneuropathy. Brain MRI was unspecific. MFS was assumed, and after treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin, plasmapheresis and steroids, complete recovery was attained. Conclusion: It is our view that this patient suffered a first episode of BBE, and now presents to our care with MFS. Such cases of recurrent anti-GQ1b syndrome under different phenotypes are exceedingly rare, and whether genetic susceptibility mechanisms exist is still unclear. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Neuro-ophthalmology/ neuro-otology Background and aims: Idiopathic intracranial hypertension is typically seen in females with high body mass index. The diagnosis of IIH in males must only be made after an extensive search for secondary causes of raised intracranial pressure. We have retrospectively reviewed the clinical characteristics and prognosis of male IIH at our centre. Methods: We reviewed the notes of 14 men fulfilling the modified Dandy criteria for IIH, diagnosed under our services at University Hospitals of Leicester between 2004-2016. Results: The case series included 14 male patients aged between 17 and 85 years old. BMI range was 23 to 43kg/ m 2 . 14% (n=2) of the patients presented with headache only, 43%(n=6) presented with vision changes only and 43% (n=6) presented with headache plus vision changes, 14%(n=2) patients reported tinnitus, 43 (n=6)patients required surgical intervention, of which 36% (n=5) had optic nerve fenestration, 7% (n=1) had ventriculoperitoneal (VP) and 14% (n=2) had lumbar theco-peritoneal (LP) shunt. Of the patients requiring surgical intervention, 50% (n=3) still had deterioration of their visual function. 60% (n=3) of patients having optic nerve fenestration also required a second surgical procedure (ventriculoperitoneal or lumbar theco-peritoneal shunt). On follow-up, 57% (n=4) of the patients originally presented with headache, reported resolution of this. Conclusion: The commonest clinical presentation was visual impairment 86% (n=12), followed by headache 50% (n=7). There was a trend for our male cohort to be older, with disproportionately greater risk of severe visual loss and a higher proportion requiring surgical intervention. The findings suggest that males with IIH may require close monitoring and timely intervention in tertiary centres to avoid poor visual outcomes. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Ischemic isolated ocular motor cranial nerve palsies are frecuent in older and has been related with the presence of diabetes, hypertension and other risk factors.There are not previous studies to study the relationship between the presence of risk factors with the time to complete recovery. Methods: Describe our serie of patients with isolated ocular cranial nerve ischemic palsy and investigate the vascular risk factors and the relationship with recovery time. Patients with third, fourth and sixth cranial nerve ischemic palsies treated at our Unit. Demographic data were collected, as well as cardiovascular risk factors (arterial hypertension, dyslipemia, smoking and ischemic heart disease) and time to recovery. Patients were divided into two groups depending the time to recovery (>3 or <3 months). we analyze the possible relationship between the recovery time and the presence of each risk factor. Results: 48 patients with an average age 67.83 at diplopia onset. 11 (24.4%) developed a third nerve palsy (np), 2 (4.4%) a fourth np, and 35 (77.7%) a sixth np. Hypertension, diabetes mellitus and hyperlipidemia were significantly more prevalent than ischemic heart disease and smoking. In multivariant analysis we found a relationship between diabetes and time to recovery, longer in diabetics patients. Conclusion: Ischemic ocular motor nerve palsy is the main cause of isolated cranial nerve palsy in adults. In our serie all patients were older than 50 and have at least one vascular risk factor. In our knowledge there are no previous data about the link between diabetes and time to recovery. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Functional disorders may resemble many neurological disorders with a difficult diagnosis in some cases. Methods: A 56-year-old male with no personal data of interest was admitted in May 2015 due to a slight instability. Brain CT was normal. The patient progressively developed an abduction disturbance in the left eye on looking to the left, an abduction disturbance in the right eye on looking to the right, and a limitation on vertical gaze with convergence spasm. He presented instability but preserved reflexes. A complete neurological and systemic study was done and was normal. The patient received intravenous immunoglobulins experiencing an aseptic meningitis as adverse event. The patient was discharged home with a diagnosis of probable Miller-Fisher syndrome. At followup, the patient was able to carry out all normal activities (including working, writing and driving) but neurological status still showed a convergence spasm. In addition to neurological disorder, systemic complains such as cardiological and digestive disorders were also studied and revealed normal results. A clinical improvement was seen under antidepressive treatment. Results: Characterized by intermittent episodes of convergence that may mimic abducens paresis, converge spasm has not been well characterized, and may often be misdiagnosed by neurologists as brainstem pathology. In our patient a complete study was performed, and only a correct diagnosis was done at the follow up. Functional converge spasm often coexist with other psychogenic disorders. Conclusion: The prompt awareness of detecting this syndrome may lead to an early correct clinical approach and avoid unnecessary diagnostic and invasive studies. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Brainstem and cerebellar infarctions may cause acute vertigo, often mimicking vestibular neuritis. In contrast, attacks of positional vertigo mostly reflect benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV), but may rarely be of central "pseudo-vestibular" origin, as the following cases show. Methods: Case reports: Two females and one male patient were admitted because of acute attacks of severe positional vertigo, associated with nausea and omnidirectional ataxia of stance and gait. Results: Case 1 (female, age 38) showed leftward saccadic smooth pursuit, but no pathological nystagmus. MR imaging revealed right cerebellar infarcts in the right PICA and SCA territories. Case 2 (female, age 71) presented with non-habituating ageotropic positional nystagmus with severe vertigo, further periodically alternating horizontal spontaneous nystagmus, obeying Alexander's law, due to acute left PICA infarction. Videonystagmography showed mildly reduced caloric excitability of the left labyrinth, the video head impulse test bilaterally reduced VOR gain. Case 3 male, age 68) developed persistent mild nausea and ageotropic positional nystagmus with vertigo. MR imaging showed right cerebellar PICA infarcts, due to V4 occlusion. Conclusion: Our cases show that pseudo-vestibular infarctions in the PICA territory may be symptomatic by central positional vertigo with or without nystagmus. It often beats in ageotropic direction, similar to cupulolithiasis of the horizontal canal. Its central origin may be indicated by discrete clinical signs such as bilateral gaze-evoked nystagmus, saccadic smooth pursuit, missing habituation of positional nystagmus, which may also have a bad correlation with the intensity of vertigo. MR imaging should be initiated, even with pathological head impulse test. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Acute binocular double vision is a diagnostic challenge in the emergency room and is most commonly due to extraocular nerve palsies. A precise clinical and etiological classification at first medical contact is of upmost importance for promptly taking the correct therapeutic decision. Methods: We prospectively evaluated 54 patients (age 59.2±16.7 yrs) that presented to our emergency room with acute binocular double vision (no longer than ten days). Personal history was taken on the basis of a standardized questionnaire. Patients underwent a thorough neurological and neuro-orthoptical examination, including evaluation of ocular torsion using scanning laser ophthalmoscopy, subjective visual vertical (SVV) and harms targent screen test. Brain-MRI with was performed in all but five patients. Results: Forty-six patients (85%) were diagnosed with an extraocular nerve palsy (26% NIII, 17% NIV and 43% NVI), two patients with an isolated extraocular muscle paresis, three with a vertical (skew) deviation, two with a internuclear ophthalmoplegia and one patient with a decompensated strabismus deorsoadductorius. The subjective visual vertical changed independently on both eyes according to the site of lesion (peripheral vs central). On the basis of the clinical findings and SVV changes in the paretic and normal eye, we developed a clinical diagnostic algorithm. Conclusion: A systematical approach to acute, binocular double vision, especially when taking into account the subjective visual vertical on both eyes can help guide clinicians to differentiate peripheral from central lesions accurately. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Cerebellar Ataxia, Neuronopathy, Vestibular Areflexia Syndrome (CANVAS) was recognised as a distinct clinical syndrome in 2011. Afferent visual system abnormalities are a common feature of other ataxias. We set out to characterise ophthalmic involvement in CANVAS Methods: 16 patients with clinical diagnosis of CANVAS were compared with 15 healthy controls A Complete neuroophthalmic examination was performed including an optical coherence tomography (OCT) examination of peripapillary retinal nerve fibre layer (RNFL) and macula Patients'neurological impairmet was rated on the Scale for the assessment and rating of ataxia (SARA) Results: There were no significant differences in demographics between cases and controls. (Figure 1 ) Visual acuity was worse iand cup-to-disc ratio was greater n cases compared with controls ( Figure 1 ) While overall aberage Retinal Nerve Fibre Layer was the same in cases and controls the temoporal RNFL was thinner in patients than controls. (Figure 2 ) Total macular volume was increased and this was apparent all sectors but particularly in the outer macular regions, especially nasally. No association was seen between OCT findings and SARA ataxia scores.  The observed decreased in Visual acuity is likley to be due to nystagmus The Temporal RNFL thinning in CANVAS may suggest mitochondrial dysfunction as mitochondrial diseases show a simliar pattern of change. The cause of the the thiskened macular is uncertain. This is a smaill preliminary study which is not surprising given that the condition is relatively rare. Further investigation into these OcT findings will be of interest Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Impairment of upright stance is very common in senior patients and strongly influences their quality of life. The causes of disequilibrium can be very different and often present a challenge in diagnostics... The aim of the presented work is to examine the contribution of static posturography in evaluation of instability in senior patients. Methods: In the years 2013-2014 we examined 230 of the senior patients (over age of 65y). We performed posturography with sensory tests (galvanic vestibular stimulation, unilateral vibration of Achilles tendon). We evaluated the velocity and amplitude of body sways, total area, as well as frequency analysis was done Results: Posturographic tests were able to quantify the extent of instability of patients and also to define the different characteristics of upright posture impairment. Patients with somatosensoric disorders (i.e. polyneuropathy) showed increased velocity and an increase of frequencies above sways points 1Hz in the anterior-posterior direction. Patients with diffuse cerebral white-matter lesions were characterized predominantly with increased body sways amplitude and with pronounced response to sensory stimulation. Patients with vestibular disorder were often unable to maintain a stance on soft (foam) platform. They showed asymmetrical responses to the galvanic vestibular stimulation and the improvement of stability in headextension posture Conclusion: Disorders of upright stance are very frequent in senior patient and usually several factors contribute to the impairments of stance... Static posturography is a useful method for detection of dominating cause of instability in senior patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Menière's Disease (MD). The second objective was to assess whether clinical symptoms existed that were unique to RV discriminating it from VM and MD. Methods: Between January 2015 and November 2016, patients were prospectively recruited at a specialised dizziness unit. Patients were included if they met the diagnostic criteria for either RV, VM or MD. The clinical diagnosis was based on mutual consensus after consultation of an ENT-surgeon and a neurologist. Results: A total of 122 patients were included , 65 (53%) were females in whom 29 (24%) were postmenopausal. The mean age was 55.5±13.7 years and the mean age of onset of vertigo attacks was 49.2±14.8 years (n=119). Forty-five (37%) patients had a clinical diagnosis of RV, 18 (15%) of pVM, 16 (13%) of dVM and 43 (35%) of MD. Clinical symptoms in these three vertigo disorders were comparable and no symptom could be identified which was specifically linked to RV. Patients with VM reported significantly more often a positive history of motion sickness. In addition, canal paresis was most profound in patients with MD. Conclusion: We state that no clinical characteristics could be identified which were distinctive for RV. Nonetheless, we did find several distinctive clinical features for VM and MD which may assist the physician in his history taking. Prospective long-term might contribute to the discussion of whether or not RV can be identified as a separate clinical entity. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Peripheral nerve disorders 2 Effects of smart phone use on the median nerve F. Ilik 1 , H. Buyukgol 2 , F.A. Eren 3 , M.K. Ilik 4 , F. Kayhan 5 , H. Kose 6 Background and aims: We can understand the importance and the popularity of smart phones when we evaluate their sales. The median nerve is the main responsible nerve for the muscle movements while using smart phones (Fig 1) . Various reasons; particularly frequent repetitive movements can lead to carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) via median nerve damage. The aim of this study is to evaluate the effects of smart phone usage on the median nerve. Methods: In this study, the sampling group was composed of 40 smart phone users and 22 classical mobile phone users (totally 62 individuals). The use of smart phone was assessed by using smart phone addiction scale (SAS). Participants were divided into three groups; high smartphone users (SAS >71), low smartphone users (SAS <71) and classical mobile phone users. In order to evaluate the upper extremity functions and symptoms, quick-disabilities of arm, shoulder, hand (qDASH) survey was applied to participants. Participants were also assessed by using visual analogue scale (VAS). Electrophysiological examination was performed by using Micromed SpA device. Results: Totally 62 participants were included in the study. The 37 of the participants (57.9%) were female and 25 of them (40.3%) were male. In our study, median nerve sensory, motor conduction velocity, and differences in latencies were examined. It was observed that smart phone usage rarely influenced median nerves according to the classical mobile phone usage. However, median nerves were adversely affected by the increasing use of smart phones. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: We report a patient presenting with facial asymmetry due to isolated unilateral trigeminal motor neuropathy. Results: A 40-year-old woman presented with progressive facial asymmetry, left hemifacial numbness and pain for the last month. She denied past history of head or facial trauma, dental procedures, diabetes herpes-zoster or other infections, as well as systemic symptoms. On neurological examination it was disclosed left temporal and masseter muscle atrophy, left deviation of the mandible on opening of the mouth, and mild poorly-defined left hemifacial hypoesthesia. Electrophysiological study confirmed the diagnosis of pure motor trigeminal neuropathy, with chronic neurogenic potentials in the atrophic muscles. Trigeminal sensory fibers were normal on blink reflex and facial laser-evoked potential. Facial and cranial MRI revealed atrophy and fatty infiltration on left masticator muscles (figure 1) and regular thickening of the affected fifth cranial nerve at its origin in the anterolateral surface of the pons, extending to cisternal portion and Meckel´s cave (figure 2), which suggested an inflammatory lesion. Blood and cerebrospinal fluid studies were negative for autoimmune and infectious diseases. Clinical picture remained stable over 9 months of followup. Cranial MRI, T2 3D DRIVE HR, reformatted images along the trigeminal nerves. Thickening and hyperintense signal on apparent origin (white arrows), cisternal segment (black arrows) and Meckel's cavum (gray arrows) of the fifth cranial nerve. Trigeminal neuropathy is usually characterized by motor and sensory involvement. Reviewing the literature we found that 16 similar cases have been reported. As described in some other patients, sensory symptoms were referred in spite of isolate motor involvement on neurophysiology investigation. There is a wide array of possible etiologies for this neuropathy, however in most of the cases, no apparent cause is found. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Pembrolizumab is a monoclonal antibody approved for treatment of metastatic melanoma and non-small cell lung cancer. We report a case of acute bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome as a possible adverse effect to Pembrolizumab. Results: A 77-year-old man presented with progressive paresthesia and numbness in fingers and hands for the last month. Five months before he had started treatment with Pembrolizumab 2mg/kg IV every three weeks for metastatic melanoma. He denied similar symptoms on the past. He rejected recent repetitive manual activity, distal edema or arthritis symptoms. On neurological examination it was disclosed bilateral positive Phalen sign and hypoesthesia in median nerve territory. Nerve conduction studies confirmed severe bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, without signs of peripheral neuropathy. Bilateral carpal infiltration with betamethasone dipropionate and levobupivacaine was performed, with major symptomatic and electrophysiological improvement over the following week. Pembrolizumab treatment was continued and three months later he remains clinically well, with continued neurophysiological recovery. Conclusion: This is the first report of bilateral carpal tunnel as an adverse reaction to Pembrolizumab. One of the possible mechanisms could be a bilateral tenosynovitis of the wrist, as this condition has been reported as an uncommon adverse reaction to this drug. In our patient we found a segmental demyelization, in a local prone to nerve compression, as the most probable explanation. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2216 Clinical and diagnostic aspects of sensory polyneuropathy in obese patients with impaired glucose S. Karpov 1 , V. Osepyanz 2 , G. Saneeva 2 , I. Vyshlova 1 1 Neurology, neurosurgery and medical genetics, Stavropol State Medical University, Stavropol, Russian Federation, 2 Endocrinology, Stavropol State Medical University, Stavropol, Russian Federation Background and aims: Sensory neuropathy is a marker of preclinical lesions of the nerves in diabetes mellitus and prediabetes Methods: We examined 46 patients aged from 28 to 65 years (50.32±4.4 years) with obesity, diabetes mellitus (DM) type 2 (disease duration of 5.33±3.16 years), impaired fasting glucose, impaired glucose tolerance. The obesity of the first degree was observed in 19 people (41.3%), second degree -in 22 (47.8%), third degree -in 5 (10.9%) patients rves in diabetes mellitus and prediabetes Results: Sensory neuropathy diagnosed in 34 (74%) patients with obesity and glucose impairments. The main complaints of patients were pain, numbness and cramps in the legs, worse at night, that were observed in 68%, 15% and 17% cases respectively. The clinical symptoms in 82.4% of cases were confirmed by the results of the quantitative sensory testing. Clinical manifestations of sensory fibers lesions were more frequently detected in patients with prediabetes (80%). In patients with obesity without glucose disorders the prevalence of neuropathy was 68%, with severe polyneuropathy in 6 (46.1%) of them. In group with DM type 2 the diabetic polyneuropathy was detected in 75% of the patients, the most frequently (38.4%) it was mild polyneuropathy Conclusion: Our data demonstrate the possibility of early development of sensory polyneuropathy in patients with obesity and prediabetes before the laboratory and clinical manifestation of DM type 2, and its progression with chronic hyperglycemia Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: In electrodiagnostic studies, age is probably the most significant variable, with sensory response amplitudes declining progressively with advancing age. Our purpose is to determine the lower limit of the normal value (LLN) for sural and ulnar SNAP amplitudes as well as for the SUAR at varying ages and confirm the hypothesis that the SUAR is independent of age. Methods: The subject population was divided into four age groups: group 1: ≤39, group 2: 40-59, group 3: 60-69, and group 4: ≥70. All subjects were performed sensory nerve studies on ulnar (finger-to-wrist), sural nerves. The sural/ ulnar SNAP amplitude ratio was calculated. Results: We enrolled 49 men and 55 women, ranging in age from 20-80 years (mean, 52 years). The number of subjects in each group was 18 (group 1), 55 (group 2), 22 (group 3), 9 (group 4). In simple correlation analysis, sural and ulnar SNAPs were inversely correlated with age. However, SUARs were not correlated with age. The sural and ulnar SNAP mean amplitudes of each four groups were significantly different, respectively (sural amplitude: p<0.001, ulnar amplitude: p<0.001). However, mean SUARs of each groups were not significantly different ( p=0.296). Conclusion: Our results suggested that sural and ulnar SNAP amplitudes adjusted for age must be taken into account in the electrodiagnostic studies. Because SUAR is independent of age, that may be helpful in evaluation in polyneuropathy. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: The vasculitis confined to the peripheral nervous system (PNS) rare. Classically this affection is revealed with a multifocal neuropathy, and a brutal onset is uncommon. We describe a case of PNS vasculitis with an acute <<vascular>> onset. Methods: A 72 years old woman was admitted for weakness evaluation. Few hours before admission, she developed a symmetric numbness and tinglness of the limbs. The clinical examination showed a symmetric tetraparesis predominantly in the lower limbs and distally on the upper limbs, she had an absent tendon reflexes at the ankles, a gloves and socks type hypoesthesia, and troncular amyotrophy. The ENMG revealed a symmetric motor and sensitive polyneuropathy with denervation signs. The neuromuscular biopsy revealed a vasculitis of the nerve and muscle samples. All the other secondary causes of vasculitis (neoplastic, toxic, infectious, and systemic) were ruled out after several tests. The diagnosis of primitive vasculitis of the PNS was definite and the patient received steroids and immunosuppressants with a favorable evolution. Results: We are before an acute <<vascular>> onset of the PNS vasculitis, with a bilateral, symmetric, and synchronized polyneuropathy. In our knowledge, no cases of brutal polyneuropathy revealing a PNS vasculitis were reported. In 30% of the cases, the affection had a distal onset, was both motor and sensitive, and non-symmetric with a tendency of becoming bilateral. Conclusion: This case illustrates the importance of a meticulous examination and collection of the patient's history in finding the vascular onset of a peripheral neuropathy, and the importance of the biopsy in atypical cases. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Background and aims: Pseudotumour cerebri is a rare complication of Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS), occurring in about 4% of the cases. Methods: A patient who had the GBS with associated increased intracranial pressure (ICP) and papilledema is described. Results: A 22-year-old woman was admitted to our department with a two-week history of an upper respiratory tract infection, followed by tingling in the feet and weakness of the lower limbs. On examination, she had moderate proximal weakness of her legs. The limbs were areflexic with flexor plantar responses. Proprioceptive sensation was impaired. Nerve conduction studies showed slowing of velocities and a delay in F waves consistent with the GBS. Lumbar puncture (LP) yielded raised protein in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (3,5 g/L), with a normal cell count. She had motor rehabilitation without recourse to plasma exchange since she was in the plateau phase. Seven weeks after presentation, the patient developed nausea, vomiting and headache. Fundoscopy revealed papilloedema. Brain MRA was normal. LP performed revealed clear CSF with an opening pressure of 36 cm H2O and no cells, a normal glucose level and a protein of 1.5 g/L. She was treated with a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor and repetitive LPs. Two months later, she was well with no headaches and the papilloedema had resolved. Conclusion: Pathogenesis of raised ICP remains unclear. Both decreased absorption of CFS and cerebral edema have been suggested. The high concentration of CSF protein may lead to a decreased CSF absorption in arachnoid villi. Treatment remains poorly understood. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Methods: Patients adhering to the Registry can also fill online self-reported questionnaires related to five issues: pregnancy; orthotics; skeletal deformity surgery; anesthesia; sleep disorders. By December 2016, 180 patients and 30 healthy controls filled the questionnaires. Data collection is ongoing. Results: Pregnancy: 46/73 CMT women had at least one pregnancy; complications ranging from mild to severe occurred in 44/108 pregnancies (9/42 in controls). CMT worsened in 7 pregnancies (6 patients) with no recovery in 5 instances. Prenatal diagnosis was performed in 8/108 pregnancies. Satisfaction related to surgical procedures for foot deformities, assessed with VAS (score 0-10), was 6.4±3.5 (n=110). Repeat surgery was required in 9/72 instances. Sleep: the Epworth Sleepiness Scale questionnaire revealed abnormalities of sleep in 44/142 CMT patients (31%) and in 5/30 controls (17%). Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (range 0-21, 0 good sleep): most CMT subjects (123/138; mean 9.1±3.2), but also controls (27/30; 8.6±2.9) are not good sleepers. Fatigue: scores of Modified-Fatigue Impact Scale (range 0-82, 0 no fatigue) were higher for CMT (mean 33±18.2) than controls (mean 16.6±12.5). Hospital Scale for Anxiety and Depression: 63/138 CMT subjects had mild-to-severe anxiety and 35/138 mild-to-severe depression as compared to 7/29 and 4/29 controls, respectively. Data analysis on orthotics and anesthesia is ongoing. Conclusion: The first data analyses confirm that there are problems related to all the five domains explored, that will need to be specifically addressed in patients' care. Disclosure: Supported by Telethon-UILDM grant GUP13006. On behalf of the Italian CMT Network Z. Peric Background and aims: For early diagnosis of diabetic neuropathy (DN) different methods with various levels of sensitivity and specificity were used and they were often not satisfactory. Methods: In 45 patients with diabetes type 1 (DM1) without clinical signs of neuropathy (experimental group-EG) and 45 healthy subjects (control group-CG), we registered motor (MCV) and sensory (SCV) conduction velocity (in m/s) in different segments of median nerve (MN) (on the hand, forearm and upper arm). In the serum of DM1 patients titer of anti-insulin antibodies was determined by Elisa method. Statistical analysis was done by using SPSS software (t-test, Pearson two-tail correlation study). Results: In EG we registered significant lower MCV NM values in the hand -the middle third of forearm segment compared to CG (44.78±7.83 vs 64.65±6.93; p<0.05) and significant lower SCV NM values in the middle third of forearm -distal third upper arm segment in EG versus CG (45.92±9.74 vs 72.37±9.12; p<0.05). We registered significant correlation (p<0.05) between MCV NM in the hand -the middle third of forearm segment values and the titer of anti-insulin antibodies. Conclusion: The determination of MCV NM values in the hand -the middle third of forearm segment at diabetics type1 without clinical signs of neuropathy is fast and simple method for early diagnosis of DN. Besides, titer of antiinsulin antibodies has some role in complex pathogenesis of DN at DM1 patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background: Diabetes mellitus (DM) is an increasing global epidemic, type 2 diabetes (T2DM) comprises the majority of diabetics, and associated diabetic polyneuropathy (DPN) is its most common and disabling complication. Microcirculatory dysfunctions in DM are of pivotal importance for the development of diabetic complications. Aim: to evaluate microcirculatory and thermoregulatory disorders in patients with T2DM and DPN. Methods: Fifty five T2DM subjects met the case definition for DPN and were included into research together with 46 sex and age matched healthy controls. The nutritious skin vessels were investigated by nailfold videocapillaroscopy and the big tiptoe skin blood flow was measured at baseline and during axon-mediated reactive hyperemia responses to cutaneous heating (44 degrees Celsius) followed by relative cooling to 32 degrees Celsius by laser Doppler flowmetry (LDF). Results: Reduced capillary density and spastic capillaries were found in the prevailing part of the patients (89%) while the baseline LDF perfusions were higher in T2DM. The heat-and cold-induced perfusion responses were attenuated, the hyperemic peak was significantly reduced in the patients compared with the controls. The vasodilator heat-induced perfusion indices were lower and the vasoconstrictor perfusion indices during relative cooling were higher in DPN patients in relation to healthy subjects (p<0.0001). Conclusion: The combination of T2DM and polyneuropathy is associated with a decreased number of nutritious skin vessels and capillary spasm, an increased thermoregulatory skin blood flow at rest and reduced axon-reflex mediated heat-induced cutaneous vasodilation in the feet. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2225 Diagnostic validity of sympathetic skin response in small-fibre neuropathy E. Vlckova, I. Srotova, J. Bednarik Background and aims: Sympathetic skin response (SSR) is a simple and widely available test of sudomotor functions. The afferent part of this polysynaptic reflex is variable, while small unmyelinated C-fibres comprise the efferent part of its arch. The aim of the study was to evaluate the diagnostic validity of SSR in patients with sensory smallfibre neuropathy. Methods: SSR was recorded from the palms and soles of 69 patients with painful sensory neuropathy (33 of them with pure SFN and 36 with mixed small and large nervefibre dysfunction) using electrical stimulation and inspiratory gasp stimuli. Small nerve-fibre affection had been confirmed by reduced intraepidermal nerve-fibre densities (IENFD) in skin biopsy samples in all cases. Further, 89 healthy controls were examined and agestratified normal limits for amplitudes, latencies and reproducibility of response were established based on the results. Results: The latencies of SSRs and their amplitudes were of very low diagnostic validity in sensory neuropathy patients. In fact, the absence of an SSR response proved the most reliable abnormality. However, using just this parameter, dysfunction of small autonomic nerve-fibres was disclosed in only in a small proportion of our sensory neuropathy patients: its sensitivity did not exceed 10% in pure SFN patients or 33% in those with mixed small and large nerve-fibre dysfunction (where more pronounced small sensory nerve-fibre affection had already been established in terms of IENFD values). Conclusion: In view of its demonstrably low sensitivity, SSR should not be used as the only test when seeking to confirm sensory small-fibre neuropathy. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2226 Crohn's disease and polyneuropathy E. Kararizou, P. Voskou, E. Anagnostou, G. Papadimas, P. Davaki Background and aims: Aim of the present study was to establish the clinical, electrophysiological and pathological features of neuropathy in patients with Crohn's disease (CD). Methods: Biopsy specimens were obtained from over 700 sural nerves biopsies. The selection of patients was done according to the criteria for the diagnosis of CD. Complete laboratory, clinical electrophysiological and pathological studies were performed in all cases. Results: We found nerve biopsies of 4 patients with neuropathy and CD. The pattern of neuropathy was distal symmetrical sensorimotor polyneuropathy, while the pathological findings showed demyelination with predominant axonal degeneration and a varying pattern of myelinated fiber loss with no vasculitic changes. Conclusion: There is association of polyneuropathy and CD and it is important to recognize it in the early stage because remission depends on immunosuppressive therapy. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Background and aims: Thoracic outlet syndrome (TOS) is a more unknown and rare entity, of polymorphous and misleading clinical presentation. A Meticulously electrophysiological study involving the study of the internal cutaneous brachial nerve (C8-D1) is essential. We report the clinical and etiological aspects of the (TOS) in its amyotrophic form; underline the interest of the study of the internal brachial nerve brains (BCI). Methods: Prospective analysis of the clinical, electrophysiological and etiological aspects of nine observations of (TOS) for 7 women and 2 men, aged from 18 to 61 with an average age of 41 years. Results: The paresthesias of the hand and the forearm with heaviness and amyotrophy of the hand were noted in all our patients. At the Electromyogram (EMG) there was a decrease in the amplitudes of the motor potentials of the median and ulnar nerves. The sensory potentials of the median nerve were normal, those of the ulnar nerve decreased and there was an alteration of the sensory potential of the BCI. In 3 patients an apophysomegaly, 5 cervical ribs and 1 patient associating the two anomalies. At angioscanner an aberrant subclavian artery (1 case). There will be a discrete improvement post-surgery. Conclusion: The syndrome of the DCTB is difficult to diagnose based on clinical arguments confronted by a meticulous ENMG study especially before the amyotrophic forms. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2228 Clinical characteristics of patients with chronic axonal neuropathy with and without gluten sensitivity P. Zis 1 , D.G. Rao 2 , P. Sarrigiannis 3 , M. Hadjivassiliou 1 1 Neurology, University of Sheffield and Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 2 Neurophysiology, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 3 Neurophysiology, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom Background and aims: After cerebellar ataxia, peripheral neuropathy (PN) is the second commonest neurological manifestation of gluten sensitivity. We compared the clinical characteristics between PN patients with and without gluten sensitivity (GS). Methods: Between January 2016 and December 2016 all consecutive patients attending a specialist clinic that focuses on gluten and idiopathic neuropathies, were invited to participate. All patients were examined clinically and neurophysiologically. Pain was assessed via the DN4 questionnaire and the visual analogue scale (VAS). Overall Neuropathy Limitations Scale (ONLS) was used to assess the severity of neuropathy. Results: Of the 102 PN patients recruited, 76 (74.5%) had sensorimotor axonal neuropathy, 25 (24.5%) had sensory ganglionopathy and 1 (1.0%) had mononeuritis multiplex. Fifty-one patients (50%) had GS (positive serological markers for GS). Fifteen patients (14.7%) reported pain as the first symptom of their neuropathy. Prevalence of pain was 60.8%. The two groups did not differ significantly regarding age, gender, presence of pain, type and severity of neuropathy. Patients with GS reported less intense pain (VAS 6.8±2.3 versus 8.3±1.0, p<0.01). Total DN4 scores did not differ between the two groups. Patients with GS reported numbness whereas patients without GS reported tingling to be the commonest neuropathic feature accompanying their pain. Conclusion: Although pain is similarly prevalent between patients with gluten neuropathy and those with idiopathic neuropathy, gluten neuropathy appears to be a less painful. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Sleep disorders 2 EP2229 Evolution of sleep abnormalities in a patient with anti-Lgi1 antibody associated autoimmune encephalitis. T. Kelderman, M. Sprengers, P.A. Boon, S. Hödl, A. Meurs Background: A 53-year-old man was referred to us for lateonset epilepsy with recurrent generalized tonic-clonic seizures. By the time of referral, he also complained of restless sleep with continuous irregular limb movements, vivid dreams, hypersomnolence, hyperhydrosis, mild progressive cognitive decline and increased emotionality. He experienced episodes with altered taste and smell and/or bilateral piloerection, and episodes with sudden motor unrest (often rising from prone/sitting position), staring, orofacial automatisms and/or confusion during 1-5 seconds. Symptoms first appeared 2 months prior to referral, shortly after resection of a melanoma (pT1a). Methods: Neurological examination showed multifocal myoclonus, but was otherwise normal. Brain imaging was unremarkable. CSF analysis showed mildly elevated protein. Antibody testing in plasma and CSF was positive for anti-leucine-rich glioma-inactivated 1 (Lgi1) but not for anti-Caspr2 antibodies. Continuous EEG during episodes with smell/taste sensations did not show epileptiform abnormalities. EMG confirmed the presence of myoclonus, but showed no signs of neuromyotonia. Neuropsychological evaluation showed frontal involvement (attention deficits, slowed information processing speed). Polysomnography showed severe sleep fragmentation and absence of deep NREM and REM-sleep. Screening for malignancy was negative. Treatment with corticosteroids, plasmapheresis and azathioprine resulted in resolution of symptoms. On follow-up polysomnography, sleep fragmentation was resolved but sleep architecture remained disturbed with a sudden onset REM period and decreased amount of deep sleep. We describe a case of anti-Lgi1 antibody associated autoimmune encephalitis, with symptoms closely resembling Morvan's syndrome, but without myotonia. Treatment response in autoimmune encephalitis is variable, and signs and symptoms may persist or recur. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Previous studies suggest that patients with sleep disordes have higher risk of autonomic nervous system (ANS) dysfunction. The aim of this study was to correlate ANS parameters with overnight polysomnography (PSG) features. Methods: In this cross-sectional study 47 consecutive patients (25 men, mean age 48.23±16.09 years) who underwent overnight polysomnography were recruited (19 patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS), 28 non-OSAS subjects). They all underwent PSG and standardized batttery of ANS testing, including blood pressure and heart rate response to Valsalva maneuver, deep breathing test and head up tilt table test. Adrenergic and cardiovagal scores of the Composite Autonomic Scoring Scale (CASS) were determined. Results: RESULTS: Out of 47 subjects, interpretation of both cardiovagal and adrenergic CASS score was available for 40 subjects, 42.5% had CASS cardiovagal score ≥ 1, 52.5% had CASS adrenergic score ≥ 1. Negative correlation was found between CASS cardiovagal score and total sleep time (rs= -0.368, p=0.020). Positive correlation was found between CASS cardiovagal score and sleep latency (rs= 0.445, p=0.004). Oxygen saturation was found to have a negative correlation with CASS cardiovagal score (rs=-0.379, p=0.027). Positive correlation was found between CASS cardiovagal score and desaturation index per hour (rs=0.393, p=0.022). CASS adrenergic score did not show significant correlation with any PSG parameters. Conclusion: CONCLUSION: The results of this study are suggesting that parasympathetic nervous system dysfunction is associated with impaired sleep structure (sleep latency and total sleep time) and oxygen saturation. Background and aims: Catathrenia is a rare sleep disorder that affects young adults characterised by expiratory groaning during sleep, preceded by a deep inspiration which occurs specially during REM phases. Since its original description, there have been few cases reported. Patients are normally unaware but typically bed partners are troubled, often deriving in social problems. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) and surgery have been proposed as treatment. Mandibular advancement devices (MADs) have never been used before. Methods: We studied the clinical course, polysomnogram (PSG), spirometric findings and outcomes after the treatment of eight patients with a diagnosis of catathrenia at our center. Results: We included eight patients (5 men, 3 women) with a mean age at diagnosis of 28.6±4.9 years (range 22-38 years). The chief complaint was noises during sleep (62,5%), disturbances to bed partner (25%) and bad sleep quality (50%). All the patients referred that it was a nightly problem. The number of catathrenia events (single or cluster) during overnight PSG varied between 8 and 24 per patient (mean 14.8). Their exhalation and sound duration range was 23s -423 s. CPAP treatment was proposed for two of the patients. One patient had Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA), showing an improvement in his sleep quality. The other patient had significantly fewer events of groaning with CPAP and improved her sleep quality. We proposed treatment with a MAD to one patient, without improvement. Catathrenia's cluster. Conclusion: Catathrenia patients may benefit from CPAP, specially those with coexistence of OSA. In our experience, MAD was not an effective treatment. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Chronic primary insomnia (CPI) is a highly prevalent sleep disorder in subjects >50 years of age and related to psychological distress. As both sleep deprivation and increased stress susceptibility have been shown to represent risk factors for neurodegeneration, CPI patients may be subject to a higher probability for developing progressive cognitive impairment. In fact, in patients with CPI, lower sleep quality has been found to be associated with hippocampal atrophy and cognitive decline. Similar brain and cognitive changes prevail in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), who bear an increased risk for developing dementia. Our own previous work in MCI patients, applying the conceptual framework of the 'theory of visual attention' (TVA), has identified an elevated perceptual threshold in comparison to age-matched healthy participants in a whole report task. Methods: In the present study we assessed a sample of 16 CPI patients and and sex matched controls with TVA-based whole report to test the hypothesis that CPI patients also show a significant increase of the perceptual threshold. Results: Compared to a healthy control group, we found no significant differences with respect to TVA-based parameters of processing capacity. However, within the patient group, the perceptual threshold values were significantly related to the subjective evaluation of insomnia severity (ISI questionnaire). Also, higher threshold values in CPI patients were significantly correlated to polysomnography indices, i.e. sleep efficiency index, and arousal index. Conclusion: TVA-based assessment of visual processing capacity may be able to identify CPI patients with an increased risk for cognitive decline. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2235 Narcolepsy with cataplexy in a patient with anti-Hu antibodies Background and aims: Type 1 narcolepsy (NT1) is a central hypersomnia due to the loss of hypocretin-producing neurons of a likely autoimmune etiology. 'Symptomatic' forms have been rarely described. Methods: A 85-year-old male, heavy smoker and with many cardiovascular risks factors, was admitted because of a six-months history of subacute onset of behavioral change, excessive daytime sleepiness, generalized weakness, and episodes of loss of muscle tone in the limbs and slurred speech, triggered by emotions. Neurological examination revealed subcontinuous fluctuations in muscle tone with ptosis, facial grimaces, muscle sagging of upper limbs and generalized hypotonia. Polysomnography and multiple sleep latency test documented, respectively, disrupted nocturnal sleep with REM sleep behavior disorder and 5/5 sleep-onset REM sleep periods with pathologically sleep latency. Polygraphic recordings documented cataplectic status. HLA typing was negative for HLA-DR15-DQB1*0602 antigens. Paraneoplastic screening disclosed a serum positivity of anti-neuronal nuclear antibody, type 1 (anti Hu), while the analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid revealed decreased hypocretin-1 level (146,83 pg/mL). Total CT scans finally showed a hilar-perhilar lesion in the right lung that displayed hyperfixation at the whole-body fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET). Chest CT scan with hilar-perihilar lesion in the right lung; 18F-FDG PET with hyperfixation of nodular formation Results: A diagnosis of symptomatic narcolepsy with cataplexy in presence of anti-Hu antibodies and lung cancer was made. A symptomatic treatment with modafinil, sodium oxybate and venlafaxine was started, with only partial clinical benefit. Conclusion: This is the first report of symptomatic narcolepsy with cataplexy in patient with positivity of anti-Hu antibodies. Atypical age, subacute onset and cataplexy severity point to a the secondary nature of the symptoms. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP2236 Cancelled Background and aims: Cardiac diseases are common poststroke and are associated with increased morbidity and mortality. One possible mechanism of acute cardiac injury is the neurogenic myocardial damage, where the cerebral injury is disturbing the normal sympathetic and parasympathetic neuronal outflow to the heart leading to cardiac damage including myocardial infarctions. A consequence of an increased sympathetic activity is an exaggerated norepinephrine efflux from cardiac sympathetic nerve terminals into the myocardial interstitium with prolonged opening of the ß1-adrenergic receptor-controlled calcium channels. Abnormal intracellular Ca2±handling, leads to mitochondrial dysfunction, presumably mediated by the pro cell death protein BNIP3, and generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). The exact mechanism is not completely understood and the major objective of this project is to characterize the molecular phenotype of the neurogenic myocardial damage post-stroke. Methods: Our data demonstrate acute myocardial damage in wild-type mice after right-sided transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO). Results: Notably, the size of myocardial damage correlated with the brain infarct volume and triggered a ~4-fold elevation of troponin t levels that were detectable 20 h after stroke. Similar effects were found using the ß1-adrenergic receptor stimulator isoproterenol, an established model of heart failure. Following either cerebral stroke or isoproterenol treatment, higher levels of BNIP3, cardiac troponin t, ANP, BNP and norepinephrine were found in blood and heart samples at distinct time points. Conclusion: We found expression of the pro cell death protein BNIP3 in the heart after cerebral ischemia and we will further investigate the role of BNIP3 in mediating neurogenic cardiac damage. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: There is poor data concerning clinical profile and prognosis of ischemic stroke (IS) in patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) from North Africa. We attempted to estimate characteristics in demographic and clinical features, risk factors and short-term outcome of IS patients with and without AF from Tunisian population. Methods: A prospective study was conducted from February to May 2015 at Habib Bourguiba Hospital (Sfax, Tunisia) including all first acute stroke patients (≥18 years). Patients with AF (group 1) and without AF (group 2) were analyzed for demographic characteristics, stroke risk factors, clinical characteristics, location of infarct and prognosis. Results: Two hundred patients were enrolled. Out of 200, 152 had IS. Forty-nine (32.23%) patients had AF (nonvalvular AF: 93.78%). There were significant differences seen in age (group1: 73.61±14.22 years versus group 2: 67.03±13.94 years; p=0.008) and gender (group 1: men 48.98%/ women 51.02% versus group 2 men 67%/women 33%; p=0.03). Risk factors such as diabetes (18.36% versus 42.71%, p=0.03) and active smoking (32.65% versus 49.51%, p=0.05) were less prevalent in patients with AF. The mean of initial NIHSS was significant (group 1:12.67 vs group 2: 8.60; p=0.003). Extensive middle cerebral artery infarction were more significant in group 1 (26.53% vs 10.37%). Patients with AF had poor outcome at one month (mean Functional Independence Measure score: 75.29 vs 92.13; p =0.029). Conclusion: In our population, the frequency of nonvalvular AF is quite high. These patients had less risk factors but poor outcome at one month. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Epileptic seizures are common complication after stroke, devided into early seizures, which occur in the first fourteen days, and late ones which occur more than fourteen days after stroke. The aim of the research is to determine the relationship between the early and late seizures, and the influence of comorbidity on seizures. Methods: The research is retrospective and includes patients with poststroke seizures who were hospitalized at the Clinic of Neurology in Novi Sad, in the period from 2013. to 2016. year. Results: The research included 54 patients with poststroke seizures, half were male, half female, mean age 64,4±4,5 years. 36 (67%) patients had ischemic, and 18 (33%) patients had hemorrhagic stroke. Generalized seizures had 36 (67%) patients, focal seizures had18 (33%) patients, while 2 patients had status epilepticus. In the group of patients with ischemic stroke late seizures were more common, while in the group of patients with intracranial hemorrhage early seizures were more often, which was statistically significant (p=0.04). Patients with cardioembolic stroke were more likely to have generalized seizures (p=0.048). Early attacks were more often registered in patients suffering from anemia and in group of smokers. Conclusion: Age, gender, size and localization of morphological lesions do not significantly affect the type of seizures after stroke. Intracranial hemorrhage is often followed by early seizure, while ishemic stroke is accompaned by late seizures. Generalized seizures are more common in patients with cardioembolic stroke. Early attacks usually occur on first day after stroke. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Antithrombin III (ATIII) is a protease that inhibits coagulation by neutralizing thrombin activity. ATIII deficiency is a rare condition and an uncommon cause of stroke. Methods: Case report Results: A 24-year-old left-handed woman was admitted to the neurology department due to a sudden onset of speech impairment and mild weakness of her left arm. She had been on Acenocoumarol treatment for 6 years due to recurrent episodes of deep venous thrombosis. The anticoagulant medication was discontinued 10 days prior to the stroke. Her neurological examination revealed mild left central facial and left arm weakness and anarthria with normal comprehension and writing. Oral apraxia was present and the patient was unable to follow the instructions to protrude her tongue, whistle or puff out her cheeks. Spontaneous movements of the tongue, lips and jaw were intact. The patient was also unable to voluntarily swallow saliva. However, pharyngeal and esophageal phases of swallowing were preserved. Limb apraxia was absent. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed a right insular cortex and frontal operculum infarction. The patient`s ATIII activity was decreased in two independent measurements (39.7% and 31%), while protein S (75.4%), protein C (113%), APC-R (2.31) and LAC (1.2) showed normal values. Limb weakness, speech, swallowing and oral praxia gradually recovered during the following weeks. The patient was treated with low molecular weight heparin, followed by Warfarin. Genetic testing is ongoing. Conclusion: The incidence of thrombotic events, including stroke, is increased in ATIII deficient patients. This condition requires treatment with anticoagulant medication. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Background and aims: Ischemic stroke is one of the most sociologically important diseases and its linking with obstructive sleep apnea has been discussed throughout the recent years. Most of the data has come from many summary, cross, meta analyses which have shown a definite link between the two conditions. We present a localised study on acute stroke patients with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), its treatment with CPAP or BPAP, and clinical outcome and follow up. Methods: Detailed patient history, including sociodemographics; somatic and neurological status; asessment of concomitant diseases and treatment; stroke severity; OSA severity asessment; respiratory poligraphy and/or polisomnography; CPAP/BPAP treatment, patient follow up. Results: 30 patients have been fully analysed including follow up. They were divided into several common groups -patients that started CPAP/BPAP treatment during hospital stay, patients starting treatment after hospital discharge, patients without therapy, patients with treatment only in the acute phase. All but one of the patients had newly diagnosed stroke and sleep apnea. 2 patients required BPAP therapy while all others had CPAP therapy initiated. We found a close relation to sleep apnea and stroke severity -those with a higher NIHSS score had severe OSA (marked by a high AHI) in most cases. Patients undergoing OSA treatment show a better clinical outcome on follow up but time of treatment initiation didn't show any influence on outcome. Conclusion: Sleep apnea is a known risk factor for the development of stroke, but also a known consequence. Treatment of OSA following stroke shows a significant profit for clincal outcome. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3008 Intravenous thrombolysis in minor ischaemic stroke -do the octogenarians worse? S. Ostry, M. Nevsímalova, M. Reiser Dept. of Neurology, Hospital České Budějovice, a.s., České Budejovice, Czech Republic Background and aims: Minor ischaemic stroke (MIS) is not unanimously defined yet. Benefit of Intravenous thrombolysis (IVT) in MIS is not clear in general. Benefit of IVT in MIS in the elderly, is matter of discussion. Aim of the study: Safety and benefit of IVT in patients over 80 years comparing to younger ones. Methods: Prospectively and consecutively enrolled cohort in period 1/2014 to 9/2016. Inclusion criteria: MIS (defined as NIHSS 0-4), onset ≤ 4,5h or unknown, prestroke performance modified Rankin scale (mRS) 0-2. Exclusion criteria: haemorrhagic stroke. Cohort was split into two groups: "elderly" (means ≥ 80 years old) and "<80". Outcome: 3 month after stroke per mRS; symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage (sICH). Results: Cohort comprised 177 patients. Group "elderly": 30 patients, 13 males (43.3%), mean age 84.0±3.15 years; OTT: 130.1±46.9, unknown onset: 3 (10.0%), DNT 36.9±21.0. Group "<80": 147 patients, 84 males (54.7%), mean age 65.9±9.8 years; OTT: 131.5±63.7, unknown onset: 19 (12.8%), DNT 40.2±20.1. Admission status and clinical outcome see tables 1-2. Excellent clinical outcome (mRS 0-1) in "elderly" and "<80"were 66.7% and 76.5% respectively, and sICH: 1 (3.3%) and 2 (1.3%) respectively. Bleeding is a significant complication of anticoagulant and antiplatelet medications. With the growing use of acupuncture and the potential concomitant use of such medications, studies on the safety of acupuncture are necessary. The objective of this study was to evaluate the safety of acupuncture for patients taking warfarin or antiplatelet medications by comparing the rate of side effects for patients who did not take either of these medications. The medical records were searched to identify patients who had received acupuncture treatments at Stroke and Neurological Disorders Center, Kyung Hee University Hospital at Gangdong. Prescribed medications were identified from medical records and each patient was allocated to one of three groups based on the medication they were taking. Group A were taking warfarin, group B were taking antiplatelet medications but not warfarin, group C took neither warfarin nor antiplatelet medications and acted as a control group. Potential side effects that could be attributed to of acupuncture were identified. Results: A total of 242 patients and 4891 acupuncture treatments were identified. No patients experienced serious adverse events such as extensive bleeding. The occurrence rate of microbleeding (bleeding which stopped within 30 s) was 4.8% for group A, 0.9% for group B and 3.0% for group C. Conclusion: Acupuncture treatment appears safe even for patients taking warfarin or antiplatelet medications. Largescale, well-designed studies are needed to confirm these results. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Agenesis of the internal carotid artery (ICA) (uni o bilateral) is a rare congenital anomaly, occurring in less than 0.01% of the population. The term absence has been chosen to encompass agenesis, aplasia and hypoplasia of the ICA. Agenesis is use when both, the artery and the carotid canal are absent. It may be asymptomatic or produce symptoms due to vascular insufficiency. Methods: A 57-year-old female with a history of longstanding bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, hyper gonadotropic hypogonadism and hypothyroidism presented during the last month non-progressive blurry vision and headache. The neuro-ophthalmological examination was normal. Results: MRI was performed, showing no brain, brainstem or cerebellar findings. The MR angiogram revealed bilateral agenesis of the ICA with supply to the anterior circulation via carotidvertebrobasilar anastomoses, accomplished through hypertrophy of the PCOM (posterior communication). The absence of both carotid canals on a skull base CT scan confirmed the bilateral carotid agenesis.  The diagnosis of this anomaly has an important implication in thromboembolic disease, and in the surveillance and detection of associated cerebral aneurysms (approximately 35%). Associations with congenital malformations in different organs have been described, like anomalies in the hypothalamic -pituitary axis and PHACE syndrome. The cerebral angiography, MR angiogram and the CT scan and are powerful diagnostic tools in these patients, and also in their follow up. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Patients with wake-up stroke have traditionally been considered ineligible for intravenous thrombolytic treatment. Tenecteplase has pharmacological advantages over alteplase, and can be given as a bolus. We are doing a pragmatic, CT-based, randomised-controlled, open trial of tenecteplase for patients with wake-up stroke; the Tenecteplase in Wake-up Ischaemic Stroke Trial (TWIST). Methods: Patients with wake-up stroke<4.5 hours and without evidence of large infarct or proximal artery occlusion will be randomised to tenecteplase 0.25 mg/kg plus standard care or standard care alone. Plain brain CT and CT angiography will be done before randomisation and repeated on day 2. CT perfusion will be done at selected centres. Follow-up will be done at discharge (or day 7) and by telephone at 3 months. The primary effect variable is functional outcome at 3 months, measured by the modified Rankin Scale. Results: The target is to include 500 patients from centres in Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Estonia, Lithuania, UK, Ireland and Switzerland. Start of patient inclusion: January 2017. Planned study period: two years. Study questions to be answered: 1. Can thrombolytic treatment with tenecteplase within 4.5 hours of wake-up improve functional outcome at 3 months? 2. Can findings on CT angiography or CT perfusion identify patients who benefit from such treatment, compared to patients without such findings? Conclusion: TWIST will show whether patients with wake-Background and aims: Management of patients with supratentorial intracerebral hemorrhage (SICH) remains controversial. Some studies showed that selected patients may benefit from large decompressive craniectomy (DC), instead of craniotomy with hematoma evacuation. Our aim is to describe our population and compare outcomes of both surgical techniques. Methods: Retrospective analysis of clinical records from patients admitted at our center with SICH between January 2006 and October 2016 that underwent surgery. T-student and chi-square tests were used to compare continuous and categorical variables. Shift analysis was applied to compare outcomes of both surgical groups. Results: 42 SICH patients (29 men, mean age 52) were operated, 10 of which underwent DC in addition to hematoma evacuation. There were no differences between groups regarding vascular risk factors, anticoagulation, baseline blood pressure or GCS score, hematoma location, intraventricular rupture or pre-op midline deviation, bleeding etiology, surgical reintervention or complications. The group requiring DC had lower alcohol abuse (0% vs. 32%, p=0.05), lower INR (1.1 vs. 2.2, p=0 .041) and lower HASBLED score (0.6 vs. 1.6%, p=0.011). Shift analysis of mRS score and GOS score at 12 months revealed a worse outcome for DC patients (p=0.055 and p=0.061). Conclusion: Our work shows that most SICH patients were not elected for DC and the small number of patients in this group is a limitation of the study. Since patients were not randomly assigned to the procedures, one must be cautious when interpreting the worse functional outcome of DC patients, since they might have a worse pre-op prognosis. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose is rare and it usually results from atherosclerotic disease; however it can also be influenced by the inflammatory process, related with higher mortality rates. Methods: Diagnostic evaluation and short-term follow-up of a patient admitted in neurology department. Results: An 86-year-old Portuguese man was admitted in neurology department with imbalance on walking, recurrent vomiting, progressive clinical deterioration, prostration and severe weight loss, beginning three months ago. Neurological exam revealed temporal and spatial disorientation without impairment of other higher functions, cranial nerves or muscle strength. Patient was unable to walk due to postural instability. Temporal artery pulses were present and symmetric, with no pain or induration on palpation. Many diagnostic examinations were performed: blood tests revealed normocytic normochromic anemia and high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (86 mm/h); CT scan showed subacute bilateral cerebellar infarction; cervical and transcranial doppler ultrasound showed BVAO with diffuse wall thickening suggestive of arteritis; Angio-MRI confirmed vertebral artery occlusion and peripheral concentric linear capture, supporting an inflammatory process in the artery wall. Temporal artery biopsy confirmed GCA. General condition and neurological deficits have gradually improved after early administration of corticotherapy. Bilateral cerebellar infarction (T2 FLAIR) Left: non-filling of vertebral arteries; Right: peripheral concentric linear capture. A few cases of BVAO in the context of GCA are described; however causality between these two entities cannot be demonstrated easily. In this case report, the findings suggestive of inflammation in the artery wall support that vasculitis is the main pathogenic mechanism of occlusion and consequent bilateral cerebellar infarction. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3017 Cancelled EP3018 Intracerebral haemorrhage and the role of the inflammatory response M. Seabra 1 , A. Soares 2 , F. Costa 3 , S. Fonseca 4 , T. Parreira 5 , E. Azevedo 6 , P. Castro 7 Background and aims: Spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage (sICH) has been linked to a systemic inflammatory and stress response, translated by hyperglycaemia and increased neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR). We determined if these factors affect the prognosis. Methods: From September to December 2014 we evaluated all the patients admitted to our centre with sICH. Clinical, laboratorial and radiological features were analysed to assess the influence in outcome, defined by mortality at 30 days and functional independence at 90 days (modified Rankin Scale (mRS) ≤2). Results: We included 51 patients. The mortality rate was 40% and 74% had mRS>2 at 90 days. Higher mortality and long term dependence were associated with low Glasgow Coma Scale score at entrance (both p<0.001), higher systolic blood pressure (respectively p=0.008 and 0.005), glucose level (both p=0.001), NLR (p=0.132 and 0.008), larger haematoma (p<0.001 and 0.082) and intraventricular blood (p=0.07 and 0.021). In a multivariate logistic regression model, hyperglycaemia (beta=1.02, IC95% 1.01 -1.05, p=0.019) and NLR (beta=1.49, IC95% 1.01 -1.79, p=0.046) were predictors of poor outcome at 90 days, but not mortality (p>0.05). Conclusion: The presence of high glucose level at admittance as well as increased NLR, a probable manifestation of stress response, were predictors of poor outcome in sICH. This could be new target for therapeutic intervention. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: The hyperdense artery sign on computed tomography is a surrogate of intraluminal thrombus. Clot density can be quantified by means of Hounsfield Units (HU). Here, we explored whether clot density in middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion is related to blood constituents and prestroke medication. Methods: We performed a retrospective review of patients with ischemic stroke admitted within 4.5 h of symptom onset. We assessed the site of MCA occlusion as well as density of the clot in 150 patients. The HU values for the clot were divided with contralateral MCA segment to yield relative HU ratio (rHU). Results: We found an inverse correlation of rHU with erythrocyte count (p<0.001). Patients on antiplatelets had a significantly higher rHU compared to patients without (p=0.024). Higher rHU was more likely with the use of antiplatelets (OR 4.24, p=0.036) . Erythrocyte (OR 0.18, p=0.003) , and thrombocyte counts (OR 0.99, p=0 .029) were associated with odds for more hypodense clots. Conclusion: Aspirin alters clot structure in vitro, resulting in the formation of clots with thicker fibbers and bigger pores, which subsequently allows better entanglement of erythrocytes and raises the efficacy of thrombolysis. Our study disclosed an effect of antiplatelet therapy on the composition of intracranial clots in the setting of acute ischemic stroke in the anterior circulation. This finding may in part explain the higher success of thrombolyis and better prognosis ischemic stroke in patients on aspirin. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3020 Diagnosis challenges in Susac's syndrome: A case report K. Wiegler Beiruti, N. Simaan, M. Daitzchman, R. Shahien Neurology, Ziv Medical Center, Safed, Israel Background and aims: Susac's syndrome is a rare neurologic disorder mainly affecting young women aged 20-to 40 years. It consists of a clinical triad including encephalopathy, branch retinal artery occlusions and sensorineural hearing loss. Methods: We present a case of Susac's syndrome with an atypical delay in symptoms development. Results: A 41-year-old woman was admitted to the ED due to her acute confusional state. She suffered from sudden bilateral hearing loss and general weakness two days before. Past medical history revealed recurrent retinal artery occlusions in both eyes from 2005 to 2007. Neurological examination revealed a relative afferent pupil defect in right eye and bilateral hearing impairment. She was treated with predinisone and vitamin E without significant improvement. After an extensive investigation including clinical, laboratory and MRI findings including "snowball lesions" in the corpus callosum and periventricular hyperintense lesions, the patient was found to suffer from Susac's syndrome. She was treated with i.v. methylprednisolone. Slow and light improvements were observed. Conclusion: Patients suffering from SUSAC often present only part of the triad, and there is multisystemic involvement which imitates other more common neurologic disorders such as acute disseminated encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis. Our patient does not have at initial presentation all the classical features of the disease. About 10 years separate the first manifestations of the syndrome from the appearance of the other symptoms. MRI imaging characteristics specific to the disease allowed us to rule out of other clinical disorders and avoid delay in treatment. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: The apolipoprotein E gene (apoE) influences susceptibility to atherosclerosis. ApoE ε4 is independently associated with lobar intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) and it enhances amyloid deposition in blood vessels, while the ε2 allele predisposes to vasculopathic changes leading to rupture of amyloid laden vessels. Thus, one might expect ε4 and ε2 carriers to have increased susceptibility to ICH, especially in a lobar location. Aim: to study the impact of the different haplotypes in the outcome of thrombolysis, namely in the development of symptomatic ICH (sICH), recanalization, functional outcome and mortality. Methods: We included 385 consecutive ischemic stroke patients submitted to recombinant tissue plasminogen activator treatment between January-2011 and March-2015. Admission CT-scans were reviewed to calculate ARWMC, Edema and ASPECTS scores. Patients were followed for up to at least 6 months post-stroke or until death. Outcome measures included evaluation of recanalization on the first 24hours (transcranial color coded Doppler or angio-CT), sICH and assessment of functional outcome at 3 months after stroke (using modified Rankin scale). Results: Peripheral artery disease, higher uric acid and HDL levels were associated with the presence of at least one ε2 allele. In multivariate analysis, ε2 allele predicts mortality (HR: 1.907, [1.119,3.248] ,p=0.018). Considering radiologic measures, ε2 allele predicts ARWMC (OR: 2.093, [1.095,4 .006],p=0.026). The main findings of our study is the relationship of apoE ε2 with white matter changes and with a higher mortality rate. No association was found between with either allele and the predefined thrombolysis outcomes. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Conclusion: Efficacy and safety of low-dose rtPA were comparable to standard-dose rtPA. Due to the small number of patients, the results of this exploratory study cannot be generalized and need to be confirmed in a larger stroke population. However, it appears feasible to consider using low-dose rtPA in frail stroke subjects. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Background and aims: Carotid endarterectomy (CEA) is an effective treatment for symptomatic and asymptomatic patients with high-grade extra cranial carotid stenosis. However, its efficacy is dependent also by the maintaining of the arterial patency. Even if restenosis after CEA is uncommon, its occurrence could increase the risk of cerebrovascular accidents. The cause of this condition could be related with miointimal hyperplasia also sustained by atherosclerotic process. Homocysteine has been identified as a potential risk factor for atherosclerosis. For this reason, we conducted a meta-analysis to investigate the association between homocysteine levels and the risk of restenosis after CEA Methods: We performed a literature search in the three main databases (PUBMED/MEDLINE, EMBASE, COCHRANE). We identified 4 main trials investigating the role of homocysteinemia as risk factor for carotid restenosis. We perfomed a meta-analysis using Hedges g statistic as a formulation for the standardized mean difference under the fixed effects model. Results: A total of 562 patients were included in the analysis (116 with carotid restenosis -19% of total). We did not observe a statistical association between homocysteine levels and the risk of carotid restenosis after CEA (SE for fixed effects: 0.112; p: 0.708). Test for heterogeneity showed a Q: 5.12 with I2of 61% (p: 0.07). Conclusion: Hyperhomocysteinemia did not represent a risk factor for early restenosis after CEA. However, further studies with standardized methodology of laboratory tests and radiological evaluation of restenosis degree are required. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3030 New approach to evaluation of stroke risk: Modification of social predictors A. Volosovets, A. Zozulya, I. Zozulya Background and aims: The strategy of prevention of stroke is based on the detection and correction of stroke risk factors. However, descriptions of external (or social) risk factors of stroke are poorly presented in scientific researches and publications, although they play a significant role in the autoregulation of cerebral circulation. Our objective is to study the spectrum of social risk factors and their impact on the incidence of different subtypes of cerebral ischemic stroke. Methods: We have examined 140 patients with ischemic stroke (average age -65.2±8.7 years) using clinical and instrumental methods, laboratory examination and detailed clinical and anamnestic survey. 45 patients without stroke (average age -63.3±3.1 years) were included in control group. Among known social predictors of development of cerebral ischemia we discover 7 risk factors with higher incidence and use them to evaluate risk of cerebral stroke with help of specialized social risk of stroke scale (SSRS). Results: Adequate correction of predictors has resulted in 13.5% of decreasing of risk of stroke incidence (2 years of observation). The incidence of lacunar stroke was tied with excessive stress, high nocturnal activity, long-term work with monitors and irregular meals. Atherothrombotic stroke was connected with excessive stress, sleep disturbance, reduced physical activity, irregular meals and smoke and alcohol addiction. Cardioembolic stroke subtype was associated with excessive stress, smoking and irregular meals. Neurology, Prasat Neurological Institute, Bangkok, Thailand, 2 Interventional Neuroradiology unit, Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand, 3 Neurology, Ramkamhang Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand Background and aims: Mechanical thrombectomy is now the advance treatment in acute large vessel occlusion. The complications after thrombectomy are variety. Methods: We purpose an interesting case of direct caroticocavernous fistula (CCF) after thrombectomy. Results: Case: A 76 years old man presented with sudden left hemiparesis for 3 hours. He was administrated with intravenous thrombolysis but clinical not improved. The MRA brain showed right proximal M1 occlusion. Then, he was sent to mechanical thrombectomy using stent retriever for 3 times. Control angiogram showed complete recanalization of right M1 (TICI 3) and small tear vessel at right internal carotid artery (ICA) and right cavernous sinus with blood flow drained to right inferior petrosal vein, right sphenoparietal sinus but not seen drained in ophthalmic vein, so called direct CCF. We decided to observe this CCF and clinical of stroke. His clinical improved, power motor from grade 0 to grade 3. He stayed in hospital for 2 weeks with no clinical of direct CCF. Two months later, he developed the clinical of direct CCF with proptosis, chemosis, limit extraocular muscle movement and ophthalmic bruit at right eye. He was sent to transvenous embolization using fiber coils at right cavernous sinus. Twenty-four hours after procedure, his clinical of direct CCF significantly improved and turn to normal within 2 weeks. Conclusion: Direct CCF is a rare complication from mechanical thrombectomy that endovascular devices injured the cavernous segment of ICA. It can be treated by transvenous coil embolization or transarterial detachable balloon embolization. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Neurosurgery, Tainan Municipal Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan, Chinese Taipei, 2 Registered professional nurse, Department of Surgery, Tainan Municipal Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan, Chinese Taipei Background and aims: The purpose of this study was to investigate the factors affecting the functional outcome in patients after surgically treated putaminal hemorrhages. Surgery for putaminal hemorrhages remains a controversial issue. Although numerous reports describe conflictive results regarding short-term outcome of surgically treated patients, very little is known about their long-term functional outcome. Methods: We evaluated the data of 58 patients who underwent open surgical evacuation of putaminal hematomas admitted to a metropolitan hospital in southern Taiwan from January 2009 to December 2015. Patients were categorized into 2 groups based on their modified Rankin Scale (mRS) after 6 months from onset. Various presumptive prognostic factors were analyzed to investigate relationships between various clinical characteristics and outcomes. Results: Of the enrolled patients, 11(19%) showed a mRS of 0-3, and were categorized as the good outcome group, while another 47(81%) patients showed a mRS of 4-6 and were categorized as the poor outcome group. (Table 1 ) By univariate analyses, poor outcome was associated with old age, poor initial GCS score, volume of parenchymal hematoma, presence of intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH), hydrocephalus and modified intracerebral hemorrhage (MICH) score. By multivariate analysis, among the factors above, old age and MICH score were independent prognostic factors for poor outcome  Expanding neuroradiological spectrum of Rubinstein Taybi syndrome: report of a case W. Boadu, G. Sechi, G.A. Deiana, N. Murdeu, E. Nako, G. Pilurzi, D.G. Corda Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy Background and aims: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a rare genetic disorder mainly caused by heterozygous mutations of the CREBBP (cAMP-response element binding protein) gene (16p 13.3). RTS is characterized by growth retardation, facial and limb dysmorphies and microcephaly with neurocognitive dysfunction. Epilepsy occurs in about 25% of cases. Brain MRI abnormalities are reported in a variable percentage of patients, involving corpus callosum, posterior periventricular white matter and posterior fossa; rarely, gyration abnormalities such as pachygyria and polymicrogyria have been reported. We report a case of a patient with an MRI pattern of bilateral superior temporal gyrus cortical dysplasia. Methods: A 22-year-old was diagnosed with RTS at the age of 4 based on typical dysmorphies: broad thumbs and big toes, downward slanting palpebral fissures, microcephaly. Severe mental retardation, autism, hypoacusia and hypotonia were also noted on the neurological examination. Pharmacoresistant partial and generalized seizures started at 2 years. Results: Sequencing of CREBBP gene revealed a de novo mutation in exon 27 (substitution c.4508A>T, p. Tyr1503Phe). Brain MRI with gadolinium performed at 6 years documented poor grey-white matter differentiation and abnormal gyral anatomy with hyperintensity of the subcortical white matter at the superior temporal gyri bilaterally (double ECHO). The corpus callosum was normal. We were not able to find in literature the peculiar cerebral malformation we found in our patient. Conclusion: The causal mutation impairs transcriptional regulation by damaging, in particular, neurogenesis and differentiation of the cortical neural progenitor cells. We think that cortical dysmorphologies in RTS are more frequent than expected based on literature reports. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3040 Intranasal oxytocin administration reduces memory, anxiety and depressionrelated deficits in a valproic acid-induced perinatal model of autism R. Lefter 1 , A. Ciobica 2 , M. Padurariu 2 , I. Antioch 3 , I. Balmus 3 , R. Dobrin 4 1 SOP HRD/159 /1.5/S/133675 Project, Romanian Academy, Iasi, Romania, 2 Iasi, Romania, 3 UAIC, Iasi, Romania, 4 UMF Iasi, Iasi, Romania Background and aims: Lately there is an increased interest for the beneficial effect of the intranasal oxytocin in the neuropsychiatric disorders, including autism. Also, one important animal model of autism in rodents is based on the perinatal administration of valproic acid. Thus, we studied the relevance of intranasal oxytocin administration in this valproic acid-induced rat model of autism, as tested on some behavioural tasks relevant for memory, anxiety or depression-like manifestations. Methods: The model of autism was induced through the intraperitoneally administration of valproic acid (500mg/ kg) in the 12.5 day of gestation. The offspring were weaned on postnatal day 21 and after that male animals (n=15) received intranasally administrated oxytocin (Sygma) for 10 consecutive days (20IU), while controls received intranasal saline (3 groups: control, valproic acid and valproic acid+intranasal oxytocin). Memory functions were tested through Y-maze, anxiety behaviour through elevatedplus-maze, while depression was analyzed through the forced-swim-task, during the last 3 days of treatment (days 8, 9 and 10). Results: We showed an increased in the immediate working memory (e.g.spontaneous alternation behavior) in the valproic acid+intranasal oxytocin group, as compared to valproic acid alone in the Y-maze test. Moreover, the time spent in the open arms of the elevated-plus-maze and the mobility time in the forced-swim-test were increased in the valproic acid+intransal oxytocin group, as compared to valproic acid alone rats, suggesting facilitatory effects in anxiety and depression-related behaviours. Conclusion: 10 days of intranasal oxytocin administration in a valproic acid-induced rat model of autism seems to reduce some associated memory, anxiety and depressionrelated deficits. Disclosure: This work is supported by a PN-II-RU-TE-2014-4-1886 grant called "A complex study regarding the relevance of oxytocin administration in some animal models of neuropsychiatric disorders", number 120 from 01/10/2015. Background and aims: Acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ANE) is a rare disorder presenting with rapidly progressing encephalopathy, usually preceded by a virus-associated febrile illness. While most cases are sporadic and nonrecurrent, familial recurrent ANE due to mutations in the Ran Binding Protein 2 (RANBP2) gene have been recently reported. Methods: We report the clinical course of a Portuguese child with recurrent ANE. Results: A 4-year-old boy, with a previous history of encephalopathy due to ANE at the age of 5-months with residual language domain deficit and right motor hemiparesis, developed reduced consciousness and seizures following a febrile respiratory infection. Seizures were refractory to first and second antiepileptic drugs and he was sedated with midazolam. His EEG revealed mild background slowing and left temporal slow waves. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed symmetric multifocal lesions involving bilateral thalami, brainstem, cerebellum and external capsules, consistent with ANE. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed mildly elevated protein concentration and oligoclonal bands. Remaining investigation identified a positive polymerase chain reaction for human herpesvirus 7 (HHV-7) in CSF and influenza A H1N1 in bronchoalveolar lavage. He was treated with oseltamivir and high-dose steroid therapy followed by oral tapering. He recovered gradually with no de novo deficits. There was no family history of ANE. Genetic testing identified a missense mutation p.Thr585Met in the RANBP2 gene. Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of recurrent ANE in Portugal. This report emphasizes the need for increased awareness and earlier recognition, since prophylaxis and symptomatic management of infections may be beneficial. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Neurology, Neurosurgery and Medical Genetics, Stavropol State Medical University, Stavropol, Russian Federation, 2 Propedeutics of Pediatric Diseases, Stavropol State Medical University, Stavropol, Russian Federation, 3 Neurology, Stavropol state medical university, Stavropol, Russian Federation Background and aims: Early diagnosis and timely adequate causal and pathogenetic treatment reduces the risk of severe consequences of infectious diseases of the brain. The study of etiological structure of encephalitis presented an interest. Methods: We conducted dynamic observation of 66 patients (2 months-16 years) with encephalitis. Conducted direct microscopic, bacteriological, mycological study of CSF biological material. Results: It is established that serious infectious diseases of brain tissue were caused both by bacterial and viral monoinfection and associated pathogens. Viral encephalitis was detected in 45 (68.2%) patients. Among patients with established etiology, predominance of monoinfection was observed (90%) over mixed infection. In mixed infection the pathological process was caused by a combination of herpes simplex virus enterovirus, cytomegalovirus. Monoinfection was caused by enterovirus (44.4%), herpes simplex virus (37%), the virus Varicella Zoster (14,8%), cytomegalovirus (3.7%). In 28.9% of cases occurring with involvement of the meninges (unknown etiology and enterovirus). Bacterial encephalitis (31.8%) in 100% of cases proceeded with meninges invovement. In 52.4% of cases monoinfection of H. infl., Str. pneum was observed, in 28.6%-mixed infection (bacterial-fungal, viral-bacterial, including-Mycobacterium tuberculosis), 19% -of unidentified etiology. Among patients with bacterial encephalitis rural areas prevailed. Patients with encephalitis of unknown etiology received at different times from the onset of the disease, which had an impact on the verification of the etiological diagnosis. To improve the quality of etiologic diagnosis it is necessary to organize early hospitalization of patients with suspected neuroinfection in specialized hospitals of the Regional center. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose A. Potic 1 , D. Di Bella 2 , E. Salsano 2 , F. Taroni 2 1 Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 2 IRCCS Foundation, "C. Besta" Neurological Institute, Milan, Italy Background and aims: Migraine is the most common recurrent headache in children and young adults. Little is known about the comorbidity of migraine and inherited white matter disorders. We investigated the accidental detection of leukodystrophies among patients with migraine. Methods: The study comprised 400 patients referred to our Centres over the last six years because of the chronic recurrent headaches. The age of the patients ranged from 5-25 years. In all the patients the headache was the only presenting symptom at admission. Neurologic and neuroophthalmologic examination, psychological evaluation, evoked potentials, and radiological studies (CT, MRI, and MRA) were performed in all the subjects. Some underwent also further investigations: metabolic, cardiac, endocrine, and genetic analyses. Results: In 270 out of the 400 studied patients the headache fulfilled the required diagnostic criteria for a migraine. Of note, among the 270 migraineurs the leukodystrophies were diagnosed in 5 patients (1. 85% of the examined migraineurs): Alexander Disease (a 15-year-old male), X-linked Adrenoleukodystrophy (a 24-year-old male), Vanishing White Matter Disease (two females: age 21 years, and 25 years), Pol III-related Leukodystrophy (a 9-year-old male). In the absence of neurologic abnormalities, the neuroimaging and genetic findings revealed the proper diagnosis. The observed interval between the onset of migraine and distinctive clinical features of the leukodystrophies was 1-4 years. Conclusion: Migraine may precede the typical neurologic signs of leukodystrophies. In patients presenting solely with chronic recurrent headaches, MRI of the brain and genetic analyses can identify a leukodystrophy months/years before the onset of overt leukodystrophy-related symptoms. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3044 Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma as a rare cause of lumbar pain in a pediatric patient: a case report. K. Prus 1 , J. Barycki 1 , A. Szewczyk 1 , E. Zienkiewicz 2 , B. Golebiowska 2 , K. Mitosek Szewczyk 1 1 Neurologiy, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland, 2 Neurology, Children's University Hospital, Lublin, Poland Background and aims: Prevalence of low back pain in pediatric patients ranges widely from 9% to 66% depending on the source population and definition of pain. It has been accepted that back pain in children is connected with highly possible organic etiology. Researches have shown, that MRI may reveal presence of significant pathology in around 25% of cases. In patients with prolonged history of back pain and those presenting significant neurological examination findings, neuroimaging needs to be used at all times to exclude severe and life-threatening conditions that need immediate intervention. Methods: We present a case of 17-year-old female patient with a few weeks' history of back pain, headache and nonspecific bladder disturbances. No muscle weakness, deep tendon reflexes abnormalities or significant sensation disturbances were present. Results: A CT scan revealed a tumour mass originating in S1 and S2. MRI confirmed presence of unevenly contrastenhanced tumour, expanding into spinal canal and compressing dural sac. Patient was immediately admitted to an orthopedic department to perform laminectomy and tumour resection, followed by an adjuvant chemotherapy. Methods: Children with electroclinical criteria of EMA were retrospectively identified and followed-up with sleep and awake EEGs between April 1995 to July 2016 who visited four hospitals/epilepsy centers in Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates. Results: Ten patients who fulfilled the criteria for EMA were identified, 7 were females, and 3 were males. The age of onset was from 2 years and 4 months to 9 years. The manifestations of EMA included mild impairment of consciousness, rhythmic myoclonic jerks without evident tonic contraction of the upper extremities in 6 patients, and 2 cases presented with versive seizures with deviation of head and body to one side. A twin presented with continuous flutter of eyes and their EEGs showed consistently the phenomenon of fixation-off sensitivity ( Figure 1 ). The ictal EEG consisted of rhythmic, bilateral, synchronous and symmetrical ,3 Hz spike and wave discharges in all patients. Emirati twin II with eye lid myoclonia. Fixationoff sensitivity suspected when high-voltage bilateral occipital epileptiform discharges appeared when her eyes were held closed and persisted as long as her eyes were closed. Low-cut filter, 1.6 Hz; highcut filter, 70 Hz. Video EEG is consequently of paramount importance in the diagnosis of EMA, as the opinion of the author that the condition is underrecognized, at least in the Arab Gulf region, as Video EEG is not routinely applied for pediatric population with epilepsy. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3046 Cancelled EP3047 Autonomic cardiac control system response to walking task and executive cognitive task in children with acquired brain injury and typically developed controls G. Sorek 1 , S. Shaklai 2 , Y. Fadida 3 , M. Tel Aviv university, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2 Child Rehabilitation, Loewenstein Rehabilitation Hospital, Raanana, Israel, 3 Physical Therapy, Loewenstein Rehabilitation Hospita, Raanana, Israel, 4 Tel Aviv, Israel Background and aims: Children with acquired brain injury (ABI) present dysfunction in a range of physical executive cognitive as well as cardiac autonomic control system (CACS) dysfunctions. Aim: To examine the CACS response to an executive task, to walking, and to a combined walking and executive task in children with ABI and typically developed (TD) controls. Methods: 17 children (11-18 years) with ABI, in an active rehabilitation process and had independent walking capability. The control group consisted of 18 age and gender-matched TD children. A Polar RS800CX device was used for assessing heart-rate-variability (HRV), walking endurance assessed by the Six-Minute-Walk-test and executive cognitive function was assessed using the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function questionnaire. The study includes four trials: A five-minute walk on a treadmill set at the average speed measured in the 6MW test, a cognitive manipulation using the Digit Span Backward test at rest, while walking on the treadmill, and during the recovery period post-walking on the treadmill. Results: Children with ABI presented higher heart rate and lower HRV measures at rest (P-value<0.01). A significant interaction effect was found between the groups; walking on the treadmill has a significant smaller effects on HRV parameters in children with ABI as compared to controls (F2,64=7.9, p<0.001). Interaction effect of cognitive and walking on treadmill task on HR and HRV was noted with no significant between groups effect. Conclusion: ABI associated with reduce CACS activity at rest and during and after walking training. Performing cognitive task during walking training may modify these differences.  Background and aims: Comatose Cardiac Arrest (CA) survivors frequently develop early myoclonus, viewed as a poor prognostic sign (status myoclonus); however, a small subset may present precocious Lance-Adams syndrome (LAS); they can markedly improve with treatment. Our aim was to review these patients, focusing on pharmacologic management in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU), time to awakening, and long-term prognosis. Methods: From our prospective CA registry over 10 years (2006 to 2016), we retrospectively indentified adult patients with precocious LAS (defined as generalized myoclonus within 7 days with epileptiform EEG within 48 hours after CA). Functional outcome was assessed through Cerebral Performance Categories (CPC) at three months, CPC 1-2 defined good outcome. Results: We identified 458 patients, 7 of them (1.5%) developed precocious LAS (4 women, median age 57 years). Within 72 hours after CA, normothermia and off sedation, all had preserved brainstem reflexes, localized pain, and showed epileptiform activity and preserved background reactivity on early EEG. All received valproate, levetiracetam and clonazepam as first line; additionally, topiramate was prescribed in 4, pregabaline in 2, piracetam and perampanel in one each. Valproate serum levels were subtherapeutic in 5/6 tested patients, despite maximal doses. Patients started to show awareness after 3-23 days (median 12); at the three months 3/7 had a good outcome. Conclusion: Precocious LAS needs to be diagnosed and treated soon, because patients may reach a good functional outcome. A combination of highly dosed, mostly large spectrum antiepileptic agents is often necessary. Awakening may be delayed. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose 1 Neurology, Zagreb University Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia, 2 Neurology, University Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia Background and aims: Our goal was to assess the usefulness of the evoked potentials in the prediction of the outcome in severe hemorrhagic stroke patients. Methods: In 22 patients (13 men, mean age 61.95+/-11.63) with hemorrhagic stroke (19 intracerebral and 3 subarachnoid hemorrhage) within the 48 hours after admission to neurointensive care unit (NICU), brainstem auditory evoked potentials (BAEP) and somatosensory evoked potentials (mSSEP) of median nerve were performed in every patient. Glasgow Coma Score (GCS), Full Outline of Unresponsiveness (FOUR) were assessed on the arrival and on the day of release. Modified Rankin scale (mRS) was assessed on the day of release. Results: There was statistically significant negative correlation between GCS at the day of release and BAEP interlatency III-V for the left side (rs= -0.444, p=0.039). BAEP III amplitude for the left side positively correlated with GCS at release (rs=0.435, p=0.049). SSEP amplitude P14-N18 for the right side negatively correlated (rs=-0.453, p=0.034) with mRS at release. SSEP interlatency P14-N20 for the left side had a negative correlation with GCS at the day of recording (rs=-0.448,p=0.036), GCS at the release (rs=-0.542, p=0.009) and FOUR at release (rs=-0.505, p=0.017). SSEP amplitude P15-N20 positively correlated with GCS and FOUR at the day of recording (rs=0. 506, p=0.027; rs=0.563, p=0.015, respectively), and GCS and FOUR at release (rs=0.468, p=0.043; rs=0.583, p=0.009, respectively) , while negative correlation was found with mRS at release (rs=-0.457, p=0.049 We identified a total of 142 psychiatric inpatients which accounted for 2.2% of patients admitted to the NICU over the study period. The most common main psychiatric diagnoses (ICD-10) and reasons for admission are summarized in figure 1 and clinical details of the cohort are presented in table 1. Mean duration of stay was 6.5 days (range 1-55) and metabolic and hypoxic encephalopathies (62%) prevailed among patients with a stay beyond 10 days. Among the nine fatal cases (6%), four had been admitted after suicidal action (44%). The causes of death included cerebral hypoxia (n=6), multiple organ failure following intoxication, consequences of traumatic brain injury and respiratory insufficiency (n=1 each). Demographics and NICU parameters of psychiatric inpatients Conclusion: Our study of psychiatric inpatients requiring critical care disclosed a broad range of reasons for NICU admission and underlying mental and behavioral disorders. The duration of ICU care was usually less than 10 days and need for mechanical ventilation was infrequent. Mortality was in part the consequence of suicidal action. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3057 Diagnostic usefulness and outcome of 24-48 hours inpatient Diagnostic Video-EEG monitoring for cases with recent onset paroxysmal events. Background and aims: Inpatient long-term video-EEG Monitoring for Epilepsy(LTME) is widely used for patients with paroxysmal events(epileptic and non epileptic). The diagnostic usefulness varies considerably depending on patient selection and referral category-diagnosis, seizure classification and presurgical evaluation. The purpose of this study was to assess diagnostic usefulness and management decisions of LTME in patients with recent onset seizures (within the previous 12 months) and inconclusive standard investigations before LTME. Methods: We retrospectively reviewed data from 336 consecutive LTME-investigations over a 3-year referral period (January 2014-December 2016). There were 96(57males and 39 females) patients having inconclusive previous routine EEG and MRI studies. Patient ages ranged from 2 months to 74 years (0-14 yr:48, 15-74yr: 48) . Results: Mean duration of LTME was 1,14 days. The events in question were recorded in 40/96 (41%). Interictal epileptiform abnormalities were detected in 52/96 (54%). In 24/96 (25%) studies there were no events and no interictal epileptiform abnormalities recorded. A diagnosis of epilepsy was established in 59(62%), of Non-epileptic Events in 31(32%), and was uncertain in 6(6%). Considering all information, treatment and management modifications were implemented in 60 patients (63%). Conclusion: We conclude that the diagnostic yield of even short-lasting LTME studies is still considerable in the particularly challenging category of patients with new-onset suspected epilepsy and inconclusive standard diagnostic work-up. Information thus gained may suggest management and treatment changes in as many as 60% of investigated cases. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Gdansk, Gdańsk, Poland, 2 Developmental Neurology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland, 3 Developmental Neurology, Medical University Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland, 4 Gdansk, Poland Background and aims: In last years it becomes more and more evident that focal EEG changes can be detected in patients with idiopathic generalized epilepsies . The aim of the study was to estimate the frequency of focal interictal EEG abnormalities in pediatric patients with absence seizures (ASs) and to identify their clinical, EEG and semiological correlates Methods: Patients with typical absence seizures who were hospitalized or consulted at Dept. of Developmental Neurology between 2000 and 2015 were included in the study and followed prospectively. All patients underwent video-EEG monitoring at regular intervals. 149 patients who fulfilled criteria for typical absence seizures were included in the study. Results: In 15% of patients we found interictal epileptiform discharges, and in 31% intermittent fronto-temporal slow waves. We found significant correlation between presence of interictal focal epileptiform discharges and long term prognosis, but did not find the correlation between worse prognosis and presence of fronto-temporal interictal slow wave activity. Interestingly, we did not found correlation between presence of focal abnormalities and worse performance in cognitive tests. The presence of focal EEGchanges were associated more freqently with presence of automatisms. Conclusion: The value of focal interictal EEG abnormalities should not be overestimated acoording to prognosis and cognitive performance in children with typical absence seizures. The cautious EEG interpretation of focal changes in absance seizures is needed in order to prevent wrong diagnosis of focal epilepsy Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Background and aims: Status epilepticus (SE) is a sever expression of an acute brain insult or systemic disturbance wich leads to excessive hyperexcitation of brain. This study aims to determine the most common causes and outcomes in patients hospitalized with SE in a regional academic hospital. Methods: Over a 4-year period (Jan 1, 2012 to Dec 30, 2016) all patients older than 18 years with SE were included. The ethiology, and outcome under Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS) in 156 patients with SE (convulsive or nonconvulsive), have been reviewed. Results: The most common cause of SE was nonadherence with antiepileptic drugs (nAED) and this accounted in 67.3% of the patients with previous seizures and in 32.7% of all the patients. The other causes in our series were alcohol-withdrawal, cerebrovascular disease, cerebral tumors or trauma, infection, metabolic disorders, anoxia. SE was never the initial manifestation of further epilepsy. 92.3% of patients developed generalized tonic-clonic SE and only 3 (1.92%) patients presented with nonconvulsive SE. A poor GOS outcome of SE was correlated with cerebral infarction and increased age, low mortality rates were noted in alcohol and nAED etiologies. Conclusion: Cerebrovascular disease and nAED were the most prominent causes of SE in this study. Low incidence of non-convulsive SE requires a better clinical evaluation and continuous EEG monitoring in suspected cases. GOS scores and etiology SE showed a better outcome in patients with nAED and unfavorable outcomes in elderly patients and those with acute brain injury such as stroke or cerebral anoxia. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3060 Deep brain stimulation in adult-onset Rasmussen with disabling dystonia. C. Painous Martí 1 , M. Martí 2 , J. Rumià 2 , F. Valldeoriola 2 , N. Bargalló 2 , T. Boget 2 , L. Pintor 2 , X. Setoain 2 , E. Bailles 2 , L. Guio 1 , F. Gil 2 , A. Donaire 2 , M. Carreño 2 1 Barcelona, Spain, 2 Hospital Clínic Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain Background and aims: Rasmussen's syndrome (RS) is a progressive inflammatory disease that involves one cerebral hemisphere and causes neurological deterioration and seizures. Rare cases of adults with RS and movement disorders have been described. We report an unusual case of adult RS with disabling focal dystonia and excellent response to contralateral pallidal stimulation. Methods: The patient is a 40-year-old female suffering from focal persylvian epilepsy since the age of 22. Seizures consisted of left hemiface paresthesias and tonic position of the left arm. Initially neurological examination and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were normal. At 38 she developed pain and abnormal dystonic posturing of the left leg two weeks after a motor vehicle accident. Lab tests for secondary dystonia were normal. MRI showed atrophy of the right cerebral hemisphere, predominantly in the insula and frontotemporal cortex, and decreased volume of right caudate nucleus. PET scan showed hympometabolism of right frontal and insular areas. Brain biopsy showed chronic encephalitis consistent with RS. Seizures remained under control with a combination of antiepileptic drugs but the dystonia increased in severity in spite of multiple immunomodulatory and antidystonic drugs. The patient was offered pallidal stimulation, which was performed eight years after onset of the dystonia. Results: The abnormal movement has significantly improved and the patient is now able to stand and walk alone. Conclusion: This case expands the clinical spectrum of movement disorders in adult RS. To our knowledge, this is the first case of disabling dystonia in adult RS treated with GPi-DBS, with good outcome. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3061 Unusual ictal features in temporal lobe epilepsy I. Rosário Marques 1 , I. Pappalardo 2 , C. Pastori 2 , A. Dominese 2 , G. Didato 2 , F. Villani 2 Background and aims: Temporal Lobe Epilepsy (TLE) is the commonest form of location-related epilepsy. The ictal manifestations of TLE are typically quite stereotyped -it usually presents with recurrent complex focal seizures, often preceded by vegetative auras. However, unusual semiologic features have been described, rendering the localization of the epileptic discharge less straightforward. Results: Case reports: Four drug-resistant epileptic patients (aged between 15 and 42 years) with uncommon seizure descriptions completed Video-Electroencephalography monitoring (VEEG) for diagnostic and pre-surgical evaluation purposes. All had seizures during the VEEG, and detailed video analysis was performed. Patient One had two seizures with hypermotor bilateral leg movements and lefthand dystonic posturing. Patient Two had two seizures with echolalia and echopraxia, and late right-hand dystonic posturing. Patient Three had four abrupt-onset hypermotor seizures and one complex focal seizure. Patient Four had eleven seizures with urinary urge and upper limbs choreiform movements. Ictal electroencephalogram was compatible with temporal lobe origin. All patients had lesions located in the temporal lobe; two of them underwent anterior temporal lobectomy, both with favorable outcomes. The remaining patients are currently undertaking further pre-surgical investigation. Conclusion: Clinical semiology remains the starting point for the diagnosis and classification of epilepsy. It is equally invaluable for the determination of the seizure onset zone in surgical candidates. Nonetheless, although many semiologic features have high localizing value, each of them has also some potential to falsely localize. We present four patients whose ictal manifestations were unusual for TLE, reinforcing the importance of correlating clinical with EEG and imaging findings. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Barcelona, Spain, 2 Saragossa, Spain, 3 Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4 Neurology, Hospital Royo Villanova, Saragossa, Spain, 5 Neurology, Hospital General de la Defensa, Saragossa, Spain, 6 Hospital General de la Defensa, Saragossa, Spain, 7 Neurology, Hospital de Barbastro, Barbastro, Spain, 8 Hospital Vall Hebron, Barcelona, Spain Background and aims: Some studies in clinical experience with Perampanel (PER) suggest that patients taking fewer prior AEDs had a more favourable clinical response, however there are no series focused exclusively early use. Based on these data, we aimed to evaluate the use of PER as first add-on treatment in patents with focal epilepsy and idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE). Methods: We selected retrospectively with PER as first add-on from six Spanish centers. We collected demographics, type of epilepsy, concomitant treatment and we analysed the improvement of seizure frequency, the presence of adverse events (AEs) and the retention rate at 3 and 6 months. Results: 49 patients were evaluated. Mean age: 44.8 (17-76) years old. 31(63.3%) were male. 18(36.7%) were diagnosed as symptomatic focal epilepsy, 17(34.7%) as cryptogenic focal epilepsy, 9(18.4%) as IGE and 5 (10.2%) as undefined epilepsy. At 3 months follow-up: 38 (77.8%) showed efficacy, including 15 (30.6%) seizure-free and 32 (65.3%) with a seizure reduction>50%. 17 (34.7%) had AEs (5 fatigue/somnolence, 4 irritability, 8 dizziness). The median dose was 4 mg. The retention rate was 77.6%. At 6 months (n=37), PER was effective in 33 (89.2%) remaining 14 (37.8% seizure-free and 29 (59.2%) and with a reduction>50%. 11(29.7%) had AEs (3 fatigue/somnolence, 2 irritability, 2 dizziness, 1 anosmia). Retention rate was 89.2%. The median dose was 6 mg. Conclusion: In clinical practice, the adjunctive treatment with PER as first-add may lead to an improvement in seizures frequency. It seems a well tolerated a drug as addon with a low rate of AEs. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Background and aims: Cluster seizures (CS) are commonly observed among patients with drug resistant epilepsy or acute brain damage. However despite its occurrence, there was not indicated precisely prognostic factors or tools. The aim of this study was to determine a risk factors for poor outcome. Methods: We retrospectively reviewed 200 patients with CS in a 5-year period and considered all potential predictors of poor outcome for patients with continuous seizures. Unfavorable outcome was defined as a modified Rankin Score ≥5. A univariate and multivariate analysis was used to determine the predictors. Results: Mortality counted 20 cases (10%) of patients on analyzed cohort. The risk factors of death in univariate analysis included age (p<0.001), history of drug resistant epilepsy (p=0.03), acute (p=0.005) and idiopathic etiology (p=0.017), level of consciousness (p<0.001), seizure type (0.05) and seizure progressing to status epilepticus (p<0.001). Thereafther, independent predictors were definied as age (OR=0.1; years), acute etiology (OR=4.1), level of consciousness (OR=3.0) and seizure type (OR=3.2). Conclusion: CS patients are frequently overlooked in literature, however represent important population due to its mortality rates. Therefore indicated predictive factors should be considered within diagnostic/treatment procedures. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3064 Simple neurovascular reactivity in patients with idiopathic generalized epilepsy G. Tekgol Uzuner, N. Uzuner Neurology, Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Eskisehir, Turkey Background and aims: Simple neurovascular activation by transcranial Doppler (TCD) is not presented to date in drug responsive patients with idiopathic generalised epilepsy. The objective of this study is to assess the neurovascular activation to simple visual stimulation of patients with idiopathic generalised epilepsy during interictal period. Methods: Thirty-four patients with idiopathic generalised epilepsy at least ten days later after last epileptic attack and 14 healthy subjects were screened for this study in our Neurosonology Laboratory. We performed trans-temporal TCD recordings from the P2-segments of both posterior cerebral arteries (PCA) simultaneously during simple visual stimulation. The individual reactivity was defined as a relative increase of the blood flow velocities as a percentage change of the baseline values. Results: None of the patients has an epileptic focus on the brain documented by the MRI, nor EEG. The Doppler data of the patients and healthy subjects showed non-significant side difference, and therefore, were analysed 68 vessels in patients and 28 vessels in controls. The blood flow velocity during stimulation and simple visual reactivity were slightly lower in the patients (42.5 cm/s and 25.6%, respectively) from those of the controls (44.7 cm/s and 29.4%, respectively) (p=0.3 and p= 0.1, respectively). Conclusion: Our study showed the temporal and occipital region of brain perfused by PCA of the patients with idiopathic generalised epilepsy have normoactive neurones during the interictal period when comparing with the healthy subjects, or under appropriate antiepileptic treatment, neuronal hyperactivation could be successfully inhibited at least too weak stimulus likewise simple visual stimulation. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3065 Long-term follow-up of five cases with late-onset Rasmussen encephalitis in University Hospital Bratislava, Slovakia. Background and aims: RE is a rare disease. Most cases start in children under 10 years, about 10% of cases in adolescence or early adulthood. These cases are typical with slowlier course of disease. Methods: In University Hospital in Bratislava, Slovakia, we follow five patients with late onset of RE. 2/5 are women. Patients are 23 to 59 ys old, median 35ys.The patients suffered their first epileptic seizure between 6 and 30 ys of age, median 18. All 5 pts started with motor seizures. They suffered first epileptic state between 19-46ys, median 28y. Two of them presented with epilepsia partialis continua (EPC).Atrophy of the brain was verified in 4 of them. Two out of them presented with anti-GAD antibodies, three of them without detectable antibodies in the sera. Results: All patients were treated with immunomodifying therapy -intravenous immunoglobulins, plasmaexchange, azathioprin, rituximab, kortikosteroids in individualized regimens. In 4/5 the neurological deficit is still mild, with mild cognitive decline, but the epilepsy is the main problem. The diagnosis of RE was delayed 1-16 years from the first epileptic seizures, median 4 years. The brain hemiatrophy was verified in patients 4-14 years after first epileptic seizure. Conclusion: Late onset RE is extremelly rare. Due to its slowlier course, delay between first epileptic seizures and first epileptic state, it might be not recognized for many years. Immunotherapy of late onset RE is the treatment of the first choise. The hemispherectomy could be postponed. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3066 Epilepsia Partialis Continua in Creutzfeldt Jacob Disease S. Ufuk Ersoy 1 , G. Kutlu 2 1 Nicosia, Cyprus, 2 Ankara, Turkey Background and aims: Creutzfeldt-Jacob Disease is a progressive, degenerative disease of the central nervous system. It occurs as a result of prion protein deposition. Progressive dementia, myoclonus, cerebellar, pyramidal and extrapyramidal symptoms are characteristic for this disease. Methods: 57 years old male patient applied to emergency service with syptoidms of dementia, bizarre behaviours and continous unvoluntary contractions on the left arm. He was having calculation and memory problems for the last six months. And for the last four months he started to show psychiatric symtoms. At the same time unvoluntary movements on his left arm were seen. At another healt center, after a normal brain MRI scan he was putted on olanzapin and oxcarbamazepine. However his syptoms proceeded. He began to be very agitate and the unvoluntary contractions became worser. So his family brought him to emergency service. There he was diagnosed as encephalitis and interned to infection diseases department. However, his cerebrospinal fluid cultures did not show any evidence of infection. Later he was consultated to our neurolgy department because of these non-stop contractions on his left arm. His brain MRI scan showed bilateral basal ganglion intensity increase. There were PLEDS in his EEG. And 14.3.3 protein was positivi in his cerebrospinal fluid. With these finding he was diagnosed as Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease with epilepsia partialis continua. Results: In the literature, there are very Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease cases that have epilepsia partialis continua. Conclusion: We present this case to underlay that, at early stages of Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease focal motor seizures can be seen. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: The intracranial hypotension syndrome (IHS) is an entity whose main symptom is an intense headache that occurs or worsens with upright posture. The diagnosis is usually confirmed by demonstrating low cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) opening pressure, also supported by characteristic image findings in brain magnetic resonance (MR). To discuss whether lumbar puncture is indispensable or not, we describe a clinical case. Methods: Woman of 27 years old with 20 days of spontaneous orthostatic headache, exacerbated by Valsalva maneuver, and relieved by recumbency, associating nausea and vomits. There were no relevant findings in physical and neurological exam, ophtalmoscopy or brain computed tomography (CT). Results: Brain MR imaging detected descent of the hypothalamus, the optic chiasma and the cerebellar tonsil, important compression of the pons, and diffuse pachymeningeal enhancement. It also demonstrated a spinal meningeal diverticulum in D8-D9 that was the origin of the CSF leakage. After 33 days of postural treatment in Trendelemburg and caffeine, the patient presented spontaneous recovery. The diverticulum disappeared in the latest images. Conclusion: Spontaneous IHS with no signs of complication usually respond to conservative treatment. The fact that the lumbar puncture it is not a harmless test, but it can make the headache worse, contribute to cerebral herniation or even create a new fistula, made us consider if it is essential to performe it when the whole symptomatology and the brain MR images are compatible with the diagnosis. It is a good argument to start with conservative measures, not making any more invasive tests if they are effective. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3070 Early onset of efficacy with erenumab in a phase 2 clinical trial of subjects with chronic migraine (weeks 4, 8, 12) in a phase 2 clinical trial of chronic migraine (NCT02066415). Here, we evaluated efficacy prior to week 4. Methods: Post-hoc analyses evaluated achievement of ≥50% reduction in weekly migraine days (WMDs) and change from baseline in WMDs. P-values for these endpoints are based on odds ratios or mean differences from placebo, not adjusted for multiplicity. Also, to evaluate trends, a linear model was fitted to observed daily migraine days for days 1-7 (week 1), and pairwise comparisons of the slopes and moving averages were evaluated and overlaid with observed data. Results: Both erenumab dose groups had a greater proportion of patients achieving ≥50% reduction in WMDs by week 1; 26% for both doses vs 16% placebo (p≤0.011), increasing to 31%, 41%, and 21% in the 70mg, 140mg, and placebo groups, respectively, at week 2 (p≤0.011). At weeks 1-4, reductions from baseline in WMDs were observed with both doses vs placebo (p=0.047 at week 1 for 70mg and p≤0.002 at weeks 2-4 for both doses). Moreover, 7-day moving averages of observed data showed that each treatment arm differed from placebo within the first several days. On pairwise comparisons, slopes for 140mg differed from placebo by day 4 (p=0.03). By day 6, both doses differed from placebo (p≤0.03), but differences between doses were not detected (p=0.86). Conclusion: Erenumab showed early onset of efficacy, with separation from placebo within the first week. Disclosure: Funding for this study was provided by Amgen Inc. Background and aims: Eagle syndrome (ES) is defined as a symptomatic elongation of the styloid process or mineralization of the stylohyoid ligament. Classic ES, is seen after tonsillectomy or minor trauma. Pain is often felt on the angle of the mandible and may radiate to the ipsilateral ear. Patients also complain of dysfphagia, tinnitus, sensation of foreign body in the throat and otalgia. Impingement of close cranial nerves is thought to cause the pain. Diagnosis is based on clinical signs, digital palpation of styloid process in the tonsillar fossa, radiological findings, and Lidocaine infiltration test. Three dimensional CT is considered the Gold standard for the diagnosis of ES. Differential diagnosis includes GN. The negativity of first examination and no reaction to infiltration of corticosteroid in the hyoid area, made the diagnosis delayed. Methods: Clinical case report. Results: We report a 55-year-old woman who presented with a constant pain in the right side of the face close to the angle of mandible and sensation of foreign body in the throat on swallowing.Physical examination revealed no exacerbation of the pain by palpation of the right tonsillar fossa. Carbamacepine and Eslicarbacepine were useless. Corticosteroid infiltration of the hyoid process was negative. Computed tomography (CT) of the neck with threedimensional reconstruction showed elongation of the right styloid process. Surgery was proposed. Conclusion: ES may be confused with GN, like in our case. It´s a rare condition but not uncommon. We should keep in mind when managing refractory GN. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3072 Brain white matter and infarct-like lesions in primary headache: an Italian single centre study Background and aims: White matter lesions (WMLs) and infarct-like lesions (ILLs) are frequently detected with brain imaging techniques in patients suffering from headache, especially among migraineurs. The aim of the study was to evaluate the prevalence of WMLs and ILLs in an Italian cohort of patients with primary headache. Methods: This retrospective study collected data of patients admitted at the Headache Center of Perugia in 2012, undergoing MRI scan and diagnosed with a primary headache disorder. Patients were excluded in case of (i) secondary headache, (ii) major comorbidities and (iii) conditions associated with brain hyperintensities without migraine. Headache was classified following the 2nd ICHD revision. Brain MRI were performed on 1.5 T magnet device, with ILLs and WMLs being rated according to reported paradigms (Fig 1) . Background and aims: The spontaneous blink rate (SBR) is strongly modulated by dopamine (Karson et al., 1982) and by the occipital cortex (Karson et al., 1990) both of which also play a role in migraine pathophysiology (Charbit et al., 2010) . Photophobia is a phenotypic hallmark of migraine both during and between attacks. We searched therefore whether the SBR could be increased in migraineurs because of their sensitivity to light. Methods: We enrolled a total of 38 subjects: 7 healthy subjects (HS), 19 interictal episodic migraineurs (EM) and 10 ictal EM without prophylactic treatment. The SBR was measured in a lit room at a luminance intensity of 145 Lux or in almost total darkness, 12 Lux, using 2 electrodes placed on the orbicularis muscle of the right eye. Results: We found no difference between groups during lightened sessions. By contrast, in the dark the SBR was reduced in HS and in ictal EM, but not in interictal EM (p=0.05). The percentage SBR change between light and dark was -36.71±22% in HS, -18.7±34.74% in ictal EM and 1.9±43.98% [SD] in interictal EM. This change was significant in HS (p=0.017). We show that in migraine patients between attacks the SBR is not decreased in the dark like in healthy subjects or migraineurs during an attack. This could be due to an abnormal interictal control by dopamine and/or the occipital cortex that normalizes during the attack. Disclosure: Acknowledgement: this study was supported by FP7-EUROHEADPAIN no. 602633 Repetitive TMS over the primary motor cortex for prophylactic treatment of migraine Background and aims: Patients with chronic migraine (CM) have worse quality of life, increased headacherelated burden and worse psychiatric and medical comorbidities in comparison with patients with episodic migraine. We investigated the safety and efficacy of high frequency (HF) repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) in 40 patients with CM. Methods: All the patients were diagnosed with chronic migraine according to the criteria of IHS classification ICHD -3 beta. The stimulation protocol was HF rTMS (15 Hz, 70% of the motor threshold, 1200 pulses/session) over the primary motor cortex (M1) for 5 consecutive sessions. The patients kept a headache diary and were evaluated 30 days after the last session. We studied the change in the frequency of headache, symptomatic medication use, headache intensity measured with visual analogue scale and the result on Headache Impact Test -6 (HIT -6). For statistical analysis we used Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test. Results: In 77% of the patients we observed reduction of ≥ 50% of the number of migraine days; 78% had reduction of ≥ 50 of the number of days with acute medication use; 82% had reduction of migraine headache intensity; 85% had reduction of the overall headache intensity per month and 79% had clinically significant improvement in the HIT -6 score. There were no serious adverse events.  Background and aims: According to data of WHO Primary Headaches (PH) have both substantial burden on patients and their family life and consist serious social-economic problem. Aim of our study was investigation of prevalence of different types of PH (tension type, migraine, cluster and other cephalalgias) in patients under neurological control. Methods: 150 (113 women/ 37 men) patients with PH (migraine, tension type ad trigemino-autonomic cephalgia correspondingly) underwent special investigations including questionnaires, created correspondingly to diagnostic criteria and recommendations of International Headache Society, HIT-6, SF -36 questionnaires. Age of participants was 42±16 years. Results: Data analysis revealed that 90 patients (60%) has migraine, 47 (31%) tension type, 7 (5%) cluster headache, 4 (3%) paroxysmal hemicrania, 1 (1%) hemicrania continua and 1 (1%) SUNCT -syndrom. Main part of patients -91 patient (60%) was adressed to doctors (68 from which adressed to neurologists) previously and were misdiagnosed with other conditions. Therefore, previous treatment failed to heal the headaches. Conclusion: Our data shows some different distribution of PH types than international, in our opinion those are patients from the selected treated group, but not from general population. We conclude that is serious misdiagnosing and low awareness of all types of PH by many doctors. We need improvement in both education of medical specialists and patients, to improve both awareness and management of PH in the country. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Migraine is one of the most disabling neurological conditions worldwide. The purpose of this study was to characterize the incremental burden of migraine on quality of life (QoL), productivity, and healthcare resource utilization (HRU) by the frequency of migraine in adults using European data from the National Health and Wellness Survey (NHWS), a self-administered, internet-based questionnaire. Methods: A retrospective, cross-sectional analysis of responses from the 2016 NHWS was performed using data from the France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and UK (5EU). Adult NHWS respondents with a self-reported migraine diagnosis who completed the migraine module were matched by propensity scores to those without migraines (controls) using sociodemographic characteristics. Outcomes of interest analyzed were from EQ-5D, SF-36v2, HRU and the Work Productivity and Activity Impairment (WPAI-GH) questionnaires. Migraine respondents were stratified by frequency of migraines (headache days/month): 4-7 episodic migraine (EM), 8-14 EM, and chronic migraine (≥15; CM). Independent sample t-tests were used to determine significant differences between controls and the frequency of migraine groups. Results: Results from the propensity score matched analysis demonstrated that migraineurs reported statistically significant lower QoL and higher HRU as compared to their matched controls. Impairment while at work and total activity impairment was statistically significant higher among all migraineurs compared to matched controls (Table  1) . Table 1 Results on domains of health status, QOL and work productivity in migraine subgroups after propensity score matched analysis with non-migraine controls across 5EU Conclusion: Migraine is a chronic disorder negatively affecting multiple domains of individuals' lives. This study demonstrated that there is a statistically significant incremental burden due to migraine on QoL, HRU and work productivity amongst the migraineurs in comparison to matched controls. Disclosure: This study was sponsored by Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. A descriptive analysis of the burden of migraine based on self-reported migraine diary data using the Migraine Buddy application in Europe N. Paris 1 , P. Vo 2 , F. de Reydet de Vulpillieres 2 , J. Fang 3 , C. Naujoks 2 , A. Bilitou 4 , F. Everhard 2 , F. Cadiou 1 Impact of migraine on daily activities (Number and proportion of patients by subgroup reporting impact from migraine on daily activities is shown) Conclusion: This study highlights the high burden of migraine on HRQOL and overall well-being of individuals suffering from migraines. Disclosure: This study was sponsored by Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. Understanding the impact of migraine on work productivity using self-reported migraine diary data using the Migraine Buddy application in Europe Background and aims: The purpose of the study was to evaluate the impact of migraine on work productivity as perceived by individuals suffering from migraine in the real world using a self-reported smartphone application called Migraine-Buddy©. Methods: A retrospective, cross-sectional analysis was conducted using data captured through Migraine-Buddy© from adult, self-diagnosed migraineurs in 17 European countries. Data was analyzed for the most recent 28-day period reported by migraineurs during the study period June 2015-July 2016. Data from chronic migraine (CM: ≥15 headache days/month, N=900), 4-7 episodic migraine (EM) (n=1500) and 8-14 EM (n=1500) individuals were randomly selected based on data completeness (fill rates >70%). Descriptive analysis was performed. Results: A total of 10,347, 11,301 and 6,504 migraine records were retrieved from CM, 8-14 EM and 4-7 EM individuals, respectively corresponding to a total of 16,815, 14,398, and 7,693 migraine days. Among employed migraineurs (n=2,722) who declared `work` either as their migraine location or in 'affected activities' at least once, an average of 61.7, 31.6 and 18.4 work days missed per year were reported by CM (n=679), 8-14 EM (n=1084) and 4-7 EM (n=959) sufferers, respectively. The most commonly reported triggers of absenteeism-related migraines were psychological (38%), sleep (34%), nutrition (25%) and/or menstruation (23%). Employed sufferers reporting absenteeism recorded symptoms relating to pain/body, mood/cognition disturbances, environmental handicap and depression among others (Table 1) . Background and aims: To describe real-world management of Parkinson's disease (PD) with dopaminergic treatments and the influence of routinely used management strategies on clinical outcomes. The study was also part of a European Medicines Agency risk-management plan for the nonergoline dopamine agonist (DA) rotigotine, focusing on cardiovalvular fibrosis. Methods: SP0854 (NCT00599339) was a prospective, multicentre (10 countries), non-interventional postauthorisation safety study of rotigotine and other dopaminergics, conducted under standard medical practice. Patients requiring either monotherapy (rotigotine/other DAs/levodopa), or levodopa in combination with rotigotine/ other DA, were included and followed for ≤33 months. Baseline intended patient-ratio: 5:2:2:5:2 for "rotigotine", "other DA", "levodopa", "levodopa+rotigotine", "levodopa+other DA". Treatment modifications were allowed according to patients' needs. Primary safety objective: evaluation of cardiovalvular fibrosis. Primary efficacy variable: change from baseline in UPDRS-III (motor), assessed by treatment received at a particular postbaseline visit. Figure 1 ). Background and aims: The differential diagnosis of Parkinson's disease (PD) and multiple system atrophy (MSA) is difficult yet crucial. The aim of this study was to compare the neurophysiologic cardiac autonomic findings in these two degenerative diseases. Methods: Retrospective study (from January 2015 to December 2016) including patients diagnosed with PD or MSA who had clinical cardiac autonomic function tests carried out according to Ewing's battery. We assessed cardiac parasympathetic (Heart rate variation to deep breathing(HR-DB), to Valsalva(HR-V), heart rate response to standing(HR-S)) and sympathetic (sympathetic skin response(SSR)) autonomic system. Patients were graded as per Ewing's criteria into normal, early or definite autonomic dysfunction. Results: We collected 65 patients: 42PD and 23MSA (respectively: sex-ratio=2.8 and 0,8; dysautonomic complaints in 90.4%PD and 95.6%MSA). Neurophysiologic dysautomia was found respectively in 95.2% of PD and 100% of MSA. HR-DB was altered respectively in PD and MSA in 4.7% and 8.7% (mean variation=37 and 32.6), HR-V in 38% and 39% (mean variation=1.53 and 1.56) and HR-S in 78.5% and 82.6% (mean response=1.07 and 0.96). Parasympathetic dysautonomia was, respectively in PD and MSA, early in 66.6% and 47.8%, and definite in 26.2% and 43.5%. Sympathetic dysautonomia was associated in 16.6% in PD and 47.8% in MSA (p=0,009) and isolated in 2.4% of PD and 13% of MSA. Conclusion: Our study showed that neurophysiologic autonomic dysfunction was constant in MSA. The association of sympathetic and parasympathetic dysautonomia was significantly more suggestive of MSA rather than PD. Further studies on larger cohorts are required to confirm these findings. Background and aims: 'Advanced' Parkinson's disease (PD) patients are often treated at specialized movement disorder centres. However, the defining features of 'advanced' PD patients are not well understood. This study characterized the clinical and non-clinical features and treatments (including device-aided options) in PD patients considered 'advanced' by movement disorder specialists. Methods: A cross-sectional, observational study was conducted at 128 movement disorder centres in 18 countries. The primary outcome was the proportion of PD patients identified by their physician as 'advanced'. The clinical and non-clinical characteristics of 'advanced' and 'nonadvanced' patients were compared using descriptive statistics. Physicians' assessment of 'advanced' PD was compared to a Delphi-criteria-based classification. Results: According to the physicians' judgment, 51.3% (n=1342/2615) of PD patients were considered 'advanced', but this proportion varied regionally. A moderate correlation existed between the physician's judgment and the Delphiconsensus-based criteria for 'advanced' PD. 'Advanced' and 'non-advanced' patients were similar regarding age, gender, and living situation, but differed in terms of motor symptom severity (Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale [UPDRS] Part III score), motor fluctuations (UPDRS Part IV Q32 and Q39), non-motor symptoms (NMS) (NMS Scale total score), quality of life (8-item Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire total score) and caregiver support status (Table) . Of the 'advanced' patients 882/1342 (66%), Background and aims: To investigate whether a structured medication review (SMR) executed by community pharmacists leads to better quality of life (QoL) in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD). The secondary objectives are measurements of activities of daily life, presence of non-motor symptoms, disease perception and quality of life of personal caregivers. Background: Treatment of PD is symptomatic and frequently consists of complicated medication. This negatively influences therapy adherence, resulting in a substantial lower benefit of treatment and a decreased QoL. Little is known about the effects of a SMR on QoL and the feasibility of medication assessment within primary care. Methods: In this multicenter randomized controlled study, 108 PD-patients with ≥ four different medications and ≥ four different medication intake moments daily were included. The intervention consisted of a SMR performed by community pharmacists. Primary outcome was PD-specific QoL (PDQ-39). Measurements were performed at baseline, 3 and 6 months of follow up. Analyses were performed using linear mixed model repeated measurements analyses. Results: A total of 108 of the 200 patients were thus far included with a mean age of 74.2 years (SD±7.0), 8.2 (SD±2.8) different medications and 5.2 (SD±1.8) medication intake moments daily. After six months, there was no significant difference in overall score of the PDQ-39, although a clinically and statistically significant difference was found in the domain 'emotional well-being', in favour of the control group (Table 1) . In this interim analysis, QoL in PD-patients did not improve six months after performing a SMR executed by community pharmacists. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: APL-130277 (apomorphine) is administered sublingually and being studied for OFF episodes. The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the pharmacokinetics (PK) parameters of a single 15 mg dose of APL-130277 in healthy volunteers and compare the bioavailability between the formulation used in study CTH-105 and the scaled-up formulation. Methods: Twelve healthy male volunteers between 21 and 60 years inclusive were enrolled. All subjects received APL-130277 (CTH-105 formulation [drug-side facing up towards the tongue]), APL-130277 (scaled-up formulation [buffer-side facing up towards the tongue]), and APL-130277 (scaled-up formulation [drug-side facing up towards the tongue]) dosed on three separate days, crossed over with a 24-hour washout. PK assessments were evaluated from 0 to 12 hours post dosing. Subjects were pretreated with domperidone BID starting on Day -3. Study subjects and clinical staff members (except the staff member responsible for dosing) were blinded. Results: The PK parameters were similar between the two formulations [i.e., CTH-105 formulation and the scaled-up formulation, irrespective of the orientation of the film under the tongue] ( Table 1 ). The plasma apomorphine concentration was similar at all timepoints with the scaledup formulation, irrespective of the orientation of the film under the tongue (Figure 1 ). Background and aims: To characterize the effect of food on the pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD) of opicapone (OPC) after single and repeated doses. Methods: Two open-label studies were conducted: Study-1 was a 50mg OPC single-dose, 2-period, 2-sequence, crossover fast versus fed (high-fat and high-caloric meal) study in 12 healthy subjects; Study-2 was a 12-day fasting once-daily 50mg OPC single-arm study in 28 healthy subjects, for which on day 10 OPC was administered in the evening with a moderate meal. Results: In Study-1, following a 50mg OPC single-dose, the OPC rate and extent of absorption were significantly lower in the fed state compared to the fasted state (fed:fasted ratios of 31.73% for Cmax and 47.11% for AUCt). The tmax was also significantly increased by the presence of food. In Study-2, following once-daily 50mg OPC, the OPC rate and extent of absorption were significantly lower in the fed state (day 10) compared to the fasted state (day 9, fed:fasted ratios of 38.21% for Cmax and 68.70% for AUCt). The tmax was also significantly increased by the presence of food. However, despite AUEC being slightly higher (with upper limit of the 90%CI just outside the prespecified acceptance interval of 80-125%), following a moderate meal (day 10), Emax and the threshold of efficacy, i.e., every 24 hour effect (Emin) of COMT were not affected in a relevant way. Conclusion: Opicapone was safe and well tolerated and at steady-state, can be administered concomitantly with a moderate meal without affecting its COMT inhibition. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3094 Opicapone's bedtime regimen and the decision-making process Background and aims: To clarify the decision-making process for opicapone's bedtime regimen. Methods: Review of opicapone, levodopa, carbidopa and benserazide pharmacokinetic data. Five phase-1 studies were selected on the basis of concomitant, alone or 1-hour apart administration between oral single-doses of opicapone (25, 50 and 100mg) and immediate-(IR) or controlledrelease (CR) levodopa/carbidopa (LC, 100/25) or levodopa/ benserazide (LB, 100/25). Results: In studies conducted with IR/CR-LB concomitant administration, an increase in rate (Cmax) and extent (AUC) to levodopa and benserazide occurred at all doses of opicapone. The increase was statistically significant for IR formulation. Levodopa Cmax decreased when doses of opicapone increased. In studies conducted with IR/CR-LC concomitant administration, a statistically significant increase in Cmax and AUC to levodopa, but not to carbidopa, occurred at all doses of opicapone. Levodopa Cmax decreased (more pronounced with CR formulation) when doses of opicapone increased. Similar levodopa and carbidopa Cmax was observed when opicapone (50mg) was administered 1-hour apart from IR-LC. Opicapone´s systemic exposure increased in a dose-proportional manner but an important variability was observed between different levodopa formulations and the use of carbidopa/benserazide. Conclusion: The pharmacokinetic data suggest a certain degree of interaction at absorption phase that was minimized by separating both administrations for at least 1-hour. Opicapone was developed as an add-on to levodopa and, taking into consideration that Parkinson's disease patients may well necessitate several daily doses of levodopa, a bedtime regimen for opicapone was proposed to better allow the physician to individually tailor the levodopa daily regimen without any concern of a potential absorption interaction. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3097 Differentiation between Lewy body diseases and atypical parkinsonian syndromes using combined brain SPECTs Background and aims: Neuroimaging facilitates the differential diagnosis of movement disorders. We aimed to assess whether an automated analysis of combined dopamine transporter (DA) and perfusion single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) could discriminate patients with Lewy body diseases (LBD), including idiopathic Parkinson disease (PD) and diffuse Lewy body disease (DLB), and atypical parkinsonian syndromes (APS), including multiple system atrophy (MSA), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal syndrome (CBS). Methods: We examined consecutive 32 patients with LBD and 21 patients with APS. The clinical diagnosis of each disease was made based on published criteria without imaging data. Anatomical MRI was segmented into cortical and subcortical regions using an automated process. Then, 123I-ioflupane (123I-FP-CIT)-and 123I-iodoamphetamine (IMP)-SPECT data were coregistered onto the anatomical MRI in each patient using mutual information algorithm. DAT activity and regional perfusion in each brain region were extracted in each patient and submitted to a logistic regression analysis as independent variables. A stepwise procedure was used to select predictive variables that should be included in the model to differentiate LBD and APS. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was performed to measure diagnostic power. Results: The stepwise logistic regression analysis yielded three predictive variables; striatal DAT activity, the regional perfusion in the lenticular nucleus and midline frontal lobe. ROC analysis revealed that the area under the curve was 0.876 (sensitivity 84.4%, specificity 90.5%). Conclusion: An automated classification using combined dopamine transporter and perfusion SPECTs showed a high accuracy in distinguishing patients with LBD and APS without clinical information. Disclosure: This study was supported by by Nihon Medi-Physics Co., Ltd. The sponsor had no role in the study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of this report. A. Toth 1 , A. Csillik 1 , I. Szocs 1 , J. Kárpáti 1 , B. Melegh 2 , D. Bereczki 1 , A. Takats 1 Background and aims: Kennedy's disease (SBMA) is a rare, adult-onset, X-linked, recessive trinucleotide, neuromuscular disease, caused by expansion of a CAGtandem-repeat in exon 1 of the androgen-receptor (AR) gene on chromosome Xq11-12. Methods: Case report. Results: We present the case of a 72-year-old male patient who developed the symptoms of parkinsonism in 2011bilateral rigidity, bradykinesia, frequent falls with early postural instability -and five years later he developed the symptoms of Kennedy's disease. In 2014 progressive dysphagia has been formed and from 2016 bulbar and spinal symptoms have appeared (perioral and lingual tremor, fibrillation, weakness and wasting of facial, bulbar, glossal and upper limb muscles, fasciculation, dysarthria, dysphagia, reduced deep tendon reflexes). At the last clinical admission beside the symptoms mentioned above we observed gynecomastia in July 2016. The fast progression of the parkinsonism has to be mentioned. Considering the clinical data and electrophysiological results we thought of the possibility of Kennedy's disease. The genetic testing gave the final diagnosis: SBMA (CAGtandem-repeat number in exon 1 of the AR gene on chromosome Xq12: 44+/-1). Conclusion: This is one of the first reported cases of Kennedy's disease with parkinsonism. Another lesson of the case is severe progressive dysphagia may be the manifestation of a rare genetic disorder. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose (PD) . The relationship between regional brain atropy and FOG has been poorly investigated. Using Freesurfer software we tested whethear gray matter (GM) atrophy contributes to FOG in PD. Methods: We investigated 20 patients with PD, 10 with FOG and 10 without FOG, both groups of patients were assessed using FOG questionnaire, "Time up and go" test, Hoehn and Yahr staging. High resolution T1-weighted brain images were acquired for each subject using a 1.5T MRI scanner. Asurface-based method implemented in FreeSurfer was used to quantify GM atrophy. A vertex-wise and region of interest (ROI) two-sample t-test of normalized subject data was used to assess significant group differences. The analysis was controlled for age, gender and total intracranial volume. Results: Gray matter was significantly reduced in the presupplementary motor area in freezers, compared to matched nonfreezers at p<0.001, uncorrected. The ROI (region of interest) analysis controlled for age, gender and intracranialvolme yielded further differences in in gyrus cinguli (in the anterior part), in supplementary motor area (SMA) on the left side, in the area of frontal operculum on the right side. FOG-groups of our patients reported greated atrophy in the occipital cortex. Higher global level of cortical trophy were detected in freezers. Conclusion: Our findings provide the additional evidence that the development of FOG in patients with PD is associated with local GM atrophy, which may play a role in the complex pathophysiology of this disabling symptom. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Huntington's disease (HD) is a rare neurodegenerative disorder characterized by chorea, psychiatric disturbances and dementia. We aim to review the demographics, clinical and genetic features of HD in Bulgaria and create a local patient database. The patients underwent clinical, neurophysiological examinations, brain magnetic resonance/ computed tomography imaging and molecular genetic studies. Results: A total of 80 symptomatic individuals from 60 families, belonging to two large ethnic groups (Bulgarian and Turkish) were evaluated. There were no families from the Roma ethnic group. The affected originated from different regions in Bulgaria. HD was confirmed through genetic tests on 64 individuals, of whom 63 were symptomatic and 1 asymptomatic. The gene was inherited maternally in 28 and paternally in 18. In 4 participants there was no known family history, and in 14 the information was missing. Motor onset was the most common, followed by mixed onset (motor and cognitive signs) and non-motor onset (psychiatric problems). The age at onset varied from 17 to 66 years. Most participants were undergoing treatment for hyperkinesis with Haloperidol. According to family history, 60 additional family members showed signs of HD. Conclusion: The observed phenotypes and genotypes are similar to those reported in literature. Anticipation and genome imprinting were also detected. Creation of a local patient database will help us with regular monitoring and timely implementation of latest therapeutic strategies. Background and aims: Both fingolimod and teriflunomide are oral agent effectively used in multiple sclerosis (MS). The aim of this study was to determine early relapse possibilities in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients switching to oral therapy following a period of stable disease on IFNb or GA and to compare fingolimod and teriflunomide in this respect. Methods: A total of 164 patients included in the study from our cohort. Of the total patients, 126 (82.3%) switched to fingolimod, and 29 (17.7%) to teriflunomide. 110 patients were switched from IFNb and 54 patients from GA. Switchers were compared with 124 patients remaining on platform injectables with satisfactory disease control. Results: Within the switchers, the most frequent reason was lack of tolerance (73.8%). There was no difference in the proportion of patients having at least one relapse in the first 6 months between switchers and patients remaining on platform injectables. The mean annualized relapse rate was 0.03 for switchers, and 0.04 for stayers (p=0.098). There was not any difference in disability progression in terms of number of patients in 6 months. There was also no difference between patients switched to fingolimod or teriflunomide in terms of annualized relapse rate (p=0.12) and EDSS progression (p=0.096). Conclusion: In conclusion, our results indicated that there was no evidence of disease reactivation within the first 6 months in patients switching to oral therapy when they were previously stable, and both fingolimod and teriflunomide had similar results in this respect. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: A female patient, 34 y.o. affected by multiple sclerosis since October 2004 experienced a high relapse rate in the first two years and underwent an induction therapy. Therapeutic attempts with mitoxantrone and cyclophosphamide failed in achieving disease stability. From 2008 she underwent 57 cycles of Natalizumab with complete disease control. She decided for tree times to discontinue treatment due to PML fear and invariably experienced massive disease reactivation. After the last reactivation we administered two courses of alemtuzumab (January 2015-2016). Since then she had no evidence of clinical or MRI disease activity, and referred high quality of life. Methods: Clinical case Results: Since August 2016 she had abnormal bruising for minimal trauma and four haemorrhages: on the left palm after squats, over the dorsalis pedis after tying shoes, over the right hand after having kept her mobile tightly. She was finally admitted at our hospital for limitation in walking abilities due to popliteus muscle's haemorrage. At blood tests we found high PTT and absence of FVIII. The finding of anti-FVIII antibodies confirmed the diagnosis of AHA. She was treated with rFVII and then with cyclophosphamide 100mg daily for two months and prednisone 100mg daily for a month plus tapering with initial response to treatment. In January 2016, an increase of FVIII-inhibitor without clinical manifestation was found. Due to relapse of AHA we started rituximab 375mg/m 2 weekly for 4 times. Background and aims: Neurodegeneration has proved to be the major reason of disability in multiple sclerosis (MS). Mitochondrial dysfunction results in functional disturbance without structural damage, then leads to disturbance of respiratory chain function and liberates electrons, giving rise to reactive oxygen species (ROS) and to axonal degeneration, cell death, and tissue destruction. There are no drugs with proven efficacy, nor non-invasive evaluation methods of drug's impact on neurodegeneration in central nervous system. The aims of our research were: 1. to investigate the ability to influence neurodegeneration in MS of Ethylmethyl-hydroxypyridine succinate (EMНS) -drug with antioxidant and antihypoxant effect, approved in Russian Federation. 2. to educe the potential of Diffusion tensor MRI with tractography (DTI) as an objective evaluation method of treatments efficacy. Methods: 51 RR and SP MS patients without signs of disease activity were treated with EMНS, and fractional anisotropy of corticospinal tracts (FA CST) was assessed before and after treatment course. Results: Compared with 24 healthy volunteers, the patients had significantly lower FA CST. After the treatment, locomotive ability improved as well as FA CST increased, with lasting clinical effect. Conclusion: The decrease of FA CST is reversible and measuring FA CST can be used as an objective method in evaluating the efficacy of therapy of neurodegeneration in MS patients. EMHS therapy can be considered as a potentially effective method to prevent progressing neurodegeneration in MS patients. However, further controlled clinical trials are necessary in order to prove this effect. Background and aims: Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorders (NMOSD) is a severe demyelinating disease antibody-mediated with no approved treatment. Rituximab (RTX) has been proposed as a first-line therapy, but few comparative studies have been published so far. We retrospectively evaluated the effect of RTX treatment respect to cyclophosphamide (CFX) which is one of the main alternative therapy used in these patients. Methods: Overall among the 70 NMOSD patients followed at our centre, 42 patients received at least one cycle of RTX and 25 patients received at least two cycles of CFX. Results: No differences in disease severity and clinical characteristics between the two cohorts were observed (Table1). The median treatment duration was 33 and 11 months for the RTX and CFX group respectively. Overall the proportion of relapse free patients was significantly higher in the RTX group (57% vs 20% p<0.0001) (Fig1). The reduction of the mean ARR was significantly higher in the group of patients receiving RTX (81 vs 43% p< 0,05) (Fig2). In both groups the EDSS was stable or improved in the majority of patients (83% in the group treated with RTX and 72% in the group receiving CFX). Since fourteen patients were treated with RTX after the failure of CFX, subgroup analysis confirming the results were performed. Background and aims: Neuromyelitis Optica (NMO) is a severe inflammatory disease of the CNS. We report the impact of an earlier treatment in clinical practice. Methods: We included in our cohort only patients in which, at the end of a thorough investigation, other alternative diagnosis were excluded. Overall 70 patients reached a diagnosis of NMO. We evaluated how treatment approach changes overtime. We divided patients in "early treatment group" if the treatment was started after 1 or 2 relapses and "late-treatment group" if it started after more than 2 relapses. Results: Overall the number of patients who received an "early treatment" was significantly higher for patients with a disease onset after 2007 (23% vs 50%, p<0.001). In order to test the beneficial effect of an earlier treatment, we excluded 20 patients because they reached a severe disability status within the second relapses. Overall 16 patients were treated "early" and 34 patients were treated "late". The proportion of patients who reached a severe disability was significantly higher in the "late treatment group" (59% vs 6%; p<0.05). The same results were observed evaluating the proportion of patients developing a permanent EDSS score of at least 6.0 (32% vs 0%; p<0.05) or a permanent severe ipovisus (32% vs 6%; p<0.05). Conclusion: After the 2006 diagnostic criteria and the definition of NMO SD our treatment approach has significantly changed. An early treatment allowed a better outcome changing the natural history of the disease. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose T. Rasul 1 , J.L. Frederiksen 2 1 Department of Neurology, Glostrup, Denmark, Glostrup, Denmark Background and aims: The prevalence of overweight/ obesity is a major problem in the world and the number of MS cases is increasing. This literature study examines the relationship between overweight/obesity in children and adolescents and occurrence of MS. Methods: We performed a complete literature study resulting in 11 relevant original studies. The search database is primarily Pubmed using MeSH terms "Multiple Sclerosis", "Obesity" and "Overweight" and textwords not to restrict searches. Results: All 11 relevant included studies show a link between overweight/obesity and the presence of MS among people below 20 years of age. The relation is especially true for young girls. There is a need for more and larger studies, and to investigate the molecular mechanisms that may link obesity and MS. Conclusion: The literature study convincingly revealed a link between young overweight/obese and occurrence of MS, in particular for girls. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3110 Extracellular vesicles in cerebrospinal fluid as possible biomarkers for multiple sclerosis G. Salemi 1 , P. Ragonese 1 , F. Geraci 2 , E. Allotta 2 , M.M. Barreca 2 , S. Realmuto 1 , M.A. Mazzola 3 , G. Sconzo 2 , G. Savettieri 1 Background and aims: (1) to assess adherence, disability, cognition and patient-reported outcomes (PRO) in relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) patients on dimethyl fumarate (DMF) (first-line treatment or switching from other disease-modifying therapies). (2) to identify relevant factors for non-adherence (discontinuation of study or DMF intake). Methods: 12-month interim analysis (T12) of a 2-year prospective, multicenter, registry study with assessments at baseline/T0 and at T3, T6, T9, T12, T18 and T24 months. At T12, 721 RRMS patients on DMF (mean age 40.9 yr, 72.4% female, median EDSS 2.0) were analysed. Outcomes: Adherence (yes/no) and time to non-adherence, disability, cognition and PROs representing treatment/life satisfaction, depression, anxiety, fatigue, QoL, disease coping and personality. Descriptive analysis and regression models (logistic and Cox) were used to assess the factors associated with adherence. Results: All clinical, behavioral and cognitive parameters remained stable during the first 12 months of DMF treatment. By T12, 26.8% (193/721) of patients were nonadherent. Women were more likely to be non-adherent (OR 1.9, HR1.8). The primary reason for non-adherence by T12 was physical complaints (13.0%; 94/721), mainly of gastrointestinal origin (7.9%; 57/721). Univariate (logistic/ Cox) regression analyses (p<0.15) identified gender, premedication pause, pre-treatments (≥2), depression, QoL, life/treatment satisfaction, fatigue, anxiety and nonverbal memory as putative predictors of non-adherence. Conclusion: (1) DMF prevents deterioration of clinical, cognitive and behavioral symptoms in RRMS. (2) Behavioral factors, gender and pre-treatment issues may emerge as predictors of non-adherence. (3) Multiple regression analyses considering collinearity after 2 years are warranted. Disclosure: The study was funded by Biogen. Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA Background and aims: Magnetic resonance imaging is used as a diagnostic tool to detect spinal cord lesions. The objective of this paper is to examine cross-sectional correlations of MR images with EDSS. Limited number of studies examined EDSS and MRI correlations in patients with Transverse Myelitis. MRI images can help predict recovery progress based on lesion characteristics. Methods: We conducted a retrospective review of the last 42 monophasic TM admissions to the Johns Hopkins Hospital. Inclusion criteria included a single inflammatory attack localizing to the spinal cord presenting with a change in neurological examination and a new MRI lesion. Subjects were excluded if their TM was part of a recurring disease or if they tested positive for the NMO-IgG blood test. Extended Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score was calculated at baseline, at presentation, at discharge, and on follow-up. MR images were examined and broken down by Number of Vertebral Bodies Lesion Location Length of the lesion Results of the MRI were compared to the EDSS scores to evaluate outcome based on lesions characteristics. Results: Of the 42 subjects enrolled, 37% with Long Lesion (more than 4 vertebral bodies) showed improvement by at least 1 point at one year follow up on EDSS exam. Whereas 19% with Short Lesion (3 or less vertebral bodies) show improvement from admission to one year follow up. Conclusion: Longer lesion on MR images from admission to follow up resulted in better long term recovery outcome. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Brain atrophy occurs early in multiple sclerosis. It is associated with cognitive impairment. Transcranial sonography of the brain parenchyma (TCS) can assess ventricular diameter noninvasively, as marker of brain atrphy. We aimed to correlate cognitive performance among patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) to ventricular diameters, as a marker of brain atrophy using TCS of brain parenchyma. Methods: Case-control study, conducted on 125 Egyptian subjects, including 54 multiple sclerosis patients with RRMS, 16 males (29.6%) & 38 females (70.4%), with mean age of 29.22±8.15 SD, mean EDSS of 2.34±1.12 SD & at least 9 years of education. Control group included 71 age, sex and education matched healthy volunteers. All participants were subjected to clinical assessment, cognitive evaluation using California verbal leaning & memory test-2nd edition CVLT-II), Symbol digit modality test (SDMT) & Controlled oral ward association test (COWAT). B-mode TCS of the brain parenchyma was used to evaluate ventricular diameters as parameters of brain atrophy. Results: In comparison to the healthy control, patients with RRMS showed significantly wider ventricular diameters (p<0.001) denoting brain atrophy. Physical disability & cognitive performance correlated significantly with parameters of brain atrophy. Impairment in executive function is an early marker of CI in patients with RRMS, which was correlated with brain atrophy. Conclusion: TCS for brain parenchyma is a valuable & easily applicable method in detecting brain atrophy which is correlated with their physical disability & cognitive performance. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose ) showing a wellcircumscribed T2 lesion with a diameter of>2 cm. A total of 231 MS records were analysed using the local prospective MS database. We classified the lesions according to the recently proposed morphologic classification and the contrast enhancement pattern. Results: Twenty-two patients (9.5%) (18 females, 4 males), mean age of 35.6 years [14-59], showed PTL. PTL at the onset of the disease were observed in 54.5%. All patients had a relapsing-remitting form. Ten patients (47.6%) had a polysymptomatic presentation at the disease onset. All PTL were supratentorial. Median largest lesion size was 32.4 mm . The morphology of the largest PTL was categorized as being either Balo-like (n=2), megacystic (n=1), infiltrative (n=11) or ring-like (n=8). The contrast enhancement pattern was nodular (n=2), complete ring (n=1), incomplete ring (n=6) and diffuse (n=2). MR spectroscopy performed in four patients, showed an inflammatory profile. Annualized relapse rate was 0.7 and the mean final EDSS was 2.64. The mean progression index and MSSS were respectively 0.37 and 3.64. Conclusion: Our findings showed a high frequency and a rather mild disease progression of PT forms of MS in our North African population. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose MS and related disorders 6 Background and aims: The aim of this study was to find a correlation between the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickness and macular volume (MV) measured by spectraldomain OCT (SD-OCT) with visual evoked potentials (VEP) in familial (fMS) and sporadic (sMS) multiple sclerosis patients. Methods: 30 RR MS patients (17 fMS and 13 sMS) were recruited in the study. Both MS groups were matched according to disability measured by EDSS, annual relapse rate and disease duration. All patients had SD-OCT examination (Spectralis, Heildelberg Engineering) and VEP. Total RNFL thickness, MV, latency and amplitude of VEP were assessed in right and left eyes and were expressed as a mean value for both eyes for each patients Results: Mean RNFL thickness in fMS were lower but not significantly than in sMS (91.5±10.4 vs 93.03±14.8 p=0.1). Mean MV in fMS did not differ from sMS (8.5±0.5 vs 8.62±0.4 p=0.3). Mean VEP latency was slightly longer, but not significantly, in fMS compared to sMS (120.40±18.9 vs 116.7±10.6 p=0.1). We observed a trend of lower mean VEP amplitude in sMS compared to fMS (8.64±4.15 vs 11.84±5.09 p=0.06). In fMS, but not in sMS, we found a modest correlation between mean RNFL and VEP latency (r=-0.5, p=0.02). In fMS we have also found modest a correlation between mean MV and VEP latency (r=-0.4, p=0.04). Conclusion: Our results suggest that in fMS there is stronger correlation between structural retinal changes measured by OCT and visual system function measured by VEPs than in sMS patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3119 Russian cohort of patients with NMO spectrum disorders: 58 cases Background and aims: Antibodies to aquaporin-4 (AQP4-Ab) is a sensitive and highly specific serum marker of neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and NMO-spectrum disorders (NMOSD). The aim of our research was to analyze the characteristics of patients with NMOSD according to demographics, clinical symptoms and MRI findings and estimate frequency of AQP4-Ab in Russian group patients with NMOSD. Methods: Serum samples from 58 patients with NMOSD were analyzed. We used cell-based assay for the detection of AQP4-Ab (Euroimmun). Results: 58 patients (81% female) aged 16-65 years (mean age 40.2 years) were included in the study. AQP4-Ab were detectable in 86.7% patients with NMOSD. The mean age of onset of symptoms was 38.4 years. The mean time to diagnosis was 16.9 months (range: 1 month-5 years). In most patients, the onset symptoms were longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis (LETM) and optic neuritis (ON) (62% and 34%, respectively). In three cases, the disease manifested with area postrema syndrome. In total, during disease course 6 patients developed area postrema syndrome, 2 − acute brainstem syndrome, and 2− symptomatic cerebral syndrome. According to MRI, 83% of the 58 patients had LETM lesions and 14% had short transverse myelitis lesions extending fewer than three vertebral segments. Spinal cord lesions spanned 1-13 vertebral segments (mean 5.5). The cervical cord was involved in 30% of cases, thoracic cord -in 30%, both cervical and thoracic cord -in 40%. 19% of patients had brain lesions. Conclusion: Our results confirm high clinical heterogeneity of NMOSD and specificity of AQP4-Ab as a marker of NMOSD. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose e-Poster © 2017 European Journal of Neurology, 24 (Suppl. 1), 123-444 EP3120 Absolute lymphocyte counts in patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis (RMS) treated with cladribine tablets 3.5 mg/kg in the CLARITY and CLARITY Extension studies P. Soelberg-Sorensen 1 , F. Dangond 2 , C. Hicking 3 , G. Giovannoni 4 1 Department of Neurology, Danish MS Center, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2 EMD Serono, Inc, Billerica, USA, 3 Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany, 4 Blizard Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom Background and aims: In CLARITY, the most commonly reported adverse event was lymphopenia, consistent with the mechanism of action for cladribine tablets (CT). We investigate the absolute lymphocyte count (ALC) in patients with RMS receiving 2 year's treatment with CT 3.5mg/kg (CT3.5). Methods: Data from patients randomised to CT3.5 for 2 years in CLARITY/CLARITY Extension including time spent in the PREMIERE registry (N=685) were pooled to provide long-term follow-up data. Data from patients randomised to placebo in CLARITY and followed up in CLARITY Extension and PREMIERE are also reported (PBO;N=435). Results: At baseline (start of CLARITY or CLARITY Extension), median ALC was 1.86×109/L for CT3.5 and 1.91×109/L for PBO (Table) . During Year 1, ALC in CT3.5 reached a nadir at 9 weeks post-treatment (1.00×109/L; Figure) . At the end of Year 1 (48 weeks), median ALC had increased to 1.21×109/L. During Year 2, ALC in CT3.5 reached a nadir 7 weeks after re-treatment (0.81×109/L), increasing to 1.03×109/L at the end of Year 2 (96 weeks). At the end of Years 3 and 4 (144 and 192 weeks), ALC in the CT3.5 group (with no further treatment) increased to 1.36×109/L and 1.40×109/L, respectively, reaching a final median ALC of 1.76×109/L after 6.5 years (312 weeks). In PBO patients, median ALC values were between 1.69×109/L and 1.95×109/L ( Figure) . Conclusion: Rapid reductions in ALC after CT3.5 treatment in Years 1 and 2 were followed by gradual returns toward baseline. Median lymphocyte counts were within normal range beyond Year 2 (96 weeks) in all patients for whom follow-up data are available. Disclosure: This study was funded by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. Medical writing assistance was provided by inScience Communications, Springer Healthcare, Chester, UK, and was funded by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. Methods: 40 participants were studied: 10 with MS without additional comorbidities for white matter abnormalities; 10 with MS with additional comorbidities for white matter abnormalities; 10 with migraine, MRI white matter abnormalities, and no additional comorbidities for white matter abnormalities; and 10 erroneously diagnosed with MS. 3T MRIs, performed with gadopentetate dimeglumine, were de-identified and randomly ordered and then provided to three MS physicians at three different institutions blinded to diagnosis. Three ovoid lesions 3mm³ in at least one plane and restricted to the subcortical or deep white matter were first selected in each patient on FLAIR and subsequently evaluated for CVS using FLAIR*. Results: Two MS participants were excluded from analysis due to inadequate candidate lesions. Using a threshold of 3/3 lesions with CVS as diagnostic of MS resulted in mean specificity and sensitivity across readers of 0.98 and 0.52 respectively. With a threshold of 2/3 lesions, the corresponding values were 0.95 and 0.81. Conclusion: Evaluation of only three lesions for CVS, using FLAIR* MRI, demonstrated high specificity and good sensitivity for MS. Disclosure: Supported by the University of Vermont Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Vermont Department of Radiology, and the University of Vermont MRI Center for Biomedical Imaging, and partially supported by the Intramural Research Program of National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. O. Stuve 1 , P. Soelberg-Sorensen 2 , G. Giovannoni 3 , T. Leist 4 , Y. Hyvert 5 , D. Damian 6 , U. Boschert 6 1 Dallas, TX, USA, 2 Department of Neurology, Danish MS Center, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3 Blizard Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom, 4 Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, USA, 5 EMD Serono, Inc, , Billerica, USA, 6 EMD Serono, Inc, Billerica, USA Background and aims: Efficacy of cladribine tablets (CT) 3.5mg/kg has been demonstrated in patients with early MS (ORACLE-MS) and in patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis (RMS) in CLARITY/CLARITY Extension studies. Methods: Longitudinal (48 weeks) evaluation of peripheral blood lymphocyte subtypes from patients treated with CT 3.5mg/kg (N=274) or placebo (N=140) was conducted. CLARITY Extension patients received placebo in CLARITY and switched to CT 3.5mg/kg in the Extension phase. Lymphocytes were measured at baseline, and Weeks 5, 13, 24 and 48. Changes in absolute counts and changes in relative proportion of the lymphocyte subtypes were evaluated. Results: The baseline distributions of absolute lymphocyte counts (ALC) were similar across studies. Profiles of CD19+ B lymphocytes and CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes were generally consistent across studies. The most rapid reduction in cell numbers occurred in the CD19+ B cell compartment (approximately 75% at Week 5 in each study). Nadir was reached at Week 13 with >80% reduction, and reconstitution towards baseline occurred from Week 24 to 48. CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were also markedly reduced in numbers, but to a lesser degree than CD19+ B cells (at most 55%; ORACLE-MS). Cladribine had a stronger suppressive effect on CD4+ than CD8+ T cells. There was only incomplete reconstitution of T cells at Week 48. Changes in relative proportion confirmed the effect on CD19+ B cells at ALC nadir. Background and aims: Several factors can compromise the endogens protective system of organism and accelerate the induction of free radicals that may influence the course of MS. Study aimed to investigate the role of several possible risk factors in secondary progression of MS. Methods: We investigated smoking, dietary patterns, alcohol intake, severe and chronic stress in 60 secondary progressive MS (SPMS) patients, 33 (first group) from refuges, 27 from general population (second group). Age at disease onset, disease duration, number of relapses, length of period until the secondary progression of disease and the Kurtzke Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) scores were collected. Control comprised 15 healthy volunteers. Brain was visualized by Magnetic Resonance Tomography (MRT-1.5-Tesla). Mood examined by Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II). Blood free radicals detected by Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Method (EPR). Statistics was performed by SPSS-11.0 Results: First group developed SPMS in a shorter period compared to second group (7.2± 2.1 versus 16.4±3.8, p<0.05). Multiple logistic regression found the significance of smoking and depression for development of SPMS (p<0.05). Depression was found in 85% of first -and in 23% of second group (BDI> 9/10). Lypoperoxyradical ( LOO-) and superoxide anion (O2-) were increased in first group as compared to second group and control. Positive correlation was established between BDI index and LOOand O2-data (r=+0.33 and r=+0.19, p<0.05) Conclusion: Smoking and depression due to chronic social stress may contribute to the promotion of free radical pathology in MS and thus, can stimulate the neurodegeneration. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3125 The NLRP1 and NLRP3 inflammasomes are activated in multiple sclerosis and clinically isolated syndrome R. Türkoglu 1 , D. Özkan-Yaşargün 2 , E. Tüzün 1 1 Istanbul, Turkey, 2 Neurology, Haydarpaşa Research and Training Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey Background and aims: Inflammasome is a multiprotein oligomer expressed in myeloid cells and involved in inflammatory processes. In this study, we aimed to analyze the value of serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of NLRP1 and NLRP3 inflammasomes as predictors of conversion to multiple sclerosis (MS). Methods: A total of 23 relapsing remitting MS (RRMS) patients, 18 clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) patients and 30 healthy controls were recruited for this study. Patients were in remission and were not under immunosuppressive treatment during serum and CSF sampling. Disease durations, EDSS scores, relapse numbers and oligoclonal band (OCB) status of all patients were recorded. Serum and CSF levels of NLRP1 and NLRP3 were measured using ELISA. Results: While both RRMS and CIS patients had significantly higher serum and CSF levels of NLRP1 and NLRP3 than healthy controls, there were no significant differences between MS/CIS patients and healthy controls. Moreover, CSF but not serum levels of OCB positive patients were significantly higher than those of the OCB negative patients. There were no correlations between NLRP1/NLRP3 levels and clinical-demographic features of MS patients. Conclusion: Inflammasome complex appears to be activated as early as during the first MS attack. However, levels of NLRP1 and NLRP3 are not altered in a time-or disability-dependent manner and thus cannot be used as indicators of MS conversion or as a prognostic biomarker. Increased CSF NLRP1/NLRP3 levels of OCB positive patients might indicate enhanced blood-brain barrier transport of myeloid cells in these patients. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Adipokines are known to be involved in numerous inflammatory diseases. This study aimed to analyze the value of serum adipokine levels as biomarkers in determining the clinical progression of multiple sclerosis (MS). Methods: A total of 50 MS patients and 40 healthy individuals were recruited for this study. Clinical course of MS patients was classified as benign (>10 years of disease duration and £3 EDSS score) and classical (>10 years of disease duration and >3 EDSS score). Disease duration, annual relapse rate, EDSS and attack types of MS patients were recorded. Levels of serum adipokines and adipocytederived cytokines were measured using ELISA. Results: Serum adiponectin, monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1), TNF-a and IL-6 levels were significantly higher in classical MS patients than benign MS patients and healthy controls. There were no significant differences between levels of leptin, resistin, IL-1b and IL-8 among groups. Adiponectin, MCP-1 and TNF-a levels were directly correlated with EDSS scores. Notably, MS patients with an initial attack of optic neuritis displayed significantly lower EDSS scores, adiponectin, MCP-1 and TNF-a levels than other MS patients. There was no correlation between adipokine levels and other clinical-demographic features. Conclusion: Adipokines appear to be involved in clinical progression of MS and thus adiponectin, MCP-1 and TNF-a might potentially serve as prognostic biomarkers in MS. Our results confirm previous studies which have claimed that MS initiating with optic neuritis has a relatively more benign course. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Alemtuzumab 12 mg/day (baseline: 5 days; 12 months later: 3 days) improved 2-year outcomes versus SC IFNB-1a in treatment-naive patients with active relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) (CARE-MS I; NCT00530348), with durable efficacy through 6 years (NCT00930553). 85% of alemtuzumab-treated patients were relapse-free between Courses 1-2. We evaluated 6-year efficacy in patients who relapsed in this interval. Methods: Assessments: annualised relapse rate (ARR); freedom from 6-month confirmed disability worsening (CDW), MRI disease activity (gadolinium [Gd]-enhancing T1 and new/enlarging T2 lesions), or new T1 hypointense lesions; brain volume loss (BVL). Results: 56/376 (15%) alemtuzumab-treated patients relapsed between Courses 1-2; 52/56 (93%) enrolled in extension; 45/52 (87%) remained through Year 6. In patients who relapsed, ARR in Year 1 (1. 3) declined in the year after Course 2 (0.3); 27% relapsed in Year 2. ARR remained 0.3-0.5 over Years 3-6. 60% of patients remained 6-month CDWfree through Year 6. Most were free of Gd-enhancing T1 lesions (84%), new/enlarging T2 lesions (71%), MRI disease activity (69%), and new T1 hypointense lesions (90%) in Year 6. Median percent yearly BVL declined over time: Years 1-6: -0.67%, -0.17%, -0.20%, -0.11%, -0.21%, -0.24%. 46% of patients received ≥1 alemtuzumab retreatment. Conclusion: Outcomes during Year 1 of alemtuzumab do not predict longer-term response. Patients who relapsed in Year 1 improved markedly in subsequent years. These data support administering alemtuzumab according to approved labeling (2 courses) for optimal and durable clinical/MRI benefits in the small population of patients experiencing relapse between Courses 1-2. Disclosure: Sanofi and Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals. Real world studies of glatiramer acetate: T. Ziemssen 1 , D. Fendji 2 , A. Müller-Schubert 2 1 Dresden, Germany, 2 Berlin, Germany Background and aims: The MS treatment landscape has changed rapidly. With the approval of DMTs new first and second-line treatment options for RRMS became available. QualiCOP and COPTIVITY are two independent noninterventional studies (NIS) with glatiramer acetate (GA), representing an area before and after oral DMTs were approved. We aimed to determine if prior treatment with oral DMTs impact the treatment algorithm with GA and patients' treatment decision. Methods: QualiCOP (n=754) Background and aims: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) or massively parallel sequencing detects the precise order of nucleotides within a DNA molecule. NGS is more effective than traditional sequencing methods, such as Sanger sequencing, when several genes are involved. Targeted NGS is starting to be used in diagnostics for disorders caused by several genes. About 100 genes may cause hereditary neuropathies. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most frequent hereditary neuropathy with a prevalence of 40-80 per 100,000 in Norway. It is probable that some patients has mutations in more than one gene causing the phenotype. Methods: CMT patients from two families were investigated for PMP22 duplications and point mutations in CMT genes with the methods Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) and NGS. Results: We identified a digenic cause to CMT in the two families, i.e. in the first family a duplication of PMP22 together with a compound heterozygous SH3TC2 mutation and in the other family point mutations in the genes PMP22 and NEFL. Conclusion: If the phenotype is atypical or more severe than expected may be wortwhile to investigate selected CMT patients for more than one genetic cause to their phenotype. The pedigree may sometimes indicate a digenic cause to the overall phenotype of CMT patients. Digenic causes to CMT may be more frequent than previously anticipated -1-2%. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: The p.A53T mutation in the alphasynuclein (SNCA) gene is a rare cause of autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease (PD). Although generally rare, it is particularly common in the Greek population due to a founder effect. A53T-positive PD patients often develop dementia during disease course and may very rarely present with dementia. Methods: We screened for the p. A53T SNCA mutation a total of 347 cases of Greek origin with parkinsonism and/or dementia, collected over 15 years at the Neurogenetics Unit, Eginition Hospital, University of Athens. Cases were classified into: "pure parkinsonism" (PD, atypical parkinsonism), "pure dementia" (frontotemporal dementia, Alzheimer disease, "other") and "parkinsonism plus dementia" (frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism, PD dementia, Lewy Body disease, atypical parkinsonism). Results: In total, 4 p.A53T SNCA mutation carriers were identified. All had autosomal dominant family history and early onset. Screening of the "pure parkinsonism" category (137 cases) revealed 2 cases with typical PD. The other two mutation carriers were identified in the "parkinsonism plus dementia" category (89 cases). One had a diagnosis of PD dementia and the other of behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia. Screening of patients with "pure dementia" (121 cases) failed to identify any further A53T-positive cases. Conclusion: Our results confirm that the p.A53T SNCA mutation is relatively common in Greek patients with PD or PD plus dementia, particularly in cases with early onset and autosomal dominant family history. However, routine screening of patients with "pure dementia" is unlikely to be clinically useful even in the Greek population. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder due to mutations in the ATMgene. The classical phenotype is characterized by progressive childhood-onset cerebellar ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, telangiectasias of the conjunctivae, hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation, and immunodeficiency. Recently some ATM mutations were found to manifest as generalized or focal dystonia without any of the classical signs of A-T. The aim of the study is to evaluate the clinical features in a group of 14 Bulgarian patients, belonging to a religious minority, homozygous forV2716A in АТМ-gene. Methods: The study encompassed 14 patients, belonging to two big Bulgarian muslim pedigrees, with data of more than 25 affected from four consequent generations. All of them underwent neurological evaluation. Brain MRI was performed in 7, PET-CT-in 1, neuroophthalmological assessment-in 9. Exome sequencing was performed in 8-5 affected and 3 healthy relatives. Results: The age at onset in our group varies between 14 days and 20 years. The main symptoms are dystonic and choreic hyperkinesias, more prominent in the upper limbs and the neck, dystonic disarthria and dysphagia. The clinical course was very slowly progressive. Brain imaging was normal. In all the affected a homozygous mutation p.V2716A in АТМ gene was found. Conclusion: Clinical features, due to mutations in ATM gene can be very broad. The disease may appear as dystonia, especially of early onset, without frank cerebellar involvement and also normal cerebral imaging. A-T should be considered in all patients with unexplained, even mild movement disorders. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose  Early onset autonomic dysfunction with both sympathetic and parasympathetic involvement in Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease type 2J A.E. Friis-Hansen 1 , M. Ballegaard 2 , I. Christiansen 1 , K. Svenstrup 1 1 Neuromuscular, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2 Clinical Neurophysiology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark Background and aims: Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2J (CMT2J) is an autosomal dominantly inherited axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy caused by a few missense mutations in the MPZ gene. It is characterized by pupillary abnormalities, hearing loss, late onset sensorimotor polyneuropathy and parasympathetic autonomic dysfunction. Methods: A Thr124Met MPZ mutation was found in a 52-year-old-male and his daughter. They presented at respectively 30 and 20 years of age with problems emptying the bladder and the daughter needed chronic intermittent catheterization at 24 years of age. The index patient underwent prostate resection and later developed erectile dysfunction. At 45 years of age he had onset of symptoms of sensory and motor symptoms in his feet. The patients underwent autonomic testing, nerve conduction studies (NCS), urodynamics in addition to neurological examination at 56 and 26 years of age, respectively. Results: Clinical examination revealed tonic pupils in the daughter and clinical signs of CMT in the index patient. Autonomic testing of the daughter showed primarily sympathetic involvement, with an abnormal fall in pulse amplitude during Valsalva's maneuver and an abnormal heart rate increase during the head-up tilt, but minor abnormalities in the index patient. NCS showed an axonal sensorymotor polyneuropathy in the index patient and normal results in the daughter. Urodynamics showed hypotonic bladders and lack of sphincter relaxation. Conclusion: We report clinical and paraclinical data on two patients with CMT2J. The data show a sympathetic dysfunction in CMT2J in addition to a parasympathetic involvement as previously reported. Autonomic symptoms precede classic polyneuropathy symptoms and can result in unnecessary surgery. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3136 Neurological phenotype of Ataxia-Pancytopenia Syndrome caused by SAMD9L mutations in a Swedish family S. Gorcenco 1 , J. Davidsson 2 , U. Tedgård 3 , D. Turkiewicz 4 , L. Nilsson 5 , C. Nilsson 1 , J. Cammenga 6 , A. Puschmann 1 Background and aims: Missense mutations in SAMD9L have recently been identified as the cause of autosomal dominant Ataxia-pancytopenia syndrome, with neurological features, hematologic cytopenias and markedly increased leukaemia risk. We recently reported a Swedish family with this syndrome and a SAMD9L c.2956C>T (p.Arg986Cys) mutation (Tesi et al. Blood 2017). Methods: We expanded the pedigree, examined additional family members, reviewed charts and radiological examinations, compiling data on a total of 21 members. Genetic analysis was performed on buccal swabs. Results: Six members of the family had neurological signs or symptoms. Age at onset varied from 6 to 15 years. The initial symptom was gait imbalance in all affected individuals. Symptoms were slowly progressive but remained generally mild. Two individuals had dysmetria and only one dysarthria. Additional signs were horizontal and vertical nystagmus, hyperreflexia and foot clonus. One family member, who received matched unrelated HSC transplantation at age 4.5 years because of myelodysplastic syndrome, displayed marked neurological deficit after cytostatic treatment. Neuroimaging revealed cerebellar atrophy and supratentorial white matter changes in all patients examined. Seven of 13 family members tested carried the SAMD9L c.2956C>T mutation. Three mutation carriers have not been examined yet. For five mutation carriers a history of cytopenia was confirmed, but it may have been intermittent and mild. Neurologic evaluation of patients with germline SAMD9L c.2956C>T mutations Conclusion: The neurological phenotype of patients with SAMD9L mutation includes slowly progressive gait imbalance and nystagmus which often remain disproportionally mild compared to marked cerebellar atrophy on imaging. Testing for SAMD9L mutations should be performed on non-hematopoietic tissue due to mosaicism in blood. Disclosure: Institutional support for this research has been granted by ALF, MultiPark, Lund University and Skåne University Hospital, Sweden. The AARS-related neuropathy in four Czech patients -clinical and electrophysiological study R. Mazanec 1 , P. Lassuthová 2 , D. Šafka-Brožková 3 , M. Krůtová 2 , J. Neupauerová 3 , J. Haberlová 3 , V. Potockova 4 , D. Baumgartner 5 , P. Seeman 2 Background and aims: Mutations in genes encoding aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases(ARS) cause several forms of CMT2 with different clinical and electrophysiological features. In four CMT2 patients (3M + 1F) from one large family we found causative mutation c.986G>A (p. Arg329His) in heterozygous state in the AARS gene (alanyl t-RNA synthetase) (AARS). Methods: The onset of disease ranged between age 10-18y, first symptoms were symmetrical weakness and atrophies of peroneal and calf muscles. Neurological exams were performed at different ages of patients (35F, 40M, 52M, 59M). We found mild pes cavus, severe peroneal and calf muscle atrophies drop and steppage gait. The sensory symptoms included deficit of vibration and touch at LL, except of a 35y old female. Results: EDX studies confirmed intermediate conduction abnormalities on motor fibers at UL and no responses at LL. Sensory fibers of median nerve were excitable with low amplitude of SNAP, conduction slowing at wrist and no responses of sural nerve in all patiens. The conduction studies confirmed mixed demyelinating and axonal lesion in all patients. Conclusion: The phenotype of our patients was similar. The clinical neuropathic symptoms at the onset were mostly motor and less sensory in symmetric distribution at LL and mimic distal motor neuropathy. The paraparesis of LL started during second decade and has a relatively slow progression, two patients were able to walk without support at age over fifty. Electrophysiological studies confirmed a mixed demyelinating and axonal lesion of motor and sensory nerve fibers at the onset of the disease and distinguish CMT2N from distal motor neuropathy. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Alexander disease (AD) is a rare neurodegenerative disorder caused by mutations in the gene encoding glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). AD is classified into three main forms: Infantile, juvenile and adult. Adult onset (AOAD) commonly presents with bulbar and pseudobulbar symptoms. Spastic paraparesis, urinary disturbances, ataxia, palatal myoclonus and dysautonomia have also been reported. We describe a family with four affected from three generations. Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was conducted on 10 family members. They underwent physical, neurological, neuropsychological examinations, cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), electromyography (EMG) and evoked potential (EP) testing. Results: WES detected a missense heterozygous mutation (c.209G>A p.R70Q) in exon 1 of the GFAP gene in 5 individuals, four of whom were symptomatic and one still asymptomatic at age 28. The clinical onset varied from 15-25 years, presenting with ataxia, dysphagia, dysarthria, dysphonia, orofacial dystonia, lower spastic paraparesis, disturbed proprioception and paresthesia in the lower limbs, urinary incontinency and mild to severe cognitive decline. Two affected from the first and second generations died at ages 50 and 46 respectively. Brain and spinal cord MRI revealed confluent, symmetric white matter abnormalities in all cerebral lobes and atrophy of the cerebellum, medulla and upper cervical spinal cord. EMG was consistent with axonal polyneuropathy in the lower limbs; also EPs were abnormal. Conclusion: We observe a wide interfamilial phenotypical variability in relation to disease onset and clinical severity, with no correlation between the two. The extensively distributed leucoencephalopathy and axonal polyneuropathy observed in our family are atypical to AOAD. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: An association between Val66Met brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) polymorphism and Parkinson's disease (PD) has been disproved in the large meta-analysis of 15 studies. However, Val66Met BDNF polymorphism, resulting in abnormal intracellular distribution and low activity-dependent secretion of BDNF, has been associated with cognitive dysfunctions in PD patients in several studies. Our aim is to evaluate the impact of Val66Met BDNF polymorphic variant on cognitive functions in PD patients. Methods: 200 patients and 150 ethnically, age and sexmatched controls without neurological disorders were included in the study. Genotyping was carried out by tetraprimer amplified refractory mutation system (ARMS)-PCR. We performed the cognitive examination in 105 patients with PD (62 PD patients with cognitive impairment and 43 without cognitive impairment). Cognitive functions were tested using mini-mental state examination (MMSE), Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), verbal fluency test, and clock-drawing test. Results: Here we examined whether polymorphic variant Val66Met are relevant to idiopathic PD in Russia. There were no differences in genotypes distribution and alleles frequencies between PD patients and controls. Furthermore, there was no difference between Met66 allele frequency in PD patients with and without cognitive impairment. Background and aims: Punding is a poorly investigated impulsive-compulsive behavior (ICB) in Parkinson's disease (PD), causing severe threat to physical and psychosocial well-being. This study assessed whether a functional dysregulation of the habenula and amygdala, as modulators of the reward brain circuit, contributes to PD-punding. Methods: Structural and resting state functional MRI were obtained from 22 PD-punding patients, 30 PD patients without any ICB (PD no-ICB) matched for disease stage and duration, motor impairment, and cognitive status, and 30 healthy controls. Resting state functional connectivity of the habenula and amygdala bilaterally was assessed using a seed-based approach. Habenula and amygdala volumes and cortical thickness measures were obtained. Results: Compared to both controls and PD no-ICB cases, PD-punding patients showed higher functional connectivity of habenula and amygdala with thalamus and striatum bilaterally, and lower connectivity between bilateral habenula and left frontal and precentral cortices. In PD-punding relative to PD no-ICB patients, a lower functional connectivity between right amygdala and hippocampus was observed. Habenula and amygdala volumes were not different among groups. PD-punding patients showed a cortical thinning of the left superior frontal and precentral gyri and right middle temporal gyrus and isthmus cingulate compared to controls, and of the right inferior frontal gyrus compared to both controls and PD no-ICB patients. Conclusion: A breakdown of the connectivity among the crucial nodes of the reward circuit (i.e., habenula, amygdala, basal ganglia, frontal cortex) might be a contributory factor to punding in PD. This study provides potential instruments to detect and monitor punding in PD patients. Disclosure: Ministry of Education and Science Republic of Serbia (Grant #175090). is characterized by dysautonomia, extrapyramidal, cerebellar and pyramidal signs and is subdivided in MSA-P and MSA-C, depending on the predominant clinical features. Its' main differential diagnosis is Parkinson's disease (PD). The aim of this study was to implement MRI distance and surface measurements of brainstem structures to differentiate MSA-C, MSA-P and PD patients. Methods: A total of 25 patients (8 MSA-C, 6 MSA-P and 11 PD) and 12 healthy controls were included. MRI measurements included simple brainstem distances. MRI planometry included midbrain, pons, corpus callosum and 4th ventricle surfaces. Relevant ratios of distances and surfaces, as well as the Magnetic Resonance Parkinsonism Index (MRPI) were calculated. Analysis of variance, Kruskal-Wallis and ROC curve analysis were used as appropriate. Results: All measured brainstem distances, with the exception of midbrain (A-P) distance, pons surface, all relevant ratios and the MRPI were significantly lower in MSA-C patients. No MRI measurement could differentiate MSA-P from PD patients. MCP width was most potent in discriminating MSA-C patients (AUC=1.00, p<0.0001, 100% sensitivity and specificity, for a cut-off point of ≤7.6mm). Pons distance and surface, midbrain to pons distance and surface ratios as well as MRPI also provided excellent discriminative diagnostic value for MSA-C. Conclusion: MSA-C can be differentiated from MSA-P and PD by a multitude of simple MRI distance and surface measurements. MSA-P did not differ from PD patients in any of the applied MRI measurements. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose 1 Department of Neuroradiology , University Hospital Henri Mondor , 2 Department of Neurophysiology , University Hospital Henri Mondor, 3 Department of Neurology -Amyloid network, University Hospital Henri Mondor, Creteil, France Background and aims: Transthyretin (TTR) familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) is a relentless lengthdependent sensori-motor axonal polyneuropathy. Amyloid fibrils unevenly accumulate for years in the nerve roots, plexuses and trunks before the onset of neuropathic manifestations. Nerve plexuses, which were so far not accessible to imaging, can now be explored by MRI neurography. Objectives: To evaluate high-resolution 3T MRI neurography of the lumbo-sacral plexuses in a cohort of consecutive TTR-FAP patients or asymptomatic carriers. Methods: 13 individuals with pathogenic mutation of the TTR gene were included (10 symptomatic, 3 asymptomatic carriers). The median neuropathy impairment score (NIS) was 38.5/244 (range 4-102). MRI neurography of the lumbo-sacral nerve plexuses was performed at 3T, including high-resolution T2-weighted and diffusion-weighted MR sequences in the coronal and axial planes. The same MRI protocol was applied in 10 controls. Two blinded readers assessed nerve plexus calibre and signal. Nerve enlargement was defined as an increase in nerve caliber of at least 50%. Results: Agreement between readers was excellent (kappa of 0.88). MRI neurography revealed abnormalities of nerve plexuses in both symptomatic patients and asymptomatic gene carriers. Proximal and focal enlargement of nerve plexus was visible in 5 of the 13 patients with FAP, punctiform T2-weighted hyperintensities in 10. Of the 3 asymptomatic gene carriers, all exhibited punctiform hyperintensities and one also showed focal enlargement of nerve plexus. None of these abnormalities were observed in controls. Conclusion: MRI neurography can show abnormalities in both symptomatic patients and asymptomatic gene carriers, providing new insights regarding the diagnosis of TTR-FAP. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3150 Assessing longitudinal iron deposition in deep grey matter nuclei with high-pass filtered phase MR Imaging in Parkinson's disease A. Martin Bastida 1 , N.P. Lao-Kaim 1 , Y. Xing 2 , C. Loane 3 , A. Roussakis 1 , S.T. Schwarz 2 , X. Li 2 , N. Valle-Guzman 4 , P. Mahlknecht 5 , G. Paul-Visse 6 , H. Widner 6 , M. Politis 7 , T. Foltynie 5 , R. Barker 4 , D.P. Auer 2 , P. Piccini 1 Background and aims: Iron accumulation plays an important role in neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease. Susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI) is a high-resolution MR-based imaging technique for quantifying iron depositions in vivo. Phase images offer greater specificity in quantifying brain iron load. We hypothesised that high-pass filtered phase imaging may be a useful monitoring tool for longitudinal clinical characterization of PD, and we sought to investigate the clinical associations of iron depositions in deep grey matter nuclei. Methods: We evaluated forty-two PD subjects and six age and gender matched healthy volunteers (HV) longitudinally with high-pass filtered phase imaging at baseline and after 18 months. Average phase shifts (radians) in the caudate nucleus, putamen, globus pallidus, substantia nigra (SN) and dentate nucleus (DN) were analysed using SPIN software. Longitudinal changes of bilateral radians (Δ radians) were calculated by subtracting baseline values from follow up values. Parametric correlations of regional Δ radians were conducted with Δ UPDRS part III, tremor and bradykinesia-rigidity sub-scores. Results: PD patients showed significantly higher radians in the SN (p<0.001) after 18 months, without significant change in controls. Δ SN radians positively correlated with Δ UPDRS-III (p<0.001) and bradykinesia-rigidity subscores (p=0.001). In addition Δ DN correlated with tremor subscores (p<0.01). Conclusion: Our results show that high-pass filtered phase imaging might offer an interesting monitoring tool to evaluate longitudinal progression of motor severity and clinical phenotypes in PD, and could be useful to assess the effect on these structures of iron chelation therapies. Disclosure: This work was supported by Parkinson's UK (PaMIR), the Medical Research Council and FP7 EU consortium (TransEuro). Part of this work was supported by NIHR awards of the Biomedical Research Centre to the University of Cambridge/Addenbrooke's Hospital and to Imperial College London. Background and aims: Pain is a common symptom in patients with systemic diseases. In addition to joint and muscle pain, neuropathic pain can worsen their quality of life. We describe herein the clinical and electrophysiological feature of patients with systemic diseases and presenting for neuropathic pain and its effect on the quality of life. Methods: Patients with various systemic diseases and referred to our department for neuropathic pain assessment from January 2016 to December 2016 were included. All patients had neurological examination, electromyography with nerve conduction study (NCS) and evaluation with the neuropathic pain questionnaire (NPQ) and quality of life assessment (McGILL QoL questionnaire). Response to medication was also related. Results: Thirty-three patients were included (sex ratio= 0.36; mean age= 41.8 years). Underlying systemic disease was systemic lupus (16 patients, 48%) primary Sjögren syndrome (10 patients, 30%) scleroderma (4 patients, 12%) and sarcoidosis (3 patients, 9%). Mean NPQ score was 7.2 (5-10) and mean McGILL QoL questionnaire was 54 (33-76). NCS revealed axonal sensory or sensory motor neuropathy (30%), mononeuropathy multiplex (24%) and radiculopathy (9%). NCS did not show any abnormality in 12 patients (36%) suggesting small fiber neuropathy. Poorer quality of life was associated with mononeuropathy multiplex (p<0.01) and systemic lupus (p<0.05). Treatment options included tricyclic antidepressants, pregabalin and carbamazepin. Monotherapy was insufficient in 75% of patients and 36% of them were not satisfied despite the association of two or more molecules. Conclusion: Neuropathic pain can represent an irritating thorn in the course of various systemic diseases. Adequate treatment can be challenging in order to improve patients' quality of life. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose The assessment of brain metastases risk in cancer patients: The influence of primary tumor location, histological and immunohistochemical aspects (a retrospective observational descriptive study) Background and aims: The aim of this study was to identify cancer patients with high risk of brain metastases, in this way improving early detection of cases. Methods: Retrospective observational descriptive study on 396 cancer patients admitted in hospital between 2013 and 2016, which received clinical neurological exam and brain CT/MRI in selected cases. Data regarding primary cancer location (breast, upper/lower digestive, small and non-small lung cancer-SCLC, NSCLC-,urogenital, skin, head and neck, others), histological and immunohistochemical characteristics were collected from the medical records. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS Statistics v.23.0 (statistical significance assumed at p<0.05). Results: Mean age (±SD) was 61.62±11.31 years. 94 patients had brain metastases (23.7%). Brain metastases were significantly correlated with younger age (p=0.001) and lung cancer (p=0.002). Upper and lower digestive cancers (p=0.016 and p=0.034) and head and neck cancers (p<0.001) correlated negatively with brain metastases. Patients with SCLC had more brain metastases than patients with NSCLC (46.6% versus 36.20%,without statistical significance, p=0.555). Negative hormone receptor status breast cancer patients had more frequently brain metastases than positive ones (40.90% versus 21.05%; p=0.093) and those with more than 70% of tumoral cells having hormone receptors seemed protected from brain metastases (p=0.013). Conclusion: This work allowed identification of cancer patients with higher and lower risk for brain metastases. This is an important step in developing better future screening and early detection strategies thus facilitating early treatment and survival improvement Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3169 Cancelled EP3170 Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes in Algeria: Clinical heterogeneity and atypical revelation patterns A. Djellaoui 1 , N. Attal 2 , E. Attal 1 1 Neurology, Ait Idir Hospital, Algiers, Algeria, 2 Immunology, Institut Pasteur Algérie, Algiers, Algeria Background: Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes (PNSs) are rare autoimmune disorders that occur in association with cancer and are not explained by a metabolic, metatarsal, infectious or iatrogenic complication. Aims: To study the clinical and paraclinical profiles of NPS in a hospital series. Describe the peculiarities of these PNSs and compare them with the data of the literature. Methods: A monocentric, retrospective study of PNSs supported in the Neurology department of Ait Idir Hospital in collaboration with the Immunology of the Pasteur Institute of Algeria. Results: We included 12 patients, 10 men and 2 women, with SNPs with anti-neural antibodies positive. Antibodies found were anti-Yo (n=4), anti-Ma 2(N=2), antiamphiphysin (n=1), anti-Zic (n=1) and anti-NMDAR (n=1). Two other patients had a POEMS. Most patients had a combination of at least two antibodies. Conclusion: The SNPs described in our patients were characterized by high heterogeneity clinical and atypical modes of revelation. A postinfectious presentation subacute was particularly noted. PNSs can be revealed in atypical and deceptive presentations. Their recognition is, however, crucial for early care and better prognosis Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3171 Anti-Ri-antibody paraneoplastic syndrome with complete horizontal ophthalmoplegia J.B. Escribano 1 , J. Martinez-Poles 1 , V. Nedkova-Hristova 2 , S. García-Madrona 1 , E. Natera-Villalba 2 , F. Acebrón-Sánchez-Herrera 2 , J. Buisán-Catevilla 1 , C. Anciones 2 , R. Vera-Lechuga 2 , B. Zarza-Sanz 2 , R. Alvarez-Velasco 3 1 Neurology, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 2 Neurology, Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 3 Neurology, Hospital Universitario Ramon y Cajal, Madrid, Spain Background and aims: Paraneoplastic neurological disorders associated with anti-Ri-antibodies mostly present with opsoclonus-myoclonus-ataxia. Anti-Ri-antibodies have been mainly reported in patients with breast cancer althought gynecological tumors and small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) are identified, too. Ophthalmoplegia without opsoclonus is very rare. We present a woman with SCLC who had atypical anti-Ri-antibody paraneoplastic syndrome presenting as complete horizontal ophthalmoplegia and truncal ataxia. Methods: A 59-year-old woman with subacute onset of bilateral horizontal gaze palsy and gait disturbance. She has a history of hypertension, diabetes and smoking. Neurologic examination revealed complete horizontal gaze palsy without opsoclonus-myoclonus. Diplopia wasn´t reported. She presented a wide-based gait and couldn´t perform tandem-gait. Results: Her CSF showed high cell count, normal protein values, and negative cytology and viral markers. Serum´s immunofluorescence analysis revealed anti-Ri-antibodies. Body-CT showed a solid lesion in left lower lung lobe with pathological lymph nodes and bilateral adrenal nodules. Fine-Needle-Aspiration through bronchoscope revealed a cytology compatible with SCLC. Brain-MRI revealed a high-signal-intensity lesion in the pontine tegmentum that wasn´t enhanced with gadolinium. She was diagnosed with anti-Ri positive paraneoplastic Rombencefalitis, secondary to SCLC. She was treated with high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy, 1gr for 5 days without response and started standar chemotherapy (Carboplatin plus etoposide). Neurological deficits persisted during the subsequent chemotherapy. Conclusion: Anti-Ri-antibody-associated paraneoplastic syndrome has been linked to ataxia and opsoclonusmyoclonus. However, even in the absence of opsoclonus, oculomotor dysfunction is usually prominent and the brainstem is a major site of autoimmunity. This case, showing an Anti-Ri-antibody-associated syndrome with oftalmoplegia without opsoclonus, supports the clinical disparity of this entity. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes (PNS) in lymphomas have importnat diffrences compared with those in solid tumors. Classical PNS are rarer; onconeural antibodies are absent in most PNS; and at the time of diagnosis, lymphomas in people with PNS are already extended. This makes the diagnostic of PNS in lymphomas chalenging Methods: We report the case of a 17-year-old girl with an aggresive form of encephalo-myelo-polyradiculoneuritis associated with anti-VGCC antibodies which led to the discovery of anaplastic lymphoma Results: The patient presented with subacute headache, vomiting and drowsiness, cerebellar ataxia and axonal sensory-motor polyradiculoneuritis. These were followed by opsoclonus, urinary retention, severe limb weakness and dysarthria. The clinical peak was reached at 3 weeks from onset. Extensive workup ruled out infection. Brain MRI showed mild hiperintensity in the pons and cerebellar peduncles. Immunophenotyping from CSF was normal. Extensive screening of antineuronal antibodies was negative except for VGCC N and P/Q antibodies. The pathology from an axillary lymphadenopathy showed a CD30+, ALKanaplastic lymphoma. Despite repeated courses of ivIg, plasma exchange, aggresive immunosuppresion and cytostatic chemotherapy she relentlessly worsened requiring nasogastric feeding and mechanical ventilation, and died at 2.5 months from onset. Conclusion: Apart from cerebellar degeneration in Hodgkin's lymphoma and poly/deramtomyositis in both Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, other PNS are very rare in people with lymphoma. Of our knowledge, this is the firs reported case of encephalo-myelopolyradiculoneuritis with anti-VGCC antibodies associated with anaplastic lymphoma. Screening for neoplasia in progressive subacute unexplained neurological syndromes is of utmost importance Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3173 Presenting features, referral pathways, and waiting times for patients with glioblastoma multiforme: A retrospective cross-sectional analysis T. Hart 1 , B. Ceronie 2 , A. Bahra 1 1 Whipps Cross University Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2 Barts Health NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom Background and aims: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a highly malignant form of glioma with a universally poor prognosis, despite advances in treatment and the introduction of national UK cancer waiting time targets. We aimed to assess the common presenting features, and the effects of referral pathway on patient outcomes. Methods: We collected data for all cases diagnosed locally between 2009 and 2016, including clinical features, referral route, and mortality. Patterns of presenting signs and symptoms were compared with previous studies, and current NICE guidelines for the referral of suspected brain cancer. Timelines for discussion, investigation and treatment were constructed for each patient, and compared for evidence of variation in care and clinical outcomes based on referral route. Results: Of 58 cases, emergency admissions accounted for 69%, followed by non-urgent GP referrals (19%) and urgent referrals (9%). Presenting features were highly variable and included headache, weakness, seizures, and cognitive deficits. There was no difference in waiting time to first specialist discussion, biopsy, or treatment between emergency and urgent referral cases. Non-urgent referrals experienced longer waits for specialist discussion (p=0.037) and biopsy (p<0.001). However, this had no impact on time to initiation of treatment or on 1, 3, or 5-year survival. Conclusion: Our study shows that the majority of patients with high-grade gliomas are not detected via the urgent referral system, and that referral route has a negligible impact on patient care. This highlights significant human and financial resources that could be more productively deployed elsewhere, and the need for more effective strategies of referral and investigation. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3174 Oligodendroglioma with a microscopic pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma-like perivascular lesion H. Ikota 1 , S. Nakata 1 , T. Yamazaki 1 , S. Nobusawa 1 , Y. Hashiba 2 , J. Hirato 3 , H. Yokoo 1 1 Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, Maebashi, Japan, 2 Kiryu Kosei General Hospital, , Kiryu, Japan, 3 Gunma University Hospital, Maebashi, Japan Background and aims: The coexistence of diffuse and localized glioma has rarely been reported. Herein, we present a histological and genetic case study of concurrent oligodendroglioma and pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (PXA). Methods: A 48-year-old male presented with a generalized seizure. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a nonenhanced mass in the left frontal lobe, which was suggestive of low-grade glioma. The patient was monitored with serial MRI, which revealed slight enlargement of the tumor. The patient underwent a craniotomy and tumor resection about 18 months after the initial symptoms appeared. Results: Examination of the surgical specimen showed an oligodendroglioma containing a localized astrocytoma element, which corresponded to PXA, measured only 0.9 mm in greatest diameter, and was almost completely limited to the Virchow-Robin space of the superficial cortex. No elevated mitotic activity, microvascular proliferation, or necrosis was found in either tumor. Immunohistochemistry confirmed that each tumor was mIDH1R132H-positive, p53-negative, and ATRX-positive. Genetic analysis demonstrated that each component harbored an IDH1 G395A mutation, 1p/19q co-deletion, and a TERT promoter C228T mutation, whereas no TP53 or BRAF mutations were detected. The diffuse glioma met the diagnostic criteria for oligodendroglioma, IDH-mutant and 1p/19qcodeleted, according to the 2016 World Health Organization classification of tumors of the central nervous system. Genetic testing of the microscopic PXA-like lesion was performed with laser microdissection. Conclusion: Genetic analysis confirmed that this case involved an unusual type of combined glioma of the same genotype rather than a collision tumor. This case provides further insights into the pathogenesis of glioma. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose Background and aims: Gangliogliomas are rare (1.3% of all primary brain tumours) and consist of both neuronal and glial elements. Anaplastic gangliogliomas are even rarer, accounting for 1-5% of all gangliogliomas. Paraneoplastic T-cell vasculitis of the CNS is very rare. Methods: We report the case of a 25-year-old man with a 6-month history of episodic anxiety, followed by left hemiparesis and partial complex seizures. A brain MRI revealed two large enhancing tumours (left temporal and right fronto-parietal) with necrotic areas and important oedema. The tumour in the temporal lobe was resected. The pathological examination showed a massive lymphocytic vascular and perivascular proliferation with activated CD8+CD4-T-cells and no lymphomatous cells. Infections that could mount the T-cell response (HIV, HTLV1 and Toxoplasma gondii) were ruled out. Hybridization in situ for EBV was negative. Further tissue immunocytochemistry showed anaplastic ganglioglioma (WHO 9505/3).  The massive vasogenic oedema secondary to the vasculitic cytotoxic T-cell response led to a relentless clinical worsening despite strong and early immunosuppression with high dose steroids, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and ivIg, and a left decompressive hemicraniotomy. After four weeks the patient died. Conclusion: The massive cytotoxic lymphocytic vasculitis in the presence of a aggressive type of brain tumour suggests a paraneoplastic mechanism. This is the first case reported of a secondary T cell response directed against brain vessels probably driven by anaplastic ganglioglioma. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3177 Bilateral vestibulocochlear nerve enhancement as an isolated brain MRI sign of leptomeningeal carcinomatosis S. Sousa, C. Carmona, F. Pita Background and aims: Leptomeningeal carcinomatosis occurs in approximately 5% of patients with cancer. Clinical manifestations can be highly variable and may affect both central and peripheral nervous system. Involvement of multiple cranial nerves is common, with III, IV, VI and VII nerves most often affected. Isolated vestibulocochlear nerve involvement is rare. This report describes a case of a patient with vertigo and a bilateral VIII nerves enhancement as clinical-imagological presentation of leptomingeal carcionomatosis. Results: A 56-year-old woman presented, at our emergency room, with a one week history of vertigo and imbalance. She was a smoker and had a history of lung adenocarcinoma diagnosed one year before, treated with pulmonary lobectomy and chemotherapy. She denied other symptoms, namely headache. On examination, she had a right gazeevoked nystagmus and a sensory ataxia with positive Romberg`s sign. She had no meningism and no obvious other neurological signs and the fundus oculi examination was normal. Head computed tomography (CT) showed no abnormalities. Brain MRI showed a contrast enhancement of both vestibulocochlear nerves. CSF analysis showed pleocytosis and the cytology revealed malignant cells, compatible with a diagnosis of metastatic adenocarcinoma. Conclusion: Our data show that vestibulocochlear symptoms represent the only clinical manifestation in a small proportion of patients (about 10%) with leptomeningeal carcinomatosis. Isolated bilateral vestibulocochlear nerve enhancement is a rare imagological finding and should be considered in the differential diagnosis even in the absence of associated clinical symptoms and neuroimaging alterations more suggestive of meningeal carcinomatosis. Disclosure: Nothing to disclose EP3178 Glioblastoma as differential diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis 
