706cfdb60b1817fc7dd30f8c16a370ab32014eee
Scientific Programme -Abstracts 1 B Scientif Scientif Scientif Scientif Scientific Sessions ic Sessions ic Sessions ic Sessions ic Sessions C Scientif Scientif Scientif Scientif Scientific and Educa ic and Educa ic and Educa ic and Educa ic and Educational tional tional tional tional Exhibits Exhibits Exhibits Exhibits Exhibits 321 321 321 321 321 D Sa Sa Sa Sa Satellite Symposia tellite Symposia tellite Symposia tellite Symposia tellite Symposia



Daily overviews display all sessions' basic details and indicate the page on which the related abstracts can be found. Sessions and abstracts are listed by days. Presentations for which the author(s) have submitted additional material and images to EPOS TM are marked with the ! icon. Session numbers are prefixed by SS 133 133 133 133 133 Presentation numbers are prefixed by the letter D 495 495 495 495 495 Daily overviews display all sessions' basic details and indicate the page on which the related abstracts can be found. Sessions and abstracts are listed by days. Presentations for which the author(s) have submitted additional material and images to EPOS TM are marked with the ! icon. Imaging plays a central role in staging cancer providing information which guides treatment decisions. This information is becoming increasingly complex due to the development of functional imaging with positron emission tomography (PET) and to the highly sophisticated morphological and functional information derived from CT and MR imaging. Such advances together with the relentless increase in incidence of cancer and improved survival rates have led to rising demands for imaging studies. The goal of cancer imaging is to improve patient outcomes by providing a high quality service in which information derived is accurate, concise and relevant to patient management. Thus strategies in cancer imaging need to be developed, agreed and continually updated. Factors which influence strategies include trends in incidence and mortality, technological advance, the outcome of clinical and imaging research and multidisciplinary team working. The radiologist is a key member of the multidisciplinary team and should develop guidelines and protocols for individual tumours and have knowledge of patterns of tumour spread, the major staging classifications and current treatment options. The radiologist should advise on the choice of imaging modality and provide appropriate protocols for imaging studies. The cancer staging report is of critical importance and should contain a description of imaging findings and a clear, concise statement regarding tumour stage. In this presentation these issues will be addressed using examples in different tumour types to provide an introduction and overview to the Cancer Staging Categorical Course. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the impact of trends in cancer and the need for development in imaging services. 2. To review the evolving role of different imaging modalities in the multidisciplinary management of cancer. 3. To identify the need for a standardised imaging approach to staging. B. Significance of results in staging R.H. Reznek; London/UK (r.h.reznek@qmul.ac.uk) This talk will discuss the significance of the results in cancer staging in two contexts: (a) how the results influence the patient's outcome and (b) how interpretation of the results has to be made with knowledge of the clinical situation. (a) A robust hierarchical framework exists for measuring the effect of imaging technology on the patient's health requiring assessment of the technical performance, diagnostic performance, diagnostic impact, therapeutic and health impact. Each of the steps in this framework has to be satisfactorily tested before proceeding to the next. The method of testing each step will be defined and explained using everyday examples of the application of imaging to stage cancer. Difficulties in assessing each step, particularly the therapeutic and health impact will be discussed. (b) Interpretation of the significance of the results in an individual case requires a detailed understanding of diagnostic performance. The standard parameters for the measurement of diagnostic performance includes sensitivity, specificity and accuracy. The importance of predictive values, prevalence, receiver-operator characteristic (ROC) curves and interobserver variation will be discussed and illustrated with examples. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the framework for evaluation of the effect of imaging on healthcare. 2. To review the basic statistics used for the measurement of diagnostic performance. 3. To highlight the difficulties in evaluating the therapeutic impact of imaging in cancer staging. 4. To briefly review the techniques for the measurement of cost-effectiveness of imaging technology. Bone marrow edema is a generic term commonly used by radiologists to describe a pattern of bone marrow changes characterized by the presence of moderate decrease in signal intensity on T1-weighted spin echo images and intermediate to high signal intensity on T2-weighted spin echo images in the bone marrow. From an histological point of view, the use of this term is rather incorrect as edema is rarely a predominant feature at microscopic analysis. However, radiologists should regard the presence of bone marrow edema as a sign indicative of an active process. The current lecture will illustrate the MR appearance of marrow edema and cover the wide spectrum of conditions in which it is observed. We will emphasize the role of the radiologist in making a specific diagnosis, starting from a non specific finding like marrow edema. The value of a multimodality approach will be emphasized. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn how to confidently recognize bone marrow edema of the femoral head at MR imaging to avoid confusion with hip osteoarthritis or femoral head avascular necrosis. 2. To emphasize the natural history of bone marrow edema lesions of the femoral head. 3. To discuss the differential diagnosis of bone marrow edema lesions including transient osteoporosis, epiphyseal stress fracture and osteonecrosis. A-004 B. Imaging of the acetabular labrum H. Imhof; Vienna/AT (mr@univie.ac.at) The labrum serves as load distributor, stabilizer and joint "sealer" during motion. The labrum is ten times stiffer than the hyaline cartilage and broadens the acetabulum by about 20 %. Degeneration of the labrum leads to mucoid/cystic transformations of the labrum matrix (=abnormal intralabral signal), followed by mild free edge blunting. Because of the abnormal internal structure labral tears may develop. In 40 -80 % of patients with degenerative osteoarthritis labral tears are found (most commonly anteriorly and anterior superiorly). They have a very low tendency of self healing -very similar to the degenerative tears in the menisci of the knee joint. On the other hand it is well known that asymptomatic labral tears are found in 42 -58 % of all persons over 50 years. Labral tears are also found in 72 % of patients with dysplasia, in patients with Perthes disease, slipped epiphysis and reduced anteversion, as well. The femoro-acetabular impingement (= Pincer impingement) and the Cam-impingement (acetabular rim syndrome) -are leading to labral damage (edema, blunting, tear, paralabral cyst) and are followed by damage of the neighbouring cartilage, ending up in early degenerative osteoarthritis. Labral tears and internal structure abnormalities may end up in the development of large paralabral cysts (filled with synovial fluid) and/or labral calcifications. It is thought that paralabral tears are connected with and based on labral tears. Learning Objectives: 1. To get good knowledge of normal anatomy, physiology and pathophysiology. 2. To learn standard-imaging procedures and indications. 3. To understand common variations resulting in different joint loading. 4. To understand the development of the impingent syndrome and clinical consequences. A-005 C. Impingement syndromes C.W.A. Pfirrmann; Zürich/CH (christian.pfirrmann@balgrist.ch) Femoroacetabular impingement (FAI) is a conflict occurring between the proximal femur and the acetabular rim. Femoroacetabular impingement is caused either by abnormalities of the proximal femur or the acetabulum. Often a combination of factors may lead to FAI. The repetitive mechanical conflict occurring in flexion and internal rotation will lead to lesions of acetabular labrum and the adjacent acetabular cartilage. Two distinct types of femoroacetabular impingement can be distinguished "Cam" and "Pincer" impingement. "Cam" impingement is caused by jamming of an abnormal femoral head neck junction into the acetabulum during forceful flection and internal rotation of the hip. This results in abrasion of the acetabular cartilage or its avulsion from the labrum and subchondral bone in a rather constant anterosuperior area. Chondral avulsion in turn leads to tear or detachment of the principally uninvolved labrum. Cam impingement is common in young and athletic males. "Pincer" impingement is the result of linear contact between the acetabular rim and the femoral head-neck junction. The femoral waist is usually normal and the abutment is the result of an acetabular abnormality, often a general over-coverage (coxa profunda) or local anterior over coverage (acetabular retroversion). The first structure to fail in this situation is the acetabular labrum. Continued impact of abutment results in degeneration of the labrum and ossification of the rim leading to additional deepening of the acetabulum and worsening of the over coverage. The persistent abutment can result in chondral injury in the 'contrecoup' region of the posteroinferior acetabulum. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the basic biomechanical principles of femoroacetabular impingement. 2. To be able to distinguish the two main types of femoroacetabular impingement. 3. To be able to identify the structural abnormalities that lead to femoroacetabular impingement. 4. To know the typical structural changes and their imaging appearance that result from femoroacetabular impingement. The evaluation of cardiac metric parameters was mainly developed in the seventies and eighties by modalities of nuclear medicine. With the introduction of cardiac MR a new method without radiation exposure became available and with promising capabilities for morphometric evaluation. With the development of high gradient MR systems routine imaging of the myocardium became an important new diagnostic tool in the beginning of the nineties. Already in that time the first observations on late enhancement (LE) MR imaging of the myocardium to detect myocardial infarcts were published. Today with the development of parallel imaging MR is profiling itself as the modality of first choice for LE CMR and studies show its superiority over nuclear methods. Even reliable perfusion MR techniques become available and are also highly competitive compared to nuclear scanning. Surprisingly the latest developments in MDCT show a remarkable capability for myocardial evaluation and it is not sure were this will lead to. Stress testing became a reliable tool when cine MR imaging was used as monitoring modality instead of ultrasound and it probably will be the one and only modality that can safely and reliably monitor the myocardium during stress testing. The 3 lectures on these topics will address the developments in these fields and focus on the future role of imaging modalities in the evaluation of the myocardium. Learning Objectives: 1. To display the capabilities of myocardial radiological techniques. 2. To understand the relation between the clinical problem and the radiological application. 3. To learn how to use the different imaging techniques. Myocardial perfusion: Which technique offers the best qualitative and quantitative data of all available imaging techniques? M. Gutberlet; Berlin/DE (matthias.gutberlet@charite.de) Different modalities are available for the non-invasive qualitative or quantitative assessment of myocardial perfusion. The most commonly used techniques to assess myocardial perfusion are still thallium or technetium SPECT, and PET is still the best method to non-invasively quantify myocardial perfusion. Newer techniques like MR imaging however, without the disadvantage of radiation exposure, or low availability like PET, seem to provide at least comparable results to the more established methods. The different image modalities which are available to assess myocardial perfusion, newer developments (e.g. high field MR imaging, new contrast agents etc) and the results of the latest studies will be described. Learning Objectives: 1. To compare the quantitative and qualitative validation of the available techniques. 2 . To analyse which technique should be applied for different clinical problems. 3. To learn guidelines for clinical implementation. Myocardial stress testing: Towards an objective approach in radiological perspective D. Kuijpers; The Hague/NL (kps@xs4all.nl) Functional information about the presence of myocardial ischemia is crucial in patients with chronic chest pain. Myocardial stress imaging is based on the ischemic cascade and in radiological perspective mainly focused on the analysis of perfusion-and wall motion abnormalities. Cardiac stress MR imaging can be performed with adenosine (perfusion analysis of the left ventricle) or dobutamine (wall motion analysis). How should one apply these techniques? A diagnostic algorithm for symptomatic patients with stable chest pain is discussed. The role of CT calcium scores as the initial diagnostic filter is explained in relation to cardiac stress MR imaging. High dose dobutamine stress MR imaging is a reliable technique for the assessment of myocardial ischemia in coronary artery disease. Technological advances have evolved this technique to an adequate alternative to the standard cardiac stress tests. Its high reproducibility and excellent image quality of the anatomical features of the left ventricle and left ventricular function at rest and during stress makes it an ideal technique for the comprehensive evaluation of patients with suspected coronary artery disease. Besides its ability to detect myocardial ischemia, dobutamine stress MR imaging has proved to be diagnostic for myocardial viability as well. The use of myocardial tagging has improved the diagnostic accuracy for myocardial ischemia even further. Safety and feasibility of the technique has been well established. The use of this technique and the clinical applications are discussed. Colorectal cancer screening has vast potential. Beyond considerations for cost and diagnostic accuracy, the effectiveness of any colorectal screening strategy will be dependent on the degree of patient acceptance. MR colonography has been shown to be accurate regarding the detection of clinically relevant colonic polyps exceeding 6 mm in size, with reported sensitivity and specificity values of over 90%. To further enhance patient acceptance, strategies for fecal tagging have recently been developed. Techniques underlying MR colonography will be described and clinical experience with fecal tagging techniques will be outlined. There is a challenging task for radiologists in helping to improve the therapeutic management of rectal cancer patients. With the introduction of new treatment strategies there is a growing need for an accurate imaging tool to identify patients who are at risk for a local recurrence. The main risk factors for local recurrences are the CRM, the nodal status and distal location of the tumour. MR imaging is at present the best technique to evaluate the CRM. There is evi-dence that MR imaging is superior to CT for the assessment of organ invasion. The role of multislice spiral CT in rectal cancer has been tested in a Dutch multicenter study of which we are awaiting the results. Identifying nodal disease is still a diagnostic problem for the radiologist. Despite the identification of lymph nodes even as small as 2-3 mm on MR imaging, detection of nodal metastases is not possible on bases of morphological criteria. However promising results have been reported with the use of Iron oxide enhanced MR imaging for the detection of the nodal status in rectal cancer. These results will be discussed in the given lecture. Lower-extremity venous insufficiency is a common medical condition; although many people seek medical treatment for varicose veins because they find them unsightly, most also experience symptoms. Left untreated, nearly 50% of patients with significant superficial venous insufficiency will eventually experience chronic venous insufficiency characterized by lower extremity swelling, eczema, pigmentation, haemorrhage, and ulceration. Great saphenous vein reflux (GSV) is the most common underlying cause of significant varicose veins. Traditional treatment for this has been surgical removal of the GSV. Although surgical ligation and stripping of the GSV has been the most durable treatment, it is associated with significant perioperative morbidity. With the recent development of new endovascular treatments for patients with varicose veins, many interventional radiologists are eager to gain a greater understanding of the techniques and knowledge base that is necessary to successfully treat patients with varicose veins. While many practitioners have some understanding of venous disease and others bring with them the necessary catheter skills to perform the technical aspects of venous therapy, it is clear that any doctor that wishes to successfully develop and maintain a venous practice has to have a complete understanding of venous disease, anatomy and treatments if they are going to be successful. Within this session, will be discussed the basis of treating and managing patients with varicose vein disease using endovenous therapy and also understanding the role of procedures adjunctive to saphenous vein ablation such as ultrasound guided sclerotherapy. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand who to treat, treatment options and treatment outcomes. 2. To learn technique of laser ablation for varicose veins. 3. To learn how to set up IR service for treatment of varicose veins. Radiologic management of varicose veins L.S. Machan; Vancouver, BC/CA (lmachan@vanhosp.bc.ca) There are a wide variety of image guided therapies now available for the treatment of virtually every manifestation of lower extremity superficial venous insufficiency. For ablation of the greater or lesser saphenous vein or their major tributaries there is endovenous laser, radiofrequency ablation, and ultrasound guided foam sclerotherapy. For occlusion of incompetent perforators, there are the above options or SEPS. For large residual varicosities left after ablation of the highest point of reflux, there is ultrasound guided injection of foam or liquid sclerosant, stab avulsion or trivex. For reticular and spider veins there is meticulous sclerotherapy or topical laser. The choice of therapy is often a matter of physician and patient preference, but it is preferable that a radiologist involved in varicose vein therapy at the least be able to offer access to treatment for the full range of venous problems. It bears repeating that clarification of the patient's anatomy and identification and treatment of the highest point of reflux is essential before starting any therapy. At time of writing, there is no published data comparing laser to RF for occlusion of the GSV. The EVOLVeS trial comparing RF to surgical ligation and stripping of the GSV demonstrated similar immediate technical success but longer post surgical recovery and higher recurrence rates at 2 years. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the role of RF ablation of the saphenous vein. 2. To understand the role of procedures adjunctive to saphenous vein ablation such as ultrasound guided sclerotherapy in the management of lower extremity varicosities. 3. To list the differences in outcomes between different methods of saphenous vein occlusion. 4. To understand the basic principles of sclerotherapy. Technique of laser ablation for varicose veins S. Kundu; Toronto, ON/CA (sanjoy_kundu40@hotmail.com) With the recent development of new endovascular treatments for patients with varicose veins, many interventional radiologists are eager to gain a greater understanding of the techniques that are necessary to successfully treat patients with varicose veins. While many practitioners have some understanding of venous disease and others bring with them the necessary catheter skills to perform the technical aspects of venous therapy, it is clear that any doctor that wishes to successfully develop and maintain a venous practice has to have a complete understanding of venous disease, anatomy and treatments if they are going to be successful. The first step in endovenous laser ablation is a careful history, physical examination and a venous ultrasound. Once the source of reflux is determined the patient is placed in a supine position for treatment of the greater saphenous vein (GSV). The GSV should be punctured at the lowest point on the leg as possible. The GSV is punctured using ultrasound guidance. The laser fibre is inserted through a vascular sheath, followed by the application of tumescent anesthesia. The laser fiber is deployed under ultrasound guidance from the saphenofemoral junction to the puncture site. Patients are instructed to wear 30-40 mm Hg compression hose for two weeks after the procedure. Patients are followed up at serial intervals to ensure the greater saphenous vein is occluded, along with supplementary sclerotherapy injections. Endovenous laser ablation for greater saphenous vein reflux, has been shown to have a 95% success rate, and less than 5 % recurrence rate. Learning Objectives: 1. To define the technique of endovenous laser ablation of the greater saphenous vein. 2. To learn the success rate and efficacy of endovenous laser ablation. 3 . To learn who should perform endovenous laser ablation. 4 . To understand what are the pitfalls involved with endovenous laser ablation. Setting up an IR practice for treatment of varicose veins: How I did it J. Brookes; London/UK (jocelyn.brookes@uclh.org) There is growing precedent for direct clinical management of patients by radiologists. In defined specialist areas where the entire treatment spectrum is within the skill set of the radiologist, it seems reasonable for consultation and management to occur within the same clinic. This has advantages for the patient in meeting and discussing their problem and gaining true insight into the proposed treatment before committing to it. It is, most of all, a logical and efficient medical pathway for the patient and their physician. The management of thyroid masses by radiologists/nuclear medicine physicians provides such a model. Another is the clinical practice model for embolotherapy for complex AVM's. Many interventional radiologists see angioplasty follow-ups in a clinic or at least on a ward round and are familiar with direct clinical care. Most radiologists in the UK are doubly qualified as physicians or surgeons and are fully trained in direct clinical care. Laser ablation treatment for varicose veins is a specific clinical indication for which the entire treatment spectrum falls within the skill set of the interventional radiologist. The method was, indeed, developed and promoted by interventional radiologists. It is the ideal clinical indication for the establishment of a "Clinical Interventional Radiology" practice. The physician-radiologist can take direct referrals, advise, treat and refer or discharge as necessary, staying within her clinical competency. Building referral networks and supportive relationships with surgical colleagues is a realistic goal. Although undoubtedly challenging, establishing an IR practice is a logical (and enjoyable) specialty development at this time. The majority of lesions consist of small rounded opacities which can be classified according to position within the secondary lobule and/or relation to the pleural surface. Diseases presenting the nodular pattern include a variety of granulomatous diseases arising in the lung, haematogenous spread of diseases halting in the small vessels, and bronchogenic diseases, when the reaction to an inhaled substance is limited to the adjacent areas. Centrilobular nodules: The nodules tend to be centered at a certain distance from the pleural surface and at times also from the interlobular septa. Centrilobular distribution is more typical of diseases in which the elementary lesions originate from or near the peripheral bronchioles. Random nodules: These nodules are often of good density with sharp borders, mainly due to their being confined into the interstitium. Their distribution is reasonably uniform in the secondary lobule and parenchyma. At times they can be seen in contact with the extremities of the vascular structure from which they appear to originate (feeding vessel sign). In short, their spatial distribution appears to be uniform. Perilymphatic nodules: These nodules tend to be prevalent in the perilobular and subpleural interstitium and are therefore abundant along the costal pleura and the fissures. They are more common in diseases which spread along the lymphatics, and may therefore be found within the lobule and along the vessels and bronchi (beaded appearance). The spatial arrangement of these lesions tends to be patchy. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand why some disease present as a nodular pattern. 2. To recognize that the aspect of the nodules helps to understand their texture and localization. 3. To recognize that the distribution is very helpful to focus their origin and the underlying disease. 4. To discuss an approach to the differential diagnosis based on the distribution and appearance of abnormalities. A-018 B. Reticular pattern M.L. Storto; Chieti/IT (ml.storto@radiol.unich.it) On HRCT, the finding of numerous interlacing lines resembling a mesh is indicated as reticular pattern and is usually associated with interstitial lung disease. It may result from interlobular and/or intralobular interstitial thickening by fluid, fibrous tissue, or infiltration by cell or other material. Although a reticular pattern can be found in a variety of diseases, the HRCT appearance of reticulation and the distribution of abnormalities are important keyfindings in the differential diagnosis. A course reticular pattern associated with severe distorsion of lobular architecture, traction bronchiectasis and bronchiolectasis is indicative of fibrosis and can be observed in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis or other causes of UIP. Similarly, a reticular pattern characterized by irregular cystic spaces and honeycombing is almost typical of end-stage pulmonary fibrosis. A smooth reticular pattern characterized by interlobular septal thickening and a normal lobular architecture can be found in pulmonary edema or hemorrhage, sarcoidosis, lymphangitic spread of cancer, and amyloidosis. In patients with lymphangitic spread of cancer or lymphoma, sarcoidosis, silicosis or coal worker's pneumoconiosis a nodular appearance of thickened interlobular septa can be observed. Intralobular interstitial thickening can also be seen in the absence of significant fibrosis. When this is the case, traction bronchiectasis or other manifestations of fibrosis are absent. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with the reticular pattern seen on HRCT scans and the underlying pathological changes. 2. To review the spectrum of imaging findings of the most common diseases presenting with a reticular pattern. 3. To discuss an approach to the differential diagnosis based on the distribution and appearance of abnormalities. A-019 C. Ground-glass pattern K. Malagari; Athens/GR (kmalag@acn.gr) Ground glass opacity is defined as a hazy increase of lung attenuation not associated with obscuration of the outline of underlying lung vessels. It is produced by volume averaging of pathologic abnormalities too small to be clearly resolved in HRCT, i.e. minimal septal or alveolar interstitial thickening, minimal filling of the alveolar spaces, or in some cases it may be the result of increased capillary blood volume -most properly described as "mosaic perfusion" in the latter case. Ground glass therefore represents isolated or combined involvement of lung compartments and is non-specific. Distribution and associated lung parenchymal findings are essential for the diagnosis. To avoid pitfalls in the recognition of this pattern it should only be called on thin slices. It should also be considered that a number of factors may affect lung density including the depth of inspiration, gravitational differences, photopenic artifacts, and window and level settings. In the differential diagnosis in patients with acute symptoms pulmonary edema, hemorrhage, acute eosinophilic pneumonia, and infection (particularly in immunocompromize) should be considered. Idiopathic interstitial pneumonia, sarcoidosis, alveolar proteinosis should be considered in chronic cases. Subpleural distribution is highly associated with the UIP histologic subtype of idiopathic interstitial pneumonia. Ground glass superimposed on septal thickening ("crazy paving") is most frequently associated with alveolar proteinosis, ARDS, lipoid pneumonia or subacute alveolar hemorrhage. When a geographic distribution is observed, assessment of the relative size of lung vessels and inspiratory and expiratory slices are essential for differentiation between vascular and airway disease. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with reticular pattern. 2. To understand the radiologic-pathologic correlations of the ground glass pattern on HRCT scans. 3. To discuss potential pitfalls and technical issues of this pattern. 4. To review the spectrum of the most common conditions presenting with a ground glass pattern and discuss the clinical value and limitations of this pattern in diagnosis and follow-up. Knowledge and familiarity with cardiac anatomy is a prerequisite to understand both cardiac physiology and pathological changes in congenital and adult heart disease. Depiction of cardiac anatomy on imaging studies until relatively recently has involved plain X-rays, cardiac catheterizations and ultrasonography, the latter two being almost exclusively practiced by cardiologists. Indications of cardiac imaging on sequential CT or early MR scanners remained relatively limited in the everyday clinical practice, mainly due to the low temporal resolution of these modalities and/or the unacceptable required long scanning times. With the advent, however, of modern multislice CT and the evolution of cardiac MR imaging a still evolving wide spectrum of new clinical indications arises. Traditional training in Radiology during residency often does not yield familiarization with different structures in specific intrinsic organ-related tomographic planes (long-axis, short-axis, 4-chamber etc), which are mainly used by cardiologists. Cardiologists on the other hand are not generally familiar with tomographic imaging and the variety of post-processing techniques (MPR, MIP, SSD, Volume rendering etc), already widely used in everyday radiology. Successful patient management requires additional familiarization with different modalities used by both specialties, as well as establishment of a common ground of communication. This lecture will focus on depiction of cardiac anatomy on different imaging modalities, familiarization with different imaging planes, specific anatomical charac-teristics of cardiac chambers as well as anatomical variants which may mimic or cause pathology. Learning Objectives: 1. To familiarize with cardiac anatomy and most important anatomical landmarks. 2. To be able to identify different anatomical landmarks in imaging studies of normal and abnormal hearts. 3. To understand and be able to plan imaging studies in various imaging planes. 4. To be able to identify morphologically the different cardiac chambers in congenital heart disease. A-021 B. Cardiac physiology F.E. Rademakers; Leuven/BE (frank.rademakers@uz.kuleuven.ac.be) Cardiac imaging techniques have evolved over the last decades to provide a comprehensive evaluation of cardiovascular morphology and function. Whereas echocardiography remains the most important technique, both in scope and applicability, the newer techniques like magnetic resonance imaging and MSCT have contributed significantly to our understanding of cardiovascular physiology and pathophysiology and have entered the clinical arena. The purpose of this presentation is to (re-) introduce some general aspects of cardiac physiology and to give an insight into the basic mechanisms of cardiovascular performance as they can be evaluated with the newer imaging modalities. Starting with the smallest contractile unit, i.e. the sarcomere, the heart as a muscle and pump, will be analysed and the parameters of function, deformation and load will be discussed. The distinction between deformation parameters (wall thickening, stroke volume, ejection fraction) and intrinsic or extrinsic changes in contractility will be made. The functional implications of the specific characteristics of the circulatory components will be shown and as an example the coronary circulation will be discussed. Briefly some aspects of valvular function will be touched upon. At the end of this presentation, the participant should be able to choose the correct parameters of cardiac performance and to make a comprehensive evaluation of pump function. He should be aware of the pitfalls of simplifying the interpretation of cardiac parameters and to put the measurements in their correct clinical perspective. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the basic principles of cardiac physiology. 2. To understand the implications of these principles for the indications and methodology of cardiac imaging. 3. To understand the limitations of the interpretation of cardiac imaging tests based on physiologic principles. Treatment of symptomatic patients with a carotid artery stenosis > 70% has been proven to be useful in 2 large prospective randomized trials. In these studies, patients presenting with a TIA or minor stroke first had a duplex investigation to screen for severe carotid disease. The Doppler criteria for optimal patient selection for further investigation were assessed. In these studies, DSA was used to show the stenosis so this method became the gold standard. This method however is invasive, has a small complication rate and due to the limited number of projections, cross-sectional methods could be more reliable in showing the degree of stenosis. In the last 5 years MR angiography first without and later with contrast seems to be an acceptable alternative for angiography, although claustrophobia and artefacts can obviate diagnosis in up to 20%. Recently multislice CT offers new possibilities and its usefulness has been proven in larger studies. Since new techniques will never have a similar accuracy to the gold standard angiography, cost effective analysis is necessary to prove that the advantage of the non-invasive character of the new techniques (less complications) outweighs its disadvantage of not being as accurate as the angiogram. Confusingly, the junction between the neck and the thorax is known anatomically as the thoracic inlet, but clinically is frequently referred to as the thoracic outlet. Thus, the clinical syndrome in the upper limb resulting from compression of vessels and/or nerves have become popularly known as thoracic outlet compression syndrome (TOCS). The presentation of TOCS is variable due to a combination of neural, arterial or venous symptoms. As the brachial plexus and subclavian vessels traverse the root of the neck, they may be compressed by a number of abnormal anatomical structures, such as cervical ribs, an abnormal first rib, fibromuscular bands and so on. A number of imaging modalities may be of value, and each has merits depending on the clinical presentation. Plain films may show an abnormal bony structure such as a cervical rib. Doppler ultrasound may show associated arterial or venous abnormalities, but is unlikely to show abnormal soft tissue structures. CT angiography may show the vascular abnormalities as well, but gives little advantage over Doppler ultrasound, and will not demonstrate the abnormal soft tissue structures responsible for compression. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be extremely valuable. First, MRA may be used to examine the arterial tree to look for compression damage or other causative lesions. Similarly, MR venography may be performed. MR imaging can also be used to examine the brachial plexus, and too look for compressive structures such as fibromuscular bands. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the anatomy and mechanisms of thoracic outlet syndrome. 2. To understand the techniques, limitations and results of CTA and MRA in the evaluation of the thoracic inlet. 3. To understand the merits and limitations of the various imaging strategies in the diagnosis of thoracic outlet syndrome. A-030 C. Imaging of the upper extremity vessels before and after placement of dialysis fistulae L. Turmel-Rodrigues; Tours/FR (luc.turmel@wanadoo.fr) Venous mapping is necessary prior to fistula creation whenever clinical examination does not show evidence of a usable vein in either forearm and in all cases of previous central line placement. Such venous mapping can be achieved by iodine or CO 2 venography, ultrasonography (US) or MRA. Once the fistula has been constructed, imaging is indicated from the 5 th week in cases of delayed maturation. US examination rules out deep location of the vein and indicates the need for surgery in cases of stenoses located close to the anastomosis. In all other cases, angiography with concomitant dilatation of underlying stenoses is indicated. On mature fistulas, flow rate monitoring during dialysis sessions is now a well established method of screening for stenoses, with thresholds ranging from 350 mL/min for forearm fistulas to 600 for grafts. There is no indication for imaging of asymptomatic stenoses as long as the overall access flow rate is above these thresholds. In cases of clinical abnormalities with preserved flow rates, US examination can diagnose stenoses and help choose between surgical and endovascular treatment. However, angiography remains the gold standard when US does not reveal a clear explanation for clinical abnormalities or when clinical examination indicates that percutaneous dilatation would be the best treatment. US examination can be useful when monitored flow rates fall below thresholds but urgent angiography with concomitant dilatation may be preferable in order to avoid the risk of acute thrombosis. MRA can provide reliable images of stenoses but does not allow concomitant percutaneous treatment. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand why surgeons must first try to create native arteriovenous fistulae in either forearm whenever possible. A-032 B. Endometriosis K. Kinkel; Chêne-Bougeries/CH (karen.kinkel@grangettes.ch) Endometriosis corresponds to ectopic endometrial glands and stroma outside the uterine cavity. Clinical symptoms include dysmenorrhoea, dyspareunia, infertility, painful defecation or urinary symptoms. Transabdominal and transvaginal ultrasound is the primary imaging modality to identify and differentiate locations to the ovary (endometriomas) and the bladder wall. Characteristic sonographic features of endometriomas are diffuse low-level internal echos, multilocularity and hyperchoic foci in the wall. Differential diagnoses include corpus luteum, teratoma, cystadenoma, fibroma, tubo-ovarian abscess and carcinoma. Repeated ultrasound is highly recommended for unilocular cysts with low-level internal echoes to differentiate functional corpus luteum from endometriomas. Hysterosalpingography remains the key examination for patients complaining about infertility (scheduled between day 8 and 12 of the menstrual cycle to prevent radiation of possible early pregnancy). Posterior locations of endometriosis include uterosacral ligaments, torus uterinus, vagina and recto-sigmoid. Sonographic and MR imaging features are discussed for each location. Although ultrasound is able to diagnose most locations, its limited sensitivity for posterior lesions does not allow management decisions in all patients. MR imaging has shown high accuracies for both anterior and posterior endometriosis and enables complete lesion mapping before surgery. Endometriomas are T2 and T1-hyperintense persisting at fat suppression. Posterior locations demonstrate abnormal T2-hypointense signal, nodules with occasional T1-hyperintense spots and are easier to identify when peristaltic inhibitors and intravenous contrast media are used with decreased enhancement compared to myometrium, bladder detrusor or muscularis propria of the colon. Anterior locations benefit from MR imaging urography sequences within the same examination to identify the position and possible luminal narrowing of the ureter. Learning Objectives: 1. To identify features of ovarian peritoneal, vaginal, bladder, rectal and bowel endometriosis at ultrasound and MR imaging. 2. To discuss differential diagnosis in patients with pelvic pain. 3. To compare the value of preoperative imaging modalities according to symptoms and lesion location. A-033 C. Adnexal lesions characterization and staging C.S. Balleyguier 1 , K. Kinkel 2 , N. Perrot 3 , P. Morice 1 , C. Lhomme 1 , R. Sigal 1 ; 1 Villejuif/FR, 2 Geneva/CH, 3 Paris/FR (balleyguier@igr.fr) Imaging is essential for characterization and staging of adnexal masses. The role of modern imaging is to point out the organ of origin, to specify if the process is congenital, functional, hemorrhagic, neoplastic, obstructive or inflammatory and finally to adequately stage the neoplastic diseases before surgery or medical treatment. Adnexal lesions may include lesions of ovaries, fallopian tubes, broad ligament, uterosacral ligaments and their blood and nervous supply. Masses may also arise from the uterus. Non gynaecologic sources of abdominopelvic masses must also be considered. Knowledge of female anatomy, embryology and physiology is necessary to understand adnexal diseases. Awareness of previous surgery and medical treatment are also helpful for the analysis of organs. Ultrasonography and Doppler US remain the first step to detect and characterize adnexal lesions. Nevertheless, MR imaging is often more accurate, provided an excellent technique depending on the suspected disease and based on multiplanar capability, spontaneous organ contrast and optional enhancement by contrast media. MR imaging has a better soft tissue contrast than CT and precisely delineates pelvic organs and the pelvic wall landmarks like nodal chains and bones. MR imaging is also the best imaging method for deep pelvic endometriosis and atypical endometriomas. CT can provide useful information about the extent of disease in the case of malignancy, and in some ovarian lesions, like teratomas or calcified ovarian tumors. US and MR imaging appear to be complementary tools for the examination of adnexal diseases. Multidisciplinary approach is mandatory in order to understand the possibilities and limits, advantages and pitfalls of pelvic imaging. Learning Objectives: 1. To list the most common ovarian tumors, benign or malignant, including main features of prognosis and natural history. 2. To understand why non neoplastic diseases like infection or endometriosis may present as adnexal masses. 3. To understand the role of Doppler ultrasonography for the detection and characterization of masses. 4. To know the standard technique for MR imaging, and to understand how to optimize spatial resolution and tissue characterization. 5. To describe the role of CT, which is mandatory for staging and follow-up of tumors, and may help for tumor characterization. 6. To understand the role of the radiologist in the multidisciplinary approach for decision making. risk (penumbra) the traditional role of neuroimaging has changed. Multimodal MR imaging and CT have improved our understanding of the pathophysiology of stroke, in terms of cerebral blood flow and cell metabolism. A patient suspected of having suffered an acute stroke should be cleared for thrombolytic therapy, by excluding intracranial hemorrhage and non-stroke causes of the patient's symptoms. The critical 3 to 6 hour time window for thrombolytic therapy necessitates rapid and accurate diagnosis. The fundamental goals of neuroimaging in the patient with acute stroke are therefore: 1. To rule out intracranial hemorrhage, e.g. by CT or MR imaging; 2. To show ischemic brain tissue, e.g. by diffusion-weighted MR imaging; 3. To show tissue blood flow and to identify areas of potentially salvageable brain tissue, e.g. by perfusion CT or MR imaging. 4. To assess vessel patency, e.g. by performing CT angiography or MR angiography. The purpose of this presentation is to review the pathophysiology of acute stroke and to demonstrate how multimodal neuroimaging techniques now play a crucial role in the diagnosis, clinical management therapy and outcome prediction of patients with an acute stroke. Learning Objectives: 1. To review the physiology of cerebral blood flow and explain the mechanism of cytotoxic edema. 2. To review the CT imaging findings in acute cerebral infarction. 3. To review the imaging findings in acute cerebral infarction on conventional MR sequences, diffusion-weighted MR imaging (DWI) and MR perfusion. 4. To suggest the algorithm for optimal imaging protocol in acute stroke, discuss optimal time to image the stroke patient, and optimal method for infarct detection. 5. To learn how to select patients which may benefit from treatment with thrombolytics. A-035 B. Imaging in chronic cerebral ischemia P.A. Brouwer, M.A. van Buchem; Leiden/NL (m.a.van_buchem@lumc.nl) Chronic cerebral ischemia is a condition that can be described as a longstanding decrease in oxygen supply to the brain or parts of it. Chronic cerebral ischemia is a relatively frequent condition. A variety of disorders can lead to chronic cerebral ischemia, and each of these causes can be associated with different imaging findings. In this presentation, an overview will be provided of the causes and consequences (in terms of abnormalities that can be detected with imaging techniques and in terms of function) of chronic cerebral ischemia. Finally, the availability of therapeutic strategies for chronic cerebral ischemia will be discussed. Learning Objectives: 1. To review the causes of chronic cerebral ischemia. 2. To know and understand the imaging findings in chronic cerebral ischemia. 3. To review the functional and therapeutic consequences of chronic cerebral ischemia. A-036 C. Carotid and vertebral artery disease P. Vilela, A. Goulão; Almada/PT (rmcaselas@rm-sdi.pt) Ischemic stokes may have distinct aetiologies including several different intrinsic arterial pathological disorders. The diagnosis and understanding of these arterial diseases is critical for the correct management of stroke as different treatment approaches are undertaken according to the aetiology. Atherosclerosis is, by far, the most common arterial disease among adults and other pathological processes include arterial dissection, small-vessel disease, inflammatory and noninflammatory vasculopathy and vasomotor disorders. In children there are several vasculopathies responsible for vaso-occlusive disease like sickle-cell anemia, acute regressive angiopathy and Moya-Moya disease, neurofibromatosis, dissections, vasculitis associated with intracranial and systemic infections. An overview of the major carotid and vertebral pathological diseases responsible for ischemic stroke in adults and children, highlighting the accuracy of the different imaging modalities for its diagnosis and the imaging appearance of these diseases, is given. Learning Objectives: 1. To recognize the most common causes of carotid and vertebral pathology responsible for stroke for children and adults. 2. To learn the technical principles underling the vascular imaging modalities and realize its accuracy and limitations. 3. To comprehend the value of the different imaging modalities to evaluate the arterial system and establish an imaging protocol for the stroke study in adults and children. MR mammography (MRM) occupies a strong position among other diagnostic imaging methods. The task of a radiologist specialized in "breast imaging" is to rule out malignancy, staging of tumour extent or to set the diagnosis in the easiest and cheapest way, shortest possible time and with minimal patient discomfort. Combination of high quality mammography and sonography is essential. According to our experience as many as 30% of all indications to MRM are incorrect; these are mostly ambiguous focal changes (core biopsy is a method of choice) or findings of bubious microcalcification. MRM is relatively often indicated on basis of an interpretation of low quality mammograms and substitutes cheaper spot compression/magnification mammography. Main indications of MRM are: Exclusion of rupture and complications of silicon implant, assessment of scarring after breast conserving therapy, exclusion of multifocality and preoperative assessment of the extent of carcinoma in mammographically dense breast. It is suitable for screening of, "BRCA1.2 positive" women and for monitoring of chemotherapy. On the other hand it is inappropriate for young symptomatic women with dense breasts, in cases of clustered microcalcification or for differentiation of inflammation from inflammatory (erysipeloid) carcinoma. Author also describes recommended techniques of imaging and evaluation with emphasis on standardization of procedure. He shows typical cases. Contrast-enhanced MR imaging of the breast has proved to be a valuable tool in the detection and work-up of breast lesions. Most of these lesions are small and not visible by other imaging modalities such as mammography or US. Thus, MRguided preoperative localization techniques or MR-guided percutaneous biopsy can provide a histologic work-up of such lesions. MR-guided preoperative localization seems to be a well-established procedure. However, MR-guided biopsy is still problematic. Although prototypic biopsy systems have been developed, considerable progress is still required. Thus, needle biopsy currently is not recommended for lesions smaller than 10 mm. Beside the potential of MR imaging of the breast for monitoring of interventional procedures MR imaging provides also the impetus for the development of dedicated systems for MR-guided therapy. A variety of minimally invasive procedures have already been used to characterize and treat breast lesions. These therapies include thermal treatments, percutaneous excision or breast lumpectomy, and interstitial radiotherapy. This course reviews current techniques for MR-guided preoperative localization and percutaneous biopsy in breast lesions. The diagnostic accuracy achievable with these techniques will be discussed. Potential for new research opportunities and directions will be provided. MR screening in high-risk patients is now a validated indication with several reports demonstrating its effectiveness for detecting breast cancer. Dynamic contrast-enhanced MR imaging has a high sensitivity but a limited specificity, due to the non selective extravasation of gadolinium chelates from blood into the interstitium of both normal and pathological tissues. New techniques can be added to improve these results. The high capillary perfusion of cancers can be assessed with T2*-weighted first -pass MR imaging; hydrogen MR spectroscopy allows the detection of an abnormal choline resonance peak in cancers. First results of combined MR studies are encouraging with a very high reported specificity. MR elastography is an imaging-based method for quantitatively imaging the elastic properties of breast tissue. Preliminary results show a significant difference between normal and malignant tissues. MR imaging at 3 Tesla allows a high temporal and spatial resolution and improved also the spectroscopic data. New different contrast agents are under evaluation. Macromolecular contrast media should diffuse only across the pathological endothelium of malignant tumours. These agents seem promising and allow quantitative assessment of tumor blood flow and microvascular permeability. Current clinical applications have to define the optimal MR protocols. Ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxyde agents increase the detection of malignant axillary lymph nodes (no captation after intravenous injection, T2*-weighted sequence) and can be used in association with gadolinium chelates for the staging of breast cancer. Intramammary injection of this contrast medium seems possible for the detection of the sentinel lymph node. In recent years blood pool agents have received increasing attention for highresolution imaging of the cardiovascular system, as MR angiography (MRA) is less invasive and more cost-effective than conventional angiography. A prerequisite for blood pool agents is a higher efficiency on signal enhancement than non specific agents to allow visualization of small vessels, i.e. coronary and peripheral arteries. With higher r1 relaxivity, they are expected to demonstrate improved diagnostic performance, intense and selective vascular enhancement at a dose lower than doses for approved gadolinium contrast agents. Blood pool agents currently under clinical trials present a high r1 relaxivity and a vascular pharmacokinetic behaviour. For MRA, different drug design strategies, i.e. macromolecules, small molecules with reversible albumin binding, and iron oxide particles have been investigated. With imaging at 3 T and higher, their r1 NMRD profile has also to be considered to maintain r1 efficiency at high field. To fully benefit from the higher r1 and the longer vascular residence time, dedicated MRA acquisition and post-processing methods need to be implemented in concert with the blood pool agent evaluation. Dose adjustment, safety, patient benefit and cost are also key issues before marketing. Blood pool agents have many other applications, i.e. tissue perfusion, permeability and vessel wall imaging. With new MR markers, it is also feasible to target molecular actors of atherosclerosis. In conclusion, blood pool agents and their targeted derivatives are very promising for the diagnosis of vascular diseases and for molecular imaging of the unstable plaque. The great sensitivity of magnetic resonance (MR) to the variations of signal intensity (SI) induced by CM has led to the development of several different types of CM, which utilize the paramagnetic properties of gadolinium or manganese or the superparamagnetic properties of iron. Cell-specific CM are mostly targeted to the liver. Liver specific CM (LSCM) with a first phase of extracellular distribution give both dynamic (morphological) and late phase (functional) useful information for lesion characterization. LSCM with exclusive distribution to the hepato-cellular compartment has a very high sensitivity and specificity in differentiating hepatocellular vs non hepatocellular lesions. The use of the superparamagnetic effect of iron oxide particles is based on a distribution in the reticuloendothelial system (RES). SPIO particles are cleared from the blood by phagocytosis accomplished by RES, so that uptake is observed in the normal liver, spleen, bone marrow, and lymph nodes, according to the size of the particles. Malignant lesions lack both the RES and the capacity to take up particles. After SPIO injection, the darkening of normal parenchyma which surrounds neoplastic lesion increases their contrast, thus appearing more hyperintense at T2weighted images. It is necessary to have an in depth knowledge either of the biological and histological characteristics of lesions either of the enhancement mechanism of cell-specific CM to gain significant accuracy. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the mechanism of uptake of cell specific agents. 2. To learn about the advantages of clinical use of cell specific agents. 3. To understand the possibilities of differential diagnosis using cell specific agents. A-042 MR contrast agents can extract morphologic and physiologic information from normal and pathologic tissues, which can be applied to differentiate normal from pathologic tissues and to monitor new therapy regimens. Potential new applications of approved MR contrast agents and applications of new MR contrast agents are reviewed in this presentation. USPIO are currently investigated for the diagnosis of various phagocytosis associated processes, such as inflammation, encephalomyelitis and atherosclerosis. USPIO may provide a positive T1-enhancement, similar to standard Gd-based contrast agents, and a T2-effect, which correlates with the phagocytic activity of the investigated process. New applications of macromolecular Gd-based contrast agents (MMCM) are directed towards enhancement of pathological processes at high field strengths. New MR contrast agents represent receptor targeted contrast agents and "smart" contrast agents. As examples of receptor targeted contrast agents, folate receptor specific contrast agents and Gd-labeled monoclonal antibodies against Her-2/neu will be introduced. As examples of "smart" contrast agents, the galactosidase-sensitive Gd-chelate EgadMe, T 2 -contrast agents which can visualize specific oligonucleotide sequences and Ca 2+ sensitive Gd-chelates will be reviewed. Established and new MR contrast agents are currently investigated for cell labeling purposes and subsequent in vivo tracking of stem cells. Advantages and disadvantages of various MR contrast agents and labeling techniques will be explained and reviewed. The ability to trace the in vivo stem cell distribution with non-invasive imaging techniques may improve our understanding of how stem cells mediate recovery of injured organs and may be ultimately applied clinically to monitor transplantation procedures. The approach in this foundation course is to address a series of frequently asked questions. a) Is there an injury? One needs to be familiar with: 1) The spinal anatomy and its variations, how it varies with age, and pathological states prior to injury. 2) The strengths and weaknesses of conventional radiography, CT and MR imaging. 3) The imaging signs and their significance. b) What is its extent? The identification of an injury requires further study usually with CT to fully delineate the injury. The levels immediately above and below need to be imaged. c) Do you need to classify it? Classifications from the radiologists view point are only useful because they introduce the mechanisms of injury and aid in forming a mental construct of injury patterns that need to be looked for. d) Is it stable or unstable? The radiologist infers whether an injury is stable or not, using imaging produced in a static state of the spine. e) Are there bone fragments in the canal? The identification and implications of bone fragments in the main spinal canal and neural foramen needs separate focus. f) Do you need to image the whole spine? Concomitant contiguous as well as non-contiguous injuries are common ranging from 15% using conventional radiography to almost 50% using MR imaging. The major diagnostic task in degenerative spinal disorders is distinguishing the 95% of patients with simple mechanical pain from the 5% with neurogenic problems or serious underlying diseases such as infection, inflammation or neoplasm. Radiographs are of limited value but indicate disc degeneration by disc space narrowing which may be associated with sclerosis and adjacent vertebral endplates irregularity. Disc degeneration results in annulus fibrosis bulging resulting in osteophyte formation from the vertebral rim. Facet joint sclerosis and some bone hypertrophy may be seen but accurate grading of facet osteoarthritis and differentiation from erosion is best performed on CT but is also satisfactory on MR. Radiographs may differentiate inflammatory spondylo-arthropathies by show- Acute abdomen is one of the most common and diverse syndromes in medicine. In its broad sense it refers to various disorders associated with more or less severe abdominal pain of rapid onset. Imaging diagnosis plays a crucial role in differentiating the underlying cause of the symptoms. Narrowing of the differential is based upon localisation of the main symptoms. The instructors will discuss in a interactive fashion the common and more unusual cases with main symptoms localised to the right lower abdominal quadrant, the right upper quadrant, the left lower quadrant, central abdominal pain, diffuse complaints and flank pain. The audience should be able to learn how to approach these cases and use different imaging modalities for establishing the diagnosis. The main focus will be on multidetector CT.  Imaging hypoxia: Importance in tumor biology and non-invasive assessment by imaging (Introduction) A.R. Padhani; Northwood/UK To provide a short historical introduction to the topic of tumour hypoxia and its effects on radiation resistance. To emphasize the opportunity of imaging to understand and to overcome hypoxia and to introduce the speakers and their remits.  Tumor hypoxia: Detection methods and role in acquired treatment resistance P. Vaupel; Mainz/DE (vaupel@uni-mainz.de) In solid tumors, O 2 delivery is frequently reduced or even abolished, mostly due to abnormalities of the tumor microvasculature, adverse diffusion geometries, and tumor-associated and/or therapy-induced anemia. Up to 60% of advanced solid tumors may exhibit hypoxic areas that are heterogeneously distributed within the tumor. In approx. 30% of pre-treatment patients, a decreased O 2 transport capacity of the blood as a result of tumor-associated anemia can greatly contribute to the development of tumor hypoxia. While normal tissues can compensate for this O 2 deficiency by a rise in blood flow rate, advanced tumors (or at least larger tumor areas) cannot adequately counteract the restriction in O 2 supply and thus the development of hypoxia. Hypoxia-induced alteration in gene expression and thus in the proteome (< 1% O 2 or < 7 mmHg), and/or genome changes (< 0.1% or < 0.7 mmHg) may promote tumor progression via mechanisms enabling cells to overcome nutritive deprivation, to escape from the hostile microenvironment and to favor unrestricted growth. Sustained hypoxia may thus lead to cellular changes resulting in a more aggressive phenotype. In addition, hypoxia is known to directly or indirectly confer resistance to X-and γ-radiation, and some chemotherapies leading to treatment failures and thus poor prognosis. Methods currently available for detection of tumor hypoxia are (1) invasive microsensor techniques for direct pO 2 measurements, (2) electron paramagnetic resonance oximetry, (3) intravascular O 2 detection, (4) nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and imaging techniques, (5) noninvasive detection of sensitizer adducts, and (6) immunohistochemistry using exogenous or endogenous hypoxic markers. Learning Objectives: 1. To appreciate the causative factors for the development of (tumor) hypoxia: Ischaemia, anaemia, diffusion limitations, and HbCO formation. 2. To discuss the methods for the measurement of hypoxia: Invasive vs. noninvasive techniques, direct vs. indirect methods. 3. To appreciate the biological consequences of tumor hypoxia: Changes in gene expression and in the proteome, genomic alterations and clonal selection. 4. To review the role of hypoxia in acquired treatment resistance, impact of hypoxia on prognosis. Non-invasive measurement of hypoxia by PET L.G. Strauss; Heidelberg/DE (lgs@ads-lgs.com) Most of the current PET studies are based on F-18-Deoxyglucose (FDG), a glucose analogue, which provides information about cell viability. It was shown that besides enhanced glycolysis, hypoxia is another characteristic parameter of malignant tumors. Hypoxia and FDG metabolism are not independent parameters and hypoxia is affecting glucose metabolism. We noted an association of HIF-1a expression and the pharmacokinetics of FDG in colorectal tumors. In giant cell tumors a correlation of HIF-1a and k3 was found, giving evidence for a modulation of the FDG kinetics by hypoxia related gene expression. Several approaches were made to use a hypoxia specific tracer for PET studies. One of the most common radiopharmaceuticals for hypoxia imaging is F-18-fluoromisonidazole (FMISO), which accumulates in tissues with oxygen concentrations of less than 3 mm Hg. Studies have shown that FMISO can be used to detect and quantify local tissue hypoxia. One limitation of FMISO is the slow pharmacokinetics, demanding imaging either dynamically for more than one hour or late images at least 90 min after tracer application. Besides FMISO, nitroimidazole analogues and tracers based on thiosemicarbazones (e.g. Cu-60-ATSM) have found increasing attention due to the shorter time interval required for the assessment of tissue hypoxia. Other tracers like fluoroazomycin arabinoside are investigated and may be also helpful for hypoxia imaging. The current results show that besides FDG other new tracers may be used to detect and quantify hypoxia in tumors, which may be especially helpful for therapy management. The development and application of non-invasive methods to rapidly determine the distribution and extent of tumour hypoxia in an individual tumour would clearly enhance cancer treatment strategies and be of considerable clinical use. The underlying principles, some pertinent experimental studies, and current issues concerned with the utility of two magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) methodologies being exploited to investigate tumour hypoxia will be discussed. 19 F MR oximetry relies on the linear increase of the MR imaging spin-lattice relaxation rate R 1 of PFC emulsions, hydrocarbons whose protons have been replaced with fluorine nuclei, with increasing oxygen tension. Molecular oxygen has a very high solubility in PFC emulsions, permitting oxygen tension measurements to be made in tumour locations where the PFC is sequestered. The measurement of PFC spin-lattice relaxation rates in vivo is currently the only NMR methodology from which absolute tumour pO 2 measurements can be derived. 1 H MR imaging methods, with their high temporal and spatial resolution, are also being investigated as surrogate markers of tumour hypoxia. Deoxyhaemoglobin, which is paramagnetic, creates magnetic susceptibility variations, increasing the MR imaging transverse relaxation rate R 2 * of water in blood and in the tissue surrounding blood vessels. Gradient recalled echo (GRE) MR imaging methods are sensitive to R 2 * and thus to blood deoxyhaemoglobin levels. Deoxyhaemoglobin therefore acts as an intrinsic, blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) contrast agent. As the oxygenation of haemoglobin is proportional to the arterial blood p a O 2 , and therefore in equilibrium with tissue pO 2 , measurements of tumour R 2 * should provide a sensitive index of tissue oxygenation. Purpose: PET/CT has become a widely accepted modality in various disease entities. In the diagnostic work-up of malignant tumors, the combination of functional and morphologic data, and the ability to examine the whole body which is achieved with PET/CT, are regarded as most useful. In this workshop, the value of PET/CT in the assessment of T-, N-and M-stage and in the follow-up of cancer patients will be reviewed. The following critical questions will be addressed: 1. Incremental value of visual and soft-ware based fusion of imaging data and hybrid modalities. 2. Low-dose CT versus diagnostic CT with contrast media application. 3. Cost-effectiveness and impact of PET/CT on workflow. 4. Comparison with other whole body imaging modalities, such as whole body MR. Results and Discussion: The incremental value of hybrid PET/CT as compared to secondary fusion is limited, when both experts in CT and PET are involved in the reading. The advantages of the combined modalities are in part due to the fact that clinicians receive a diagnosis "out of one hand" instead of separate reports, which may not be fully in agreement. When sophisticated CT techniques are combined with PET, the preparation of the patient and the examination is very involved. Therefore, one should select the appropriate approach in every individual patient. Whole body MR imaging using multiple receiver channels also proved highly effective in staging, monitoring and surveillance of cancer patients and may become a competitor of PET/CT. Learning Objectives: 1. To analyse the potentials of PET/CT for the diagnostic work-up of cancer patients, both in initial diagnosis and surveillance following treatment. 2. To discuss diagnostic algorithms in malignant diseases and to compare PET/ CT with other imaging modalities, such as whole body MR imaging. 3. To compare the results of hybrid PET/CT scanners with independent reading of both modalities and secondary image fusion. T-staging in malignant tumors using PET/CT L. Højgaard; Copenhagen/DK (lottepet@rh.dk) PET/CT is used increasingly for tumor staging of cancer (TNM), diagnosis of relapse, treatment evaluation and during radiation therapy treatment planning (RTP). FDG is the most frequently used PET tracer, with new tracers emerging. Usually PET/CT is used for whole body scans and gives information on both Tand N-and M-staging. For T-staging PET/CT is superior in lung cancer. PET/CT is favourable in head and neck cancer, for primary cancers and relapse, and for esophageal cancer for preoperative staging. PET/CT may be beneficial for Tstaging in pancreatic cancer, cholangiocarcinoma and hepatoma. In relapse of colonic and rectal cancer PET/CT is superior to other methods. In cervical cancer PET/CT has a high diagnostic accuracy for both T-, N-and M-staging. For ovarian cancer recurrence, PET/CT is useful. In lymphoma, PET/CT is superior for initial staging, relapse evaluation, and treatment monitoring after 1-2 series of chemotherapy. PET/CT and PET/MRI are useful in sarcomas, including evaluation for T-stage, both in children and in adults. In brain tumors PET/MRI image fusion is superior to PET/CT, and is used for biopsy guidance and is especially valuable for relapse evaluation. In patients with primary breast cancer and malignant melanoma, sentinel node technique is superior to PET/CT. PET/CT for RTP is used for head and neck cancer, lung, gastrointestinal, including esophageal, and for cervical cancer. Hypoxia-tracers are used for optimization of RTP. In conclusion, PET/CT is used increasingly for T-staging in malignant tumors.  N-and M-staging in malignant tumors using PET/CT G. Cook; Surrey/UK (gcook@icr.ac.uk) FDG PET and PET/CT has the potential to overcome some of the limitations of nodal and metastatic staging with conventional anatomical imaging. With nodal staging there is the potential to improve sensitivity by detecting cancer within subcentimetre nodes and to improve specificity by showing absent uptake in enlarged but benign reactive nodes. PET as a modality on its own suffers from poor anatomical definition, and therefore localisation of lymph nodes may be difficult. This disadvantage is largely overcome by the introduction of combined PET/CT. There are studies that confirm the accuracy of FDG PET and PET/CT in staging a number of cancers, e.g. lung cancer and lymphoma (both upstaging and downstaging) leading to appropriate inter and intramodality changes in medical management. In other cancers, no advantage has been shown using FDG PET, e.g. axillary staging in breast cancer compared to sentinel node sampling. FDG PET is generally more sensitive in M staging in many cancers than conventional imaging as it is a whole body technique and metastases can be detected in most organs. Additional or complimentary information can be gained by detecting unsuspected distant metastases in the skeleton, lungs and liver. Sensitivity for detecting brain metastases is poor and the sensitivity for detecting pulmonary and peritoneal disease may be limited when metastases are particularly small. Combination PET/CT minimises some of the disadvantages of either modality alone whilst maximising their advantages. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the strengths and weaknesses of PET/CT in N-and M-staging. 2. To understand the role of PET/CT in relation to other imaging modalities and investigations in N-and M-staging. 3. To understand in which cancers FDG PET is most useful in N-and M-staging. Therapy monitoring and follow-up of malignant tumors with PET/CT K. Hahn; Munich/DE (Klaus.Hahn@med.uni-muenchen.de) Some excellent articles in the literatures have shown that 18 F-FDG PET is increasingly used to assess the tumour response in patients undergoing chemoand/or radiotherapy of solid tumours such as breast, lung, colorectal, head and neck and oesophageal carcinoma. PET imaging performed as a baseline and after the initiation of treatment allows prediction of response as early as after the first cycle of chemotherapy, whereas other imaging procedures such as sonography, plain film radiography, computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging are not able to predict reliable therapy response early in the course of treatment. PET is currently the most sensitive and specific imaging measurement to obtain information about tumour physiology and metabolism. Tumour cells have increased glucose metabolism due to increased expression of glucose transporters and hexokinase as a result of oncogenic transformation, and 18 F-FDG is essentially trapped within the tumour cell. Therefore 18 F-FDG-PET may provide important prognostic information about the proliferative rates and the antiproliferative effect of cancer therapy. There is now convincing evidence that reduction of 18 F-FDG uptake in the tumour is an early indicator of response at a clinical or subclincal level. If a combined PET/CT-system are used for therapy monitoring and follow-up of malignant tumours, the marrying of structural information allows superior sensitivity for residual small-volume disease and metabolically guided biopsy. The ankle and foot have received much clinical attention because they are subject to equilibrating proprioceptive and mechanical forces resulting from the body weight in everyday, professional and athletic activities. The tendons and ligaments of the ankle and foot are an important part in the chain of transmission and absorption of bearing forces, and thus in providing stability and functionality of gait and running. Therefore, they are prone to overload and overuse syndromes which cause restricted movement and pain. Ligament pathology mainly includes traumatic sprains, responsible for a huge monetary burden to the health system. Tendon pathology includes a) injuries, as a result of prolonged abnormal training in sports activities, use of improper footwear and obesity, b) rheumatic or metabolic diseases, and c) tumors such as ganglionic cysts and giant cell tumor of the tendon sheath. Diagnostic imaging is important for detecting and characterizing the cause of the underlying disorder and thus in guiding the appropriate treatment. Ultrasonography is a low-cost non-invasive modality of first choice for tendon imaging. MR imaging is the ideal modality to depict the normal and abnormal anatomy of both ligaments and tendons, often demonstrating associated osseous and soft tissue findings. The addition of kinematic MR imaging further expands its capabilities by evaluating the functional impairment. MDCT is now under investigation for imaging both the tendons and the osseous structures in traumatic or postoperative abnormalities. All the available imaging modalities have strengths and weaknesses and therefore their clinical role should be well understood.  Ultrasonography of ankle tendons D.J. Wilson; Oxford/UK Ultrasound is a very effective means of imaging ankle tendons. It permits high resolution images that identify internal structural changes, paratendinous disease, partial and complete ruptures. Doppler imaging shows neovascularity and dynamic stress imaging will distinguish between tears and tendinopathy in a way that is not possible with MR or other imaging. Examples of tendinopathy, paratendinopathy, tears and abrasion will be shown with detail of anatomy and normal variants. The effect of infection and tumours will be discussed. The argument will be advanced that US is the primary means of examining ankle tendons and that MR should be reserved for cases where bone disease is suspected. MR imaging is an excellent technique for imaging ankle tendons. It can also demonstrate associated features such as bone marrow oedema, a cause of pain, and often a marker for adjacent tendon injury. The normal MR imaging appearance of ankle tendons and tendon sheath fluid will be discussed. The MR imaging protocol will be reviewed, as will the presence of accessory tendons. There is a variety of tendon pathology encountered -tendinopathy, tenosynovitis (or peritendinosis around tendons without a tendon sheath, e.g. the distal tibialis posterior tendon), tendon tears, subluxation/dislocation and relocation of tendons, entrapment, and tumours. There are also pathologies associated with tendon abnormality -tibialis posterior tears and the sinus tarsi syndrome, proximal tenosynovitis of flexor hallucis longus and the os trigonum syndrome (posterior ankle impingement). The salient features of these pathologies will be discussed. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the anatomy and normal variants, imaging sequences and planes used for optimal demonstration (including artefacts). 2. To review the various pathologies encountered: Tendinopathy, tendon tears, tenosynovitis, subluxation, dislocation and relocation of tendons, tendon entrapment, and tumors. 3. To understand associated pathologies such as tibialis posterior tears and the sinus tarsi syndrome, proximal tenosynovitis of flexor hallucis longus and the os trigonum syndrome (posterior ankle impingement). MDCT and MR imaging of Achilles tendon and plantar aponeurosis A. Barile; L'Aquila/IT (antonio.barile@cc.univaq.it) The Achilles tendon is a strong tendon and it is one of the most commonly injured tendons of the foot and ankle. The disorders of the Achilles tendon are generally classified as peritendinitis, tendinitis and partial and complete tendon ruptures. CT is generally able to document these pathologies and MDCT may offer more accurate information about the three-dimensional extent of the lesions. In general, however, the information provided by MR imaging in these conditions is more accurate and this method is considered the diagnostic method of choice. The plantar aponeurosis is a strong fibrous band which extends from the inferior portion of the calcaneous to the region of the metatarsal heads. The main causes of the plantar heel pain are plantar fasciitis, plantar fibromatosis and plantar soft tissue infections. Also in these cases MR imaging is considered the diagnostic method of choice to evaluate the plantar aponeurosis and its related abnormalities. CT and MDCT may be also useful in selected cases. The chest radiograph is the most frequently performed examination in most hospitals and private practices. Many physicians believe that if a lesion is present in the lungs, it will show up on the radiograph. Large scale studies, spanning over 20 years, have shown that 20 to 30% of radiographs considered as normal are in fact pathological and that up to 20% of radiographs considered as pathological are in fact normal. The perception of pulmonary lesions is influenced by numerous factors, both technical and human. The human interface is attracting growing interest and will be discussed in detail. Based on the 'discourse method' of Descartes, we have developed a structured approach for interpretation of the chest X-ray. The presentation will teach how the human eye sees the chest X-ray, and how one can educate his/her sight by learning to screen the key areas of the chest X-ray. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand how the human eye sees the chest X-ray. 2. To educate your sight for better chest X-ray analyses. 3. To apply a memotechnical method which will cover the crucial chest X-ray areas. A-063 B. The frontal view N. Howarth; Chêne-Bougeries/CH (nigel.howarth@grangettes.ch) The chest radiograph can accurately detect diseases which are frequently associated with significant morbidity: infectious diseases, heart failure, chronic airway diseases, pulmonary neoplasms. Important diagnoses may be missed when the amount of time spent reading the chest film is limited. A systematic approach is essential to avoid overlooking a lesion or misinterpreting a normal variant. We have focused on creating a convenient, user-friendly teaching method, adapted to everyone interested in thoracic radiology. To improve the radiologist's perception and performance, a concentric step-by-step approach is presented, using computerized animations. Key areas of the chest X-ray, including the apices, the hila, the lower lobes are reviewed with relevant pathologic and CT correlations. Memotechnical methods covering the crucial areas of the chest X-ray will be provided. Participants should learn to answer the following question with confidence: does this radiograph provide information relevant to the patient's health? Case studies will demonstrate how a small improvement with a systematic approach can provide many benefits in terms of time, cost and health. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn a thoroughly structured approach for reading the frontal chest radiograph. 2. To recognize key areas of the frontal chest radiograph. 3. To understand the value and difficulty of interpretation of the chest radiograph. A-064 C. The lateral view D. Bartelt; Baltimore, MD/US (debartelt@t-online.de) The lateral chest film is usually of great advantage for the evaluation of certain "problem areas": lesions in or near the mediastinum and hilus and behind and near the diaphragm, as well as abnormalities of the heart and the great vessels. Furthermore, the frequent exposure problems and abrupt difference in density between lung and mediastinum seen on many frontal-films are usually not seen on lateral films with their much greater scale of grey. This and a bigger spectrum F F F F Frida rida rida rida riday y y y y A 23 B C D E F G of kV -including low-energy kV -also facilitates the recognition of calcified structures and of other pathology. Potential disadvantages such as summation of bilateral lung structures, motion unsharpness due to longer exposure times as well as increased radiation exposure are negligible: Summation often permits, or at least facilitates, the recognition of micronodular and of other subtle interstitial patterns and of abnormal vascular filling. Motion unsharpness is no longer an issue (even in tachycardia) due to modern generators, high-kV-technique and high-speed intensifying screens. Radiation exposure and extra-cost for the additional film are negligible in view of its great added diagnostic value. The "official" recommendation to postpone the potential acquisition of a lateral film until after the frontal film has been analyzed and found "insufficient", is logistically very cumbersome and quite unrealistic. Why sacrifice simple and important information, which permits or at least facilitates the detection of an abnormal finding -or on the other hand -markedly assures the impression of a normal finding? These arguments are being supported by relevant images. There is no radiological field where the radiologist is more integrated into an interdisciplinary team than in trauma management. Consequently he should be aware of general principles in trauma management and the role of diagnostic and interventional radiology for patients' triage. Radiologists have to make sure that state of the art radiography, (multislice-) spiral-CT and diagnostic and therapeutic angiography are available at any time and within an appropriate distance to the emergency room. Imaging procedures have to be standardized according to protocols available at any time. Accepted rules of interdisciplinary trauma management should be discussed in advance, including standards for imaging and intervention. Radiologists have to be familiar with typical findings in trauma patients and with specific problems of critical periods; detection and management of ongoing bleeding during the first hours and complications around the 3 rd week. Radiologists have to make sure that modalities, technicians and instruments are on stand-by if patients arrive at the hospital, that studies proceed without time delay according to protocols, that positive and suspected findings are communicated immediately and that a reliable written report and complete image folders are available to all members of the trauma team at any time. A-067 C. The role of intervention P. Goffette, P.F. Laterre; Brussels/BE (goffette@rdgn.ucl.ac.be) Investigation of polytraumatized patients with multidetector CT, which enables precise evaluation of solid organ trauma, leads to a more conservative management of all abdominal trauma irrespective to their grading. Advances in CT technology had improved the identification of both contrast extravasation and non-bleeding vascular injuries and can predict the need for embolization in low-grade trauma. Contrast blush (CB) on CT after splenic fracture is not an absolute indication for immediate angio-intervention. Conversely, CB after liver trauma is associated with a significant increased mortality and requires angio-embolization systematically. The liberal use of angiography and the technical refinements in embolization have broaden the indications and improved the results of the non-operative management in high-grade injuries. Immediate angiography should be performed in the following settings: 1. As primary damage control modality in lieu of devastating surgery in unstable patients suspected to develop massive retroperitoneal or pelvic hemorrhage. 2. After damage control laparotomy for complex hepatic or mesenteric injuries in order to detect and treat deeply located vascular lesion not detected at surgery. 3. For all high-grade (IV-V) hepato-splenic or renal injuries, irrespective to the hemodynamic status. 4. To stop visceral bleeding in stable patient and obviate otherwise unnecessary surgery. 5. To differentiate CT findings of "ongoing hemorrhage" from small intra-parenchymal or muscular CB or venous bleeding which don't require intervention. Angio-embolization should be expected to stop bleeding in over 90% of the patients. Failures are nearly due to delayed intervention or underestimation of severity of injury on CT. Post-embolization complications are few rare. Myocardial infarction (MI) is characterized by a wavefront of necrosis that marches from subendocardium over midmyocardium to subepicardium over time. Mechanisms of muscle necrosis in irreversible ischemic myocyte injury are loss of cell membrane integrity and of intracellular-extracellular ion homeostasis resulting in swelling of the infarcted cells, accompanied by interstitial edema. In a severe ischemic injury, progressive tissue swelling causes microvascular obstruction resulting in impaired resting perfusion. Thus, MI can result in three different conditions, myocyte necrosis with gross microvascular damage causing microvascular obstruction, myocyte necrosis without gross microvascular damage, and non-necrosed, salvaged but stunned myocardium. After MI, diagnosis of myocardial viability focuses on the prediction of functional improvement after revascularization therapy. The morphologic approach is based on the detection of the ratio viable/non-viable cells. The end-diastolic wall thickness is an indirect parameter of this ratio, because thinned myocardium contains a reduced number of viable cells. This approach has a high sensitivity, but a low specificity and can only be used in chronic MI after infarct healing. Delayed enhancement allows for direct visualization of necrotic or scarred tissue. By measuring the transmural extent of delayed enhancement, the probability of mechanical improvement can precisely be given. Imaging of microvascular obstruction by first-pass perfusion or delayed enhancement gives additional information on viability and patient prognosis. The functional approach is simulation of sufficient reperfusion by the use of low-dose dobutamine-stress. This technique has a good sensitivity with a high specificity for the prediction of wall motion improvement. Multidetector-row computed tomography (MDCT) has been validated as a useful non-invasive diagnostic method in patients with various cardiac diseases. Because of the combination of fast rotation time and multi-slice acquisition with a high spatial resolution, MDCT is able to provide detailed information on cardiac morphology and on the coronary arteries at the same time. First clinical studies described the possible value of MDCT in the evaluation of patients with myocardial infarction from routine contrast-enhanced MDCT angiography of the coronary arteries, without an increase in volume of contrast agent or radiation dose administered to the patient. It was shown that by performing standard MDCT coronary angiography, areas of infarcted myocardium can be identified with moderate to high sensitivity, and infarct localization may be assessed with sufficient accuracy. To some degree, infarct age and infarct volume can be estimated. However, performing the routine multidetector-row CT angiography protocol of the heart and coronary arteries, areas of decreased CT attenuation can correspond to perfusion defects and/or infarcted tissue at the same time. In fact, this protocol resembles a first-pass perfusion technique at rest. In a number of cases, a clear differentiation of a perfusion defects (myocardium viable) vs. a myocardial infarction is not possible using this technique. Therefore, future studies will focus on delayed enhancement (DE) effects, which seem to be detectable using contrast enhanced CT imaging of the myocardium, similar to DE MR imaging techniques. Sonography (US) represents the most commonly used imaging modality for the guidance of percutaneous ablative treatments owing to its availability, rapidity, ease of use and cost-effectiveness. However, differentiation of induced necrosis from viable tumor is not possible with baseline and color Doppler sonography and therefore both immediate and long-term assessment of therapeutic result is usually accomplished by contrast-enhanced helical CT and MR imaging which are not real-time modalities and can be performed only at the end of treatment sessions. Furthermore, small neoplasms (the most suitable for local ablations) are sometimes clearly visualized on CT, but cannot be adequately detected by ultrasound. These major limitations are currently almost entirely overcome by the use of contrast-enhanced sonography (CEUS). As the lack of vascularity (or disappearance of the enhancement) is the most easily detectable sign of treatment efficacy, CEUS with second generation contrast agents, can be performed before, during and immediately at the end of ablation procedures to monitor and assess the extent of necrosis achieved prior to closing the treatment session. In our experience and according to literature reports, the sensitivity of CEUS for the detection of residual tumor is almost equivalent to that of contrast-enhanced helical CT, with an average of only 4-6% of cases with residual viable foci visualized by CT and not by CEUS. In our experience, since the introduction of intraprocedural CEUS the rate of partially unablated tumors has dropped from 16.1% to 4.9%. Cost-effectiveness and reduction of patients' discomfort related to the need of re-treatment are the two most outstanding advantages of CEUS in RFA of liver malignancies. The objective of thermal tumor ablation is to induce in situ thermal coagulation necrosis. Assessment of tumor response after thermal tumor ablation differs from other treatments in that the lesion remains and the complete ablation creates an area of necrosis larger than that of the pretreatment tumor. Therefore WHO and RE-CIST criteria cannot be applied. The primary goal of imaging is to assess the efficacy of the local therapy. Imaging findings of complete response, partial response, and local tumor progression will be described. The imaging findings are mainly based on lesion and periablational enhancement, size of the necrotic defect, sharpness of the margins at CT and MR imaging and lesion signal intensity on T1-or T2-weighted imaging at MR imaging. Examples of pitfalls will be shown. Another goal is to survey for any local recurrence or development of any additional new disease. The role of the imaging modalities : contrast-enhanced sonography, CT and MR imaging will be detailed and protocols for imaging follow-up will be discussed. A-073 C. Standardized terms and reporting criteria C.D. Becker; Geneva/CH (Christoph.Becker@hcuge.ch) Image-guided tumour ablation is currently gaining increasing importance in a variety of clinical settings and indications. In order to render results more comparable and reproducible, it is necessary for radiologists to use terms and reporting criteria in a standard fashion. The technical description of each ablation procedure should include not only whether coagulation necrosis was induced by chemical agents such as concentrated ethanol or by thermal energy delivered with cryoprobes, radiofrequency electrodes, microwave antennas, laser fibres, or highfrequency focused ultrasound, but should also mention dosage or energy parameters as appropriate for each technique. Imaging with US, CT or MR imaging is key not only for planning, targeting, monitoring of the ablation procedure, but also for the assessment of the result of ablation. Precise measurements should always be provided, including description of the size of the initial tumour, the visible ablation zone (including its involution over time) and the so-called "ablative margin" which describes the safety zone of ablation around the tumour. When describing the different changes seen on images in and around the so-called "ablation zone" the radiologist should be aware that not all of them correspond with the zone of coagulation necrosis on pathologic examination, but that a variety of phenomena may be due to reactive changes, such as vaporisation, hyperaemia, or oedema. Since an ablation treatment in a patient often consists of more than one distinct procedure, complications should be best reported per procedure; major potentially life-threatening complications should be distinguished from transient, self-limited symptoms and signs such as the postablation syndrome. The concept of the vulnerable plaque and the vulnerable patient was introduced to describe atherosclerotic plaques prone to rupture and thrombosis. The main feature of the vulnerable plaque is a thin fibrous cap overlying a large heterogeneous lipid core. Inflammatory-cell infiltrates are also markers for plaque vulnerability. In addition, the concept of arterial remodelling is being increasingly recognized. MR imaging is a promising contender for vessel wall imaging, and currently evaluation of atherosclerosis in the carotid arteries by MR imaging is superior to that of the coronary vasculature. MR imaging permits accurate, noninvasive, serial in vivo measurements of artery wall dimensions without the need for ionizing radiation. Also, it provides tomographic assessment with consistent localization, which enables identification of arterial remodelling over time and clinical results have been reported for the aorta and carotid. The use of highresolution MR imaging for plaque characterization and evaluation of total vessel plaque burden, including effect on luminal diameters, is a rapidly expanding field. The vessel wall is imaged using a spin-echo technique with different contrast weightings (T1, T2 and PD) to assist in plaque characterization. MR imaging can help characterize the lipid core, fibrous caps, calcification, normal media, and adventitia in human atherosclerotic plaques in vivo. Characterization of intraplaque haemorrhage and acute thrombosis is also possible. In conclusion, the concepts of the vulnerable plaque and arterial remodelling are here to stay as our under-standing of the atherosclerotic disease process continues to grow. Consequently, the role of newer imaging techniques focussing on quantitative aspects of atherosclerosis will increase. Vulnerable plaques (VP)are characterized by large lipid pools, thin fibrous caps, positive remodeling, signs of inflammation, and enhanced adventitial neovascularization. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) has a high resolution (100-150 um), provides cross-sectional and longitudinal images of coronary segments. Single and rarely multiple VP are found in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS) -unstable angina, acute myocardial infarction, sudden death -but also in patients with stable angina (about 20%). These lesions are mainly not hemodynamically significant and produce therefore no symptoms due to the remodelling process which is visualized by IVUS. In ACS syndromes plaque rupture is found in 65 %, plaque erosion in 35 % of patients and rarely calcified noduli. Plaque material may be washed out leading to ulcerations which are very thrombigenic. Thrombus formation may be incomplete or complete and can be identified, whereas intramural hemorrhage is much more difficult to be detected but is an important pathogenetic process. The resolution of IVUS is not high enough in order to detect plaque erosion, but is able to visualize calcified noduli. IVUS is combined with intracoronary Doppler in order to estimate the coronary flow reserve. Macroand microvascular disorders can be differentiated which are even found in non obstructing lesions due to microembolization. Most important have been follow-up studies demonstrating that healing of plaque rupture may occur, but can be very slowly with intermittent thrombus formation within the plaque ulcerations. Despite the shortcomings, IVUS is at the moment the "Gold Standard" vascular imaging technique which has entered the clinical arena. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the staging of coronary artery disease suggested as recommendation by the AHA for imaging techniques. 2. To learn the value and limitations of angiography, but also intravascular ultrasound for vascular wall imaging. 3. To understand the mechanism of vascular remodelling and vulnerable plaque formation. 4. To assess the current state of the art of coronary artery interventions. 5. To understand the future development of coronary stenting including implantation of absorbable magnesium stents. A-076 In the past, transabdominal sonography with a full bladder has been considered the first step in the assessment of the uterus. Nowadays, it has kept this role only for the paediatric patients, while the abdominal approach with an empty bladder is used for large pelvic masses. In all the other cases transvaginal sonography is the preferred technique for evaluation of the endometrium, small uterine lesions and as a preliminary step for hysteroscopic procedures. Transvaginal sonography has been complemented in recent years by additional techniques. Sonohysterography has been developed to obtain a better analysis of the endometrial surface and uterine cavity and is performed by perfusing the uterine cavity with saline flushed through a catheter passed into the cervical canal. Sonohysterography allows the differential diagnosis between endometrial hyperplasia and polyps, by defining the implantation base of the lesions. It also allows us to define the extent of the intramural portion of submucosal fibroids, which dictates the most appropriate surgical approach for their removal. Transvaginal colour Doppler demonstrates the vascular anatomy of the uterine wall and its lesions: intramural fibroids typically display a basket-like macrovascularity, while adenomyosis has a homogeneous pattern of blood flow. Although endometrial carcinoma tends to display a low-impedance pattern of flow at pulsed wave Doppler, the clinical usefulness of this finding in the diagnosis of the condition is far from being established. The use of contrast enhancement in this field is still experimental, the most promising results coming from the post-embolization assessment of uterine fibroids. Abnormal gynecologic bleeding refers to bleeding other than the expected menstrual pattern. It is usually attributed to a uterine source, but may also arise from other pelvic sites. In the diagnostic work-up of abnormal gynecological bleeding transvaginal sonography has been established as the primary imaging modality in pre-and postmenopausal women. The purpose of pelvic sonography is to identify uterine or extrauterine abnormalities, and to analyze endometrial and myometrial morphology. In cases of abnormal bleeding and indeterminate sonography MR imaging serves as an adjunct in localizing the source of hemorrhage, in establishing the definite diagnosis and in determining the feasibility of conservative uterine surgery. In patients with bleeding in childbearing age and sonographically diagnosed uterine fibroids MR imaging helps guide to the appropriate myomectomy technique. In pre-and perimenopausal women with a sonographically enlarged uterus MR imaging allows differentiation between leiomyomas and adenomyosis. In bleeding caused by uterine malignancy or vascular anomalies assessment by MR imaging may directly influence the choice of therapy and guide in therapy planning. In patients with vaginal bleeding and a large pelvic mass MR imaging helps to define the origin of the tumor and may also be able to differentiate between a neoplastic and inflammatory etiology. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with the etiologies of abnormal gynecological bleeding in pre and post menopausal patients. 2. To learn diagnostic imaging features for benign and malignant endometrial and myometrial pathologies. 3. To understand the value of MR imaging as adjunct to US in uterine disorders presenting with abnormal bleeding. 4. To learn what the gynecologist wants to know for treatment planning. A-079 C. Staging and follow-up of cervical cancer P. Petrow; Paris/FR (peter.petrow@curie.net) MR imaging provides excellent spontaneous soft tissue contrast of all female pelvic organs, permits a multiplanar exploration of the entire pelvis including lymph nodes and the pelvic floor especially on T2-weighted sequences. Therefore MR imaging is the imaging modality of choice for the initial work-up of invasive cervical cancer. This course reviews the technical aspects of MR imaging exploration of invasive cervical cancer such as choice of sequences, slice orientation, intracavitary and intravenous contrast media injection for MR examination for initial staging, follow-up examinations during radiation therapy (external RT and brachytherapy) and suspected recurrence. The imaging features encountered during initial staging such as parametrial, bladder, ureteral and rectal invasion are reviewed with particular emphasis on findings to guide fertility conserving surgery, external radiation therapy or brachytherapy. These findings will be correlated to the FIGO classification for invasive cervical cancer. Lymph node involvement of cervical cancer and its repercussions on MR imaging are highlighted. During follow-up, especially if cervical cancer is treated by chemoradiation, post radiation changes of the pelvic organs and spaces can render the interpretation of MR images more difficult and the use of dynamic-acquisition contrast-enhanced T1-weighted SE MR images is useful to distinguish post-radiation fibrosis from recurrence. In conclusion, MR imaging is the imaging modality for evaluation of initial tumor volume and extension, response to treatment and to rule out recurrence. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with initial staging and follow-up features especially on MR imaging. 2. To highlight the interaction between radiologist, radiation oncologist and surgeon. 3. To review the aspects of radiation and postoperative changes and their impact on MR images. Intracranial aneurysms become symptomatic as a result of rupture with consequent subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). Unruptured aneurysms may be discovered when they cause neurological symptoms which depend on the location and size. With the advent of spiral and multi-slice CT, CT angiography (CTA) has been proposed as an adjunct to plain CT in investigating SAH and it is under debate whether it can replace intraarterial digital subtraction angiography (IADSA) in treatment planning. Although MR angiography (MRA) has given good results in detecting aneurysms in acute SAH, it is preferred as a screening modality for patients at risk and for the follow-up of aneurysms treated with endovascular coiling. MRA has the advantage of displaying cerebral vessels without contrast medium, although it provides a limited coverage of the intracranial vasculature. IADSA is still the most sensitive tool in detecting intracranial aneurysms and should be performed within 24 hours of bleeding to ensure correct therapeutic management of patients. The selective intraarterial injection of iodinated contrast medium ensures optimal enhancement of the intracranial arteries with superior resolution than CTA or MRA. Patients with a ruptured intracranial aneurysm should be treated as soon as possible after the haemorrhage to prevent rebleeding and to provide adequate medical treatment of vasospasm. In the last decade the endovascular treatment of cerebral aneurysms with Guglielmi detachable coils, which consists of filling the aneurysmal sac with soft platinum coils through a microcatheter, has completely revolutionized the therapeutic management of patients. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with the etiology and classification of intracranial aneurysms. 2. To understand imaging strategies for detecting subarachnoid hemorrhage and aneurysms. 3. To learn how to perform non-invasive screening for cerebral aneurysms. 4. To comprehend the principles, the indications and the effectiveness of the endovascular treatment of intracranial aneurysms. A-082 C. Cerebrovascular malformations J.V. Byrne; Oxford/UK (james.byrne@radiology.ox.ac.uk) First assessed by CT; underlying causes are unlikely to be evident but haemorrhage within the brain parenchyma or ventricles should alert one to possible underlying vascular causes like 1. Arteriovenous malformation of the brain (BAVMs) 2. Cavernous malformations 3. Capillary telangiectasis 4. Dural AV fistulas BAVMs: CT scan may show vascular calcification in 20% and following contrast enancement the presence of enlarged vessels. CTA provides good detail and 3D display, but its clinical role is not clearly defined (Aoki et al 1998). MR imaging is generally preferred because it is non-invasive and demonstrates enlarged cerebral vessels. DSA is definitive. Cavernous malformations: on CT they are well-demarcated hyperdense lesions, but CT won't show 10% found at surgery and only 1/3 rd are demonstrated by MR. MR is characteristic but not pathonomonic. They are not seen on DSA. Capillary telangiectasis: These are ill-defined areas of dilated thin walled capillaries. CT and DSA are usually unhelpful but on MR these lesions show hypointense or isointense signal on T 1 W and may be isointense or hyperintense on T 2 W. Dural AV fistulas: CT is rarely diagnostic. Following haemorrhage the findings are those of lobar haematoma with or without subarachnoid haemorrhage. MR may show dilated vessels and CE-MRA will help. Catheter angiography is the 'goldstandard'. With the evolution of digital systems, since the beginning and with the experience achieved using two similar spot mammography digital systems for over 4 years and another two FFDM systems for over 2 years in different environments, (public and private practice), the exposed learning objectives and perhaps new concerns raised before the forthcoming congress will be debated. We will review the physical principles of the different systems approved in the last years and those to be introduced in near future and ways to compare objective parameters between them. We will review the differential aspects among FFDM systems and in relation to analogical mammography. The diagnostic aspects, with their advantages and disadvantages, with new signs, different image management and evaluation possibilities, as reading and evaluation in films viewers and work stations. The introduction of new systems developed for the use of digital images, image storage, PACS, filmless radiology departments, web based workflow and teleradiology, diagnostic software and intelligent detection, 3D, angiogenesis assessment, digital subtraction techniques and others, will be discussed. Basic concepts to bear in mind once the decision for transition from analogical to digital has been made, as planning mile-stones in time or the rational distribution of the systems that are to be acquired, the way of recycling or reconverting the existing systems, modular systems, opened systems for alternative providers…. The use of quality, economic and logical criteria for the election and further upgrades will be proposed. Finally, international quality standards and controls recommended by EUREF are to be presented. Digital mammography, and in particular "direct" digital mammography, may change the procedure and workflow in performing mammographies in many situations besides screening (e.g. in diagnostic workup). This is primarily attributable to the faster availability of the images without the necessity for film development and to the high dynamic range and good contrast resolution of digital mammography. Examples will be presented to illustrate the procedural changes associated with digital mammography in different situations and it will be shown how potential future applications can be integrated into the workflow. The cost-effectiveness of the different digital system in comparison to film-screen mammography is given. Special focus will be held to: a. Wire localization procedure -temporal gain, changed workflow, b. Changed procedures using digital mammography, c. Additional views: Low-dose tangential views, low-dose galactography, d. Workflow with CAD: CAD applications for assessment, software enhancement algorithms, e. Contrast-enhanced mammography, automated ultrasound, f. Cost-effectiveness of different aspects of digital mammography. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the importance of viewing software for workflow with digital mammography. 2. To learn about the impact of digital mammography on workflow in special assessment procedures. 3. To learn about integration of different CAD systems for improvement of workflow in digital mammography. To discuss logistics of assessment with advanced applications in digital mammography. 5. To discuss workflow with future applications like contrast medium mammography. A-085 Although it is often possible to characterise mediastinal masses and pulmonary lesions into benign and malignant disease, in many cases a tissue diagnosis remains necessary. The appropriate use of fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) and cutting needle biopsy (CNB) enable a correct diagnosis to be made in most instances. When performing these biopsies it is important to understand both the advantages of needle type and imaging modality chosen, and their disadvantages. This presentation will focus on the benefits and limitations of cytology and histology, and the use of ultrasound and multislice CT for image guidance. The use of pleural biopsy in diagnosing malignant disease and the use of fibrinolytic therapy in loculated pleural disease will also be discussed. MR guidance is clinically established for non-vascular interventions like biopsies, radio frequency ablation and drainages. Different MR scanners with field strengths varying from low to high field systems have been successfully used. Especially breast lesion marking is an important clinical indication for those lesions only visible on MR imaging. Visualization of metallic instruments and their artefact behaviour for different imaging sequences and sequence parameters will be discussed. The performance of vascular interventions has made dramatic progress over the last five years due to the continuous development of fast imaging sequences offering not only real-time imaging speed but also excellent image contrast of the vascular tree and the beating heart. Stent placement in the iliac, renal and coronary arteries has been performed in animal experiments. Vena cava filter placement, coil embolization, and placement of atrial septal occluders are other interventions performed under MR-guidance. Passive visualization as well as active tip tracking and instrument visualization was exploited for different vascular interventions. The different strategies of device visualization will be compared and the implications for safety will be stressed. In addition, the feasibility of using safe non-metallic guide wires is introduced. Visualization of interventional Magnetic resonance guidance of interventional vascular procedures offers several advantages over fluoroscopic-guided techniques including the absence of ionizing radiation, avoidance of potential hazards of iodinated contrast material, and superior soft tissue contrast. Particular problems are the availability of MR compatible materials such as stents and guidewires with respect to cost factors, visibility, and safety profile. The aim of this presentation is to demonstrate the possibility of performing MR-guided interventional therapy for iliacal, femoral, and popliteal artery stenoses with commercially available materials supported by MR real-time imaging and intra-arterial MR angiography. For angioplasty of iliac artery stenoses nitinol stents are placed with gradient-echo MR imaging guidance using a 2D-FLASH sequence. Anatomic landmarks and the known coordinates of the stenosis along the z direction depicted on the initial MR angiograms are used to localize the stenosis and the desired stent position. For angioplasty of the femoral and popliteal arteries intra-arterial MR angiography is performed before and after angioplasty in each patient. A FLASH 3D sequence is applied and a total of 5 mL gadodiamide is injected via the arterial access. MIPs are used as roadmaps and localizers for the interactive positioning of a continuously running 2D-Flash sequence with a temporal solution of 2 images/second. The lesion is crossed by a balloon catheter, which is mounted on a guide wire. MR imagingguided stent placement in iliac arteries and angioplasty of femoropopliteal stenoses is feasible in selected patients. Safety precautions have to be considered when using conductive guide wires while MR imaging. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn realizing problems related to MR-guided angioplasty of the superficial femoral artery using conventional devices. 2. To discuss the indications for MR-guided angioplasty. MR-guided cardiac catheterisation in congenital heart disease R. Razavi; London/UK (reza.razavi@kcl.ac.uk) To make MR guided cardiac catheterisation a reality, there is a need to be able to visualise the catheter within cardiovascular structures in real time. This requires fast imaging, which has become possible because of recent developments in MR hardware and software. Cardiac gated steady state free precession (SSFP) sequences, which benefit from high signal to noise ratio, good blood pool myocardial contrast, and high spatiotemporal resolution, have become the mainstay of cardiac MR. Passive catheter visualisation relies on inherent properties of the catheter to provide either local signal enhancement or loss. We have demonstrated that with standard balloon catheters filled with carbon dioxide, passive visualisation and manual tracking of catheters was possible using an interactive SSFP sequence. The benefit of this approach is that it uses standard catheter laboratory equipment and thus poses no greater safety risk to the patient. There has also been considerable work using active methods of catheter tracking. With these techniques an antenna or coil is incorporated in the catheter allowing automatic tracking and visualisation. However, there are still some safety concerns with these active tracking techniques because of the possibility of heating. Recently, we published the first study of MR guided cardiac catheterisation in humans. We were able to demonstrate that MR guided cardiac catheterisation was safe and practical in a clinical setting, with a reduction in ionising radiation exposure, better visualisation of cardiac anatomy, and acquisition of more pertinent physiological information. CT remains the standard for initial assessment of tumour size, tumour extent and mediastinal and chest wall involvement, despite its well-known limitations. Certain CT findings have been demonstrated as being diagnostic of unresectable disease. However, these CT signs can be misleading and care should be taken not to overestimate tumour growth into the chest wall or the mediastinal structures. The continuous technical improvement has allowed the development of techniques such as virtual bronchoscopy, computer-aided diagnosis and volumetric quantification of lung tumours that might improve or simplify T-staging with CT in the future. MR imaging can be a useful complement to CT scanning in some selected cases. It has proved superior to CT for identifying involvement of major mediastinal blood vessels and the carina. However, the ongoing technical improvement of CT with high-detail reformatted images will further influence the potential role of MR imaging in staging patients with lung cancer. At this moment, the use of FDG-PET in T-staging of patients with NSCLC is limited. The difference in FDG uptake has been used successfully to differentiate between tumour and peritumoural atelectasis and inflammation. This is particularly important for planning of radiotherapy in patients with lung cancer associated with atelectasis. FDG-PET may also play a role as a predictor for the prognosis after treatment in patients with lung cancer. The first reports on the use of PET-CT scanners, which combine high detail morphological and metabolic information, are promising. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the staging classification for lung cancer and the implications of this staging for patient management. Esophageal cancer is staged using the TNM system. The majority of patients present with advanced disease and are generally treated nonoperatively, with chemotherapy and radiation therapy. However, patients with presumed limited stage disease may be treated with chemoradiation therapy and/or esophagectomy. The role of imaging is to correctly stage patient disease so that appropriate therapy may be instigated. CT scanning of the chest and abdomen using intravenous contrast is used to detect local tumor invasion into adjacent structures (T4 disease) and/or presence of distant metastases (M1), suggesting inoperability. Such features, however, generally need biopsy proof before denying a patient surgery. CT is incapable of determining depth of tumor invasion into the esophageal wall. Therefore, if the CT shows apparently resectable disease, many patients will then undergo endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) of the esophagus, in order to more precisely establish the T stage of the primary tumor. At some institutions, patients with tumor limited to the mucosa or submucosa at EUS proceed right to surgery, whereas those with deeper extent of tumor and/or tumor involved regional lymph nodes undergo neoadjuvant chemoradiation therapy followed by surgery. EUS assessment of depth of tumor invasion (T stage) is felt to be sufficiently accurate (85-90%) that management decisions are made based on EUS imaging findings. However, EUS assessment of regional lymph node involvement is inaccurate; EUS guided biopsy of detected lymph nodes is necessary to confirm nodal involvement by tumor. Many patients now also undergo whole body PET scanning, primarily to search for occult distant metastases. Over the past years, there has been an increasing interest in cellular imaging. Cellular imaging can be defined as the non-invasive and repetitive imaging of targeted cells and cellular processes in living organisms. A key requirement for cellular imaging is the availability of high-relaxivity MR imaging contrast agents and secondarily to link them to surrogate markers. Another important challenge is the trade-off between image resolution and detectable contrast agent concentration, which must be overcome in the case of real cellular imaging. Generally, gadolinium chelates may be used for cellular imaging, but currently used agents exhibit too low relaxivities. Covalent side-chain linking would in part solve this issue, could also be used for specific targeting, but well validated models are still lacking. Currently, superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO) and ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide particles (USPIO) are the preferred MR contrast agents for cellular imaging. Depending on their size, surface charge and coating, they are engulfed by different cells of the macrophage/monocyte phagocytotic system. SPIO's for example are used for tissue specific imaging of the liver since they are taken up by the Kupffer cells. Recently several preclinical and clinical studies have demonstrated the capacity of USPIO enhanced MR imaging to detect and follow monocyte/macrophage activity in various inflammatory disorders even outside the vascular compartment. Using USPIO macrophage activity, several inflammatory diseases of the central nervous system, atherosclerotic plaques, and nephritis as well as musculoskeletal infections and arthropathies may be targeted, promising a breakthrough in non-invasive imaging of cellular progression of disease. Learning Objectives: 1. To provide a definition of cellular imaging. 2. To discuss the basic concepts of cellular imaging. 3. To provide an overview over the contrast agents which are suited for cellular imaging. Central nervous system V. Dousset; Bordeaux/FR (vincent.dousset@chu-bordeaux.fr) Background: Macrophages and the activation of local specific phagocytic cells (microglia) are involved in many pathologic tissue alterations of the CNS. Contrast agents given intravenously, mainly ultra-small particle iron oxides (US-PIO), are able to target those CNS cells in vivo, providing applications such as imaging of stroke, multiple sclerosis, brain tumors, spinal cord injury, and more. Imaging Findings: The long blood circulating time and the progressive macrophage uptake of USPIO in inflammatory tissues are two properties of major importance for pathologic tissue characterization. USPIO are able to target macrophages of normal lymph nodes and are used for MR lymphography in cancer. On animal experiments and several human studies (MS, Stroke, tumors), cell-specific MR imaging in CNS inflammatory conditions has been demonstrated besides the information provided by usual MR sequences. The exact meaning of the phagocytic activity in the brain must be, however, cautiously evaluated in the future: immune cells can be present for protective and/or deleterious purposes. A new approach for the in vivo visualization of inflammation is possible. Furthermore, the use of MR cellular imaging to monitor the efficacy of new treatments in brain inflammatory diseases might be a huge challenge in the future. Other strategies of cellular and molecular MR imaging in the CNS are emerging, especially to target neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease. Learning Objectives: 1. To discuss the concept of cellular imaging with particular approach for CNS. Sa Sa Sa Satur tur tur tur turda da da da day y y y y To review the selection of CNS inflammatory biological markers which may be targeted. 3. To discuss the current means and future approaches for CNS cellular and molecular imaging in inflammatory diseases. 4. To discuss the main results obtained in inflammatory diseases of the CNS and their impact on the understanding and therapeutic approaches. Atherosclerosis J.H. Gillard; Cambridge/UK (jhg21@cam.ac.uk) Despite tremendous advances in the recognition and management of risk factors for atheromatous disease, it remains responsible for substantial morbidity and mortality in the Western world. Until recently the risk of carotid disease in symptomatic patients was determined by simple luminal measurements. We are now able to image individual plaque components including the fibrous cap, lipid core and haemorrhage. The current goal is to be better able to characterise plaque risk, whether it is in the carotid, coronary or peripheral vasculature. Our understanding of the natural history of atheroma development continues to grow. Whilst the assessment of risk is aided by the quantification of individual morphological components in plaque viewed with MR, it has been difficult to image true plaque function. Enticing studies of plaque activity demonstrated using FDG PET showed that it is possible to image inflammatory activity in man. We now have MR contrast agents that are taken up by macrophages and are visible with high-resolution MR. We are also able to image not only individual plaque structure, but also function allowing an improved understanding of why two patients with identical degrees of luminal stenosis may have completely different degrees of vulnerability. There have been tremendous advances in our ability to assess plaque instability using MR over the last few years, the most exciting being the ability to use cell specific markers of inflammation. The challenge is to validate these techniques in the carotid and to take them into the coronary vessels as the relentless progress of technology continues. Learning Objectives: 1. To discuss the concept of cellular imaging in atherosclerosis. 2. To emphasize the role of macrophage specific MR imaging in diagnosis and monitoring of atherosclerotic disease. 3. To provide an outlook of future developments in macrophage specific MR imaging in the assessment of atherosclerotic disease. Nephritis O. Hauger; Bordeaux/FR (olivier.hauger@chu-bordeaux.fr) Specific diagnosis of most renal diseases requires pathological examination after percutaneous biopsy. Until now, renal imaging (including ultrasound, CT and MR imaging) has not detected specific changes for classification of renal diseases nor assessment their acute or chronic character, which has a tremendous impact on management. Macrophages are usually absent in normal kidneys. However, glomerular or tubulo-interstitial infiltration by inflammatory cells is a very common reactive process, either in native or in transplanted kidneys and macrophages play a major role. Because dextran-coated superparamagnetic iron oxide (USPIO) particles are taken up by mononuclear cells, especially macrophages, they can be used as a cell-specific contrast agent. Several animal experiments have demonstrated that in vivo targeting of intrarenal macrophages or activated mesangial cells by USPIO-enhanced MR imaging is possible. Relative intrarenal signal variation was related to the level of iron content, to the degree of cellular infiltration, and to the degree of renal dysfunction. The location of the maximal signal decrease depended on the type of nephropathy: exclusively cortical in experimental glomerulonephritis, exclusively medullary in ischemia-reperfusion and diffuse in toxic or obstructive nephropathies as well as in renal graft rejection. Recent studies in humans showed that USPIO-enhanced MR imaging may allow differentiation between inflammatory and non-inflammatory renal disease, and in the scenario of suspected acute graft rejection may differentiate rejection from acute tubular necrosis. This imaging modality may also be used as a target assay to determine the effectiveness of anti-inflammatory agents. Learning Objectives: 1. To discuss the concept of cellular imaging in kidney inflammation. 2. To emphasize the potential of USPIO-enhanced MR imaging in the characterization of kidney diseases. 3. To discuss the place of cell-specific MR imaging in the therapeutic strategies of renal diseases. Rheumatoid arthritis A.M. Lutz; Zürich/CH (amelie.lutz@usz.ch) Cellular MR imaging using iron oxide particles is an exciting tool for researchers to study molecular and cellular processes of various diseases. Superparamagnetic iron oxide particles are already clinically applied MR contrast agents in hepatic imaging. Ultrasmall iron oxide particles (USPIO), however, promise many more clinical applications. Due to their small diameters, a large fraction of these particles can surpass phagocytosis in liver and spleen enabling tagging of macrophages in lymph nodes and migrating macrophages. Clinical studies using USPIO-enhanced MR imaging show promising results in detection of minimal metastatic disease in lymph nodes. In addition, macrophage labeling with USPIO has successfully been demonstrated in experimental and clinical studies of various inflammatory diseases. Accordingly, the properties of USPIO can be exploited for imaging of chronic inflammatory diseases of the musculoskeletal system: most of all in rheumatoid arthritis where macrophages have a central role as major secretors of proinflammatory cytokines promoting joint inflammation and destruction. Studies in experimental rabbit models of antigen-induced arthritis have proven the feasibility in tagging synovial macrophages of affected joints. Moreover, the inherent T1-shortening properties of USPIO may be used to image the synovial hyperperfusion of arthritic joints for quantification of disease activity in rheumatoid arthritis. As newer therapy approaches target macrophage activity and synovial neoangiogenesis, USPIO-enhanced MR-imaging might become a very valuable diagnostic tool in rheumatoid arthritis in the near future. Technique: MDCT-arthrography of the shoulder provides isotropic volumetric acquisitions with excellent MPR reformatted images in all oblique planes. An acquisition time of nearly 30 seconds with neutral rotation of the humerus avoids motion artifacts in painful and older patients and consistent high quality. The increased radiation dose due to the high number of submillimetric slices (about 180) is limited by the MDCT technique. Rotator cuff tear: CT-arthrography should be performed only for preoperative imaging. We report a series of 50 cases of rotator cuff disease explored by both CT-arthrography and MR-arthrography. CT-arthrography appears highly accurate in determining the coronal and sagittal extension of full thickness tears, and does so more easily than MR-arthrography for the posterior extension of the tear. When a full thickness tear is lacking, CT-arthrography cannot explore the superficial aspect of the tendons. For subscapularis and biceps tendons, additional lateral or medial rotation slices or a kinetic study may be easily performed by CT-arthrography. Fatty degeneration of the rotator cuff muscles is always assessed on soft-tissue filtered axial and sagittal slices. Shoulder instability: We reviewed 15 capsulolabral injuries explored by both imaging modalities. CT-arthrography appeared less efficient in assessing the capsule and the ligaments, particularly the IGHL. However, CT-arthrography better assesses bony defects of the glenoid. A glenoid view (Bernageau's view) could complete MR-arthrography. The quality of both examinations is high since patients are usually young and cooperative. Primary omarthrosis: CT-arthrography rules out a tendon tear and assesses very accurately the glenoid bony stock. Learning Objectives: 1. To present the procedure of CT arthrography of the shoulder with multidetector computed tomography. 2. To present the most relevant CT arthrography abnormalities of tendons, ligaments, cartilage and muscles in rotator cuff disease and shoulder instability. 3. To discuss the advantages (reproducibility and fastness, bone assessment, high spatial resolution) of CT arthrography compared to other imaging modalities. MR arthrography C.W.A. Pfirrmann; Zürich/CH (christian.pfirrmann@balgrist.ch) MR arthrography helps with the assessment of small intra-articular structures that may be responsible for uncharacteristic shoulder pain other than the "classics" like instability and rotator cuff lesions. Joint distension with contrast material helps to delineate and thus to enhance the diagnostic performance in assessing these intra-articular structures such as the biceps tendon (biceps tendinopathy/ partial tearing), the biceps anchor (SLAP lesions), the glenohumeral ligaments (tears, degeneration), the cartilage (cartilage defects), the rotator cuff interval structures (synovitis, frozen shoulder, instability), and the reflection pulley. An advantage of MR arthrography lies in the more accurate differentiation between tendinopathy and partial thickness tear of the rotator cuff. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the major strengths and weakness of MR arthrography for the assessment of the shoulder joint. 2. To get knowledge of the most important anatomic variants and asymptomatic findings seen with MR arthrography of the shoulder. 3. To be able to recognize the classic MR arthrography findings seen with rotator cuff lesions and instability. Indirect MR arthrography M. Vahlensieck; Bonn/DE (m.vahlensieck@uni-bonn.de) With intravenous injection of gadolinium, diffusion into the joint fluid results in sufficient contrast media accumulation in order to produce arthrographic MR images. In this session techniques, results, tricks and different approaches of direct arthrographic method are addressed. The emphasis lies on application at the shoulder joint. Applications in other joints however are also discussed. Learning Objectives: 1. To present technique and physiologic aspects of indirect MR arthrography including practical hints for improving the method (e.g. internal-and external rotation). 2. To discuss virtual drawbacks such as missing joint capsule distension and advantages such as minor invasiveness. 3. To present and discuss sensitivity and specificity of indirect MR arthrography in comparison to direct MR-arthrography. Standard MR imaging: Arthrography, do we really need it? J.C. Vilanova; Girona/ES (kvilanova@comg.es) Standard MR imaging of the shoulder for evaluation rotator cuff and glenohumeral instability is a challenge for radiologist. The complexity of the capsulolabral anatomy and the subtlety of the MR findings necessitates knowledge of the anatomic details, multiple variations, imaging pitfalls and experience on the part of radiologist, together with a high-resolution optimal protocol of the shoulder to avoid the misdiagnosis of pathologic abnormalities. Routine imaging protocol of the shoulder should include fat-suppressed T2-weighted images in order to achieve optimal results. With this basis, together with clinical examination, plain X-rays, advances in surface coil and software design should diagnose with optimal accuracy the major part of the rotator cuff and glenohumeral instability lesions with non-contrast MR imaging. Several limitations concerning conventional MR imaging will be discussed. An up-dated review of the literature concerning the accuracy on high-resolution standard noncontrast MR imaging as opposed to MR arthrography of the shoulder will be presented. Adequate indications and criteria to perform an invasive technique such as MR arthrography will be addressed. This session is ambitious in its scope, as is reflected in its learning objectives. The speakers represent a wide range of experience and expertise in multi-detector computed tomography (MDCT) and their brief is to communicate in an accessible form something of the nature and interactions of important indices in MDCT, such as: image quality and dose; organ dose and effective dose and the technical developments designed to reduce them; an introduction to the basic pharmacological and physiological principles underlying contrast enhancement regimens; the advantages and pitfalls of MDCT in cardiovascular applications; and to survey the impact of MDCT on clinical medicine and medical teaching. Learning Objectives: 1. To achieve a better understanding of the relationship between radiation dose and image quality in MDCT. 2. To achieve a better understanding of the basis for logical contrast enhancement regimens in MDCT. 3. To achieve a better understanding of the potential of MDCT in modern imaging and in teaching. Optimizing contrast enhancement for MDCT J.P. Heiken; St. Louis, MO/US (heikenj@mir.wustl.edu) The reduced image acquisition times of MDCT have made scan timing more critical than for single detector CT, but have provided radiologists with an opportunity to improve CT contrast enhancement. It is therefore important for radiologists to understand 1) the factors that determine the magnitude and timing of arterial and parenchymal contrast enhancement for CT, and 2) identify the modifications needed to optimize contrast enhancement for 4-row to 64-row MDCT. The magnitude of arterial enhancement is dependent on the rate of iodine delivery and the total iodine dose, whereas that of hepatic parenchymal enhancement is dependent on iodine dose. Thus for CTA performed with MDCT, contrast medium volume can be decreased. However, contrast dose for liver imaging cannot be decreased, even with rapid MDCT acquisition. The most important patientrelated factor that affects the magnitude of aortic or hepatic enhancement is body weight. Enhancement magnitude is inversely proportional to body weight. Therefore, very large patients require higher iodine dose. The technical factor that determines the timing of peak aortic and hepatic enhancement is injection duration (the longer the injection duration, the longer the time to peak enhancement). Peak enhancement is delayed in patients with reduced cardiac output. For CTA, scan delay should be individualized with bolus tracking or test bolus. The greater the number of detector rows, the shorter the acquisition time for a particular MDCT examination. As the acquisition time decreases, the scan delay for a particular Balancing image quality and dose remains a decisive topic in the practice of CT; however, more and more technical means have become available which can support the radiologist in this process. The interdependence of dose, noise and spatial resolution are governed by physics and will not change. Typical values for these parameters, including patient dose values, will be reviewed. The high isotropic spatial resolution of typically 0.4 -0.6 mm available today can only be increased further at the expense of significantly higher dose or noise. These relations will be discussed and illustrated using simulated and measured results. Technological advances in modern scanners aim at controlling image quality in an automated fashion. The goal is to have the user select the level of image quality and the machine will then provide this user-selected level of image quality in an automated fashion. In doing so, the user is relieved from selecting scan parameters to a high degree. The underlying concepts of tube current modulation and automatic exposure control will be discussed.  Clinical medicine taught and practised by MDCT A.K. Dixon; Cambridge/UK (akd15@radiol.cam.ac.uk) Computed tomography has now become of age. In many aspects of clinical medicine, CT has been shown to be superior to the physical examination. Not only can it be used as a teaching substitute for the cadaver in the dissection room, Multidetector CT can also display the whole range of many standard clinical conditions and signs. MDCT can show the budding clinician how difficult certain clinical signs can be to elicit and how certain anatomical variations can cause very misleading features. Simple signs such as collateral veins in SVC obstruction, lumbar (sacral) oedema and tricuspid regurgitation can all be ascertained from close scrutiny of the images. Indeed it is, increasingly, becoming the duty of the radiologist to point out such signs as such clinical skills are diminishing. When will the syllabi for medical and surgical pre-clinical and post-graduate training start to reflect the enormous training opportunities available in clinical radiology? When will there be a reduction in numbers of training posts in some areas to allow the necessary expansion of radiology? When will clinical practice really change to maximise the potential benefits that MDCT can bring to patient care? Multi-detector computed tomography (MDCT) has significantly developed in the last years. All the cutting applications of CT and in particular CT angiography have been enhanced. High spatial resolution and high temporal resolution are mandatory for a proper angiographic evaluation using MDCT. MDCT is a wellknown standard for the detection pulmonary embolism. Subsegmental branches of the pulmonary artery can be well depicted. The study of the abdominal aorta is a common indication for MDCT angiography. Thoracic aorta is a routine study with MDCT with the exception of the ascending aorta. With the introduction ECGgated MDCT imaging, motion artifacts at the aortic root can be ruled out. Computed tomography of the coronary arteries has reached the edge of clinical implementation. Only large trials are now missing to understand what will be the role of this technology for the detection of coronary lesions. Extensive validation literature on 16-slice and the first reports on 64-slice technologies suggest that this modality is ready for clinical implementation. Currently the role of cardiac CT is not defined. Clinical studies are lacking while professionals are increasingly asking for guidelines and indications. Besides very well established clinical applications of MDCT, such as detection and rule-out of pulmonary embolism and diagnosis of aortic diseases, the new generation of MDCT scanners and in particular the newest 64-slice generation are now being implemented in the clinical workup of patients with acute chest pain including coronary arteries. The potential of MDCT in triage settings is to be fully explored in the next years.  A. Gangi; Strasbourg/FR (gangi@rad6.u-strasbg.fr) Percutaneous spinal interventions are in constant progress. We will develop the advances in this field. One of the most successful procedures is the vertebroplasty with new indications and materials. The majority of vertebroplasty are performed with acrylic cements. One of the major drawbacks of this cement is its stiffness particularly in osteoporotic spine. The new cements particularly phosphocalcic cements are very promising. However, there are some difficulties to inject those cements and we will precise when, where, which and how to use them. Percutaneous tumour management with radiofrequency ablation alone or associated to vertebroplasty is the other promising procedure in spine. The indications of this technique will be developed in details. Other advances are the development of new devices for tumour resection with radiofrequency or mechanical aspiration. These devices are particularly interesting in spinal tumours with rupture of posterior wall and risk of spinal cord compression. These materials are used previous to cement injection to resect and produce a room in the tumour reducing the risk of tumour bulging in the canal. Other devices are used in osteosclerotic metastasis. The injection of cement is particularly difficult with high risk of leakage in osteoblastic lesions. The use of the ablation systems and dilatation instruments allow easing the vertebroplasty and reducing the risk of complications by leakage. Other advance is to fill skeletal cystic lesions and aneurysmal bone cyst with bone graft.  Reduction of compression fractures with vertebroplasty and use of bone substitutes P.F. Heini; Berne/CH (paul.heini@insel.ch) Cement augmentation using PMMA cement is known as an efficient treatment for vertebral compression fractures (VCF) with a rapid release of pain in most patients and prevention of an ongoing kyphotic deformity of the vertebrae treated. However performing a vertebroplasty there is no chance to restore vertebral height. Using the technique of kyphoplasty a certain restoration of vertebral body height can be achieved. There is a limitation of recovery due to loss of correction when deflating the kyphoplastic ballon and before injecting the cement. In addition the instruments used are quite expensive. Lordoplasty is another technique to restore kyphosis by indirect fracture reduction as it is used with an internal fixateur. The fractured and the adjacent vertebrae are instrumentated with bone cannulas bipediculary and the adjacent vertebrae are augmentated with cement. After curing of the cement the fractured vertebra is reduced applying a lordotic moment via the cannulas. Having the pretension maintained the fractured vertebra is reinforced. We performed a prospective trial of 26 patients with a lordoplasty procedure. There was a pain relief about 87% and a significant decrease in VAS value from 7.3 to 1.9. Due to lordoplasty there was a significant and permanent correction in vertebral and segmental kyphotic angle about 15.2° and 10.0° and also a significant restoration in anterior and mid vertebral height. Lordoplasty is a minimal invasive technique to restore vertebral body height. An immediate relief of pain is achieved in most patients. The procedure is safe and cost effective. Vertebroplasty is gaining popularity in the treatment of specific painful spine lesions. It remains unclear, however, what possible side effects the cement might have upon the vertebral body and intervertebral disc. We performed a histologic and radiographic analysis of the endplate and disc in the goat spine after vertebroplasty with poly (methyl methacrylate) cement or calcium phosphate cement, to study possible differences in surrounding tissue reaction. Furthermore, we assessed whether a defect in the endplate, simulating endplate fracture and allowing for contact of cement with disc tissue, had any effect on endplate or disc degeneration. Twenty-four mature goats were divided between two follow-up periods (six weeks and six months). All animals underwent bilateral transpedicular vertebroplasty at two lumbar levels, where one of four treatments was applied: injection with calcium phosphate cement with or without endplate defect, and injection with poly (methyl methacrylate) cement with or without endplate defect. The effect of the treatments on the integrity of the disc, endplate and surrounding tissue was examined by semiquantitative histology and radiography. No signs of disc or endplate degeneration were seen in any of the sections. The mean disc height did not decrease from the postoperative period to follow-up in any group thereby supporting the histological findings. A mild inflammatory reaction was found in four vertebral bodies in the poly (methyl methacrylate) groups. The results of this study suggest that vertebroplasty with either of these cements can be performed without an increased risk of disc or endplate degeneration even when endplate discontinuity is present. Learning Objectives: 1. To recognize the possibility of nutritional pathway obstruction and subsequent degeneration of the intervertebral disc after vertebroplasty. 2. To learn the radiologic and histologic changes after vertebroplasty with PMMA and calcium phosphate cement in a large animal model. 3. To discuss the differences in indication for different types of cement in vertebroplasty for osteoporotic and traumatic fractures. The paravertebral intramuscular technique consists of bilateral paravertebral intramuscular infiltration of an oxygen-ozone gas mixture at a concentration of around 25-27µg into the disk spaces affected in the lumbar spine, usually from L3 to S1. The intradiscal technique involves a posterolateral ipsilateral approach to pain in the lumbar spine with intradiscal infiltration of 3 cc oxygen-ozone gas mixture at a concentration of 27µg followed by intraforaminal injection. It is neither possible nor advisable to inject more than 1 ml of gas mixture in the cervical spines. The success rate of oxygen-ozone treatment of disk disease and low back pain and sciatica varies from 75% to 90% in different series and depending on the technique adopted. Our results administering oxygen-ozone are satisfactory compared with those obtained using other percutaneous techniques. In particular, the success rate in our series was similar to that reported in a number of studies using enzymatic chemonucleolysis. However, oxygen-ozone administra-tion is even less invasive than enzymatic chemonucleolysis. Oxygen-ozone administration is a useful means of treating cervical and lumbar herniated disks, cervicobrachyalgia, low back and sciatic nerve pain in patients who fail to respond to conservative management, before embarking on surgery. The colorectum is the fourth commonest site for cancer world wide, although the incidence is second only to lung cancer in Northern Europe and North America. There has been a marked increase in incidence amongst migrants adopting a Western lifestyle, and although a clear genetic predisposition exists, over 75% of cancers develop in people with no identifiable risk factors. Most colorectal cancer arises form precursor adenomatous polyps, with the adenoma-carcinoma sequence taking around 10 years. There is however an increasing realisation that progression of disease may be accelerated in flat or depressed adenomas, which could account for up to 25% of cancers. Good evidence exists that endoscopic polypectomy can prevent colorectal cancer and a clear relationship exists between cancer stage and prognosis. Colorectal cancer thus lends itself well to population screening, being prevalent, treatable and preventable by well-established techniques. The optimum screening strategy is not yet established. Many candidate tests exist, but only faecal occult blood testing (FOBT) has been shown to be both feasible and to reduce mortality in randomised control trials. Data from large-scale trials of flexible sigmoidoscopy are currently awaited. Emerging technologies such as CT and MR imaging colonography and DNA based stool tests may play future roles. Mass screening is not without risk with cardiac morbidity secondary to laxative use or sedation, and complications related to endoscopy such as perforation and haemorrhage all well described. Cost effectiveness compares well to more established programmes such as breast screening, but is heavily reliant on frequency and initial screening age. Learning Objectives: 1. To demonstrate an understanding of the epidemiology of colon cancer. 2. To review the rationale of screening for colorectal cancer. 3. To discuss the disadvantages of screening. CT colonography is a noninvasive test for the examination of the colon. The technique is extremely easy. Following the same meticulous bowel preparation as conventional colonoscopy, the colon is inflated with air or carbon dioxide using either a rectal tube or a rubber catheter. No sedation is required. In order to improve patient compliance, research is focused on the development of new bowel preparation regimens, including low-prep schedules. Fecal tagging, using either iodine or barium compounds, is of great value to improve specificity, especially for small polyps. Dual scanning with the patient respectively in prone and supine position is obtained. Scanning protocols are in continuous evolution, in parallel with the development of new multidetector-row CT (MDCT) scanners. With the use of MDCT scanner and sub-millimeter collimation isotropic voxels are routinely achieved, improving the quality of reformatted as well as endoluminal images. The use of low-dose protocols minimizes radiation exposure. The acquired volumetric dataset is post-processed on dedicated workstations using commercially available software programs. Image analysis is performed using a primary 2D (i.e. scrolling through axial slices and multiplanar reformatted images and using 3D endoluminal views as problem-solving support) or primary 3D approach (i.e. using endoluminal view as a primary approach for lesion detection). Open problems, including readers' learning curve and inter-observed variability, perceptual A-115 C. The practical application of CT colonography J. Stoker; Amsterdam/NL (j.stoker@amc.uva.nl) CT-colonography (CTC) is an accurate technique for the detection of colorectal cancer and significant polyps in symptomatic patients. CTC has replaced double contrast barium enema as primary imaging technique in symptomatic patients and is important as an adjunct in incomplete colonoscopy examinations. Most series concern CTC after extensive bowel cleansing, but more recent series have demonstrated that accurate CTC after limited bowel preparation is feasible resulting in reduced burden to patients. The role of CTC in screening is currently extensively studied. Studies on CTC with extensive bowel preparation in low prevalence populations have demonstrated that high sensitivity and specificity can be obtained in such populations. However, factors such as reader experience and evaluation technique influence the results and require further study. Primary two-dimensional evaluation is commonly performed, but recent studies seem to indicate the advantage of primary three-dimensional evaluation. Reduction of the burden of CTC (primarily extensive bowel preparation) is mandatory before the technique can be implemented. Modified bowel preparation and radiation exposure reduction are feasible and large series with this CTC-modifications are mandatory in low prevalence populations. Development of accurate automated polyp detection is important for cost effective screening programs. Digital detectors have now become the state-of-the-art in diagnostic radiology. They have opened up new frontiers in diagnosis, but have also created the need for additional expertise and for new evaluation and quality control criteria. This workshop is the 8 th of the series EFOMP Workshops in "New Technology in Diagnostic Radiology". It has been organized by EFOMP in collaboration with ECR to address the technological aspects, the medical requirements and the industry perspective of new detectors for digital imaging in mammography, in cardiology and in interventional radiology. Flat detectors and their applications in radiology and cardiology F. Günzler, M. Spahn; Forchheim/DE (florian.guenzler@siemens.com) Diagnostic and interventional flat detector X-ray systems are penetrating the market in all areas of application. First introduced in radiography and mammog-raphy, they have conquered cardiac and general angiography and are getting increasing attention in fluoroscopy. Two flat detector technologies prevail. The dominating method is based on an indirect X-ray conversion process, using cesium iodide scintillators. It offers considerable advantages in radiography, angiography and fluoroscopy. The other method employs a direct converter such as selenium which is particularly suitable for mammography. Both flat detector technologies are based on amorphous silicon active pixel matrices. Flat detectors facilitate the clinical workflow in radiographic rooms, foster improved image quality and provide the potential to reduce dose. This added value is based on their large dynamic range, their high sensitivity to X-rays and the instant availability of the image. Advanced image processing is instrumental in these improvements and expansion in the range of conventional diagnostic methods. In angiography and fluoroscopy the transition from image intensifiers to flat detectors is facilitated by the many advantages they offer, such as distortion-free images, excellent tissue contrast, large dynamic range and high X-ray sensitivity. These characteristics and their compatibility with strong magnetic fields are the basis for improved diagnostic methods and innovative interventional applications. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the working principle of flat detectors and their basic performance characteristics. 2. To become familiar with the advantages of flat detectors and the implications for improved or new applications in radiology and cardiology. Advances in digital detectors for mammography R. Klausz; Paris/FR (remy.klausz@ge.com) Whilst still a recent discipline, digital mammography has now gained maturity, as demonstrated by the widespread equipment installation, and recent large population clinical studies. Different technologies are used for image detection: Phosphor plate technology has been continuously improved since its early introduction. Acceptable Detective Quantum Efficiency (DQE) can now be reached, particularly when using a dual side read-out. Also promising is the developing technology of needle-structured screens. Integrated digital flat panels are based on two main technologies, both using an amorphous silicon read-out matrix. Differences are in photon detection mechanism: photoconduction in Selenium (direct detection), or scintillation in a CsI layer, captured by a photo-diode array in the a-Si panel (indirect detection). Reducing the electronic read-out noise in the silicon matrix has significantly improved DQE for both flat panel technologies. In addition, further progress can be obtained using a thicker and less diffusive scintillator for indirect detectors. Increased DQE at low dose levels is essential when the detector operates in fractionated dose mode, e.g. for the purpose of tomographic imaging. The last category of detectors is present in scanning devices. There too, different technologies are used: moving slot associated with scintillator and CCD, or multiple slit scanning associated with photon counting detectors. In the latter case, X-ray detection is performed in silicon detectors or avalanche-amplified gas detectors. The scanning technique displays good X-ray scatter rejection. Photon counting eliminates electronic noise, thus providing a dose-independent DQE. Learning Objectives: 1. To review the various technologies used for image detection in digital mammography. 2. To understand their main properties and peculiarities. 3. To gather information on the most recent evolutions in these technologies. Integration of digital imaging in mammography K. Faulkner; Wallsend/UK (keith.faulkner@nhs.net) At present, film screen mammography is the accepted imaging approach for breast screening. However, there is increasing pressure on breast screening units to move to digital mammography because of the broader issue of implementing a film-less and paperless radiology department within the hospital. Any change in imaging technique in breast screening must be supported by research evidence to demonstrate that quality will be maintained. Thus, any change must be preceded by consideration of the equipment's clinical and technical suitability, as well as the key practical question of how to integrate digital mammography within a mature breast screening programme. Any assessment must include a review of technical parameters to define appropriate tests for assessing equipment performance, including the display systems and develop guidance on equipment optimisation. Clinical issues to be addressed include studies of workflow management (includ-ing the use of previous images) and assessment of acceptability to women and staff. Critical to this process is the performance of suitably designed clinical trials so that digital mammography can be compared in an objective manner with film/ screen mammography. Digital mammography will need to be integrated with existing picture archiving and communication systems and hospital patient administration systems. A key issue for a breast screening programme is that often mammography is undertaken on mobile units which move to different locations in the community. The lecture will discuss the various issues and propose potential solutions. Assessment of anterior cranial fossa floor neoplastic invasion yields a great impact on surgical planning. Bone destruction of the skull base and dura mater invasion are key information provided by imaging techniques. CT better shows bone destruction, whereas MR is more precise in grading dural invasion, which implies a worse prognosis. A proper assessment requires a careful analysis of the signal intensities that compose a "sandwich" of signals corresponding to the bony floor of anterior cranial fossa, the overlying dura mater, and the CSF. On enhanced sagittal and coronal SE T1, when a sinonasal neoplasm abuts the cribrifom plate interface, without interrupting its hypointense signal, the lesion should be considered limited to the ethmoid/nasal fossa. Replacement of the hypointense signal by tumor implies bone penetration. In this case, a thickened enhancing dura mater usually borders the neoplasm. If uninterrupted, the neoplasm may be graded as intracranial-extradural. Conversely, focal or more extensive replacement of enhanced thickened dura mater by tumor signal indicate intracranial-intradural invasion. Brain invasion is suspected in the presence of edema. Resectability of tumors invading the brain does not solely depend upon the depth of tumor extent into the brain, nor bilateral brain invasion. It requires a thorough evaluation of several other issues, the most important being the histological type and patient's performance status. Patients with limited brain invasion treated by craniofacial resection are reported to have no significant decrease in survival compared to those with dural invasion alone. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with CT and MR techniques and their use in suspected anterior skull base tumors. 2. To know the basic anatomy of the anterior skull base and to be able to identify anatomic variants. 3. To know the characteristic aspect of a variety of anterior skull base tumors and be able to provide a differential diagnosis. 4. To be able to recognize characteristic patterns of tumor spread. 5. To be aware of therapeutic implications of imaging. 6. To know the basic CT and MR imaging aspects of post-surgical and post-RT treatment and be able to identify recurrences. A key point is the knowledge of pathways between the extracranial and intracranial spaces. Imaging technique: Both CT and MR imaging are often needed to study CSB lesions exactly. In CT examinations, the following general guidelines are recommended: slice thickness ≤ 3 mm, axial and coronal planes (as reformations in multi-detector CT) and bone algorithms. A routine MR imaging examination of the this area should include axial, coronal and sagittal images such as T1-weighted and T2-weighted sequences with a slice thickness between 3 to 5 mm. Intrave-nous contrast medium is used to evaluate the cavernous sinus and potential tumours. Contrast enhanced T1-weighted images are helpful in the demonstration of perineural spread. Nowadays angiography is mostly performed in combination with interventions. Tumours of the skull base: Diseases of the skull base can be divided into intrinsic lesions and lesions affecting the skull base from adjacent spaces. The latter will only be mentioned. In intrinsic lesions, the volume of the lesion is centred in the skull base, but these lesions, especially tumours, are rare. Most common tumours and tumour like lesions of CSB and their differential diagnoses will be demonstrated on typical examples. Hereby, the diagnostic possibilities and their influence on the therapeutic strategy are discussed. Learning Objectives: 1. To know the basic anatomy of the central skull base. 2. To become familiar with CT and MR imaging protocols in imaging of the central skull base. 3. To be able to recognize common central skull base lesions and be able to provide a differential diagnosis. 4. To be able to depict characteristic patterns of spread and relationship of lesions to important anatomic structures. 5. To be aware of therapeutic implications of imaging findings. A-122 C. Temporal bone F. Veillon; Strasbourg/FR (Francis.Veillon@chru-strasbourg.fr) MR imaging and CT are both necessary for evaluating temporal bone tumors. Injection of contrast medium is performed in most of the cases. Primitive cholesteatoma and cholesterol granuloma never enhance. The following will be considered: 1. In the external auditory meatus (EAM)-polyps, granulomatosis, carcinoma. 2. In the middle ear (ME)-glomic tumors, neuroma of the VII and VIIIth nerves, granulomatosis, extension of lesions from the EAM, jugular foramen (JF) and apex. 3. In the inner ear (IE)-papillary tumors of the endolymphatic sac, extension of lesions from the ME, JF and apex. Primitive cholesteatoma (PC) are found in the EAM, ME, IE. Other lesions in the skull base include: 1. In the jugular foramen-jugular glomic tumor (JGT), meningioma, mixed nerve neuroma. 2. In the apex-cholesterol granuloma, PC, vascular dysplasia, chondrosarcoma (CS), neuromas of the V and VIII cranial nerves, mixed nerve neuromas, meningiomas, extension of carcinoma from the adjacent pharynx and lateral pharyngeal space, sphenoidal sinus, pituitary gland adenoma, JGT. Bony temporal bone lesions include osteoma (EAM), chondrosarcoma (apex), giant cell tumors (apex), myeloma (apex), osteoblastoma (mastoid), fibrous dysplasia and Pagets. Finally metastases can occur from the following primaries: oropharynx, breast, prostate and lung. In most of the cases the etiologic diagnosis is possible. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the imaging techniques needed to detect tumors of the temporal bone. 2. To be able to recognize the most common temporal bone tumors and be able to differentiate them from non-tumorous pathology. 3. To be able to assess characteristic patterns of tumor spread and involvement of important anatomic structures. 4. To be aware of the therapeutic implications of imaging findings. 5. To learn how to report the imaging findings. Image-guided percutaneous techniques for thermal tumor ablation have been one of the major advances in nonsurgical treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Percutaneous ablation is currently accepted as the best therapeutic choice for patients with early-stage HCC when liver transplantation or surgical resection are not suitable options. Over the past two decades, several methods for chemical or thermal tumor destruction have been developed and clinically tested. RF ablation has been the most widely assessed alternative to chemical ablation with ethanol (percutaneous ethanol injection, PEI) for local treatment of HCC. Three randomized studies compared RF ablation versus PEI for the treatment of earlystage HCC. The first trial, performed in European centers, failed to show a statistically significant difference in overall survival between patients who received RF ablation and those treated with PEI. More recently, survival advantages have been identified in two Asian studies. All three investigations showed that RF ablation had higher local anticancer effect than PEI, leading to a better local control of the disease. Therefore, RF ablation appears as the preferred percutaneous therapy for patients with early-stage HCC on the basis of more consistent local tumor control. Clinical research with cryo and microwave ablation has been conducted in the framework of feasibility studies. These early investigations showed feasibility and safety of these procedures. However, further trials are needed to establish the clinical efficacy of these novel treatment options with respect to RF ablation and to devise an unbiased therapeutic strategy. Radiofrequency ablation of liver metastases can be done under conscious sedation or general anesthesia. General anesthesia limits possibilities of deep inspiration for lesions located near the diaphragm but permits more easily the treatment of multiple tumors in a single session. The indications of antibiotic coverage will be detailed such as previous bilio-enteric anastomoses, suspected biliary dilatation or previous abdominal surgery. Results of RFA in patients with liver metastases from colorectal cancer will be given in the context of surgical resection comparison. Uni-and multicentric study results will be detailed. Rarer indications include endocrine tumor metastases for symptom palliation as well as for curative intent. Indications and results in patients with breast cancer metastases will be given. Methods that help tumor localization and needle positioning will be given both for CT and ultrasound with a special emphasis for ultrasound contrast agents. Tips and tricks when lesions are located near large vessels will be detailed. Indications and methods for portal or hepatic vein temporary occlusion will be given. Learning Objectives: 1. To list appropriate medications for sedation and analgesia before, during and after radiofrequency ablation procedures. 2. To list the characteristics of metastases most likely to be successfully ablated with radiofrequency ablation. 3. To outline a method of improving visualization of metastases poorly visible on CT and US to facilitate radiofrequency ablation. 4. To outline a method of reducing heat loss when ablating lesions adjacent to a hepatic vein. A-125 C. Prevention and management of complications P.L. Pereira; Tübingen/DE (philippe.pereira@med.uni-tuebingen.de) Radiofrequency (RF) ablation is increasingly used for the therapy of inoperable malignant tumors involving solid organs. Although minor complications (definition has been reported by SCVIR) are common similar to all other image guided interventions, the rate of major complications remains under 2%. The majority of them are related to thermal injury. Nevertheless RF ablation involves some elements of risk depending on the location and the size of the tumor to be treated and the aggressiveness of the entire procedure. Adverse effects are pain, fever, fatigue and nausea. The most frequent complications, also depending upon the tumor type and location, are bleeding, pleural effusion and infection. Tumor cell seeding and grounding pad burns are seldom, and may be considered as iatrogenic complications. Perforation of bowel structures occurs most often by using ultrasound as the imaging modality for guidance. Renal and lung ablation may be related to organ-specific complications such as ureteral strictures or pneumothorax respectively. To perform RF ablation in a safe way, the interventionalist must: a) be aware of potential risks related to tumor location and tumor type, b) use an adequate imaging modality to monitor the procedure, c) recognize the preliminary signs of complications, d) be able to treat the majority of these complications. In this categorical course, we will illustrate a broad spectrum of minor and major complications and provide practical tips for preventing or treating them. The development in recent years has resulted in achieving significant advances in molecular biology allowing the identification of genes and pathways related to the disease and in parallel technologies allowing improved spatial and temporal resolution, better depth penetration, enhanced sensitivity, improved image processing and advanced combinations of different imaging modalities. In the following, the aims of molecular imaging are presented as well as the methodological requirements such as laboratory equipment, and radiological modalities such as CT, PET-CT, MR imaging and optional technology. Different methods will be introduced to increase spatial and temporal resolution in order to improve sensitivity, depth penetration, image processing and the impact of different imaging modalities. The role of the molecular imaging team will be highlighted including the cooperation with scientific groups such as biological and molecular oncology and various other basic sciences. In summary, it will be a challenging task to structure a molecular imaging program as it needs integrative cooperation between various techniques and fields of experimental and clinical medicine. Animal imaging laboratories must be considered from two different angles. 1. Why set up animal imaging laboratories? To answer to this, one must have above all a clear research program. Strategic research orientations will be discussed, according to the NIH and NIBIB programs. 2. Which kind of equipment? Performance and limitations of current animal imaging modalities will be reviewed. Finally, data on small animal imaging facilities of Europe and US will be provided. Learning Objectives: 1. To give a vision of research in imaging. 2. To introduce the concept of interdisciplinarity. 3. To present some European projects. Cooperation between industry and academics: Key to innovation in biomedical imaging? P. Loescher; Chalfont St. Giles/UK (peter.loescher@ge.com) The trends dictating the need for novel diagnostics-particularly biomedical imaging-will be critical to delivering quality patient care. The regulatory environment in the US and Europe is focused on establishing better efficacy and safety for therapeutics due to both increasing costs of reimbursement as well as the patient burden caused by side-effects. Public and private payers are also spearheading initiatives to stem the costs of treating acute events, which are neither cost-effective, nor advantageous for patients who would drastically benefit from earlier disease detection. Further, the pharmaceutical industry is seeking to develop novel treatments in therapeutic areas such as neurology, where objective clinical diagnosis of disease would help drug developers assess the impact of a potential treatment. Just as most of the therapeutics used commonly were ushered in by advances in diagnostics, more sophisticated diagnostics will lead to new pharmaceutical development resulting in more targeted, patient-specific and cost-effective treatments. Patients will benefit, physicians will benefit, and payers will benefit. This session will further detail how the relationship between diagnostic and pharmaceutical R&D will evolve. We will discuss examples of tandem diagnostic and pharmaceutical development that GE Healthcare is exploring in Alzheimer's and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We will explore the regulatory shifts that might catalyze these advances, reiterating the importance of interaction between the academic research communities and the diagnostics industry. We will also detail opportunities for improved cooperation between academia and industry that might further support the objectives of each. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the symbiotic relationship between new diagnostic development and pharmaceutical drug discovery. 2. To appreciate the need for more innovation in biomedical imaging. 3. To comprehend the development advantages gained with multiple collaborators. L. Højgaard; Copenhagen/DK (lottepet@rh.dk) The role of ESFRI is to support a coherent approach to policy making on research infrastructures in Europe and to act as an incubator for international negotiations about concrete initiatives, creating a European road-map for new research infrastructures of pan-European interest. Research infrastructures are: "tools that provide essential services to the scientific community for basic or applied research. These may concern the whole range of scientific and technological fields, from social sciences to astronomy, through genomics and nanotechnologies. Examples include libraries, databases, biological archives, clean rooms, communication networks, research vessels, satellite and aircraft observation facilities, coastal observatories, telescopes, synchrotrons and accelerators. They may be "single-sited", "distributed" and "virtual". ESFRI members are from all EU member states and seven associated countries representing the Ministers of Research. ESFRI has 3 Working Groups, with one in Medicine and Biology, which has 3 expert groups: Genomics, proteomics, bioinformatics and structural and chemical biology; Clinical and translational research, imaging and radiation; Biodiversity and environment. The Expert Group in Clinical and Translational Research, Imaging and Radiation will evaluate proposals and bring them to a mature position for entering the Euro- Multislice computed tomography (MSCT) has greatly increased the range, the speed, and the spatial resolution along the z-axis (long axis of body) of helical CT scanning. Current MSCT scanners examine the abdomen and pelvis within one breathold, i.e., without motion-artifact. MSCT of the urinary tract allows for multiplanar image reconstruction with meaningful diagnosis of the precise location, size, and extent of renal lesions in imaging planes other than axial. Postprocessing tools provide 2D-and 3D-impressions of renal lesions in relation to renal parenchyma, extrarenal fat, renal sinus, pyelocaliceal system, ureter, blood vessels, and surrounding organs. Urinary tract trauma typically occurs in motor vehicle accidents, assaults, sports, fall from heights or from surgical procedures. Trauma may be blunt, penetrating or due to deceleration. Specific symptoms, e.g. hematuria, may be absent even in severe injuries. The radiological evaluation includes the occurrence and extent of renal injury (contusion, laceration, fracture, shattered kidney) with or without ischemia, rupture of the collecting system (urinary leakage), subcapsular and perirenal hematoma, vascular pedicle injury (renal artery and vein) and associated injuries. Ultrasonography and urography should not be used for initial evaluation, since the degree of injury may be grossly underestimated. Multislice CT (MSCT) using thin collimation, isotropic voxels and coronal and sagittal reconstructions greatly facilitates interpretation. Scanning in the early vascular phase depicts vascular injuries and the extent of ischemic renal injury. Scanning should also be performed in the excretory phase, > 8-10 minutes after contrast injection, including the entire abdomen and pelvis to assess the extent of urine and blood leakage. MSCT can be decisive in identifying the relatively rare cases where surgical or radiological intervention is necessary. Bladder rupture may be intra-or extraperitoneal. Surgery should be considered in cases of intraperitoneal rupture. MSCT including late imaging (10 minutes) after intravenous contrast is accurate in differentiating the two, by identification of opacified urine intra-or extraperitoneally. Alternatively, MSCT may be performed after diluted contrast medium has been instilled through a transurethral Foley catheter (CT cystography), but bladder catheterisation should only be performed after urethral injury has been ruled out. Learning Objectives: 1. To provide an understanding of the mechanisms and types of traumatic injuries of the kidneys and urinary tract. In the evaluation of extra-axial brain tumors CT and MR imaging represent the two most important and commonly used imaging modalities. CT is superior for detecting areas of calcification and for evaluating bony changes related to the tumor. Multidetector CT (MDCT) is also very helpful in the presurgical evaluation of the tumors. The multiplanar capability and the superior contrast resolution of MR imaging makes it the best technique in the evaluation of extra-axial brain tumors. MR imaging permits more reliable distinction between intra-and extraaxial tumors and provides better delineation of the relationship of extra-axial tumors to the surrounding brain and vital structures involved by the tumor. Additionally MR imaging is also more useful in delineating tumors of the posterior cranial fossa where beam hardening artifacts obscure their delineation on CT. Imaging studies play an important role in the diagnosis of extra-axial tumors and provide crucial information to the neurosurgeon in preoperative planning. Neuroradiology plays a key role in the diagnosis and preoperative setup of patients with brain tumours. State-of-the-art imaging requires a standardised imaging protocol, careful and systematic study of the images and finally an attempt at characterisation of the lesion. The radiological diagnosis and differential diagnosis of intra-axial tumours no longer relies on CT-scan and routine MR-sequences alone. Standard multiplanar imaging has to be combined with fMRI to allow exact anatomical location of the lesion and precise determination of the extension of the tumour. Perfusion and diffusion MR become more and more important in the differential diagnosis of cerebral mass lesions and in grading and typing of gliomas. More sophisticated techniques such as diffusion tensor imaging and spectroscopy will further enhance the value of the radiological studies. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the standard imaging protocols for the radiological study of intraaxial brain tumors. 2. To underline the importance of new imaging techniques in the diagnosis and differential diagnosis of intra-axial brain tumors. 3. To give some clues for the differential diagnosis of intra-axial brain tumors. A-136 C. Pituitary, supra and parasellar lesions J. Ruscalleda; Barcelona/ES (jruscalleda@hsp.santpau.es) The sellar region is a well-defined intracranial anatomical area where pituitary adenomas represent by far the most common pathology. Presently MR is the method of choice for diagnosis and characterisation of pituitary adenomas, in order to differentiate them from other less frequent pathologies occurring in the sellar region and to decide the best therapeutic approach. Detection, size of lesions and their relationship with the surrounding structures define several patterns of pituitary adenomas that have to be described by imaging studies. The parasellar region is a more complex area located at a crucial crossroads of important adjacent structures. Although the cavernous sinus represents the most relevant parasellar structure, from the clinical and practical point of view all the structures that surround the sella turcica are suitable to be included in the parasellar region. The vascular elements of the circle of Willis, optical pathways, the hypothalamus and base of skull harbour relevant pathological lesions to be included in the study and differential diagnosis of that region. MR is enormously valuable, but is not the only technique of choice in the study of parasellar region; CT or nuclear studies can also provide relevant information. Learning Objectives: 1. To review the complex anatomic relationships between structures in the sellar and parasellar regions. 2. To understand the main patterns and radiological characterisation, mainly by MR, of the many lesions that alter the structure and function of sellar and parasellar anatomy. 3. To be familiar with the description of the MR features that permit differentiation among less common lesions. 4. To learn the different protocols in the approach parasellar pathology. Breast interventional procedures (i.e. percutaneous biopsy methods to confirm or exclude malignancy and localisation procedures to guide preoperatively surgery of non palpable lesions), have become the key to a successful multidisciplinary diagnostic and treatment concept of breast cancer. To achieve full benefit of the interventional procedures all together with the lowest possible morbidity, quality performance indicators are mandatory. They have to encompass all structural, process-and outcome facets of a quality assurance program. Structural quality parameters mean physical -technical equipment standards and especially trained and experienced staff. Process quality indicators are based on standards of performance. The performance of a percutaneous intervention includes number of specimen, specimen radiography in case of microcalcification, histopathologic handling of the probes and finally the use of standard of reporting after histologic-radiologic correlation. 70 % (minimum) and 90 % (best practice) of all cancer patients have to be confirmed histologically before surgery. Imaging guidance should be chosen in respect of the most reliable way to visualize the lesion. The shortest approach should be attempted in accordance with the surgeons. Performance indicators of every localisation method are: 1. the distance between wire and lesion, 2. the percentage of non -palpable lesions successfully removed with one step procedure and 3. the benign: malignant biopsy ratio. Outcome quality assurance requires comprehensive documentation and a multidisciplinary approach to get institution-specific audit results. (2) to provide an accurate histological diagnosis for malignant lesions, to design the patient's treatment before any surgery. The difficulty of these procedures is that the diagnoses are made only on a sampling of the targeted lesion. The definitive conclusions can be made if appropriate radiological information are provided to the pathologist. In the histological report, relevant information are required for the appropriate clinical management of the patient. Benign lesions that need to be excised have to be clearly identified. For malignant lesion, the amount of information given is controversial but is related to the quality of the sampling. For in situ carcinoma, the histological type, the nuclear grade and the absence of invasion on the analyzed samples should be provided. For invasive carcinomas, the type, the grade, the mitotic index and immunohistochemical predictive factors should be evaluated when possible. Some specific information for radiological/histological analysis, have to be clearly documented within the report to guarantee the accuracy of the sampling. This information depends on the type of the targeted. The remaining discordant cases should be discussed in multidisciplinary meeting. Lesions such as atypical ductal hyperplasia, columnar cell lesions and lobular neoplasia are more frequently diagnosed on core needle biopsies. A cautious diagnostic management of these "borderline" lesions is warranted. Chronic liver disease leading to hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis represents the most common and clinically important etiopathogenetic base of sinusoidal portal hypertension (PH). The presinusoidal PH evolves as a result of extrahepatic portal vein obstruction or infiltration of portal spaces (schistosomiasis, congenital fibrosis). The hepatocytes are usually not touched by these pathogenetic processes. Postsinusoidal PH is characterized by diffuse obstruction of the hepatic venous tree, or by venoocclusive disease, touching primarily the central hepatic venule. The critical sequella is ischemic liver injury due to a reduction in hepatic perfusion. Interventional radiologic methods play a significant role in the diagnosis and treatment of patients with PH. The liver biopsy provides information about etiology and inflammatory activity of the pathogenetic process. The biopsy can be performed via a transjugular approach in patients at high risk of peritoneal bleeding. The pressure in the portal system is best evaluated as the hepatic venous pressure gradient measured by the wedged catheter in the hepatic vein (a gradient larger than 6 mmHg is defined as PH and clinical complications occur above 12 mmHg). The TIPS is a side-to-side nonselective portacaval shunt created percutaneously that can effectively decompress the portal venous system. Partial splenic embolization has been shown to be an alternative to splenectomy in patients with symptomatic hypersplenism. There are a large variety of tumours and tumour-like lesions arising in bones. To the unwary observer they present a bewildering spectrum of radiographic appearances that can lead to misinterpretation and suboptimal management. Although primary malignancies of bone are relatively rare they frequently pose an intriguing problem for the radiologist as the pathologist is often equally challenged. Despite major advances in musculoskeletal imaging the cornerstone of the radiological diagnosis of bone tumours remains the radiograph. This presentation will revisit the fundamentals of radiographic interpretation of bone lesions. Likening the search for the diagnosis to a detective story an ordered approach to radiographic interpretation (pattern analysis) will be stressed rather than the frequently employed pattern recognition ("Aunt Minnie" approach). The salient features of bone destruction, periosteal new bone formation and matrix mineralization will be reviewed. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the factors that influence the detection of a bone tumour. 2. To learn the factors that influence the differential diagnosis of a bone tumour (age, site etc). 3. To discuss the radiographic features that indicate rate of growth of a bone tumour. 4. To discuss the radiographic features that indicate the predominant tissue in a bone tumour (osteogenic vs chondrogenic). 5. To understand the spectrum of tumours which may arise in bone and which conditions do NOT require biopsy. Primary bone tumours are rare compared to metastases (secondary bone tumours) and hematologic conditions which include plasmocytomas and malignant lymphomas. Tumour-like lesions are distinctly different from primary bone tumours, but are customarily discussed with them. Tumour-like lesions can spontaneously regress or cease to grow and never metastasize. They are relatively common, can often be classified by imaging methods and have to be differentiated from benign bone tumours. Common malignant primary bone tumours are osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma and chordomas. Common benign primary bone tumours are osteoid osteoma, enchondroma, osteochondroma and hemangioma. MR imaging is considered the gold standard for staging malignant and benign tumours. This refers to the entire skeleton, but above all to the extremities. Further more, MR imaging can provide a variety of differential diagnostic criteria by means of the different signal intensities and contrast enhancement. Suspected tumours and tumour-like conditions which can be diagnosed with MR imaging are lipoma, hemangioma, enchondroma, cysts. Quantitative dynamic gadolinium enhanced MR imaging is a promising technique for providing a non invasive and repeatable assessment of the histologic response to neoadjuvant therapy. The technique is based on the principle that viable tumour enhances more rapidly than does necrotic tumour or post-therapy changes. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn about the findings of common benign and malignant bone tumours in cross-sectional imaging. To discuss the role of CT and MR imaging in refining and reaching the diagnosis of benign and malignant bone tumours. 3. To understand the role of imaging modalities in the pre and post operative work up of bone tumours.  Guiding new approaches to treatment: The impact of imaging (Introduction) J.E. Husband; London/UK (Janet.Husband@icr.ac.uk) As the world of imaging continues to escalate at an unprecedented pace it is of critical importance to determine the impact of these technologies on diagnosis, treatment and outcome of disease. In this session the wide-ranging and complex issues related to assessing the value of imaging will be addressed in three different ways. In the first presentation, to be given by Professor Dixon, concepts applied to the measurement of imaging effectiveness will be discussed. Professor Hansell will then consider the value of imaging in developing our understanding of disease processes and the impact that this has in stratifying patients into different clinical groups. Finally Professor Reznek will demonstrate the way in which imaging can facilitate the development of new approaches to treatment. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the importance of assessing the clinical value of imaging techniques. 2. To understand the concepts applied to the measurement of the diagnostic and therapeutic impact of imaging. 3. To understand the value of HRCT in unravelling the underlying pathological processes of diffuse interstitial lung disease. 4. To appreciate the impact of imaging on planning modern approaches to treatment. Measuring the effects of imaging A.K. Dixon; Cambridge/UK (akd15@radiol.cam.ac.uk) The UK has been responsible for the introduction of numerous new imaging investigations over the last few decades. However, despite an active NHS Health Technology Assessment programme, such investigations are often adopted and disseminated without full assessment of their effectiveness. Although initial reports of technical and diagnostic efficacy may be well described in the literature, there are far fewer high quality reports about the diagnostic and therapeutic impact, let alone robust papers on the ultimate evaluation, namely the impact on the health of the patient. More recently it has been appreciated that economic aspects may be the ultimate determining factor in the uptake of new tests. Only belatedly have research workers started to ask which investigation is preferred by the patient! In these days of patient choice, this form of evidence may become the most powerful in order to obtain increased funding for new non-invasive investigations. Learning Objectives: 1. To comprehend assessment of the effectiveness of imaging. 2. To appreciate the difference between the accuracy and diagnostic/therapeutic impact of imaging. 3. To learn the principles of studies in effectiveness of imaging. HRCT of the lungs: More than just the diagnosis D.M. Hansell; London/UK (d.hansell@rbh.nthames.nhs.uk) The remarkable step-up in diagnostic accuracy afforded by high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) in the evaluation of patients with diffuse interstitial lung disease (DILD) is now taken for granted. The purpose of this presentation is to highlight the less obvious benefits that HRCT has brought. The role of HRCT in elucidating the pathogenesis and behaviour of some DILDs has only emerged in the last few years. In particular, HRCT has helped to reconcile apparent discrepancies between pathologic diagnosis and expected clinical outcome in the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias. HRCT has increasingly revealed what histopathologic examination of a small volume of lung tissue cannot, namely the frequency with which different pathologic processes may be present in a given individual. In this context, the concepts of coexistence, overlap and transformation will be explored. As a consequence of both the diagnostic prowess of HRCT and patient preference, lung biopsy confirmation of DILD is increasingly confined to "atypical" cases such that there are difficulties in acquiring enough data for morphologic studies. In a clinical trial setting, HRCT is now being used as a powerful means of stratifying subjects who were previously recruited and categorised by relatively crude criteria. As an example, HRCT of a study group of subjects labelled as having "COPD" showed a heterogeneous group of conditions with 29% of the group having bronchiectasis as the primary pulmonary disease. HRCT continues to reveal more that just a histospecific diagnosis. The introduction of new radiotherapy and surgical techniques requires close collaboration between clinician and radiologist to optimise the application of imaging. This principle will be illustrated by a review of how MR imaging has helped implement new therapies for the treatment of cervical and rectal carcinoma. In cervical cancer the selection of patients for uterus-conserving surgery has been optimised by accurate MR imaging prediction of the relationship of the tumour to the internal os. Also, intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) has been aided by co-locational imaging between MR imaging and CT to define the gross tumour volume (GTV). Widespread implementation of pelvic IMRT has been prevented by the lack of a validated method for defining the nodal clinical volume (CTV). Recent work has shown the accuracy of ultrasmall paramagnetic iron oxide particles (USPIOs) in distinguishing infiltrated from normal nodes in gynaecological malignancy. By evaluating 1216 nodal contours, using USPIOs, guidelines for outlining pelvic nodes have been produced. Multi-institutional studies in rectal cancer show that MR imaging is equivalent to histopathology in delineating local tumour spread prior to total meso-rectal excision. As the presence of the tumour at the circumferential resection margin affects prognosis, MR imaging plays a crucial role in the selection of appropriate therapy and has become an effective tool for the identification of patients at risk of incomplete resection. Learning Objectives: 1. To appreciate how surgical and radiotherapy techniques have changed in the management of patients with gynaecological and rectal cancer. 2. To understand how new imaging techniques need to be applied to aid in the planning of these newer treatment techniques. 3. To learn the process for assessing the value of new modalities including MR imaging, MR imaging contrast agents and co-locational techniques in defining the gross tumour volume (GTV) of the primary tumour and lymph nodes to plain radiotherapy techniques. Standardisation and regulatory aspects of digital detectors C. Lavoie; Ottawa, ON/CA (Christian_Lavoie@hc-sc.gc.ca) For over 90 years, radiology relied mostly on photographic film to obtain and maintain radiological images. However, in the last 10 to 20 years, digital imaging modalities are becoming more prevalent as new techniques and equipment are developed. Most standardization work was directed at the source of radiation with little attention the recording media. Radiological equipment had to be designed and operated in such a way as to optimize the fundamental properties of films. Most standards and regulations were intended to ensure that these characteristics would be maintained during the operation of the equipment. However, with the advent of digital receptors and their different operational characteristics, these principles do not necessarily apply and need to be revisited. The standardization of digital image receptors brings new challenges to Standard Writing Organizations and to governments alike. The standardization work is further complicated by the multiplicity of technologies available in digital image receptors. Acceptance and Quality Control tests that have been used for years are no longer appropriate. Standard Writing Organizations and governments are also trying to find a balance between stringent requirements which could discourage technological development and innovation, and inadequate requirements which could lead to high patient doses and poor image quality. The standardization and regulatory aspects of the performance and design of digital detectors used in radiology will be presented.  Practical experience with the use of dynamic flat detectors E. Vano; Madrid/ES (eliseov@med.ucm.es) Before the clinical use of X-ray systems equipped with dynamic flat panel detectors, medical specialists needed to know entrance dose rates for the different fluoroscopic and image acquisition modes and their variation with patient thickness and detector field sizes. These data, together with the evaluation of the accuracy for the dosimetric indications of the systems and the information contained in the DICOM header should be tested by a medical physicist. Methodology and results of several tests performed during the last two years are presented. Dose rate values and image quality measured with Leeds and NEMA phantoms for low, normal and high fluoroscopy and typical imaging acquisition modes are discussed. Accuracy of the dose area product and cumulative dose indications is also tested. Some specific DICOM tags containing useful information for quality control and audit of the procedures are identified. The content of the patient dosimetric reports for the evaluated systems is analysed. Manufacturers should offer enough technical information to the medical physicists and users on the criteria to define the initial setting of the systems for the appropriate dose and image quality balance. Dosimetric reports should always be recorded, available in electronic format and easily transferable to a data base. DICOM conformity statements should include a more detailed description of the tags including relevant dosimetric information. No single musculoskeletal disorder has generated more passionate discussion than bone osteonecrosis with its poorly understood physiopathogeny, its wide range of clinical presentation and its debated treatment. MR imaging largely contributed to the discussion mainly because it provided new insights into the natural history of ischemic lesions of bones and demonstrated several patterns of involvement. This presentation addresses key imaging features of bone osteonecrosis such as elementary lesion patterns and subchondral fractures in the case of epiphyseal osteonecrosis. Imaging features that enable differentiation between epiphyseal osteonecrosis, rapidly progressive osteoarthritis, transient osteoporosis and epiphyseal fractures will be emphasized. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the fundamental radiographic and MR imaging of osteonecrosis, and to correlate them with macro-and microscopic findings. 2. To discuss the imaging findings that help for differential diagnosis and for predicting lesion's outcome. 3. To understand the limitations of MR imaging in the assessment of epiphyseal disorders, diagnosis and the limitations of this technique. Early diagnosis is essential for spinal and bone infection and it affects the prognosis and final outcome of patient. Hematogeneous spread is the most common cause of spinal infection due to a dense vascular network around the vertebral column. Infection starts in the well-vascularized anterolateral edge of a vertebral body which has a particularly dense supply and infection spreads within the vertebral body, adjacent soft tissues and, involves intervertebral disc from here. MR imaging in the examination is the method preferred today, being highly sensitive and specific than plain radiography and CT. Although finding the difference between tuberculosis and pyogenic spinal infection is difficult clinically and radiographically, symmetric and large paravertebral abscess, disc preservation in the early stage of the disease, involvement of posterior elements are the much favorable radiological findings for spinal tuberculosis. Osteomyelitis indicates infection of bone and marrow space. It can be classified into three forms: acute, subacute and chronic. There are three routes of infection: hematogenous, implantation, and contiguous. Staphylococcus aureus is the most common cause of the disease. In pediatric age group, osteomyelitis is seen in two different entities as infantile and juvenile osteomyelitis related to blood supply of the bone. The diagnosis of osteomyelitis, is largely dependent to use combination of plain radiography, MR imaging and/or scintigraphy. On plain film, early findings include smaller lytic lesions which may coalesce into larger lesions with time. Periosteal reaction, sequestration, cortical thickening, thick periosteal reaction and sinus tracts are the findings of subacute or chronic osteomyelitis. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn anatomic details of vertebral column and to make correlation with pathological changes which occur due to spinal infection. 2. To learn how to make interpretations of radiological changes at spinal infection using with plain radiography, CT and MR imaging. 3. To understand pathological changes due to spinal bone infections and choose appropriate imaging algorithm for making differential diagnosis between pyogenic infection and spinal tuberculosis. 4. To learn causes of bone infection and make correlation with clinicopathological classification. 5. To understand the pathophysiology of paediatric osteomyelitis and contrast it with the available imaging modalities. 6. To discuss the differences of imaging features between acute, sub-acute and chronic bone infections. Within a few months of the discovery of X-rays by Wilhelm Röntgen, X-ray images were used to plan and guide a surgical intervention. This lecture provides a brief history of the subsequent technological advances that led to surgical navigation and image directed therapy. In the first half of the 20 th Century triangulation methods were used to locate and remove foreign bodies. In the 1950's real-time fluoroscopic imaging provided the means to place devices and assess their effect in cardiovascular interventions. In the 1970's the advent of 3D imaging, together with the stereotactic frame, provided the means to place a needle at a 3D target in the brain. Improved methods for registration between images, plan and patient provided real-time surgical navigation largely supplanted the stereotactic frame. Parallel developments in image directed radiotherapy allowed planning and accurate delivery of radiation. Over the last couple of decades a number of other energy sources have been developed for image directed tissue ablation including radio-frequency, high intensity focussed ultrasound, light in photodynamic therapy and cryo-ablation. Image directed therapy has to date primarily been restricted to applications in which the spatial transformation between the coordinates of the patient's anatomy and the image derived plan can be described by the 3D motion of a rigid body. Where therapy is to be delivered to soft deform-ing tissue this is clearly inadequate. This talk will describe the computational and engineering challenges in building appropriate patient specific computational models of soft deforming and moving anatomy and their validation in image guided interventions and image directed therapy. Image guidance will be augmented by high-resolution, intra-operative imaging based on optical, ultrasound or MR technologies. These technologies will be integrated with novel, molecular based, patient-specific treatments that will translate from the laboratory to the clinic. The subjective interpretation of breast lesions with mammography, ultrasound, and MR-imaging is difficult to evaluate and to improve. Medical audit is the only way to measure breast imaging performance in a manner, that includes not only technical, but also interpretive capabilities of the system. The "Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System" (BI-RADS TM ) is a quality insurance tool, designed to standardize breast imaging reporting, reduce confusion in breast imaging interpretations, and facilitate outcome monitoring. Through a medical audit and outcome monitoring, the system provides important peer review and quality assurance data to improve the quality of patient care. The BI-RADS TM is the product of a cooperative effort between members of various committees of the American College of Radiology and has become a widely accepted tool all over the world. There is a need for continuous education of the BI-RADS TM -classification because it is arranged to be used in everyday practice and should make it possible to issue meaningful unambiguous breast imaging reports. This BI-RADS TM -session is organized to provide participants with an introduction to the most important sections of this system. These are the breast imaging lexicon for mammography, ultrasound, and MR imaging; the reporting system, including report organisation, and finally follow-up and outcome monitoring. Beside the theoretical background participants will be trained under supervision how to apply the BI-RADS TM by teaching breast imaging cases. The material will be presented in an interactive way with audience participation and self assessment by use of an electronic voting system (key-pads). The majority of laryngeal and hypopharyngeal neoplasms are squamous cell cancers. As these tumors arise from the mucosal layer, inspection is important in staging the lesion. Imaging is needed to detect deep tumour growth into the paraglottic space, cartilage involvement and extralaryngeal or extrapharyngeal tumour spread. Overall, CT and MR imaging show comparable results in defining tumour extent. Surgery and radiotherapy are the only curative treatments for laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer. Chemotherapy can be used as an adjunct to one or both of the other treatment modalities. Most early staged cancers can be cured by either surgery or radiotherapy. Patients with moderately advanced lesions may benefit from combined therapy. Advanced lesions often can only be treated palliatively. The treatment plan for a particular patient is the result of a multifactorial decision process including tumour characteristics, tumour staging and volume, patient condition, and patient/institutional preferences. Objective tumour data from imaging studies, are helpful to ensure a firm basis for informing the patient about his prognosis and for treatment decision making. After radiotherapy, the detection of residual or recurrent tumor by physical examination is difficult. The use of follow-up imaging allows to identify patients at risk for recurrent tumor, and to detect these recurrences at an earlier stage than clinical examination alone. This potentially leads to more prompt salvage surgery in non-responders but whether a survival benefit is achievable remains to be proven. Imaging is also of value to differentiate treatment complications, such as laryngeal necrosis from tumor recurrence. A-159 C. The contrast-enhancing disc D. Weishaupt; Zürich/CH (dominik.weishaupt@usz.ch) Since normal discs lack vascular supply, the common understanding is that there is no enhancement of the normal intervertebral discs following i.v. administration of MR contrast agents. This is probably the reason why the use of gadoliniumchelate has been propagated for assessment of disc space infection and for the distinction between recurrent disc herniation and peridural fibrosus in patients who underwent spinal surgery. However, even normal discs may enhance minimally during MR imaging when intravenous gadolinium-based contrast agents are administered and delayed images are obtained. The weak enhancement of normal discs is caused by the fact that diffusion is the only mechanism how contrast agent may enter into the disc. Marked contrast enhancement of the entire disc is rare and, if present, most commonly associated with phlegmoneous disc space infection. More commonly peripheral disc enhancement may be observed due to ingrowth of fibrovascular tissue within the disc or the adjacent bone marrow. Peripheral contrast enhancement may be present in extruded or fragmented discs and in degenerative discs with abnormalities of the adjacent bone marrow of Modic Type I. A typical representative of localized contrast-enhancement at the vertebral rim at the insertion of the annulus fibrosus is the Romanus lesion in patients with ankylosing spondylitis. Slight peripheral enhancement of the disc may also be present in Schmorl's node. Finally disc enhancement is a hallmark of disc space infection. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the role of MR contrast agents for evaluation of spinal disc abnormalities. 2. To provide an overview of the disease spectrum which are associated with an enhancing disc. 3. To review the differential diagnosis of an enhancing disc. Room C Pulmonary nodules are a common finding in daily radiology practice. They are defined as small round or oval opacities with well-defined margins, and a size of less than 3 cm. Before the widespread use of computed tomography (CT), nodules were primarily detected on chest radiograms, and when they measured more than 1 cm in diameter. Nowadays, with CT scanning applicable to most indications for imaging of the chest, more and smaller nodules are detected in different patient populations. This tendency is enhanced by technical progress, and by every step in the development of new CT scanners. Whereas the increasing sensitivity in nodule detection is desirable for early diagnosis of lung cancer, and for the care of the oncologic patient, it may pose significant problems for the management of individual patients. Although recent CT lung cancer screening trials have yielded an abundance of data, and thus, helped to create a new body of knowledge regarding the morphology, biologic characteristics, and growth rate of lung nodules, a large number of important questions remain: Is a nodule found in a smoker benign or malignant? Which nodule out of several found in a smoker is malignant and which is benign? How shall we manage a five millimeter nodule detected in a patient with a non-pulmonary cancer? Shall we use invasive or non-invasive methods to explore a 6 millimeter nodule in a non-smoker? To answer these questions, a number of fundamental issues must be addressed. Therefore, this special focus session will review the epidemiologic, biologic, and molecular basics important for the understanding of managing patients with pulmonary nodules. Second, the morphologic, metabolic, and dynamic CT features of focal pulmonary abnormalities and pulmonary nodules will be elucidated. Finally, new guidelines to enhance the diagnostic armamentarium of the radiologist will be presented and integrated into a practical management approach to pulmonary nodules in low-risk and high-risk patients. Learning Objectives: 1. To familiarize the attendees with the epidemiology and biological behaviour of pulmonary nodules. 2. To describe the radiologic tools and criteria to perform a state-of-the-art assessment of a pulmonary nodule. 3. To provide guidelines for a practical management approach to pulmonary nodules in different patient populations. Epidemiology, biology and evaluation with biomarkers: The essentials E.F. Patz Jr., J. Chen, A. Chen; Durham, NC/US (patz0002@mc.duke.edu) Lung cancer continues to be a significant worldwide health problem. It is the most common cancer in both men and women, and the majority of patients present with advanced stage disease. New diagnostic and therapeutic strategies are clearly needed if improvements in outcomes are to be realized. The primary goal of radiologic studies is to provide diagnostic information. While imaging has traditionally provided anatomical and morphological detail, a complementary approach with biomarkers has been suggested to improve non-invasive diagnostic accuracy. For biomarkers to be effective in clinical practice they should be non-invasive and easy to obtain. In addition, biomarker assays must be specific, reproducible, and cost effective. For this purpose, many investigators have explored a variety of biologic biomarkers, including DNA, mRNA, and proteins. There are a number of patient management issues that would undoubtedly benefit from more accurate assessment of disease. A clear understanding of the relevant diagnostic problems and translation into clinical practice, however, is a complex process. Thus integration of biomarkers with imaging requires knowledge of the current limitations in radiological studies. Once the diagnostic issues are clearly defined, then hypothesis driven clinical trial can be constructed. Although imaging technology continues to evolve, it is clear that not all diagnostic problems will be addressed with radiology alone. It is essential to integrate other non-invasive techniques into the diagnostic armamentarium if improvements in patient management are to occur. Learning Objectives: 1. To describe the incidence and etiology of small pulmonary nodules. 2. To discuss the biological behavior of small nodules. 3. To discuss the integration of biomarkers with imaging findings as a new diagnostic strategy. Radiological assessment of pulmonary nodules: The criteria P.A. Grenier; Paris/FR (philippe.grenier@psl.ap-hop-paris.fr) The HRCT criteria for suggesting malignancy or benignancy of a small pulmonary nodule are based on its pattern, size, shape, margins, content, and growth at follow-up. Pure (non-solid) or mixed (partially-solid) ground glass opacities (GGOs) are more likely to be malignant than solid nodules. The great majority of small (< 5 mm) nodules are benign. The likelihood of a solid nodule being malignant increases with increasing size. Round shaped GGOs and mixed nodules with GGO in the periphery and high attenuation in the centre are very often malignant whereas solid nodules with a polygonal shape are most commonly benign. A ratio of maximum transverse diameter to maximum z-axis dimension > 1.78 is highly specific for benign nodules. Smooth margin of solid nodules is most commonly associated with benignancy. Although complex shape, irregular or spiculated margin, and air content of solid nodules are more frequent in malignant than benign nodules, the discriminant role of these features remains limited. Both diffuse calcification of the nodule and presence of fat in a solid nodule are definitive criteria of benignancy. For solid nodules (> 10 mm) a negative quantitative contrast enhanced CT or negative FDG-PET is a strong predictor of benignancy. Most benign GGO and mixed nodules disappear after 3-month follow-up. Appearance of solid components in GGO nodules in follow-up is a very high predictor of malignancy. Volume doubling times of malignant GGO and solid nodules are on the order of 2 years and 6 months respectively.  Management approach to pulmonary nodules in low risk and high risk patients C.J. Herold; Vienna/AT (Christian.Herold@meduniwien.ac.at) Patients with pulmonary nodules are not a homogenous group of individuals. Clearly, lung nodules in a smoker have a different significance compared to those detected in an oncologic patient, or those seen in a young non-smoker with no risk factors for malignant disease. Furthermore, there is increasing evidence that apart from pretest probability, the traditional morphologic criteria, nodule size and patient age are important factors in the construction of a management model for patients with pulmonary nodules. Current management strategies for indeterminant small pulmonary nodules have raised serious concerns, because they are partly flawed or, partly outdated. For example, existing recommendations involve several follow-up CT examinations for every indeterminant nodule, regardless of its size. Such elaborate follow-up protocols are not required for very small nodules, and particularly, not when such nodules are found incidentally in young non-smokers without a history of cancer. Furthermore, in young patients, the risk from radiation must be weighted against the risk of missing a malignant disorder, or the risk arising from an invasive diagnostic approach. As the risk of malignancy increases with nodule size, focal abnormalities with a diameter of more than 8 mm require a more aggressive and potentially invasive diagnostic approach to confirm or rule out cancer. The aim of this presentation is to provide the audience with a practical approach to the management of incidentally detected pulmonary nodules of various sizes in patients with different risk profiles for a malignant pulmonary disorder, such as lung cancer.  The role of 3D imaging in the emergency room: Is it useful? S. Wildermuth; Zurich/CH (simon.wildermuth@usz.ch) In the emergency room, the increased acquisition speed of multidetector-row CT (MDCT) together with the high resolution can enhance the diagnostic workup of traumatic and nontraumatic emergency conditions, thus potentially leading to earlier therapy and decreased mortality. New strategies in data handling are required to deal with the increasing number of acquired images, augmented by frequently needed orthogonal reformations. Three-dimensional volume rendered visualization of MDCT volume data sets produces much more then only impressive images. On the one hand the reduction of the collimated slice thickness, beside other significant benefits, realizes the isotropic voxel, which is the prerequisite for sophisticated three-dimensional visualization. But on the other hand the continuing technical innovation in MDCT technology is responsible for a true data explosion. The major consequences are: 1. conventional image interpretation slice by slice becomes time consuming, as there are thousands of single images to deal with 2. The isotropy of the acquired volume data enables distortion-free threedimensional visualization. Challenged by the data explosion evolving from MDCT, alternative visualization and analysis using volumetric tools, including 3D visualization and thick MPR reconstructions must evolve from luxury to necessity. MDCT protocols may have to be tailored on their clinical usability in consideration of three-dimensional display. More and more the volumetric display of volumetric data become reality and may lead to volume reporting. The presentation will give a overview on current useful 3D applications with a focus on emergency room usability including some technical fundamentals. CT scanning plays a major role in the emergency diagnosis of head, spine and spinal cord injury, stroke and subarachnoid haemorrhage. Magnetic resonance imaging is increasingly used in spine and spinal cord injury and to diagnose ischaemic stroke. The new therapeutic potential of thrombolysis demands an urgent diagnosis and the adoption of a "brain attack" or "stroke unit" protocol similar to the cardiology approach to heart attacks. From a therapeutic standpoint, neuroradiology can tackle the emergency treatment of subarachnoid haemorrhage with the embolization of aneurysms, AVM and fistulae and treat ischaemic stroke by locoregional intra-arterial thrombolysis. There are two clear-cut stages, diagnosis and treatment. The first requires CT scanning with multislice images, a separate reconstruction console and the possibility of CT angiography and flowmetric studies. MR should also be available with the possibility of diffusion and perfusion imaging and MR angiography. Therapeutic neuroradiology requires a sophisticated angiographic system with 3D reconstruction. The novel feature of interest in this sector is CT-like angiographic acquisitions in soft tissues, Dyna CT. This advanced application provides bone and soft tissue images using the DSA C-arm system. Post-procedural 3D CT can thus be obtained using the DSA C-arm in the operating room without moving the patient. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the added value of angiographic systems with cross-section imaging capabilities in patients with ischemic brain disease. 2. To learn the possibilities of MDCT in the study of cerebral vessels and in posttraumatic conditions. Emergency pediatric imaging: What are the specific needs? J.-F. Chateil; Bordeaux/FR (jean-francois.chateil@chu-bordeaux.fr) Emergencies in children are quite different from the pathologies encountered in adults. Management of children in the emergency room includes several important steps. The first one is the clinical knowledge of the paediatric diseases. This point is mandatory in childrens' hospitals, but sometimes more difficult to obtain in general hospitals. The second point, in relation with imaging, concerns the equipment and the radiographers. Conventional imaging remains a very important step, because many diseases can be identified with plain films. In some cases, specific devices can be useful, to perform a good exposure including chest device and sand sacks to help the immobilisation. A good practice is essential. Sonography is very often used in paediatric emergencies: in most cases, abdominal examination is performed, but also musculoskeletal, testicular, chest ultrasound is useful. High frequency probes are always mandatory. CT and MR imaging are performed with the same devices as in adults. One of the most difficult point is the need for immobility, and in some cases, sedation or anaesthesia have to be performed, and specific monitoring equipment can be used. Attention to the level of radiation delivered with CT is also very important in children. The third specific point concerns the radiologist. An awareness of the main emergencies pathologies is essential. The radiologist must also be familiar with all the normal variations which mimic pathology. Specific or rare diseases can be more difficult to teach to the entire population of radiologists, and teleradiology can be helpful to solve some urgent cases. The liver provides excellent soil in which metastases can establish, thus it is the second most commonly involved organ by metastatic disease from virtually any primary malignant neoplasm. Hepatic involvement by metastatic tumor and the duration of survival are considered to be inversely related, nevertheless the available therapeutic arsenal becomes more and more effective and thus information regarding presence, number and localization of liver metastases may greatly influence therapeutic decisions and outcome of the disease. However effective the clinical and laboratory tests may be, the final diagnosis of hepatic involvement is based on results of imaging procedures. The list of modalities available for this purpose includes transabdominal and intraoperative ultrasound (US), computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), angiography, image-guided biopsy and different methods of nuclear medicine. Detectability, appearance and characterization of liver metastases depend on site of origin, tumor characteristics, size and localization of lesions. The usual diagnostic algorithm is based on routine ultrasound and CT examination, but the clinical situation may require more accurate evaluation by contrast-enhanced US, CT-arterio-portography, or cell-specific contrast-enhanced MR imaging examination. Proper knowledge of efficiency of these methods is indispensable for finding the most effective diagnostic algorithm for the each individual patient. In comparison to metastases and HCC in cirrhosis, primary malignant hepatic tumours without cirrhosis are less common. 10% -40 % of all HCC may occur in the non-cirrhotic liver -potentially arising from adenoma/adenomatosis -whereas the tumours' imaging features compare to HCC in cirrhotic liver (hypervascularization, necrosis/heterogeneity in large tumours, fibrous capsule, fatty metamorphosis, calcifications). Fibrolamellar HCC, a tumour of young adults, distinct from HCC regarding origin, differentiation and prognosis, is characterized by lamellar fibrous strands, a fibrous central scar, calcifications, and heterogenous enhancement. Less common tumours arising from the cholangiocellular cell line are represented by the intrahepatic (peripheral) and the extrahepatic (ductal) cholangiocarcinoma (Klatskin tumour). Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas (CC) accounting for about 10 % of all primary hepatic malignancies arise from biliary ductal epithelium in the hepatic periphery often mimicking metastases with respect to imaging findings. Unlike intrahepatic CC, extrahepatic CC often causes biliary obstruction while the tumour itself frequently is not displayed. In contrast, biliary cystadenocarcinoma appears as uni-or multilocular cystic masses, whereas peripheral nodular and septal enhancement may represent malignant components of this tumours. Angiosarcoma, a rare tumour derived from endothelial cells, has a strong association with the exposure to toxic agents. In this solitary or diffuse occurring tumours imaging is non-specific with heterogenous appearance pre and post contrast on CT and MR imaging. Other rare tumours are epithelioid haemangioendothelioma and lymphoma of the liver which present in most cases with non specific features, whereas the differential is more triggered by the clinical context. A-171 C. Primary malignant lesions in the cirrhotic liver S.C. Efremidis; Ioannina/GR (sefremid@cc.uoi.gr) Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most commonly developing tumor in the setting of cirrhosis which is characterized by the development of a spectrum of nodules ranging from the benign regenerative nodule to the overtly malignant HCC with the dysplastic nodule found in between. The premalignant nature of a dysplastic nodule indicated by several ways emphasizes the need for periodic screening of patients at risk for developing HCC, such as cirrhotics or patients with chronic liver damage. Differentiation of a cirrhotic nodule by imaging is based primarily on intranodular blood supply becoming progressively arterial along the pathway of malignant transformation of a dysplastic nodule to HCC. Recent clinical studies have shown that there is a progressive decrease in both portal and arterial intranodular blood supply as the dysplastic nodule progresses from low to high grade followed by progressive increase in arterial supply as the nodule progresses from well to poorly differentiated HCC. These changes are the result of two, possibly independent, processes acting in parallel: a) Capillarization -(liver sinusoids becoming ordinary capillaries) and b) Angiogenesis (development of newly formed "unpaired" arteries). Moreover, these intranodular vascular changes dictate the imaging findings of an HCC demonstrated on a dynamic multiphasic CT and MR, or contrast enhanced US. These imaging findings represent actually a spectrum of findings with significant overlap among the different cirrhotic nodules making their differentiation sometimes difficult. Background: Benign pleural disease commonly occurs after asbestos exposure. Asbestos-induced benign pleural disease can be subdivided into pleural plaques, pleural effusions and diffuse pleural thickening. Pleural plaques are the commonest manifestation of asbestos exposure and consist of elevated areas of hyaline fibrosis arising from the parietal pleura. Pleural plaques commonly affect the posterolateral chest wall, diaphragm and mediastinal pleura, the apices and costophrenic angles being typically spared. On CT, pleural plaques are seen as circumscribed areas of pleural thickening with well-demarcated edges. Benign pleural effusions due to asbestos exposure are often underdiagnosed and consist of haemorrhagic exudates. They may spontaneously resolve, persist or recur after many years. Diffuse pleural thickening is less specific for asbestos exposure than pleural plaques and is often preceded by pleural effusion. Diffuse pleural thickening involves the visceral pleura. Pleural fibromas have various synonyms including local, fibrous benign mesothelioma; localized fibrous tumour; subpleural, submesothelial or pleural fibroma but solitary fibrous tumour is the current accepted term. The majority arise from visceral pleura and are attached to pleura by vascular pedicle which may be demonstrable on imaging. They may be mobile and change in shape with position. Pleural lipomas are mesenchymal tumours which are recognizable as being of fat attenuation on CT. Conclusion: Benign pleural diseases often have characteristic imaging features and cross-sectional imaging, including CT, can be very useful in the evaluation of these conditions. Ultrasound, multislice CT, magnetic resonance imaging and PET-CT may all be used in the investigation of suspected malignant pleural disease. The use of disease distribution, degree of pleural thickening and involvement of the chest wall have all been shown to be of benefit in discriminating malignant from benign disease. This presentation will discuss the use of these features and the use of the different imaging techniques to aid in the diagnosis of pleural disease. Additionally image guided biopsy has now been shown to be effective in the investigation of suspected malignant pleural disease, and an explanation of the techniques available for pleural biopsy will be presented. Functional MR imaging is a non-invasive technique capable of depicting brain activity. It is extensively used in the neurophysiological study of the human brain, and more recently clinical applications have appeared in the presurgical workup of patients with brain tumours as well as in the study of the diagnosis and treatment of different neurological and psychiatric diseases. This refresher course will review both the MR physics and physiological principles underlying the functional MR imaging technique. The Blood Oxygen Level Dependent (BOLD) contrast, as well as other techniques will be discussed. Pitfalls regarding false positive and false negative fMRI activation will be addressed. It will review the most widely used (clinical) protocols to visualise brain activity during sensory (visual, taste, sensation, auditory, …), motor and cognitive actions. The difference, advantages and challenges of block and event-related paradigms will be discussed. Details of acquisition and post-processing relevant to the study of specific brain activations will be elaborated on, e.g. on the use of adapted fMRI sequences for the study of the auditory system, where auditory stimuli have to be delivered without interference of the MR imaging scanner noise. Finally, stimulation equipment to deliver visual, auditory, and other stimuli, as well as monitoring equipment to record responses, eye movements, etc. … will be covered. In summary, this part of the RC will introduce the audience to the basic principles, techniques, paradigms and stimulation equipment that is at present used in state-of-the art fMRI studies. Preoperative fMRI of motor, somatosensory and language function is used worldwide by an increasing number of medical centers for safer surgery on brain tumors and epileptogenic foci. The method has not yet reached the status of a standardized diagnostic procedure. Therefore this talk provides the information that is relevant for the successful and responsible application of fMRI prior to brain surgery: The functional neuroanatomy of the motor and somatosensory systems and of language is summarized. Optimized clinical fMRI protocols and reference data are presented. Physiological and important pathological diagnostic findings are presented as well as the intraoperative validation of the functional localizations in neuronavigators using electrocorticography. Multimodality integration with MEG is presented. Important limitations and pitfalls of preoperative fMRI are discussed. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn about the functional neuroanatomy of motor, somatosensory and language associated brain activation. 2. To identify the indications for preoperative fMR imaging in patients with brain tumors. 3. To identify optimized preoperative fMR imaging protocols for patients with preexisting deficit. 4. To learn about normal and atypical findings in preoperative fMR imaging (illustrative cases). 5. To understand the use of fMR imaging in neuronavigation (illustrative cases). 6. To learn about the validity, intrinsic problems, pitfalls and limitations of preoperative fMR imaging. 7. To understand the possibilities of preoperative multimodality functional brain imaging using fMR imaging and magnetoencephalography (MEG) (illustrative cases). A-177 C. fMR imaging for evaluation of brain plasticity in multiple sclerosis, stroke and trauma A. Bizzi; Milan/IT (alberto_bizzi@fastwebnet.it) Plasticity means different things to different scientists, but most would agree with the following definition: A change in structure over time resulting in a change of function. Plastic changes occur at the level of the synapse, and are consequently reflected at the level of neuronal networks. It has been established that human brains show considerable plastic changes during development and that plasticity is also present in injured adult brains. In patients with lesions of the nervous system plasticity is the active or passive process of reorganizing connections and re-coordinating a network of areas while function is recovering. Brain functions may be localised in functionally segregated brain regions but are mainly represented in extended, connected, overlapping and highly parallel processing networks. In normal subjects, it is characterised by a decrease of focal brain activity going along with an increased connectivity between the collaborating nets. Recovery of function seems to imply the "reconnection" or the recoordination of a network of areas. Non-invasive functional neuroimaging methods such as fMRI offer the experimental opportunity for measuring changes in connectivity and functional segregation that accompany and underpin behavioural change or functional improvement after brain injury. This presentation will review the potential applications and limitations of fMRI to illustrate plastic changes occuring in patients after stroke, head injury or along the course of a relapsing remitting disease such as multiple sclerosis. Pain of dental origin is most frequently caused by the root canal or the periodontal ligament space. Inflammation, trauma or tumor in this region can easily spread into the surrounding soft tissues, sinus or jaw bone. In addition, a multitude of diseases occurring in the jaw can involve the teeth leading to pain as a first indicator of a lesion. While conventional imaging methods such as panoramic radiography and dental film are very useful in detection of these diseases, newer imaging methods including dental CT and dental MR have recently gained importance in diagnosing dental associated diseases of the mandible and maxilla. Unfortunately, most radiologists have had little experience in this area and many of the CT and MR findings remain undescribed. This presentation will focus on the technique and usefulness of CT and MR in diagnosing pathologic conditions and complications leading to pain of dental origin. Furthermore, the correct imaging technique and the most important error sources will be discussed. To enable a clear understanding of dental CT and MR, clinical images will be added to demonstrate the correlation of intra-oral findings and the radiological presentation. As a goal, the radiologist should be aware of possible findings presenting as pain in the jaw region and be able to communicate them to the clinician. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with causes of pain of dental origin. Cortical changes are best depicted by CT, whilst soft tissue including bone marrow is best visualized by MR imaging and OPG shows the relationship to the dentoalveolar system. Common causes of pain are disk dislocation, osteoarthritis ("internal derangement"), rheumatoid arthritis, and trauma. Imbalance of the muscles of mastication or masticator space tumours, as well as dysfunction of the cervical spine or sacroiliac joints are rare causes for facial pain. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with clinical aspects of facial pain related to the TMJ and masticator space and therapeutic implications. 2. To know the key anatomic structures that play a role in facial pain related to the TMJ and masticator space. 3. To be aware of the advantages and disadvantages of the imaging modalities and when to perform them. 4. To be able to recognize the most common types of TMJ dysfunction, as well as common diseases affecting muscles of mastication and the mandible. 5. To be aware of rare diseases that may lead to facial pain related to the TMJ and masticator space. Radiofrequency (RF) ablation has been widely studied in primary or secondary treatment of liver, renal and lung lesions. The indications of percutaneous management of malignant skeletal lesion are usually palliative, with pain control as the primary aim. RF ablation of bone metastases in patients with refractory pain destroys sensory nerves and tumour cells, interrupting pain transmission and reducing the humoral cascade involved in both nerve sensitization and osteoclastic activity, thus resulting in pain relief. The RF ablation creates well-delineated local tumour destruction with excellent pain control. However, skeletal tumour which has structural compromise with risk of compression fracture should be consolidated. For long bones, (e.g. femoral shaft) osteosynthesis is necessary but for flat bones, percutaneous cementoplasty will reduce the risk of compression fractures. Percutaneous cementoplasty is a therapeutic injection of bone cement into a vertebral body or bone which has structural compromise. It treats both pain and consolidates the weakened bone preventing further collapse. A painful lytic skeletal lesion, without fragility or risk of pathological fracture is the best indication for RF ablation alone; destroying the soft tissue mass and reducing pain. However for larger lesion with paravertebral invasion as well in cases of bone weakening secondary to a large mass, the combination of both techniques is an excellent procedure to ablate the tumour and to reduce the risk of vertebral body collapse. The best examples outside the spine are the iliac bone with extension of the tumour to the acetabulum or tibial and femoral condyle metastases. Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer death. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) comprises approximately 80% of primary malignant lung tumors. Lungs are also the second most frequent site of metastatic disease. Surgical resection is the treatment of choice for early-stage NSCLC and oligometastases from colorectal cancer. Unfortunately, because of the high prevalence of chronic respiratory disorders and atherosclerotic vascular disease, only 30% of patients with NSCLC are clinically operable. On the other hand, the high risk of recurrence and the need to remove functioning lung tissue along with the lesions limit the indications for surgery in patients with colorectal metastases. Image-guided radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is a minimally invasive technique used to treat solid tumors. Because of its ability to produce large volumes of coagulation necrosis in a controlled fashion, this technique has gained acceptance as viable therapeutic option for unresectable liver malignancies. Recently, investigation has been focused on the use of RFA for the treatment of lung tumors. Pilot clinical trials have shown that this technique can achieve effective and reproducible tumor destruction with acceptable morbidity, and have suggested that it could represent a viable alternative or complementary treatment method for selected patients with NSCLC or lung metastases who are not candidates for surgical resection. However, further investigation in larger patient cohorts and longer follow-up will be needed to confirm these promising results and to establish the role of RFA in the clinical management of nonsurgical patients with lung malignancies. The appropriate use of modern imaging has now been shown to be effective at several levels. Clinicians become more confident about their diagnoses -for example in patients with lumbar spine problems when MR imaging evidence is available. Patients usually prefer CT and MR to more invasive alternatives -e.g. MR imaging rather than radiculography. And there are economic advantages to the health community if modern imaging is used appropriately. For example, in patients admitted for acute abdominal pain, the overall length of hospital stay is reduced if CT is used at an early stage. Similar evidence about improved clinical confidence and therapeutic decisions apply to CT for thoracic disorders. For these reasons sophisticated imaging is increasingly used at the start of the patient's journey through the diagnostic pathway rather than at the end. Sets of imaging data can now be interpreted and analysed at leisure retrospectively, regardless of the initial problem. Such comprehensive diagnostic possibilities call into question changes in the roles of primary care, radiologists and imaging departments and specialists. Increased reliance on radiological investigations, often at the expense of detailed physical examination, has been shown to be of advantage to the patient in terms of time, cost and health outcome. Are radiology departments now ready to assume more of a gatekeeper role? Some of the advantages and problems which may be encountered will be discussed. Learning Objectives: 1. To comprehend the potential implications of radiology departments offering initial triage and treatment. 2. To appreciate the cost-effectiveness studies required to validate such an approach, both in the acute and community setting. 3. To reflect on the discussion that such a proposal might provoke. How do we prove continuing clinical competence? E.J. Adam; London/UK (Jane.Adam@stgeorges.nhs.uk) By tradition, professionals who have undergone appropriate training and been appointed to a substantive post have been regarded automatically as competent. This concept is now being called into question in the medical profession. There are many contributory factors to this change, including medicolegal scrutiny, but it is undoubtedly true that medicine is developing at a very fast pace, making it impossible for doctors to rely solely on knowledge gained during their training and necessitating the continual updating of knowledge and skills. The drive for the reassessment of doctors' performance at intervals during their careers has been greater in some countries than in others, and various different methods of assessment are in use or in development. The simplest schemes encourage doctors to attend appropriate courses or show that they are keeping their knowledge up to date, whilst the most elaborate rely on formal examinations for recertification. There are, however, many other methods including the appraisal of doctors' work by their peers, work colleagues and patients, and attempts to evaluate the diagnostic error rates of individual radiologists. All methods have limitations in terms of their reliability in assessing the professional and personal performance of doctors in their everyday practice. There also remains the question of what is the definition of an 'adequate' radiologist and what becomes of those doctors who are highly trained but 'fail' the reassessment process. Learning Objectives: 1. To appreciate the drive for establishing clinical competence at all stages of a medical career. 2. To understand the range of available methods and those in development to assess professional performance in post. 3. To discuss the implications of the wider introduction of career-long professional assessment, both to individuals and health services. Which imaging investigations will be performed in 10 years time, and which will have disappeared? M.F. Reiser; Munich/DE (Maximilian.Reiser@med.uni-muenchen.de) When considering the fast innovation rate of technology and science, prognosis over longer time periods are associated with a high risk of mistake. When regarding the trends of the past decade, a trend towards increased utilization of crosssectional imaging with CT and MR imaging and decrease of plain radiography and diagnostic angiography is evident. It can be anticipated that this trend will also continue in the future. Newly emerging methods may have major impact on radiological practice. Molecular imaging, the transfer of molecular medicine methods to radiology, opens new horizons in the assessment of genetic risk, selection of appropriate therapy and monitoring of response to therapy. The markers employed require highly sensitive imaging methods. PET, ultrasound and MR imaging seem to be most appropriate. Optical imaging is only able to visualize structures close to the surface of the body, so that limited applications are to be expected. Performance of CT-scanners is improving very fast and may become a real competitor to coronary angiography in the near future. Cardiologists follow a strategic plan to take over this technique, as well as MR imaging of the heart. The radiology community has to undertake major efforts not to lose this important field. MR imaging has great abilities in assessing morphology, physiology and function. With higher field strengths, these abilities are even more enhanced. Multicoil, multi-receiver-channel systems allow for coverage of the whole body. Comprehensive imaging instead of dedicated examination strategies tailored for specific clinical questions may result.  Advances in high resolution ultrasound S.T. Elliott; Newcastle/UK (simon.elliott@nuth.nhs.uk) The transmit frequencies used in diagnostic transcutaneous ultrasound have shown a steady rise over the years. Commercially available systems now offer linear transducers operating at up to 17 MHz for general radiology applications, providing remarkable detail resolution. This lecture will review the technology and applications in, for example, the genitourinary tract, abdomen and neck, including visualisation of renal collecting ducts, demonstration of histological features in the epididymis and even fingerprints. Spectral and colour Doppler analysis is now possible for minute peripheral hepatic and renal vessels, and the diagnostic potential of such measurements will be explored. Some of these new findings are already offering valuable clinical information, but we have yet to realise the diagnostic and prognostic significance of the patterns we can now demonstrate. It's time to get out the histology books and enter a new world of 'micro-ultrasound'. H. Imhof; Vienna/AT (mr@univie.ac.at) Near-misses in radiologic reporting are based on technical problems, misinterpretation of basic signs, lack of or wrong clinical information, use of inadequate equipment, lack of knowledge etc. To overcome most of these problems quality standards are necessary (QM-standards). Those standards must include the complete chain in clinical patient contacts. Current management should be based on guidelines detailing how and when to do which examination, with which equipment, with available radiologic knowledge catalogues. This interactive course will concentrate on common interpretation errors, but also on technical problems. Attendants will discuss cases in which the correct diagnosis was missed. Ways are shown how to avoid such errors. Cerebral metastases are currently the most common and feared complication of systemic cancer. Incidence is rising with improved survival of cancer patients. Placement of tumour emboli in the brain depends on passive supply of tumour cells via blood circulation. Hemispheric, brain stem, and cerebellar metastases arise proportionally to the weight and blood perfusion of these structures. Deposition of metastases occurs at the points of turbulent flow where the vessel calibre changes or at arterial end points. The most common neoplasms producing brain metastases are lung, breast, melanoma, colorectal, renal cancers. Clinical presentation and current therapeutic considerations depend on systemic dissemination of malignancy, localisation and especially, number of cerebral metastases. Therefore in cancers that frequently seed brain metastases, MR imaging as a screening method is more reasonable and cost-effective than CT. Lesions undetected on CT are less than 1-2 cm in diameter, located near to convex and skull base. Visualisation of additional metastases on CT could be improved by administration of double to triple contrast dosage and performing scans with 1-3 hours delay. On MR imaging routine contrast dose T1-WI with magnetisation transfer contrast improves detection of small lesions. The recommended basic MR imaging protocol and usefulness of additional sequences in establishing a correct diagnosis will be reviewed. Primary malignant glial tumour, abscess, spontaneous parenchymal haemorrhage, primary CNS lymphoma, inflammatory granuloma are typical differential diagnoses for single metastases, whereas consider abscesses, multifocal embolic infarction, and demyelinating disease for multiple deposits. Key facts and characteristic aspects of differentials with representative examples will be shown and disputed. Learning Objectives: 1. To review the pathophysiology of dissemination of cerebral metastatic disease -to learn organ-specific metastasis formation, comprehend the haematogenous spread and understand why do most metastases occur in the white-gray matter junction and supratentorially. 2. To become familiar with clinical presentation, pitfalls, and current therapeutic considerations. 3. To describe the imaging strategies -CE CT: Single or double dose contrast agent, role of delayed scanning; CE CT versus CE MR imaging; optimal MR imaging basic protocol, additional, alternative sequences, usefulness of magnetisation transfer contrast technique, DWI, MR spectroscopy, perfusion imaging. 4. To learn key facts for differential diagnosis of single and multiple metastases and recognize the characteristic aspects of such differentials as primary malignant glioma, abscess, inflammatory granuloma, parasite, and demyelinating disease. Extra-axial intracranial metastases may arise through several routes. Hematogenous spread to the meninges is the most frequent. Direct extension from contiguous extra-cranial neoplasms, secondary invasion of the meninges by calvarium and skull base metastases, and migration along perineural or perivascular structures are less common. The incidence of leptomeningeal metastasis seems to increase, probably because of the increment in survival of many systemic neoplasms. Leptomeningeal invasion gives rise to tumor cells dissemination by CSF, eventually leading to neoplastic coating of brain surfaces (neoplastic meningitis). The CSF exam is the most useful non-imaging based test. Contrast-enhanced MR imaging is complementary and can be invaluable, detecting up to 50% of false-negative lumbar punctures. MR findings range from diffuse linear leptomeningeal enhancementfollowing the gyri and extending into the sulci -to multiple enhancing extra-axial nodules. Obstructive communicating and non-communicating hydrocephalus may occur, due to obstruction of ventricular system or CSF resorption. Both calvarial and epidural metastases infrequently transgress the dura, which acts as a barrier against tumor spread. Radionuclide bone studies are still a valuable screening test to detect bone metastases. On CT and MR, bone metastases extending intracranially and primary dural metastases show the characteristic biconvex shape, usually associated with brain displacement away from the inner table. Although CT is better in detecting bone erosion of the skull base, MR is more sensitive in demonstrating even subtle abnormalities of the meninges, providing more detailed information about dural involvement. Perineural and perivascular spread from head and neck neoplasms require thin-section contrast-enhanced MR. Learning Objectives: 1. To comprehend the mechanisms of extra-axial metastases to the skull base, the dura mater and leptomeninges, skull base invasion, and neoplastic intracranial spread. 2. To become familiar with the basic anatomy of the skull base, meninges, and how to use the imaging techniques to identify neoplastic involvement. 3. To recognize characteristic aspects of leptomeningeal, dural metastases, and to be able to provide a differential diagnosis. 4. To be able to recognize perineural and perivascular spread from head and neck neoplasms. 5. To be aware of the therapeutic applications. C. Metastatic disease of the spine C.F. Andreula; Bari/IT (andreula@libero.it) Metastases of the spine occur in the spinal cord, in the extramedullary dura, in the epidural space and in the vertebral bodies. Imaging modalities evaluate patients with symptoms; they can also be used to screen for lesions, assessing the localisation and the compartments involved (extradural, epidural, subdural, and paraspinal) and can help suggest a therapeutic strategy. The suggested patients for screening of metastases are: -Asymptomatic patients suspected for metastases. -The patient with neurological symptoms. Imaging modalities are indispensable in the differential diagnosis of non tumoral lesions mimicking metastases. Learning Objectives: 1. To suggest the diagnosis criteria differentiates them between metastasis and other pathologies. 2. To choose the best sequences for the diagnosis of spine metastasis. 3. To discuss the future of the diffusion weighted images in suggesting the diagnosis of spine metastases. Image quality is an important consideration for any medical imaging device. The transition from analogue to digital radiography in recent years has paralleled a renewed attention to image quality. Particular attention has been paid to detector and displays, two major components of digital imaging systems. Considering their crucial role, the performance of these devices can have a direct impact on the quality and efficacy of the interpretation process. The performance of digital detectors, as one of the first elements of the imaging chain, has a "permanent" impact on image quality, as no image can be improved beyond the inherent quality provided by the detector. In terms of displays, soft-copy displays, the most common display modality today, are by nature dynamic in nature, enabling manipulation of the images. However, this dynamic advantage comes at a cost: the performance of soft-copy displays can vary from device to device, vary over time, and vary as a function of the state of the calibration and set up of the device. Recent international efforts have led to the development of guidelines for characterizing the performance of detector and soft-copy display devices. This presentation will provide a framework for characterising image quality in the context of digital detectors and displays. It delineates particular methods and procedures for characterising the performance of these devices. Specific focus will be placed on the guidelines recently developed by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) for digital detectors, and those by the American Association of Physicists in Medicine (AAPM TG18) and the IEC. A PACS system has to be considered a hospital resource. To understand the digital image management is it possible to adopt qualitative methods (interviews, questionnaires) or quantitative methods such as the number of examinations performed/patient treated or statistical analysis on turn-around time (time elapsed from examination request, execution time [ET] and the availability of report [RT] ) and on the average hospital stay by using the HIS/RIS data. It is commonly known that in a fully digital environment average turn-around time diminishes. How it diminishes is a workflow indicator: The different percentages of examinations executed/referred/completed as a function of the time are workflow indicators. How many workstations per ward, their type and number of monitors are well know arguments. Voice recognition, hanging and access protocols are some of the elements that are useful for the implementation of a "second level" PACS. Methodologies to adapt the display to environment need a multidisciplinary-multidepartment PACS planning committee. A quantitative analysis of PACS effects on the efficiency and effectiveness in overall patient clinical treatment can derive from a workflow optimization. The faster availability of reports can result in faster clinical action and a reduction in average length of patient hospital stay; however it is hard to attempt a statistical or economic assessment of this element because of its intrinsically multifactorial character. The keys to success are the interdepartmental cooperation and target sharing, training and continuous performance monitoring. Nuclear medicine and particularly PET have demonstrated over the last few years, that they are uniquely suitable to stage and monitor tumors during therapy. This is due to several factors: 1. Nuclear probes are orders of magnitude more sensitive than probes used in other clinical imaging modalities. 2. Since in FDG PET mainly tumors are depicted, the very high "signal to background" information makes it relatively easy to identify tumor foci. 3. Modern NM equipment is very efficient in assessing entire body regions and thus suitable for staging. High quality WB images are obtained in less than 30'. 4. The lack of anatomical references in FDG PET images has been overcome by the introduction of combined modality imaging with PET-CT and SPECT-CT, which make the entire examination more sensitive and more specific. While for some tumors such as bronchial carcinoma, NM imaging modalities are primarily used in initial staging, in others such as lymphoma, the emphasis is on therapy assessment. There exists a large body of literature demonstrating the superiority of NM approaches over conventional, more anatomically oriented imaging modalities. Minor limitations in the usefulness of NM methods are a lack of specificity of tracers such as FDG vis-à-vis inflammatory foci. However, in clinical practice, this limitation is rarely relevant. With the development of further tracers, particularly for PET imaging, it is expected to overcome these limitations. This will make PET uniquely suitable to become a key imaging modality in the quest for developing more personalized therapy approaches.  A 59 B C D E F G in gene therapy, in particular for applications in cancer therapy. Tumor activity can be visualized by targeting angiogenesis either directly by mapping altered gene expression levels or indirectly using biomarkers such as the quantification of perfusion or other physiological parameters (e.g. glycolyis using FDG PET). Also, processes related to apoptosis and degradation of the extracellular matrix can be mapped based on specific contrast agents targeting annexin V and Matrix Metalloproteases, respectively. Once specific markers are found, radiopharmaceuticals, and/or drugs can be attached to locally deliver therapy. Gene therapy can be guided by MI. The delivery of a gene can be targeted using real-time image guidance. In addition, expression of a marker gene can be quantified using PET, MR imaging or other imaging modalities using labelled ligands. Spatial and temporal control of transgene expression can be achieved based on a combination of MR imaging-guided local hyperthermia and a heat-sensitive promoter. Stem cells may be used as gene therapy vectors and for tissue repair. Stem cells have been isolated, and labelled with MR contrast agents, then re-injected and tracked towards their target using serial MR imaging. Such methods are promising in clarifying the homing of stem cells and may allow image-guided stem cell therapy. The study of the mediastinum is performed with cross-sectional imaging (CT or MR imaging), due to the lack of contrast among the different mediastinal structures in conventional radiography. Nevertheless, the PA and lateral chest radiograph may be very useful as the initial examination to detect mediastinal masses and to suggest the next procedure to perform. The study of the mediastinum starts with a thorough knowledge of the radiographic anatomy and most common variants. Differentiation of pulmonary from mediastinal masses is easily made by knowing basic semiology (pregnancy sign). To facilitate the differential diagnosis among different pathologies it is convenient to divide the mediastinum into different areas (thoracic outlet, anterior middle and posterior, including supra and intravascular compartments). The radiographic appearance and location of masses on cross-sectional imaging will contribute to narrowing the differential diagnosis. Rectal cancers have traditionally been thought to fare worse than colon cancers due to higher local recurrence rates and poorer overall survival rates. However, with better surgical techniques (total mesorectal excision), superior preoperative imaging (high resolution magnetic resonance imaging) and neoadjuvant treatments (radiotherapy and chemoradiotherapy), rectal cancer local recurrence rates are reducing and overall 5 year survival rates of 75% are being achieved. Accurate local staging of rectal cancer requires good quality high resolution imaging of the rectum and mesorectum. A thorough understanding of the surgical anatomy and the pathology of rectal cancer is required in addition to a multidisciplinary team (involving surgeons, radiologists, pathologists and oncologists) discussion of the imaging findings. The routine use of high resolution T2 weighted can identify a number of poor prognostic features preoperatively, namely increasing depth of extramural spread, potential surgical resection margin involvement, N2 nodal disease, extramural venous invasion and peritoneal infiltration. Team discussion of these findings enables a preoperative treatment strategy to be tailored to these prognostic features and the patients clinical condition. Therefore, in approximately 30-40% of patients, MR imaging features will result in preoperative administration of chemoradiotherapy to prevent incomplete resection. Tumor regression and subsequent resection with clear margins can then be achieved in the vast majority of patients thus treated but an appreciation of the post treatment related changes and relation of these to the initial baseline imaging is important. The careful use of MR imaging in preoperative decision making and treatment planning substantially reduces the number of non-curative rectal cancer resections. Both PET-FDG and whole body MR imaging allow a study of the whole marrow within a one step examination. PET studies the metabolism, and the superimposition with CT images localises well the abnormalities. It is expensive, uses a sophisticated contrast medium, and a specific environment, and is not very specific. False negative results (such as in prostate metastases) are discovered and analysed, so that precise indications will be clarified. Whole body MR imaging is cheaper, faster (less than 30m examination with 2 sequences), performed without injection, easy to read, but non specific either. It studies bone marrow signal. It is more efficient on fat marrow, and if 2 types of sequences are used (such as STIR and T1W-SE). Image quality may not be satisfactory (skull, moving locations, artefacts induced by the vessels). PET is certainly more reliable to evaluate treatment effectiveness. Learning Objectives: 1. To explain the advantages and limitations of whole body MR imaging and PET scan in the study of bone marrow. Minimally invasive, image-guided, thermoablative therapies are developing in many fields of cancer therapy as adjuncts to surgical approaches. The methods used in clinics to induce thermal cell death are focused ultrasound (FUS), radiofrequency (RF), laser and cryotherapy. Imaging techniques guiding these treatments (by ultrasound, CT or MR imaging) allow for accurate and safe positioning of the device to the target, and precise definition of the tumor volume. However, the actual limitations of these techniques are the limited volume of tumor accessible for efficient treatment and the absence of monitoring of the delivered thermal dose during the procedure. The main improvements provided by MR imaging are its ability to get a 3D control of the organ and its surroundings for safety, measurement of temperature in real time and in 3D, and monitoring of level and location of the delivered thermal dose, making the control of heat distribution and diffusion possible. Its compatibility with laser and US energy delivery systems is convenient whereas it requires specific filtering for RF systems. It will make FUS monitoring more accurate because it is the only technique allowing the visualisation of the thermal focal point.  Principles and advantages of real time MR-thermometry for monitoring tumor ablation C. Moonen; Bordeaux/FR (chrit.Moonen@imf.u-bordeaux2.fr) Continuous thermometry during a hyperthermic tumor ablation procedure may help to correct for local differences in heat conduction and energy absorption, and thus allow optimization of the thermal therapy and provide procedure endpoints. Noninvasive, three-dimensional mapping of temperature changes is feasible with MR, and may be based on the relaxation time T 1 , the diffusion coefficient (D), or proton resonance frequency (PRF) of tissue water. The use of temperature-sensitive contrast agents and proton spectroscopic imaging can provide absolute temperature measurements. The excellent linearity and near-independence with respect to tissue type, together with good temperature sensitivity, make PRF based temperature MR imaging the preferred choice for many applications at mid to high field strength (1 T or above). The PRF methods employ RF-spoiled gradient echo imaging methods. A precision of 1 o C, for a temporal resolution of 1 s and a spatial resolution of 2 mm, is feasible for a single slice for immobile tissues. Corrections should be made for temperature-induced susceptibility effects in the PRF method, and motion artefacts. Fat suppression is necessary for most tissues when T 1 , D or PRF methods are employed. Excellent registration is important to correct for displacements between scans. When combined with minimally invasive heating methods, continuous MR temperature mapping can provide feedback coupling in order to ensure a desired temperature trajectory. MR guided focused ultrasound is a particularly promising method for medical therapies. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the basic principles of MR temperature imaging. 2. To assess pitfalls of temperature imaging, like motion artefacts and interference with energy deposition devices. 3. To understand the principles of real-time control of thermal heat deposition using temperature MR imaging. MR-controlled RF ablation of liver tumors C.D. Becker; Geneva/CH (Christoph.Becker@hcuge.ch) In clinical practice, RF ablation of liver tumours is most commonly guided and monitored with real-time ultrasonography (US) because this method is easily available, rapid, and practical. Computed tomography (CT) may be used as an alternative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has some important potential advantages over US and CT that warrant its use for monitoring RF ablation. Firstly, a variety of hepatic contrast materials enable detection of some tumour nodules that are invisible with US and CT. Secondly, MR imaging at high field strength allows in vivo temperature mapping with phase shift algorithms. Colour-coded mapping of isothermes and energy deposition over time obtained with this method could render monitoring of RF ablation more accurate and reproducible, and facilitate visualisation of local heat loss due to convection by larger vessels. Over the past few years, we have successfully used an open-field 0.23 T MR unit for guidance of RF ablation in selected patients. So far, however, many RF generators and electrodes still produce major artifacts in the high-field MR environment, thus hampering real-time temperature mapping. An additional, practical drawback is the difficult procedure of targeting liver nodules under MR guidance, which may take up to several hours in the MR suite. For these reasons, the clinical role for MR guidance and monitoring of RF ablation has so far been almost negligible. It appears likely, however, that progress in the areas of MR compatibility, new real-time targeting methods, thermometry software, and respiratory gating may render MR guidance and monitoring of RF ablation of liver tumours more practical and enhance its role in the near future. Learning Objectives: 1. To summarise the rationale and indications of MR-controlled RF ablation of liver tumors. 2. To discuss technical requirements and possibilities. 3. To present current experience and future perspectives. Thermal ablation of uterine fibroids with MR-controlled focused US C.M. Tempany-Afdhal; Boston, MA/US (ctempany@bwh.harvard.edu) Purpose: To describe the principles of MR guided FUS, the role of MR imaging in leiomyomas and summarize the results of the clinical trials in MR guided FUS for uterine leiomyomas, with over 700 procedures performed to date worldwide. Methods and Materials: Today, there are a variety of less invasive alternatives to hysterectomy available, such as myomectomy, hormonal therapy, uterine artery embolization (UAE), and more recently MR-guided focused ultrasound surgery (MRgFUS). MRgFUS is a thermal ablation method that uses sound waves created in tissue as a source of thermal injury. Ultrasound waves are focused through intact skin of the anterior abdominal wall resulting in localized thermal tissue ablation and non-perfusion, or necrosis, of a sub-volume of the targeted tissue. Results: Using interactive target segmentation on MR imaging, an outlined volume can be non-invasively treated, monitored by on-line MR temperature control. Utilizing an effective combination of image guidance and energy delivery, MRg-FUS therefore allows for preservation of uterine function while obviating the need for a minimally invasive procedure or surgery. Conclusion: MR imaging-guided focused ultrasound surgery can non-invasively cause thermo-coagulation resulting in necrosis of uterine leiomyomas. MR imaging provided excellent guidance for treatment planning, direct monitoring of treatment delivery and thermal changes in the sonicated tissue. The FUS therapy used in this trial of women with symptomatic uterine leiomyomas appears to be feasible and is safe. MR imaging-guided FUS can be recommended for further testing as an alternative to currently available therapies for symptomatic leiomyomas. High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) has been used for prostate cancer treatment since the early 1990s. The HIFU beam is delivered by an endorectal transducer under sonographic guidance. This treatment has currently two main indications: 1. Localized prostate cancer in non-surgical patients: 5-year results challenging those of external-beam radiotherapy (ERB) have been obtained by several groups; 2. Salvage therapy of local recurrence after prostate ERB: promising preliminary results have been obtained in these patients for whom a palliative hormone therapy is usually the only valid alternative. In part these good results are due to recent improvement in prostate cancer imaging. Further improvements due to imaging are expected in 4 directions: 1. Patient selection: PET scanning has shown promising results in depicting sub-clinical metastases; 2. Intraprostatic tumor mapping: contrast-enhanced dynamic MR imaging accurately depicts the cancer distribution within the gland, (especially in patients with history of ERB), which may allow for better targeting of treatment; 3. Evaluation of HIFU-induced tissue destruction: currently, no imaging method can accurately assess the uniformity of thermal tissue ablation. The role of Elastography and Color Doppler in depicting areas of incomplete tissue destruction and/or cancer recurrence is under evaluation. 4. Evaluation of the prostate perfusion rate: currently, temperature is not monitored during the procedure and the same treatment parameters are applied to all patients. Current research is aimed at finding an accurate way of obtaining perfusion maps of the prostate in order to adapt the treatment parameters to the actual local perfusion rate observed in each patient. The introduction of contrast agents and the development of contrast-specific techniques opened new prospects in US. With the advent of second-generation agents and low mechanical index real-time scanning techniques, contrast US established itself as an easy-to-perform and reproducible examination, and appeared to be ready for routine clinical application. US contrast agents may improve information about macrovasculature, enhancing B-mode imaging, all Doppler modalities and by means of contrast-specific imaging. While results from preclinical experiments and initial clinical studies have been promising, most of the clinical indications of contrast-enhanced US remain to be validated. Concerning microvascular assessment, contrast US has a role especially in liver imaging for focal liver lesion detection and characterization. It has been shown that contrast US substantially increases the ability to detect liver metastases and to characterize focal lesions not diagnosed at baseline study. In the setting of liver cirrhosis, detection of arterial hypervascular supply by using contrast-enhanced US within a nodule emerged during surveillance may allow a confident diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma. Owing to its ability to display tumor vascularity, contrast US has also been shown to be a tool for guidance, monitoring and assessment the outcome of percutaneous treatments. Microbubbles have shown promise also in gene therapy. There is evidence that the low power used in diagnostic imaging systems may be sufficient to produce therapeutic effects, without significant toxicity. Microbubbles can be targeted to tissues and a transgene can be either mixed with or complexed to microbubbles, thus increasing the probability of genes entering the cells. Learning Objective: 1. To describe the specific characteristics of US contrast agents, in terms of physical properties and biodistribution. Assessment of macrovascular system J.-M. Correas; Paris/FR (jean-michel.correas@nck.ap-hop-paris.fr) Ultrasound contrast agents are strict blood pool agents as microbubbles administered intravenously remain in the vascular compartment due to their size. They enhance the Doppler signals in case of technical failure for the assessment of deep vessels or when the flow is reduced (tight stenosis). However, the huge increase in signal intensity results in multiple artefacts that can limit the value of this technique. New ultrasound sequences have been developed to take advantage of the resonant properties of the microbubbles in order to increase the resolution of the contrast examination and limit artefacts. Ultrasound contrast agents can be used to improve the assessment of macrovascular diseases, such as renal artery stenosis and occlusion, aortic aneurisms and grafts, carotid and peripheral arteries, portal vascular tree, as well as transcranial Doppler imaging. Commercial ultrasonic contrast agents are small encapsulated gaseous microbubbles which are designed to resonate at diagnostic ultrasonic frequencies (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) and to give ultrasonic enhancement up to 10 10 times greater than a solid microbubble of the same size. Recently there has been an increasing interest in manipulating these microbubbles to target specific sites within the body. The most commonly used method of targeting is the attachment of a biotinylated antibody or ligand to the surface of a microbubble. Targeted microbubbles can also be used to deliver genes or drugs to specific locations within the body. Drugs can be encapsulated within the microbubbles or embedded into the microbubble membrane. Likewise DNA can attached to the surface or encapsulated within the microbubble structure. Transfection techniques (Transfection refers to a range of techniques used for introducing specific double stranded DNAs into dividing cells in such a way that they can be taken up by the nucleus and expressed), can be divided into viral and non-viral approaches. Non-viral methods include liposome mediated transfection, electroporation, bombardment, microinjection and sonoporation. Of most interest is sonoporation which causes transient permeability of cell membrane by the application of ultrasound without causing damage to the cells. The transfection efficiency of this method has been shown to be high compared to both viral and other non-viral methods. Learning Objectives: 1. To outline the principles underlying the therapeutic uses of microbubble ultrasound, including cell permeabilisation ("sonoporation") and targeting of microbubbles. 2. To outline where these methods may lie in relation to other physical delivery methods, notably for gene delivery. 3. To give an overview of the current state-of-the-art, particularly for in vivo applications. Today, oncologic imaging examinations comprise a major portion of both oncologic and general radiologic practices. Proper interpretation of oncologic images requires complex knowledge specific to the type of cancer. Understanding of key imaging findings in tumor response assessment is essential. The optimal choice of imaging examination to answer cancer type-and cancer site-specific questions should be standarized. Even more importantly, training for oncologic inter-pretation should be accelerated, as present practice is lagging behind computer and technological advances. One of the major benefits of imaging is that the findings may be quantified and evaluated for changes over time. As imaging, due to its much-improved spatial resolution and capacity to offer information beyond anatomy, has become a surrogate marker for treatment response, a number of critical questions have arisen. For example, which system (WHO or RECIST) of tumor measurement and response classification should be used? Which is the best approach to measurement -uni-dimensional, bi-dimensional, or volumetric? Moving beyond anatomy, assessment of tumor biology and biological prediction of tumor response through techniques such as perfusion, angiogenesis and metabolic characterization are providing glimpses into the future of imaging assessment of tumor response and the development of new cancer-generic (e.g. apoptosis, hypoxia) and cancerspecific agents. The complexity of imaging is increasing not only with the number of available imaging and post-processing techniques, but with the diversity of relevant therapeutic options. Increasingly, it is becoming clear that a single imaging modality can be misleading if used alone, but more robust when combined with other imaging approaches.  Monitoring tumor response: Critical issues L. Schwartz; New York, NY/US (schwartl@mskcc.org) Tumor shrinkage as observed on radiographic examinations, most commonly CT and MR imaging, defines a patient's response to chemotherapy and gauges the effectiveness of investigational therapies in patients with cancers in clinical trials and clinical practice. The use of tumor shrinkage as a biomarker of the effectiveness of a cancer therapy was established decades ago. Early rules governing the methodology for using imaging were established to provide consistency in reporting results of cancer therapy. Today, there are many more options available, both for treatment of cancer and for assessing response with measurements and with other imaging methods. New classes of antitumor therapy have been developed that have a biological antiproliferative effect that may induce a delay in tumor growth or less tumor shrinkage than previously seen with cytotoxic chemotherapies. Methodologies and rules governing response assessment include the use of unidimensional measurements or bidimensional measurements, and some have proposed utilizing volumetric measures. Increasingly, heterogeneous responses are being seen that are not well captured with these methods of measurement. This has created both a challenge and opportunity for imagers to optimize the technical acquisition, analysis and reporting of imaging results for therapeutic response assessment. Individual types of cancers may respond differently and sites of metastases may also respond differently, adding to the challenges in response assessment. The overriding goal of all these techniques is to provide a rational approach to response assessment such that imaging will be viewed as an accurate biomarker of response. Learning Objectives: 1. To review and understand the rationale for image-based response to treatment. 2. To learn the principles and rules governing response assessment as outlined by regulatory agencies throughout the world. 3. To recognize the myriad challenges of designing imaging protocols for tumor response to treatment. 4. To learn how imaging relates to other biomarkers of response assessment. Use of CT/MR imaging beyond anatomy H.-U. Kauczor; Heidelberg/DE (hu.kauczor@dkfz-heidelberg.de) The standard criterion for assessing treatment response in tumors is size, despite notorious shortcomings related to measurement accuracy, the tumor's shape, and delayed reduction in size. There is a need for imaging techniques which early and sensitively detect response or recurrence, and account for tumor heterogeneity. Two possible criteria will be discussed: perfusion and metabolism. Perfusion: In larger tumors, neo-angiogenesis leads to the formation of pathological vessels, generally more than normal, with increased permeability. This can be assessed by contrast-enhanced CT or MR imaging. With dynamic imaging (3D + t) signal-intensity over time curves are generated, whose shape can be interpreted visually, or which can be analyzed by using pharmacokinetic models and calculating the amplitude and the exchange constant. These parameters are related to the microvascular density, the perfusion, and the permeability (leakiness) of the wall. Such studies may serve to differentiate benign from malignant lesions, but also to quantify treatment effects on vascularity that may precede the macroscopic response. Metabolism: Tumor cell metabolism is considerably different from metabolism in normal tissue. A variety of metabolites can be measured in vivo by MR spectroscopy. Different effects can be observed in tumors: (i) loss of tissue-specific molecules, such as citrate in the prostate, (ii) an increase of choline together with a decrease of creatine indicating a loss of membrane integrity, or (iii) an increase of lipids, indicating necrosis. Learning Objectives: 1. To review the basic principles of 4D (3D + t) CT and MR imaging acquisition. 2. To learn the quantification and the relevance of extraction of functional information from 4D datasets. 3. To learn about assessment of tumor perfusion as a surrogate marker for angiogenesis. 4. To understand the assessment of tumor metabolism by MR spectroscopy. Monitoring tumor response: A multimodality approach and the use of new tracers G.K. von Schulthess; Zürich/CH (gustav.vonschulthess@usz.ch) Over the last four years and particularly with the advent of PET-CT, FDG-PET has become a prime imaging modality for staging, restaging and therapy monitoring of tumor response to treatment. Glucose uptake and metabolism has turned out to be a very early indicator for therapy monitoring as it measures a molecular rather than an anatomic parameter in a way, which is relatively easy to assess in a whole body imaging mode. Therapy response monitoring is more relevant in some tumors than in others. Major experience exists in assessing response to therapy in lymphoma and GIST tumors, where treatment primarily relies on chemotherapy. It is accepted that in many lymphomas FDG PET is uniquely suited for therapy response assessment after six therapy cycles and the results indicate that PET is useful as early as after one chemotherapy cycle. Therapy assessment in ENT tumors after RT is also used. RT tends to generate a substantial inflammatory response, thus specificity is high, but the presence of FDG uptake does not necessarily imply tumor recurrence. It is expected that with the advent of the new generation of tumor treatment drugs, PET with FDG and other radiopharmaceuticals will assume an even more prominent role to discriminate between responders and non-responders. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn about the advantages and limitations of FDG and the need for more biologically specific tracers. The peritoneum, the largest serous membrane in the body, is reflected over abdominal organs to form a series of folds known as ligaments, mesenteries and omenta. These peritoneal reflections are composed of two serosal layers containing fatty areolar tissue, blood vessels and lymphatics and they attach, interconnect, suspend and supply the abdominal viscera. They may act as conduits or barriers in the spread of intra-or extra-peritoneal diseases and they influence the peritoneal fluid circulation along with bowel peristalsis, gravity and hydrostatic pressure gradients. Although not directly visible on imaging, the twelve major peritoneal ligaments and mesenteries can be identified by their typical position, organ relationships, fatty composition and anatomic landmarks provided by their constituent vessels. Peritoneal folds involved by edema, inflammation or neoplastic infiltration alter their composition, become thickened and they are directly recognized on imaging. Multiplanar CT reconstructions and specific MR imaging sequences, including 3d FLASH and True-FISP sequences, are useful in demonstrating normal and abnormal ligaments and mesenteries. Peritoneal reflections subdivide the peritoneal cavity into multiple compartments and recesses that are visualized when distended by fluid. These subdivisions provide the anatomic basis for localization of acsites, abscesses, seeded metastases and traumatic effusions. Familiarity with the normal anatomy and, consequently, with the anatomic barriers or pathways for diseases spread in the abdominal cavity is essential for proper cross-sectional imaging interpretation. Detection of peritoneal carcinomatosis is a major challenge in onco-imaging because of emerging and promising treatments for this condition. Reported sensitivity of imaging is low, inferior to 50 %. Even though, it may be overestimated due to the lack of gold standard, like surgery in many series. Detection relies on peritoneal fluid and peritoneal nodules, especially the localization to the liver surface and to the greater omentum known as the "omental cake". These signs lack sensitivity and/or specificity. Nevertheless, modern imaging provides the tools to improve dramatically the detection rate, using a combination of technical improvements, anatomical knowledge and multimodality comparison: Technical tips are thin slices, multiplanar reconstruction, appropriate use of contrast media. Anatomical knowledge consists in the identification of peritoneal spaces and structures, as well as the most common but overlooked seeding sites. Radiologists should be trained to detect small peritoneal nodules confidently, because it is mandatory in the era of laparoscopic surgery. It also helps in tumor follow-up. Multiplanar imaging is especially useful. Multimodality approach combines the advantages of US (high resolution images of superficial structures), MR imaging and MDCT (unique anatomical display), PET-CT (detection of small active enhancing nodules) to improve both detection and characterization of detected lesions, avoiding the drawbacks of each single method. Finally, some benign conditions may mimic peritoneal carcinomatosis in oncologic patients and should be ruled out like radiation therapy scarring, post surgical changes and infection. Major features of primary peritoneal tumors, which are rare conditions, will also be presented. Primary infective and inflammatory disease of the peritoneal cavity is uncommon but can occur in Tuberculosis and in Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis associated with chronic liver disease. More often it is secondary to infective or inflammatory disease within the abdominal cavity and is associated with pathologies such as perforation, appendicitis, diverticulitis, cholecystitis and acute pancreatitis. Sclerosing peritonitis can occur as a long-term complication of chronic ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD). Inflammatory change in the mesentery can occur in any gut-associated pathology, particularly Crohn's disease and in less common diseases affecting the mesentery including mesenteric panniculitis, epiploic appendigitis and HIV/AIDS. Whilst routine abdominal ultrasound and MR imaging can contribute significantly Intracranial aneurysms are being treated by both surgical and endovascular methods. Most endovascular techniques include packing of the aneurysm sack with platinum microcoils. While surgical clipping is more effective in preventing recanalization, the endovascular approach is significantly less invasive. For ruptured lesions, endovascular treatment is recommended whenever technically feasible, as recent studies (ISAT) demonstrated better clinical outcomes following endovascular than surgical aneurysm repair. Some morphological features, such as large size or poor neck to size ratio are associated with a high incidence of recurrence. To avoid recanalization, special endovascular techniques are employed including tighter aneurysm packing by liquid embolics, using biologically active microcoils that induce a healing reaction inside the aneurysm, and flow modification within the parent vessel by applying vascular stents. Intracranial vascular malformations are classified as capillary, venous and arteriovenous (AVM) lesions. The proper diagnosis is made by noninvasive MR imaging techniques. For AVMs, catheter angiography is necessary to choose the most appropriate therapeutic modality. These include surgical removal, transarterial embolization, radiosurgery and combinations of the above. The optimal technique is chosen based on the size, location and flow pattern of the malformation. Embolization is performed using adhesive and nonadhesive liquid embolics and employed either as a sole treatment, a preoperative measure to reduce intraoperative blood loss or to reduce the size of the AVM in preparation to radiosurgery. In general, 20-40% of all AVMs can be cured by embolization alone and 60-70% by combined techniques. Ischemic stroke is the third leading cause of death and one of the leading causes of disability in adults in Europe. Intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA) had been used within 3 hours of symptom onset and studies are going on to test the benefits of rt-PA for acute stroke within 6 hours of onset. Strict exclusion criteria are designed mainly to prevent the risk of a cerebral hemorrhage. Endovascular transarterial treatment is evolving as possible new modality. A combination of intravenous and/or endovascular thrombolytic treatments are going to be discussed such as vascular retrieval snare, laser thrombectomy, ballon angioplasty, ultra-sound-enhanced chemical thrombolysis and intra-arterial thrombolytic therapy, together with a presentation of current literature and our clinical practice. The current indications for treating symptomatic significant carotid artery stenosis will be given. There is now evidence that treating symptomatic stenosis greater than 70% within the first two weeks has most benefit. The most recent evidence concerning carotid angioplasty and stenting will be given, including presentation of a meta analysis of completed randomised trials between stenting and carotid endarterectomy, the overall conclusion for the meta analysis from existing randomised data being that there is no evidence for difference in major risks or benefits. Minor risks and costs favour endovascular treatment but with the wide confidence intervals further randomised trials are needed. There will then be a brief presentation of the International Carotid Stenting Study and other currently ongoing randomised trials. The lecture will conclude with a discussion of current technique in carotid angioplasty and stenting as well as a discussion as to whether cerebral protection should be used or not. PACS makes the digital enterprise happen. The transition from an analogue to a digital radiology department opens new possibilities in the quality assurance of the radiological process. Whereas in the analogue department, quality assurance is mostly limited to manual programs that are not linked together, in a digital environment automated quality programs can run continuously and can be linked into one quality report. It is obvious that such a digital radiology department concept needs a careful workflow with state of the art PACS equipment, secure transmission protocols and a legal framework. All those aspects are part of the departmental quality assurance program. RIS and PACS quality assurance criteria, with a QC program, need to be included. As a result of those quality assurance programs, the department can be audited in a more effective way. Besides the quality assurance audit on the PACS, a clinical governance policy needs to be installed in the radiological department. This allows auditing of the departmental workflow, equipment, statistics, timeliness of the service and the quality of the reports. Such an audit needs to include complaints, significant incidents and other feedback. Efficient implementation of PACS requires extensive local configuration of communications with diagnostic modalities, RIS, HIS and other information systems. PACS vendors cannot be expected to perform this task optimally at each site without active contributions from local radiologists and radiographers. DICOM provides standardisation far beyond the basic digital image formats and image transfer. It also defines formats for communication of image acquisition parameters, standardisation of image displays, and functionality for radiological workflow. In real world PACS installations, there may be shortcomings in the display of modality-dependent acquisition parameters, and there may be inconsistencies in the display of images throughout the site. Through some knowledge of DICOM, radiologists and radiographers can identify such shortcomings and provide requirements for improvement with reference to the standard, and thus make sure that the DICOM compliance that was negotiated in the contract is realised appropriately. The technical framework of IHE (Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise) contains integration profiles that specify how the DICOM and HL-7 standards shall be implemented in workflow. The profiles are intentionally very detailed, to minimise ambiguity in local implementation. However, the standardised information objects that represent actions or activities still need to be matched to the information structure in the local information systems. These information objects typically contain codes and descriptors as important data elements. Several of the coding schemes for these elements must be defined by radiologists and radiographers. Standardisation of such codes within and among institutions is crucial for efficient exchange of radiological information. Radiology is by now irreversibly linked to the use of computers, and consequently to the software available. While the range of products available is vast, costs are also high; unfortunately industrial products do not always meet our requirements completely and we need something more. The concept of "Open Source" -of software made available to a community of users by its developer so that it can be adapted to their specific requirements -is also enjoying success in the field of radiology. According to this philosophy, the examples of digital radiological workflow components are multiplied based on open source software: an entire diagnostic imaging department can be built based on such solutions. We will look at how radiologists can take advantage of this opportunity and benefit from a significant reduction in costs, as well as possibilities for personalization that would not be possible using the classical solutions. A key to successful outcome after uterine fibroid embolization is the appropriate selection of patients and careful post-embolization follow-up with the gynecologist and radiologist involved. Because the symptoms associated with uterine fibroids are not specific, deciding who is an appropriate candidate involves precise clinical and imaging evaluation prior to embolization. Since imaging plays a vital role in the preprocedural planning, magnetic resonance imaging should be obtained to assess uterine fibroids and associated conditions that may imitate or exacerbate the symptom complex. Radiologists should play a central role in patient evaluation but also during post-embolization recovery and follow-up. The understanding of complications and failures associated with embolization ena-bles radiologists to effectively counsel and manage patients after the procedure. Radiologists performing uterine fibroid embolization should also be familiar with the different techniques available. Recent technical improvements may influence the outcome from therapy and reduce complication rates. The method of uterine fibroid embolization has been extensively described in the literature. In essence it involves the placement of a catheter into the uterine arteries and injection of embolization particles into the uterine arteries to obtain fibroid infarction. Non spherical polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) particles were the first embolization agents used for uterine fibroid embolization. Spherical embolization particles, such as trisacryl microspheres and PVA spheres have been developed to address some of the disadvantages of non-spherical particles such as the unpredictable level of arterial occlusion and clumping. The appropriate technique of embolization (i.e. angiographic end-point) with each of the available products is still an ongoing debate. Background: Postpartum haemorrhage (PPH) remains a leading cause of maternal mortality worldwide. It is defined as blood loss greater than 500 ml following vaginal delivery or more than 1,000 ml following cesarean section. Risk factors for PPH may be recognized before delivery. Such patients warrant delivery in maternity units, with protocols and resources available to deal promptly with massive obstetric haemorrhage. Management requires restoration of the circulatory blood volume, management of any coagulopathy, and remedying the cause of bleeding. Embolization of the uterine arteries or anterior division of the internal iliac arteries is an essential part of the management protocol. Procedure Details: Prophylactic placement of catheters into the internal iliac arteries in readiness for embolization avoids delay in patients known to be at risk. Embolization of the uterine arteries or the anterior division of the internal iliac arteries may be performed using gelatin sponge or particulate emboli. Conclusion: To be part of an effective emergency protocol, radiological expertise should be available 24 hours a day. Once PPH occurs, rapid transfer of the patient to the main radiology department is desirable but may not be feasible, so radiologists should be prepared to travel to the patient. This requires good communication between the radiologists, obstetricians and anaesthetists so that all team members are aware of the management options. A rapidly changing healthcare environment all over Europe is constantly facing a lack of financial resources because of a quickly increasing number of innovations in therapy and diagnostic methods with dramatically increasing costs. IT-solutions offer the opportunity to create new economical pathways of patient care. But it is a struggle for the European radiology community to meet the challenge of changing the old structures in diagnostic patient care and to provide modern diagnostic pathways for the healthcare system of tomorrow. Instead of taking the chances, e.g. with the help of telemedicine, this improvement is often combated by healthcare providers and radiologists. The building of medical expert networks via telemedicine will not solve all problems in healthcare, but it leads to a higher availability of expert knowledge in hospitals and to an increased diagnostic quality in patient care with reduced costs. Teleradiology is the pacesetter for the continuous process of cross-linking in healthcare and has to be regarded as keycard for the integrated care of tomorrow. The European radiology community must take this chance if they want to play a leading role in designing an e-health platform in order to meet local and global competition. The achievement of these innovative efforts will be electronic patient databases accessible with secure health professional and patient card systems, and optimized administrative as well as diagnostic and therapeutic pathways. Established in 1999, the Imaging Service Network is successfully working on these topics by operating and constantly further developing a radiology driven ehealth platform. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn more about the advantages and opportunities of using teleradiology among hospitals in Germany. 2. To detect economical and technical benefits of using a radiology driven competence network for exchanging teleradiology data. 3. To discuss the influence of teleradiology on the development of health infrastructures. Teleradiology and e-learning D. Caramella; Pisa/IT The distribution of radiological images is no longer confined to the hospital, since in many instances regional PAC systems are emerging as the best solution for a rapidly consolidating healthcare sector. This trend will make the term "teleradiology" obsolete, since teleradiology is progressively becoming just another PACS function. Moreover, hospitals that have a PACS have experienced its ability to improve the quality of teaching, due to the availability of large amount of images and clinical data that allow ready access to pathological examples, facilitates the construction of multimedia teaching files, and prepares the physicians to use the powerful resources of e-learning. Presently there are many radiological resources available on the Internet: an interesting experience is represented by EURORAD, the e-learning initiative of the European Association of Radiology that has made available on the web over 1500 peer-reviewed teaching files (many of them translated into French and Spanish), that are freely accessible at the address: www.eurorad.org. The local radiological archive ceases to be solely the deposit of past examinations, but has turned into an active repository of professional knowledge that is updated and enriched at every encounter with any correctly diagnosed pathology. In his book "PACS and Imaging Informatics", H.K.Huang has introduced the intriguing concept of medical imaging informatics infrastructure (MIII), that is designed to take advantage of existing PACS resources and its image and related data for large-scale horizontal and longitudinal clinical service, research, and education applications that could not be previously performed due to the lack of sufficient data. Learning Objectives: 1. To appreciate the advantages of e-learning with respect to conventional methods. 2. To discuss the integration of electronic management of medical images (PACS, teleradiology) and e-learning. 3. To describe the ongoing projects in this rapidly evolving field. Workload and teleradiological service L. Donoso; Sabadell/ES (ldonoso@cspt.es) The increasing demand for teleradiology services both for emergencies and scheduled examinations have necessitated an analysis of our workload to allow a new approach to take advantage of this new situation. In this presentation we discuss the elements that come into play in the definition of workload in this scenario. Our environment enables "friendly" integration with local radiology departments by sharing information systems. Workload needs to take into account the relative time and effort required to review and interpret different types of imaging studies, not only volume. CT and MR imaging disproportionately tax radiologist capacity and are in high demand in teleradiology services. Study complexity is also related to the different types of clinical scenarios. Other challenges are how to integrate radiologists from different organizations and define the role of sub-specialists in productivity and added-value. The teleradiologist workstation and access to patients' clinical information and previous studies are important for performance and productivity. Failure to review previous examinations is a significant cause of errors in both perception and cognition. Audit procedures to check the quality of service, the accuracy of the reports and the overall therapeutic and clinical impact are necessary. This must include clinician feed-back. The teleradiology scenario greatly influences the implementation of these procedures; there is an important difference between the "friendly", integrated models vs "hostile" scenarios. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the importance of the teleradiologist workstation and access to patients' clinical information. 2. To discuss the elements involved in the definition of workload. 3. To understand the different teleradiology scenarios. Government centred teleradiology: Bane or boon? P.A. Dubbins; Plymouth/UK (drdubbins@phnt.swest.nhs.uk) The UK Government has introduced a raft of policies to address the need to increase imaging investigations in the face of a severe shortage of radiologists. Central to some of these has been transmission of images outside UK shores for reporting. Government coordinated Teleradiology has the potential to respond to peaks and troughs in demand, to allow rapid service expansion and to provide improved efficiency of service. This paper will explore the issues of consent, quality, quality assurance, communication, effect on existing workforce and cost and will present a model for optimising care through teleradiology. Instead, most men in the USA and worldwide have a bone scan & CT scan and then are asked to decide on a "definitive" form of therapy. The latter approach has been shown in multiple papers to grossly understage PC due to the lack of sensitivity of both bone and CT scanning. In this presentation, a logical and strategic approach to the evaluation of men with PC is presented. Such an approachbased on over tens of thousands of human outcomes in the evaluation of PC provides to patients and physicians alike, an evolved manner to evaluate the patient's biologic findings & make further recommendations to optimize a successful outcome. The above strategic approach to the staging evaluation process is further enhanced by an objectified reporting format. This allows the clinician to readily assess the patient's status as regards tumor burden & response to therapy. Examples of reporting formats for TRUSP, bone scans, endorectal MR imaging with spectroscopy & Sinerem studies will be presented as prospective templates, hopefully to be adopted by radiologists worldwide. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the medical contexts and associated radiologic imaging studies used during the natural history of prostate cancer. 2. To relate the risk assessment nomograms involved in prostate cancer that allow for a rational strategy in selecting imaging studies, which in turn determine a logical treatment strategy(ies). 3. To understand the need for an objective reporting format for all radiologic imaging studies, including comparison to enhance patient care. B. How can imaging improve prostate biopsy? F. Frauscher; Innsbruck/AT (ferdinand.frauscher@uibk.ac.at) The current standard of care for the detection of prostate cancer in patients with an elevated PSA and/or abnormal digital rectal examination is grey-scale ultrasound (US) guided "systematic sextant" biopsy. Unfortunately, this technique has shown to miss up to 35% of clinically relevant cancers. Subsequently the number of cores has been increased to improve cancer detection, however several studies have shown no significant improvement in cancer detection. To increase cancer detection new imaging techniques have been studied, which can assess tumour vascularity, since it is well known that cancerous tissue generally grows more rapidly than normal tissue and demonstrates an increased blood flow, as compared to normal tissue and benign lesions. Such new US techniques include colour and power Doppler US and the application of US contrast agents with contrast specific US techniques, such as grey-scale harmonic imaging, which has dramatically changed the role of US for prostate cancer detection. Several studies have shown that contrast enhanced US allows for targeted biopsies and can significantly improve cancer detection when compared with systematic biopsy. Furthermore elastography or "strain imaging" seems to have a great potential in prostate cancer detection. Virtual navigation tools allow for an image fusion between MRI images and US, which allows for targeted biopsies with real-time US into suspicious areas detected on MR imaging. These current trends show that these new imaging techniques allow for prostate cancer visualisation and thus for targeted biopsies and can therefore replace the current "gold standard" for prostate cancer detection-the systematic biopsy. The prevalence of metabolic disorders is higher then previously believed. Metabolic disorders account for a significant percentage of the pathology seen in the CNS, especially in the pediatric population. The metabolic disorders are classically classified into inborn (congenital) or acquired metabolic diseases and they can be further classified according to organ system involvement, cellular organelle dysfunction, biochemical abnormalities, or according to the brain substance involvement. One of the most important imaging modalities in the work-up of metabolic disorders is MR imaging, with its ability to demonstrate normal or abnormal myelination, detect signal abnormalities, differentiate white and gray matter structures, and to detect structural abnormalities. The more advanced MR imaging techniques such as MR spectroscopy and diffusion weighted imaging have shown to be helpful tools in the work-up. CT might be helpful in detecting calcifications, a common finding in some metabolic disorders. Ultrasound has shown to be especially useful to demonstrate morphological brain or skeletal abnormalities in the prenatal stage. Awareness of the different entities and their clinical and imaging characteristics Sunda Sunda Sunda Sunda Sunday y y y y A 73 B C D E F G is mandatory for the radiologist to correctly diagnose these often under-recognized or misdiagnosed entities. This lecture will focus on some of the more common metabolic disorders, their imaging, and clinical characteristics. Also different imaging methods, especially MR imaging and also new MR imaging techniques that will help in the diagnosis, will be discussed. Paediatric hemolymphoproliferative diseases (HLD) are a constellation of disorders that prominently include leukaemia, lymphoma, and histiocytoses. These conditions are invariably severe, and are burdened by elevated morbidity and mortality in the absence of proper treatment. HLD are systemic disorders, i.e., they typically affect multiple organs and systems in the human body. As a whole, they account for about 40% of all malignancies in children. Intensive treatment regimens have resulted in a significant increase in the number of survivors, but have also disclosed new phases of the natural history of these disorders, among which is involvement of the central nervous system (CNS). CNS disease is not consistent, but when present, it is commonly associated with worsened prognosis. Moreover, current treatment modalities, including systemic therapy (i.e. combination chemotherapy) and specific CNS prophylaxis (i.e. intrathecal chemotherapy with or without cranial irradiation), are potentially neurotoxic. Schematically, a rational approach to neuroimaging of CNS manifestations of HLD basically involves three perspectives: (i) Direct involvement of the CNS from primary disease, (ii) other CNS disease related to underlying and secondary effects of disease, and (iii) treatment-related complications. Magnetic resonance imaging plays an important, often crucial role in the diagnosis of several of these disorders. Close interdisciplinary collaboration between hemato-oncologists and neuroradiologists is of paramount importance to provide affected children with an early diagnosis and proper treatment. Learning Objectives: 1. To identify the MR imaging characteristics of direct central nervous system (CNS) involvement in the principal hemolymphoproliferative disorders in the pediatric age group. 2. To become familiar with CNS disorders indirectly related to hemolymphoproliferative diseases, including infection, cerebrovascular, and hematological abnormalities. 3. To recognize treatment-related complications from irradiation, chemotherapy, and bone-marrow transplantation. A-238 C. Abnormalities in brain and spine in the immunocompromised host M.M. Thurnher; Vienna/AT (majda.thurnher@meduniwien.ac.at) Increasing numbers of immunocompromised patients resulting from acquired immuno deficiency syndrome (AIDS), intravenous drug abuse, organ and bone marrow transplantation (BMT) and chemotherapy for malignancies have provided an opportunity for different pathogens to cause CNS disease. Imaging leading to early diagnosis is crucial for patient management; prompt therapy may limit or minimize neurological deficits. 40 million people are currently living with HIV world wide, and approximately 16,000 people get infected with HIV daily. 30-60% of patients after solid organ transplantation experience neurological complications, and 12-70% of patients after BMT. Infections usually occur earlier in patients who underwent BMT than in organ recipients. This review discusses how suppression of the host immune system modifies the clinical picture, diagnosis, and treatment of the infections and tumors of the brain and spine. An increase in the incidence of malignant lymphomas in immunocompromised patients found in different locations of the body has been observed in numerous reports. The compromised host is different from the normal host in distribution of pathogens, which is determined by the nature of the host and defence defect. In compromised hosts, differential diagnostic possibilities are more extensive and the likelihood of non-infectious explanations for neurological symptoms is greater. Medical image registration is a powerful tool for a wide range of medical imaging applications. This course will provide attendees with a basic working knowledge of methods and algorithms used to register images, and a description of some examples of the wide variety of applications for which these techniques are used. In particular we focus on registration algorithms that can in many cases automatically register images that are related by a rigid-body transformation. We will also introduce state-of-the-art non-rigid registration algorithms that can compensate for tissue deformation or align images from different subjects. Applications of image registration include combining images of the same subject from different modalities, aligning temporal sequences of images to compensate for motion of the subject between scans, providing guidance during surgical procedures, correcting for soft tissue deformation, and aligning images from multiple subjects in cohort studies. Over the last decade image registration has emerged as an extremely successful and powerful tool in medical imaging in a wide range of applications. Early examples include the combination of structural information from MR with the functional information available at lower spatial resolution from PET or SPECT. As the technology became more advanced very accurate alignment of intra-modality data became feasible. This allowed subtle temporal changes in structure or function to be analysed. Examples included functional MR and highly accurate detection of cerebral atrophy. Image registration to the physical space of the patient in the operating room was the key enabling technology in image-guided surgery. All these applications were built on rigid body registration technologies. Non-rigid registration, in which one image is warped or morphed into the space of another, has more recently found wide ranging applications, from the measurement (as opposed to detection) of change, to the propagation of segmentation in the automated interpretation of images. Accurate measurement of tissue growth and destruction in the monitoring of therapy and the progression of disease is achieved by analysis of the deformation fields produced by the non-rigid registration. Atlases can be built from large numbers of example images that have been aligned and the statistics of the resulting deformation models can be used to build statistical shape models. These models can then be used to propagate organ outlines to improve measurements of size and shape. Recent work includes the use of the deformation field to analyse motion and deformation when imaging moving structures and in the prediction of motion in image directed therapies. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn how to carry out very precise measurements of change, growth, atrophy. 2. To understand how to apply image registration in motion analysis. 3. To understand how to apply image registration in shape modeling, atlas generation and segmentation propagation. 4. To understand how to use image registration in image guided interventions. 5. To understand how to use image registration in multi-modality imaging. A-241 C. Strategies for validation A. Todd-Pokropek; London/UK (A.Todd@ucl.ac.uk) Image registration techniques require validation, which in general implies the availability of a gold standard. For rigid registration this then permits the definition of a target registration error and a number of successful evaluations of rigid registration techniques have been completed. Non-rigid registration includes a model of interpolation and cannot be evaluated in such a simple manner. We are interested in the accuracy of registration at all points in image space, but "weighed" by the clinical objective to be achieved. Non-rigid registration must also include a model of the process of deformation (for example a model of tissue characteristics) and can be divided into spatial deformation and material transport. It is then possible to define the registration in terms of the deformation vector field and transport field, where some methods exist for their assessment. In general, a suitable strategy for validation of such methods starts by using real clinical data and deforming it, for example using a finite element (tissue based) method. The accuracy of restoring the data back to its undeformed state provides a baseline for evaluation, although the use of circular methods (where the forward and reverse operations match) must be avoided. An alternative and novel approach not requiring ground truth to compare different non-rigid methods is based on a statistical analysis of tolerance and overlap of registrations. However clinical trials are eventually required to confirm this validation on real clinical data for real clinical applications. Learning Objectives: 1. To enable the understanding of the processes of rigid and non-rigid registration, of constraints such as diffeomorphism and consistency, and the choice of various particularities of different methods as appropriate for different clinical applications. 2. To understand the process of validation of rigid registration and strategies for use for non-rigid registration. 3. To become familiar with the use of and the limitations of such techniques. The Olivier Many different imaging methods are used in the assessment of mechanical joint disorders. Standard radiographs answer many questions relating to mechanical bone disorders. They may for instance demonstrate Hill-Sachs lesions in anterior instability of the shoulder, deformity of the proximal femor or the acetabulum in femoroacetabular impingement, Segond fractures in severe trauma of the knee. Radiographs are also most suitable for the determination of mechanical axes. Ultrasonography may be useful for the assessment of superficial joint structures, such as the medial collateral ligament of the knee. CT is mainly used in the combination with arthrography. This combination is most commonly used in the shoulder, the ankle and knee. MR imaging is the most important imaging method for assessment of internal joint derangements after standard radiographs. Its most relevant strengths are in the assessment of articular cartilage including subchondral bone, ligaments, tendons and fibrocartilaginous structures. MR arthrography adds useful information in subtle disease. The high sensitivity of MR imaging and MR arthrography for minor findings occasionally represent a problem due to overdiagnosis. A few examples follow: The most variable structure is the labrum of the shoulder which may be partially detached, appear of different forms and may be partially missing. The attachment and size of the meniscus of the knee varies throughout the joint. The appearance of tendons and ligaments may be variable for a number of reasons not related to symptoms, including partial volume and magic angle effects, differences in histology, degeneration and scarring. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the normal anatomy and variants required to diagnose mechanical joint disorders. 2. To discuss the clinical relevance of abnormalities found during imaging of major joints. 3. To understand the role of various imaging modalities in the assessment of mechanical joint disorders. B. Imaging of tendons and ligaments S. Bianchi; Chêne-Bougeries/CH (stefanobianchi@bluewin.ch) Tendons and ligaments disorders are commonly encountered in everyday practice of general radiologists. Ligaments are mainly affected by acute traumatic lesions while tendons can be concerned by metabolic, degenerative, inflammatory or infective disorders. The aims of the different imaging techniques are: to confirm the presence of pathological changes and assess their severity; to truthfully evaluate the other local structures in order to plan an eventual surgical treatment when this is required; in selected cases, such as infective tenosynovitis, to guide a diagnostic needle aspiration. Both ligaments and tendons disorders are mostly investigated by ultrasound (US) and MR imaging although occasionally standard radiographs and CT can be useful. The choice between US and MR imaging depends on a variety of factors. Local anatomy: because of their anatomic position US can't assess several structures that are very well depicted by MR imaging (cruciate ligaments of the knee, glenohumeral ligaments of the shoulder). Deep structures are in general poorly assessed by US while superficial structures are well evaluated. Dynamic evaluation: only US allows visualisation of ligaments and tendons during joint movements or muscles activations. This allows accurate assessment of intermittent tendon instability. Patients comfort: US can be performed in a few minutes and is well accepted by patients. Many patients are uncomfortable with MR imaging. Contraindications: US can be obtained in every patients while MR imaging has well known relative and absolute contraindications. The quality of the equipments available as well as the experience of radiologists are additional important factors affecting the decision to use US or MR imaging. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the US and MR appearance of acute tears, chronic stress lesions and degenerative changes in tendon and ligament disorders. 2. To discuss the imaging findings with respect to underlying pathology. 3. To understand the role of US and MR for the diagnosis of tendon and ligament disorders. For decades, Russian radiology developed in isolation. Now radiologists have realized that there is one universal road for development of the health service. Russian radiologists have started to participate actively in the work of the international scientific societies, symposiums and congresses, including ECR. They have the ability to compare the European and domestic approaches to protection and improvement of health of the population. It became obvious that the national radiology service should keep a bit of the best; change and reconstruct the rest, and this process can be quite difficult. Recent decision to turn to teaching medicine based on postulates of Bologna declaration was a very progressive one, giving hope for further improvements. It is essential to change the structure of radiology in Russia. Bad examples of wrong regulations (e.g. the radiologist legitimately has no right to use ultrasound and internist after 3 months of teaching can do it) should disappear as quickly as possible. At the same time, radiologists themselves should raise professionalism and ac- Ultrasound is well known as an excellent imaging modality. However, the use 2D ultrasound as a method of choice for many diseases is limited due to difficulties in image interpretations in comparison to other imaging modalities, like CT or MR imaging. Technologic advances can play an increasing role in ultrasound imaging. New technology incorporates a complete set of 3D and 4D imaging features, including 3D-volume rendering, post processing with maximum and minimum intensity projection (MIP, MinIP), virtual imaging, surface rendering. 3D data collection can be performed by using free hand rotation scanning mode or automated scanning with ultrasound probes that include scanning mechanism. Advance technology permits high resolution optically tracked freehand or automated volume imaging methods to be applied to diagnostic ultrasound incorporating interactive manipulation of volume data. 3D scanning provides greater anatomical information about organs and allows them to be viewed in plans unobtainable from 2D scanning. Integration of views obtained over a region of a patient with 3D scanning may permit better visualization and allow a more accurate diagnosis. Moreover, volume imaging provides the physician with the capability to image the patient after he has left the scanning site and reevaluate the diagnosis with clinicians or experts across the network. Combination 3D ultrasound imaging with real-time 3D or 4D offers new potential for ultrasound and provides access to a wide range of clinical applications. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with the principle and application of 3D/4D ultrasound imaging. 2. To understand the contribution of this new technology compared to 2D ultrasound imaging. 3. To comprehend the indication for the 3D/4D ultrasound imaging in routine practice. CT-perfusion imaging in diagnosis and staging of brain tumors I.N. Pronin; Moscow/RU (pronin@nsi.ru) Neuroimaging has become not only a method of definition of structural changes of the brain, but also the method capable of estimating and monitoring various physiological and pathophysiological processes occurring in the CNS. Recently the basic role of CT-PWI is a lifetime rating a degree of hemodynamic changes of brain and pathological tissues in their close interrelation within a skull of cavity. It is well known the fact of change in angiogenesis observed during the growth of intraaxial tumors, especially malignant, lying in a basis of brain tumours stage according to their degree of malignancy. CT-PWI has huge possibilities in preoperative estimation and prediction of histological anaplastic changes in intraaxial lesions, especially gliomas. New opportunities are open with CT-PWI in searching and prediction of metastatic brain tumor's origin supposing different mechanisms of visceral organs and brain angiogenesis. In cases of nonenhanced intraaxial tumors CT-PWI became the method of choice in identification of hyperperfusion areas in tumor's tissue and in navigation for stereotactic CT-biopsy. Clinical experience shows that CT-PWI's information plays important role in preoperative differentiation of intra-and extracranial tumors, including lesions skull base and orbit. Using CT-PWI promise to be important in the estimation of neurosurgical patients in various periods after surgical removal and/or irradiation. Learning Objectives: 1. To show possibilities of CT-PWI in astrocytic gliomas grading. 2. To demonstrate the important role of CT-PWI in stereotactic CT-biopsy of nonenhanced intraaxial lesions. 3. To show the efficiency of CT-PWI in differential diagnosis of intra-extracranial tumors, including skull base and orbit. Changing role of modern cardiovascular imaging V.E. Sinitsyn; Moscow/RU (vsini@mail.ru) Cardiac radiology has developed over the last decade as one of the most important fields of diagnostic radiology. Progress of CT and MR imaging has substantially increased the involvement of radiologists in cardiovascular imaging. Each of these noninvasive modalities could provide in one examination, images of cardiac anatomy, function and perfusion plus coronary and peripheral vascular circulation. Multiple clinical studies have shown high diagnostic value of both CT and MR imaging in cardiac imaging. For the time being, it looks like CT has advantages for screening of cardiovascular diseases and noninvasive coronary angiography and MR imaging looks more preferable for functional cardiac studies and myocardial imaging (perfusion and viability). Several guidelines for appropriate utilization of noninvasive imaging techniques have been suggested. However, due to rapid changes in technology it is too early to define the exact clinical niche for each of these imaging techniques. Definitely, we need more evidence-based comparisons of CT and MR imaging with traditional cardiac imaging techniques. In order to keep the leading role of radiologists in diagnostic imaging they should fully understand the clinical and diagnostic implications of all modern cardiac imaging techniques. Professional radiological societies must provide focused training to radiologists in cardiac and vascular imaging. Some examples of curriculums for subspecialty training in cardiac radiology exist and they are waiting for further improvements and implementation.  Modern All patients underwent the following examinations: digital microfocus radiography, high resolution ultrasonography with color Doppler scanning, multirow detector computer tomography (MDCT), digital subtraction angiography. The analysis showed the significance of modern diagnostic imaging modalities in definition of type of injuries and tactics of surgical treatment. The shell caliber, its migration, including the significant distance from inlet, were defined in 50 % of patients by the above mentioned diagnostic modalities. Besides, it has become possible to determine the object of tissue destruction along the wounded canal, and also to characterize in detail the pathological changes of anatomic structures by bullet and mine-explosive injuries. Complex radiological diagnostics gave an opportunity to get full information about the presence and amount of air and liquid in abdominal and thoracic cavities; to define exactly the foreign body topography, including X-ray negative and not enough contrast bodies; to determine the volume and verify prolonged bleeding. Osteoporosis, osteomalacia, parathyroid disorders and Paget's disease are associated with imbalance between osteoblastic and osteoclastic activity of bones. Some radiographic features reflect the gross pathologic and histologic abnormalities of these diseases. Bone resorption can be categorized as subperiosteal, intracortical, endosteal, subchondral, trabecular, or subligamentous and subtendinous. Accumulation of osteoid tissue can create lucent sites in the cortex and coarsened pattern of the trabeculae. Increased amounts of trabecular bone can create abnormal radiodensity on skeletal radiographs. Excessive and disorganized new bone formation can lead to the appearance of architecturally abnormal osseous tissue. This paper will discuss the radiographic features allowing differentiation between the main metabolic bone disorders. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the radiographic features and diagnostic criteria of osteoporosis, osteomalacia, parathyroid disorders and Paget's disease. 2. To discuss the radiographic features allowing differentiation between these metabolic bone disorders. 3. To understand the effect of imbalance between osteoblastic and osteoclastic activity as seen on radiographs.  Non-invasive cardiac imaging: Friend or foe? G.P. Krestin; Rotterdam/NL (g.p.krestin@erasmusmc.nl) Many radiologists consider non-invasive imaging of the heart to be one of the 'holy grails' of our profession. This dream is now almost within our grasp, thanks to unprecedented technical developments in recent years. Some of these techniques are already implemented as part of the clinical armament used for diagnostic decision making like coronary calcium scoring, functional exams in congenital heart disease and left ventricular failure, viability studies, and even coronary CT angiography. Even more novel applications lurk just around the corner, poised to enter the clinical arena: assessment of the total coronary plaque load, characterization of coronary plaque composition, detection of vulnerable plaque, as well as combined functional and metabolic examinations. These exciting achievements have pushed back the frontiers of non-invasive diagnosis of cardiac disease and expanded the role of the radiologist beyond our traditional turf. Is this a friendly development, or should we be concerned about the possibility of fierce battles and loss of our new turf as has happened in similar situations in the past? Are we sufficiently equipped and trained to participate in these exciting developments, now and in the future? Perhaps we stand a better chance of remaining part of the game if we reconsider our goals and modify our strategy: instead of fighting other specialists we should consider building up multidisciplinary teams with shared responsibilities. The key to our future success lies in our skills in placing the patient in the center of our attention, in developing not only image interpretation but also thorough clinical knowledge, and in applying our best and most advanced imaging techniques within the global context of health management. The staging of kidney tumors includes a systematic approach to recognize and describe the local, regional, and distant extent of tumor burden. Staging results determine therapeutic approach, success of individual treatments and prognosis of individual patients. Evolving diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic experience re-defines staging categories. In renal cell carcinoma (RCC), the Robson classification has widely been left for the TNM classification. Since 2002, the TNM classification includes RCC of 4 cm or less in stage T1a, since recent surgical experience suggests that partial nephrectomy (nephron-sparing surgery) can be curative, while it preserves excretory capacity. Since surgery is currently the only means of curative treatment, lymph node (N-) or distant metastatic (M-) extent of RCC is associated with unfavourable prognosis. However, evolving concepts of chemotherapy, such as tumor anti-angiogenesis, demonstrate promising effects on tumor volume. Staging of RCC involves various imaging modalities, such as abdominal sonography, chest X-ray, i.v.-urography, computed tomography (CT), bone scan, cavography, phlebography, MAG-3-clearance scintigraphy, MR imaging, cardiac or trans-esophageal sonography and, rarely, imaging-guided biopsy. The increase in speed and range of both CT and MR imaging suggests that these modalities may soon limit or obviate the need for other imaging modalities in the staging of renal tumors. Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the kidney is a differential diagnosis in patients with solid renal lesions who do not have other primary tumors. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn staging classifications for renal cell carcinoma and their respective implications for patient management. Given the biological heterogeneity of prostate cancer, the high prevalence of indolent disease, and the desire for patient-specific treatment, non-invasive evaluation of tumor prognostic variables (e.g., tumor location, volume, aggressiveness, and extent) is of great clinical interest. This lecture will focus on the use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and proton MR spectroscopic imaging ( 1 H-MRSI) to assess these prognostic variables and improve the primary staging of prostate cancer. 1 H-MRSI provides a metabolic map of the prostate. Prostate cancer identification is based on the detection of an increased [choline + creatine] to citrate ratio and a decrease in polyamines. Because MRI/ 1 H-MRSI can detect cancer in zones of the prostate not palpable by digital rectal examination and often not sampled during biopsy, it is useful for directing repeat biopsies when PSA levels are elevated but previous biopsies are negative. MR imaging has been shown to aid in the identification of extracapsular extension and seminal vesicle invasion, two essential factors in local staging (specific MR imaging criteria for these features will be presented in the lecture). The addition of volumetric data from 1 H-MRSI significantly improves the evaluation of extracapsular extension and decreases interobserver variability. MR spectroscopy has the potential to improve the assessment of prostate cancer aggressiveness, as the ratio of [choline+creatine] to citrate in prostate cancer correlates with Gleason grade. MR imaging can also The elbow or wrist can be scanned either with the patient prone and the arm extended above the head, or with the patient supine, with the arm beside the body. In order to facilitate interpretation of the images choosing the correct imaging planes is crucial. It is recommended to include fluid sensitive sequences such as T2 FS or STIR in the imaging protocol. Sequences and planes used are dependent both on the MR imaging, the field strength, the patient and the clinical question. Especially in the wrist, thin slices are recommended. All fractures are not detected on plain X-rays in the acute stage. In cases with a strong clinical suspicion of a possibly hazardous fracture, MR imaging can be used in the acute setting to confirm -or exclude it. An increased amount of joint fluid may, except fractures, also be explained by a bone bruise, not seen on plain X-rays. Bone bruises are often seen in association to ligament injuries. In the acute phase an increased amount of joint fluid is often seen. When fluid-sensitive sequences are used the joint fluid acts like a natural contrast agent. MR is also suitable for the diagnosis and staging of tendon and muscle injuries. Learning Objectives: 1. To comprehend the basic anatomy of the wrist and elbow. 2. To become familiar with common acute traumas of the wrist and elbow. 3. To discuss the imaging technique and MR imaging findings in wrist and elbow trauma. B. Overuse syndromes in sports M. Padrón; Madrid/ES (mario.padron@cemtro.es) Some of the more frequent overuse disorders of the upper limb are sport related. MR imaging provides a very useful clinical information in assessing these overuse related injuries. Valgus stress lesions may occur secondary to acute microtrauma or in chronic repetitive process. Medial tension overload produces medial collateral ligament sprain, flexor pronator strain and ulnar neuropathy. Lateral compression overload produces osteochondritis dissecans of the capitellum and radial head. Medial epycondilitis is caused by degeneration of the common flexor tendon. MR imaging is very useful in detecting the spectrum of damage to the muscle-tendon unit. Lateral epycondilitis is caused by degeneration and tearing of the extensor carpi radialis brevis tendon; despite other imaging modalities MR imaging can depict precisely the degree of tendon damage. In the wrist we review the MR features of the carpal tunnel syndrome, de Quervain tenosynovitis and the intersection syndrome. Learning Objectives: 1. To outline the normal anatomical considerations regarding insertional pathology in elbow and wrist. 2. To understand the pathogenesis of overuse lesions in terms of a biomechanical approach. 3. To learn the MR imaging findings and the role of other imaging modalities.  Rheumatoid arthritis and related disorders: Imaging and scoring drug effects (Introduction) K. Bohndorf; Augsburg/DE (radiol-klin.augsburg@gmx.de) Radiological methods play a key role in the evaluation of the effectiveness of anti-inflammatory therapy for rheumatoid arthritis and related disorders. This holds true for daily routine as well as for experimental research. The effectiveness of basic medical therapy is evaluated today mainly by the presence or absence of disease progression in radiographs. Several scoring systems have been developed for the small joints of hands and feet. Sonography has been found useful for documenting the first stages of the "inflammatory cascade" of rheumatic diseases (hyperemia, synovitis). In cases of negative or equivocal radiographs ultrasound has been shown to be capable of reducing the time until the initiation of proper treatment. Colour coded Doppler sonography should be a routine part of the investigation, some institutions use contrast media in combination with transducers with a low mechanical index. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has important applications in rheumatoid arthritis and related disorders. Synovial membrane inflammation and hypertrophy are detected after contrast enhancement and also by the use of dynamic MR imaging techniques, which provide a non-invasive method to accurately measure the inflammatory process. This information can be analysed and collated using MR imaging scoring systems and ultimately may be used to improve diagnostic accuracy, predict prognosis and monitor therapy in these patients. In this "State-of-the-Art Symposium" the strengths and potential weaknesses of all radiological methods in this context will be outlined and indications for their role in daily clinical practice will be presented. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the importance and value of scoring systems in the diagnosis of follow-up of rheumatological disorders. 2. To review and discuss the different imaging modalities which are available to date. 3. To become involved in the development and validation of imaging based scoring systems. Radiography: What is still valuable? A. Cotten; Lille/FR (acotten@chru-lille.fr) Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by a chronic inflammation of the joints, which leads to the destruction of articular cartilage and bone. The degree of joint damage assessed by radiographic imaging represents a key outcome in RA. It is considered as an important factor in judging the course of the disease and efficacy of antirheumatic drugs. The course of radiographic damage is mostly determined on radiographs of hands and feet. Many different scoring methods are used. Some methods are mainly qualitative and others are more quantitative. Some scoring systems may be more sensitive to change early in the disease, whereas others may become more sensitive to change late in the disease in patients with erosions. Finally, the choice of scoring method may depend on the time and staff available, and the required degree of reliability and sensitivity to change. This paper will discuss these different points. Learning Objectives: 1. To provide an overview of the current available scoring systems. 2. To discuss the pros and cons of the different scoring systems with special emphasis on practicability. 3. To understand the relationship between imaging and the rheumatoid disease process. 4. To discuss the value and current indications of plain radiography in the work up of rheumatoid arthritis. Ultrasound: Standards and new applications F. Kainberger, C. Weidekamm; Vienna/AT (franz.kainberger@billrothhaus.at) Ultrasound is especially useful for documenting the first stages of the "inflammatory cascade" of rheumatic diseases, i.e. hyperaemia and synovial inflammation. It has been defined as a specialised imaging investigation for the primary diagnosis of rheumatic diseases, if the results of clinical investigation and/or conventional radiography are equivocal. Furthermore, US offers promising options for treatment monitoring. It is generally accepted that both hands should be investigated by using high-resolution equipment with a Doppler mode. Other joints, especially of the ankle and foot, should be included if necessary. Some institutions use contrast media in combination with transducers with a low mechanical index. For image interpretation, the spread of disease remains an important hallmark. Within an afflicted joint, some distinct factors influence the anatomical distribution of inflammation that may be assessed with US: Thickening of the synovium at preformed recesses, highly vascularised tissue, capsulo-ligamentous insufficiency, para-articular bursitis or tendovaginitis (flexor carpi ulnaris tendon, Baker's cyst). Characteristic US findings may be extraarticular (tendovaginitis, bursitis or soft tissue edema) or intraarticular (effusions or erosions). Quantification mainly relies on the analysis of Doppler signals on a four-grade scale: 0 -no signal, 1single vessel signals, 2 -confluent vessel signals, 3 -more than 50% of synovium covered by vessel signals. In conclusion, valuable information may be added to the results of clinical investigation and conventional radiography. The use of US may reduce the time interval from the first onset of symptoms until the initiation of proper treatment. Learning Objectives: 1. To review the different techniques of sonographic imaging including power Doppler US and contrast media application. 2. To discuss the current quantification systems. 3. To define indications for ultrasound of arthritis with respect to conventional radiography, magnetic resonance imaging and nuclear medicine studies. MR imaging and scoring drug effects P.J. O'Connor; Leeds/UK (philip.o'connor@leedsth.nhs.uk) The development of imaging based outcome measures is of increasing interest in the field of inflammatory arthritis. Clinical trials of highly effective, though expensive, biological anti-inflammatory therapies have resulted in keen interest in the quantification of the inflammatory and damage components of these arthropathies. Following a standardised development is advised when assessing a new scoring system. This is based on recommendations from OMERACT, an expert body closely involved with assessment of arthritis outcome measures for clinical trials. This process involves the determination of truth, discrimination and feasibility. Truth is based around validation with criterion validity, construct validity and face validity. Discrimination includes reliability with intra & inter observer variation, interscan variation and sensitivity to change important factors. Feasibility relates to the potential for the imaging modality to be used in a clinical setting. This lecture will describe this process in the context of ongoing research in rheumatoid arthritis and seronegative spondylo-arthropathy, defining the terms used in the OMERACT process. Imaging tests can play a pivotal role in screening. In the past decades, only mammography has been considered to be a valuable radiological screening test in the European community. Few subjects in the current areas of radiology have matched the intensity of controversy generated by the use of CT and MR scanning for screening asymptomatic presumably healthy people. The purpose of medical screening programs is to lower morbidity or mortality in the population at reasonable costs. Only those diseases are screened to advantage for which proper treatment is available if applied at a sufficiently early stage of disease. Furthermore, the target disease must be sufficiently prevalent. The latter can be enhanced if the screened population can be selected based on known disease risk factors. This session will emphasize how appropriately designed controlled clinical trials can provide information on benefits, harms, and costs of screening programs. Then three main topics will be put in perspectives. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn why true benefits, harms, and costs of screening for cancer can only be determined from appropriately designed controlled clinical trials. 2. To discuss on assessment of screening programmes for lung cancer using a low dose MDCT. 3. To put in perspective screening CT colonography for colonic polyps and cancer, and screening whole body MR imaging for cardiovascular and oncologic diseases. Principles of screening M.G.M. Hunink; Rotterdam/NL (m.hunink@erasmusmc.nl) Screening for disease is frequently advocated. Diagnosing a disease at an early stage has enormous intuitive appeal. The decision to screen, however, depends on a number of prerequisites: 1) the disease should be common and have substantial morbidity and/or mortality; 2) the screening test considered should be acceptable, feasible, and accurate for the detection of subclinical disease; 3) curative potential must exist primarily at early disease stages; 4) early detection must result in improved patient outcomes; 5) there must be sufficient resources for screening, diagnosis, and therapy; and 6) when screening a (selected) population there must be a favorable trade-off between risks, benefits, and costs. The mean gain in life expectancy and increase in quality of life with screening is generally small. The majority of the screened population will experience no benefit, whereas only a very small proportion will experience a large benefit. Reported gains in survival may be due to lead-time bias, overdiagnosis/pseudodisease, length bias, and pseudo-stage shift. At the same time, the potential harm of screening through false positive results affects a large proportion of the screened population and can lead to an enormous use of medical resources. Whereas randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are absolutely crucial in defining the benefits of screening, a preliminary estimate of the costs and benefits that can be expected with screening can be derived with simulation (decision) models. Models are also very useful adjuncts to RCTs in extrapolating short-term results to long-term outcomes and in estimating the associated costs. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand that although screening for cancer has enormous intuitive appeal, the decision to screen depends on a number of prerequisites related to the trade-off between benefits, harms, and costs. 2. To learn about the prerequisites of a diagnostic test that will be used for screening. 3. To discuss the role of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and computer simulation models to assess the benefits, harms, costs, and cost-effectiveness of screening. Screening for lung cancer using low dose MDCT D.R. Aberle; Los Angeles, CA/US (daberle@mednet.ucla.edu) The National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) is the largest lung cancer specific screening trial ever conducted in the United States. Sponsored by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), it joins two entities: the Lung Screening Study through the Division of Cancer Prevention, and the American College of Radiology Imaging Network (ACRIN) through the Cancer Imaging Program, Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis. The study is a randomized, controlled multicenter trial comparing low-dose spiral CT to chest X-ray (CXR) to determine which screening test will result in fewer lung cancer deaths in a high risk cohort. The primary endpoint is lung cancer-specific mortality, for which the trial has 90% power to detect a 20% difference in mortality between the two arms. Additional joint endpoints include: all-cause mortality, stage distribution at diagnosis, screening test performance, and medical resource utilization for a positive screening result. The ACRIN NLST has independent endpoints that include: overall medical resource utilization and a formal cost-effectiveness analysis, screening-related quality of life, effects of screening on smoking behaviors/beliefs, and the creation of a specimen bank for biomolecular research. Participants are healthy individuals 55 to 74 years of age with a heavy current or former cigarette smoking history. The trial launched in September of 2002; accrual finished ahead of schedule in April of 2004 with 53,476 individuals enrolled. Subjects have received three annual screens and will be observed for medical outcomes up to 2009. The baseline characteristics of the subjects and available data will be presented, along with trial mileposts moving forward. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the experimental design of the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST). 2. To review primary and secondary aims of the NLST and their relationships to broader concerns in lung cancer detection. 3. To learn the available data from the NLST. Screening for colorectal cancer and adenomas using CT colonography S. Halligan; London/UK Colorectal cancer is an ideal disease to screen for: it is common; there is a considerable lag between the pre-malignant adenomatous polyp and subsequent cancer; cancer can be prevented by polypectomy; and effective treatment is available for established cancer if detected early. Unfortunately, 75% of patients who develop cancer have no identifiable risk-factors so effective screening must be by mass-population. There are two possible screening targets -established cancer and/or adenomatous polyps. Faecal occult blood, for example, effectively detects only cancer -there is no opportunity for cancer prevention. In contrast, the potential of CT colonography is based on sensitivity for both cancer and polyps: A recent meta-analysis found sensitivities of 0.96 and 0.93 (for polyps 1 cm or more) respectively. It is also very specific (0.97) on a per-patient basis, an important attribute for a screening test that requires subsequent investigation for treatment (i.e. endoscopy). Other test characteristics are also very promising -it is both safe and appealing to patients, hopefully increasing compliance. Intriguingly, it also offers the possibility to examine other intra-abdominal organs but whether this is beneficial or not in asymptomatic patients is the subject of considerable debate, and models populated by trial data will be required to answer this with certainty. The main obstacle in the way of CT colonography in a screening context is wide inter-observer variability, which is not surprising given that it is a relatively new test. The effect of accredited training programmes and computerassisted-detection (CAD) on this will need further research. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the current performance of CT colonography for the detection of colorectal cancers and adenomas. 2. To discuss the possible reasons underlying divergent results from different trials. 3. To discuss the potential role of CT colonography in a national screening programme explored. Screening with whole body MRI S.O. Schönberg; Munich/DE (Stefan.Schoenberg@med.uni-muenchen.de) Whole-body magnetic resonance imaging (wb-MRI) does not necessarily require imaging of the entire patient from head to toe, but implies comprehensive morphologic and functional assessment of disease beyond one single field-of-view. In order to address all diagnostic aims for wb-MRI, so far either extremely long scan times or substantial compromises in temporal and spatial resolution have been required. With the advent of parallel acquisition techniques (PAT) and multichannel wb-MRI systems with 32 or more independent receiver channels those limitations have been largely overcome. Dedicated organ-based exams can now be reduced to a few breath holds. The introduction of 3 Tesla wb-MRI systems has further advanced these possibilities. Clinical indications of wb-MRI include the staging of multiple myeloma, tumors without 18 F-FDG-uptake and the assessment of systemic inflammatory musculoskeletal disease. Several studies have shown the superior accuracy of wb-MRI compared with bone scintigraphy for the assessment of skeletal metastases, recent studies may even demonstrate equal accuracy in comparison with PET-CT. Arising applications are the specific imaging of diseases such as diabetes, bronchial carcinoma or secondary pulmonary hypertension. The role of wb-MRI for preventive imaging of cardiovascular and oncologic diseases remains to be determined in prospective controlled clinical trials. Initial data suggest that cardiovascular screening with wb-MRI has a high accuracy for assessment of systemic atherosclerotic vascular disease and could replace a more time-intensive multi-step multi-modality diagnostic algorithm. Due to the absence of radiation this may be a valuable imaging alternative for individuals with a high predisposition for vascular disease such long-standing diabetes. This presentation will review the radiological features seen in patients after lung transplantation. Radiological manifestations of the first postoperative phase, including surgical and non-surgical complications, will be presented. An analytical approach to acute and chronic rejection will be proposed. The presentation will also discuss radiological features of infections and neoplasms seen after lung transplantation. The role of imaging in the long-term follow-up of lung transplant recipients will be discussed, and a radiological algorithm for the early recognition of chronic rejection as manifested by the "bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome" will be proposed. Learning Objectives: 1. To illustrate the spectrum of imaging findings after lung transplantation. Over the past 10 years, considerable experience has been accrued using both diffusion MR imaging and perfusion MR imaging, by means of contrast agents, to measure cerebral hemodynamics and other cerebral diseases. Diffusion and perfusion MR imaging can be performed on nearly all up-to-date clinical scanners. Imaging technology is at a stage where, in addition to morphological information, the concomitant acquisition of functional and physiological information is possible. The most common clinical application of both techniques is within the field of stroke imaging where diffusion MR imaging can be considered a "must do" and perfusion MR imaging is added to solve further questions. However, imaging of neoplasia, inflammation, trauma and infection have gained considerable interest as well. Sunda Sunda Sunda Sunday y y y y A 81 B C D E F G Patients presenting with the possibility of brain ischemia are routinely imaged with diffusion MR imaging and "lesions" are also further differentiated by means of ADC maps. The combination of diffusion MR imaging and perfusion MR imaging is applied when tissue at risk needs to be detected. Unfortunately, meantransit-time and other timing maps do not appear to adequately distinguish between levels of hemodynamic compromise. Perfusion techniques appear not to be able to distinguish between acute hemodynamic compromise and chronic hemodynamic compromise. Fortunately, DWI can easily make this distinction. More recently, DWI has gained interest in imaging trauma patients. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn about the most common clinical applications of diffusion imaging and perfusion imaging in neuro MR imaging. 2. To understand the rationale of adding diffusion imaging and perfusion imaging to morphological MR imaging. 3. To value diffusion imaging and perfusion imaging in the scenario of a comprehensive neuro MR imaging examination. A-269 C. Diffusion tensor imaging and fibre tracking D. Prayer, C. Nasel; Vienna/AT (daniela.prayer@meduniwien.ac.at) Diffusion-tensor-imaging (DTI) provides non-invasive information about organization of brain tissue on a microscopic level. Tissue organization, as measured by DTI, is characterized by anisotropy, magnitude-and direction of diffusion of water molecules. Qualitative and quantitative evaluation of these parameters give evidence about membrane permeability, maturational state of axons, axonal thickness, integrity, and connectivity. In addition, compartmentalization (with respect to intra-or extracellular space) of water can be determined, and hindrance to water motility can be identified. The diffusion tensor is an ellipsoid, the parameters of which reflect the local properties of the water molecules as mentioned above; the eigenvalues correspond to the amount of diffusivity in each direction, while the eigenvectors indicate the directions. The eigenvector with the largest eigenvalue defines the principal direction of a structure. This information may be color-coded, and allows construction of three-dimensional maps of fibres. Thus the course and thickness of white-matter tracts may be visualized. DTI has been shown to contribute information regarding maturational changes of white-matter, connectivity of malformations of cortical development, growth patterns of brain tumors, demyelination and remyelination processes in multiple sclerosis, compartmentalization of acute edema, Wallerian degeneration in chronic vascular disease, diffuse axonal injury in post-traumatic states, connectivity of epileptogenic foci and fibre anomalies in psychiatric diseases. To determine the feasibility and safety of ultrasound (US)-guided percutaneous radiofrequency ablation (RFA) in the local treatment of invasive breast carcinomas 2 cm or less in diameter, we undertook a pilot study on 21 malignant lesions in 20 patients immediately before their scheduled lumpectomy or mastectomy. A conventional RFA generator and a 15-gauge multi-array needle-electrode were used. The RFA device was placed in the lesion and its prongs deployed under real-time US guidance. A temperature of approximately 95° C was maintained for 15 minutes at the tips of the prongs. Pathologic examination of the resected specimen included nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-diaphorase stain, a vital stain specifically designed to confirm cell death. The outcome of the procedure was ablation of the tumor with an adequate margin, as confirmed by the absence of viable tumor in the specimen. In all cases, complete ablation of the target lesion visualized on sonography was achieved. One patient, however, who had received preoperative chemotherapy for a T2 tumor, still had a small residual tumor detectable both mammographically and sonographically after chemotherapy and her target lesion was ablated, but residual occult (mammographically and sonographically invisible) invasive carcinoma was found on pathologic examination. No adverse effects of the procedure occurred. US-guided percutaneous ablation of small invasive breast carcinomas is feasible with commercially available RFA devices and is safe. However, significant operator dependence and skill requirements, combined with the current inability to verify the margins of the ablated lesion, are obstacles preventing this technique from being used as an alternative to the current standard treatment for small breast carcinoma (lumpectomy and radiotherapy), except in rare selected cases. Indications for adrenal ablation include isolated, limited malignant disease and hormone secreting tumours. Although adrenal metastases are often a marker for widespread disease they can be isolated and merit treatment e.g. in non-small cell lung or colorectal cancer. Percutaneous image guided ablation is an attractive alternative to surgery in patients with Cushings as these patients are usually obese and heal poorly. The percutaneous approach to the adrenal is the same as biopsy. Ablation of normally functioning adrenal tissue can result in severe hypertension secondary to release of vasopressors. Arterial monitoring of blood pressure and the ready availability of IV vasodilators are required. If hypertension occurs, interruption of the ablation is usually associated with a return to normal. Laser, radiofrequency, cryotherapy and photodynamic therapy have all been used for prostatic ablation. TRUS and fluoroscopy were the traditional guidance methods but MR imaging allows imaging of the surrounding structures, of the needle/ electrode trajectory and of the treatment effect. In thermal techniques cooling/ warming of the urethra may be required. Assessment of treatment efficacy is best achieved with contrast enhanced high field MR imaging. Ablation of isolated pelvic recurrence from colorectal cancer is useful in patients who still have active disease despite optimal radiotherapy. Similarly ablation of isolated nodal disease, either pelvic or para-aortic, is technically feasible. It is necessary to avoid or displace vulnerable structures. Bowel loops can usually be displaced. Care must be taken to avoid the sciatic nerve or lumbosacral plexus. Despite prophylactic anticoagulation acute massive pulmonary embolism (PE) is still a common and often life-threatening entity. Survival of patients with right ventricular dysfunction depends on rapid recanalisation of the pulmonary arterial occlusion. Percutaneous catheter treatment represents a therapeutic option for these patients. Catheter devices include standard diagnostic catheters, balloon catheters, dedicated suction catheters (Greenfield vacuum cup catheter), rotating pigtail catheter, hydrodynamic thrombectomy catheter, and high-speed rotating tip catheters. The principles employed are extraction and/or fragmentation of the embolic material. Fragmentation of central emboli and dislocation of the fragments to the periphery result in a relative gain of non-obstructed cross-sectional area. The increased total surface area of the fragments accelerates the efficacy of an accompanying thrombolysis or of spontaneous intrinsic lytic activity. In the workshop pulmonary placement and navigation of the pigtail rotation catheter will be demonstrated as well as the mechanical action for recanalisation. The indications, safety, efficacy, the influence on hemodynamic parameters, possible complications, and pitfalls will be discussed. Percutaneous inferior vena cava (IVC) filter implantation represents a mechanical prophylaxis of PE. Absolute indications are recurrent PE despite sufficient anticoagulation and occurrence of PE in patients with contraindicated anticoagulation. The most common IVC filters will be presented. Implantation can be performed via femoral or jugular access. Temporary and facultative temporary filters can be removed within a certain duration after placement. Filter complications include misplacement, IVC thrombosis, perforation, migration, filter breakage, and recurrent PE. Therefore, diligent checking of the indication for IVC filter implantation is advisable.  Patients work flow and modalities work load C. Capotondi; Rome/IT (carlo.capotondi@fastwebnet.it) The development of computed and informatic technology systems for the radiological management of departments and of whole hospital structures, allows a careful planning and monitoring of the patients workflow, with possibility to recognize problems in the varied phases of the trial and to apply a promty corrective to the project. All this is applicable to the ordinary radiological activity while in emergency, where the planning is not possible due to the difficult management of the request, the tools of control of the work flow just allows to identify the necessity of further engagement of the human resources. The new modalities of diagnostic procedure and the rapid development of those already existing update the features of the modalities work load. If the innovation allows a wide reduction of the time consuming for each diagnostic procedure with an improved productivity supplied to the radiologist, it needs an increase of the human resources and sometimes an internal reorganization to make possible the same quality standard for reporting. This situation is well emphasized in case of the formal procedure MDCT in which, at present, 16 detectors technology produces images dataset of 350 as mean number; such volume of images obligates to carry out evaluations in softcopy reporting using advanced WS with advanced software for multidimensional analysis. Quality of service and customer satisfaction are closely related and quality can be defined as meeting or exceeding customer requirements. There are several approaches to maintaining and improving quality in radiology. Traditional quality assurance (QA) programs usually focus on establishing a certain minimal quality level through defined standards, usually set by an external regulatory body. In contrast to this, continuous quality improvement (CQI) is an ongoing process based on continuous collection and improvement of performance data relevant to the various customers. Examples of important performance indicators in radiology are incidence of adverse events, patient wait time, report turnaround time, appointment availability and referring physician satisfaction. Radiology provides services both to customers internal to the organization (e.g. referring physicians from other clinical departments) as well as to external customers (e.g. patients) and the needs from these two groups may not always be aligned. A typical example for this is if emergency inpatient procedures lead to delays for outpatients. Processes in radiology have to be organized in such a way that these conflicts are kept to a minimum. It is important to realize that high quality of service and cost-efficient operation do not contradict each other. In many cases, the same measures which lead to improved quality of service will also result in a reduction of costs. In other cases, an increase in cost of operation in radiology may be compensated for by additional patient revenue or higher cost-efficiency in other areas of the institution. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn about the different aspects of quality control in radiology. To realize how quality standards can improve customer satisfaction. 3. To understand the dual role of radiology in servicing both patients and clinicians as customers. 4. To recognize the impact of customer satisfaction on the financial performance of a radiology department or practice. Filing and safety of data N.H. Strickland; London/UK (nstrickland@hhnt.nhs.uk) Filing and safety of data are integrally related and together constitute data security. Correct filing of digital data depends upon effective staff training and upon audit mechanisms, with housekeeping to check the database to detect and correct misfiled data. Archive security is multifactional, involving: archive redundancy, including disaster recovery and off-site storage; limitation of archive access, both physical and password protected; and robust audit trails to investigate any breech of archive security. At the level of the workstation simple measures to ensure data safety involve implementing appropriate log-out times, screen-savers, virus checkers and secure physical placement of workstations. Teleradiology and telemedicine over public networks necessitate added safety measures such as encrypting the data and avoiding local insecure data caches on personal computers. As digital systems become obsolete, data need to be migrated and refiled safely on the replacement system. This process of data migration must be anticipated in the original IT system contract. Many current systems do not allow selective anonymization or protection of specific patient data, even if desired for personal reasons in individual patients. Conclusion: Filing and safety of digital data involve complex multilevel issues within any information technology system, but in the medical workplace setting an acceptable practical compromise is often necessary. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the issues relating to filing and safety of data at the level of the archive. 2. To understand the issues relating to security at the workstation level. 3. To appreciate the added requirements when teleradiology/telemedicine is involved. 4. To be aware of the current technical and practical limitations in implementing digital data security. Operational effectiveness J.L. Bloem; Leiden/NL (j.l.bloem@lumc.nl) Operational effectiveness is the basis of a successful enterprise that has the ability to change, use its resources and adapt to the changing external environment. There are four levels of hierarchy in the development of an organisation: operational effectiveness, cost-effectiveness, commercial effectiveness, and strategic effectiveness. Although strategic effectiveness is the highest level, it also is the starting point of new development at the level of operational effectiveness because strategic orientation is the trigger to start the sequence again. When change has reached its goal at each level before moving on to the next level, the process of development will be swift, coherent and focused. If more than one level is activated at the same time, the process will take too much energy and will be divergent. Operational effectiveness means that the product lines (producing clinical output, research, education) of the enterprise run smoothly. At a minimal level this is operational integrity, and a top level this means that a department meets high international standards. The infrastructure of the department is a major determinator of operational effectiveness. Resources like human resources, technical platform, and budget determine the infrastructure. Infrastructure is also based on effective exchange and availability of information. Development and use of resources and informatics is therefore pivotal in improving operational effectiveness. Only if operational effectiveness is reached may the enterprise move to the higher levels of development. The introduction of multidetector row computed tomography (MDCT) scanners has altered the approach to imaging the paediatric thorax. This presentation focuses on the main principles of volumetric CT imaging, and applies generically to 16 slice detector CT scanners. The general principles however apply to all MDCT imaging and we describe the reconstruction techniques that apply for imaging the thorax and the paediatric low-dose protocols which we use in our institution giving examples of the most common clinical applications. In an environment where the rapid acquisition of CT data allow general hospitals to image children (whereas in the past children would have been referred to specialist centers for children to be sedated, when image acquisition was more prolonged), it is vital that the general radiologists have access to appropriate protocols for use in children. This is important in order to dramatically reduce the delivered radiation dose and ensure appropriate contrast bolus delivery and timing, so that examinations do not need to be repeated inappropriately. With MR imaging, we are so far not able to show the same precise pictures of the lung parenchyma as in CT. First the principle problems are discussed that occur with imaging of the lung parenchyma on MR imaging. Central bronchus lesions are detectable on MR imaging with the same reliability as in computer tomography. The visibility of intrapulmonary metastases depends on the size of the lesion. Peripheral metastases can be recognised from a size of 4 mm by using optimal investigation strategies. Interstitial processes show discrete findings: Fibrosis is better demonstrated on MR imaging since it shows on T2 and even on T1 images a higher signal due to its cellular component. Alveolar processes are very well visible on proton MR imaging due to the high liquid content, even in small findings. The possibilities of functional imaging by using proton MR imaging are demonstrated. Perfusion measures are the most common functional assessment in clinical use. With colour coded perfusion maps, perfusion defects are often very clearly visible. Even the spatial resolution is much higher than in conventional perfusion scintigraphy. Imaging of ventilation is still work in progress. Methods we used are oxygen enhanced imaging of the air space, volume estimation of the lung and imaging of trapped air by using expiration technique. A new possibility seems to be the estimation of the lung function diffusion by means of nebulized Gadubutrol. With a combination of morphological and functional imaging, MR imaging of the lung will find its place in paediatric radiology. Learning Objectives: 1. To point out the principle problems that will occur when you image the lung in MR imaging. This lecture will review the role of thoracic imaging in children with systemic disorders. Following a discussion of examination techniques, specific systemic conditions with thoracic manifestations will be presented. Their general features will be described prior to a review of their specific imaging characteristics. This re-view will emphasize both advanced imaging techniques and recent developments. Plain radiographs remain the most common thoracic imaging study. Computed radiography is replacing film radiography in many sites but its resolution remains lower. Computed tomography (CT) is the primary cross-sectional imaging modality used to evaluate all thoracic components due to its increased sensitivity and specificity compared to chest radiography. CT may be used either to better evaluate radiographic abnormalities or to assess the presence and extent of a suspected complication of a systemic disease. Low-dose techniques have been applied to both helical CT and high-resolution CT (HRCT). HRCT is the method of choice for the evaluation of diffuse parenchymal disease. Evaluation of the mediastinum and chest wall should be performed with helical CT. Parenchymal characteristics such as fibrosis or ground glass increased density cannot be seen using MR imaging. However, MR imaging is better in evaluating the chest wall or in demonstrating soft tissue inflammation and rib bone marrow changes compared to CT. Nuclear medicine can add functional information to the morphological information provided by CT and MR imaging. The systemic diseases in children includes the connective tissue diseases, immunodeficiency and immunodeficiency syndromes, chronic granulomatous disease, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, cystic fibrosis, phacomatoses such as tuberous sclerosis and neurofibromatosis, etc.  A. The role of the radiographer in a large epidemiology study: The AGES study (age/gene environment susceptibility study) S. Sigurdsson; Kopavogur/IS (sigurdur@hjarta.is) The AGES study includes extensive phenotyping of quantitative traits related to diseases common in old age including indicators of disease process, body composition and functional decline that are coupled with collection of DNA. Many different MR imaging and CT examinations contribute a major part of the AGES study where radiographers play an important and challenging role. The AGES study is a collaboration project between the National Institute of Aging in USA and the Icelandic Heart Association (IHA). The study goal is to examine 8000 elderly individuals to characterize diseases and conditions of importance in old age. Conclusion: Quantitative analysis methods for the MR imaging and CT data are robust and suitable for large population based studies like the AGES study. It is our experience so far that the skill mix environment in the radiology department has brought the radiographers into new and exciting dimensions of their profession. To be involved in all steps of the image process from acquisition to analysis has proved to be challenging, motivating and to give opportunities to combine work and education. Learning Objectives: 1. To discuss the various tasks carried out by radiographers in the study from image acquisitions to the analysis of the image data acquired with CT and MR imaging. 2. To learn about quantitative and semi-quantitative analysis techniques applied in the imaging part of the study with focus on the cardiovascular system, the muscular-skeletal system and the brain. 3. To discuss how the skill mix environment in the study has created research and post-graduate educational opportunities for radiographers. Purpose: To describe the installation and operation of a 3 T MR system in Sheffield, UK used for both research and clinical imaging and with reference to safety issues at higher field strengths. Some non neuro applications will also be discussed. Methods and Materials: A Philips Intera 3 T MR system was used for both clinical scanning and research studies. Volunteers were recruited initially for full optimisation of protocols and sequences, along with an ethics approved 1.5 T/ 3 T comparison study. Images from both will be presented along with clinical images and images from both neuro and non neuro research studies. Results: Advantages of 3 T MR are increased spatial resolution, better T2 and T2* contrast and increased flow effects. Disadvantages are decreased T1 contrast, increased susceptibility artefact and increased flow/movement artefact. Consequently, specific groups of patients are more suitable for scanning at 3 T e.g. those requiring MR angiography ,epilepsy imaging or EPI studies. Modern MR scanners approach the safety limits for patients for almost all relevant physical parameters of the MR scanner. These parameter can have specific physical effects: applied dynamic gradient fields -which may create peripheral nerve stimulation; acoustic noise produced by the gradients -which makes the use of ear protection essential; and the RF fields transmitted by the RF coilswhich may heat up the human body, make it essential to implement safety measures on the MR scanner. The static magnetic field (known to create instantaneous effects such as nausea or dizziness or metallic taste) may become a limiting factor for future scanners. The MR specific limits of these parameters for patients are described in the IEC 60601-2-33 international standard for safety of MR equipment. In 2004, new European legislation has been accepted which also limits these parameters for MR workers and thus has direct implications for the use of MR. In particular high field systems and interventional MR are hindered by this new legislation. This necessitates as a matter of urgency, more research to determine the safety levels, which should be added to the IEC standards for MR. In spite of these hazards MR scanners are still considered to be a most safe and patient friendly modality. In MR imaging safety issues affect everyday clinical practice. Every patient and visitor to the MR suite has to be screened for implants, tattoos, eyeliner, and clothing, i.e. anything which may move in the magnetic field or heat up and cause injury. It is important to note that MR imaging burns are the most reported incident type. Even the way the patient is set up within the bore of the magnet is an important safety issue, especially if there are monitoring devices involved. These issues will be reviewed in the talk. Another major cause of injury in MR is projectile hazards; ways in which to minimize the risk of this will be discussed in term of good practice within the MR suite. Currently higher and higher field strengths are being installed which in turn means that patients and staff are exposed to higher and higher noise levels; this presents noise protection issues which will be discussed. Another important concern is that of pregnancy and MR imaging. The current state of play regarding imaging of pregnant patients and pregnant staff working in MR imaging will be addressed. MR guidance of interventional procedures requires fast imaging sequences to speed up the procedure and even real-time imaging for guidance of vascular interventions. Interventional devices used have to be MR-safe as well as MRcompatible. Using passive methods for device visualization one has to be aware of the artifact behaviour of interventional instruments in order to correctly localize the instrument tip. The artifact behaviour can be quite dependent on the applied imaging sequence (gradient versus spin echo) and sequence parameters like echo time and phase encoding direction. Active methods can overcome these potential problems and allow not only for device visualization but also for slice tracking. Drawbacks of active methods are more sophisticated hard-and software requirements. Furthermore safety issues concerning heating of long conductive wires have to be taken into account in order not to jeopardize the patient or interventionalist. Initial approaches are using fiberoptic means to achieve MRsafe active instrument visualization. While passive device visualization is sufficient for interventions like biopsies, vascular interventions will greatly profit from the possibility of slice and tip tracking of active means especially in the region of small and tortuous vessels. Performing interventions in the MR environment requires special awareness of all personnel involved in the procedure including anesthesiology. Consequently, a dedicated team should be set up in order to avoid accidents from inexperienced handling of metallic patient support devices. Uterine artery embolization (UAE) is now well-established in many countries as a uterus-conserving alternative treatment for symptomatic fibroid disease. This is despite any level 1 evidence or randomised controlled studies. The indications and the comparison of UAE with alternative treatments will be discussed. Also how best to establish a fibroid embolization service. Although the technique of selective catheterisation of the uterine arteries has changed little since the earliest reports some refinements have occurred. Practical aspects of the procedure and methods of dealing with difficult catheterisations will be detailed. The management of these patients after discharge from hospital is very important and the combined roles of both the radiologist and the gynaecologist will be assessed. Complications and their management will discussed. Finally fertility is an important issue particularly in younger women. The evidence that fertility does not appear to be adversely affected following UAE will be reviewed. Uterine artery embolization has been applied successfully for the control of acute or delayed post-partum hemorrhage, post-surgical hemorrhage, hemorrhage from ectopic pregnancy, treatment of uterine arteriovenous malformations, and as prophylaxis prior to high risk surgery such as caesarean section in patients with placenta previa. The technique of embolization is similar regardless of the indication. The choice of embolization agent varies depending upon the indication and regional vascular anatomy, as in any other vascular bed. The author applies PVA particles for elective uterine artery embolization, and gelatin sponge in cases of acute hemorrhage when only a transient effect is required and the patient has concerns regarding future fertility. In the emergent setting, the care of the hemodynamic consequences of precipitous bleeding is the most important concern. This implies having a protocol for emergent uterine artery embolization devised with the obstetrical team ahead of time. After uterine artery embolization, the patients invariably develop post-embolization syndrome consisting of 3-5 days of significant pain and fever. Treatment is symptomatic. It is critical that radiologists be involved in post embolization care, as clinicians and most clinicians are not familiar with the consequences of embolization. Ovarian cancer is the most lethal among the gynecological malignancies with more than 2/3 of patients presenting at an advanced tumor stage. Tumor spreads most commonly directly and via peritoneal pathways in the pelvis and abdomen and is followed by lymphatic dissemination. Rarely, patients present with hematogenous metastases at the time of diagnosis. The prognosis of patients with ovarian cancer is directly related to the tumor stage and residual tumor burden after cytoreductive surgery. Exploratory laparotomy has been the cornerstone in the management of ovarian cancer, as it offers staging and tumor debulking. Understaging at initial laparotomy, however, is a problem in more than 30%, mainly due to unexpected peritoneal spread outside the pelvis and new surgery techniques. Recently, CT and MR imaging have been accepted as adjunct imaging modalities for preoperative treatment decisions. Based upon imaging findings complementary information may be rendered towards surgical planning and clinical management. It may alert the surgeon to tumor sites difficult to visualize intraoperatively, such as deposits in the upper abdomen and lymph nodes. It may also influence subspecialist cooperation or referral to an oncology center. Furthermore, it offers high efficacy in identifying resectable from non resectable disease. Identification of the latter may help to select patients with advanced ovarian cancer who may benefit from chemotherapy before debulking. Sports activities either professional or not are growing in importance into our day-life. This means a corresponding higher frequency of sport-related injuries, leading to muscles, tendons, ligaments and bone pathological involvement. Usually in these conditions an early and correct diagnosis is required to avoid subsequent joint instability and/or functional impairment. Many of the diagnostic techniques now available play an important role in sports-related diseases; however to choose the right diagnostic protocol it is always necessary to know how traumatic forces acted. The most frequently involved joints are those provided by the largest range of motion: shoulder, knee and ankle. As this field of diseases comprehend either acute and chronic traumas we will consider only the degenerative conditions caused by long-lasting microtraumas and overloads which may lead to stress fractures, synovial hyperplastic reactions, chondral and subchondral suffering, tendon's degeneration, impingement syndromes and entrapment neuropathies (typically involved structures narrowed into bony or ligaments channels). Plain film is usually the first examination to perform as it allows the best detection of bony alterations as consequence of altered loads, being able to clearly depict osteophytes, bone sclerosis and osteochondral fragments. However in many cases plain film may result completely negative as in stress fractures, impingement syndromes and ligament derangements. In these cases ultrasound, magnetic resonance and computed tomography allow a complete evaluation of all the remaining soft joint components. An appropriate US examination of the knee requires state-of-the-art equipment including a high-frequency (at least 7.5 MHz) linear transducer with available color/power-Doppler mode. Since side-by-side comparison during the examination can be misleading due to asymptomatic overuse lesions, knowledge of normal US anatomy is essential. Some remarks with regard to patient positioning will be made. Because of their high prevalence, patellar tendinosis and iliotibial band friction syndrome will be discussed in detail, followed by a shorter overview of overuse lesions of other tendons, bursae, Hoffa's fat pad, some meniscal lesions etc. Beside its wide availability and low cost, US is preferred for extra-articular pathology because of its high spatial resolution, the possibility to target the examination to the patient's painful area, allowing a dynamic examination. However, one should keep in mind that the correlation between clinical symptoms and US findings is not always good. The use of US in the evaluation of intra-articular overuse lesions is limited. Although several US experts report a good accuracy for meniscal lesions, for this type of pathology MR imaging is preferred. The most recent literature on US in overuse lesions of the knee deals with the subject of intratendinous neovascularisation in patellar tendinosis. Although certainly not the only cause of tendon pain, the presence of this neovascularisation of non-inflammatory origin seems to correlate better with symptoms than grayscale findings of tendinosis. US guided sclerosing injection of these vessels is a promising new therapeutic option. An acute impaction force on a bone results in a "contusion bone bruise pattern", corresponding to trabecular microfractures, marrow edema and/or hemorrhage. Standard radiography is usually negative, whereas on MR imaging, these contusions manifest as relatively huge ill-defined areas of decreased signal intensity on T1-weighted images. They are, however, most conspicuous on fat-saturated T2-weighted or STIR images. Focal bone bruise may result from direct trauma to the bone, but most often a pattern of bone marrow changes on adjacent bones occurs due to impaction of one bone on another. Systematic analysis of this pattern and location of these "kissing contusions", together with the associated soft tissue changes can reveal the specific mechanism of injury. Distraction injuries are usually due to valgus, varus or rotational stress on a joint, resulting in a small avulsion fracture related to a tendinous, ligamentous or capsular attachment on the bone. Because the cortical bone is involved rather than the trabecular bone, the resulting "avulsion bone bruise pattern" is much less extensive than in impaction injuries. The avulsed bone fragment may be very difficult to detect on MR imaging and is usually better demonstrated on conventional radiographs (or CT). 1. MR imaging is the most sensitive imaging modality to detect bone marrow lesions in sports injuries. The most useful sequences are fluid sensitive sequences. 2. A systematic analysis of the pattern of bone marrow changes and associated soft tissue lesions reveals the underlying trauma mechanism. 3. Residual indications for conventional radiography (and/or CT) PET is used to detect metabolic alterations. To combine PET with imaging modalities (i.e. CT), offers additional anatomic information, thus increasing the accuracy of diagnosis. The major clinical role of PET/CT is the evaluation of metastatic disease. It's ability to monitor treatment response may be used to follow neoadjuvant treatment and the therapy of metastatic disease. At present integrated SPECT/CT has been introduced for the evaluation of axillary microscopic metastasis using sentinel lymph node scintigraphy. Molecular imaging offers new insight in the physiological and biochemical processes at the cellular and molecular level. Optical imaging techniques, particularly in the near infrared (NIR) range, offer high signal to noise ratios and efficient photon penetration to enable breast tissue characterisation (e. g. perfusion, angiogenesis) non-invasively. Recent developments include targeting of cancer-related proteins, molecules relevant for the diagnosis and prognosis of breast cancer (e.g. EGF receptor and apoptosis-targeting probes). "Smart" probes can sensitively detect protease expression of primary tumours and help to define nodal involvement (SLN) with the use of molecular MR contrast agents. Contrast digital mammography using different technical approaches, i.e. temporal substraction, dual energy and computed tomography may overcome the limitations of conventional mammography due to summation phenomena, problems to recognize small, low-contrast masses within dense tissue or subtle structural distortions. The possibility to visualize neoangiogenesis mammographically is challenging. Results of first clinical studies and future developments will be presented. A limitation of PET imaging is the poor anatomic information. In the last 3 years, integrated PET/CT imaging has been clinically introduced. Integrated anatomic-molecular imaging has several advantages. The addition of PET provides a rapid way of acquiring attenuation correction data and the availability of perfectly matched anatomic data, increases the accuracy of diagnosis. The restricted sensitivity of FDG PET for small lesions in breast cancer, particularly in invasive lobular carcinoma is well recognized This limits the role of PET in evaluation the primary breast lesion. The major clinical role of PET/CT today is in the evaluation of metastatic disease. The ability of PET/CT to monitor treatment response allows individualization of therapy. FDG uptake decreases rapidly with effective chemotherapy, at a rate faster than the decline in tumor size. A lack of decline in FDG uptake with treatment suggests lack of efficacy of treatment. At present integrated SPECT/CT has been introduced for evaluation of axillary microscopic metastases using sentinel lymph node scintigraphy. Our data suggest that combined SPECT/CT imaging is a promising method for minimal invasive sentinel node biopsy, particularly for retrosternal nodes.  New developments in molecular imaging and breast cancer C. Bremer; Münster/DE (bremerc@uni-muenster.de) Optical imaging techniques, particularly in the near infrared (NIR) range, offer high signal to noise ratios and efficient photon penetration in breast tissue. Intrinsic absorbers such as hemoglobin, fat and water can be exploited to interrogate breast tissue characteristics (e.g. perfusion, angiogenesis) non-invasively. More recently the definition of breast cancer related proteins has prompted the development of target specific fluorochromes for cancer detection. Optical tracers have been explored experimentally for non invasive detection of molecules relevant for the diagnosis and prognosis of breast cancer (e.g. EGF receptor). Moreover, treatment response to chemotherapy can potentially be monitored by apoptosis -targeting probes. Autoquenched 'smart' probes can sensitively detect protease expression of primary tumors and help to define nodal involvement in a 'sentinel' lymph node model. Due to an inherently lower sensitivity of MR imaging to depict molecular structures efficient signal amplification strategies are essential for molecular MR contrast agents. Various enzyme systems (e.g. Tyrosinase, β-galactosidase, peroxidase) or internalizing cell receptors have been exploited for the detection protein expression by MR imaging. Fluorine imaging has been pursued for molecular MR imaging in order to decrease the background signal for label detection. 'Magnetic particle imaging' was recently described as another promising imaging tool for the detection of (target specific) superparamagnetic contrast agents. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the concept of optical contrasting strategies by targeted and "smart" probes. 2. To learn about the progress in 3D imaging modalities for clinical optical imaging. 3 . To learn about new developments in target-specific MR contrast agents. 4. To understand the strengths and limitations of the imaging methods discussed. Contrast digital mammography R.A. Jong; Toronto, ON/CA (roberta.jong@sw.ca) Mammography is the only breast imaging modality shown in randomised controlled trials to contribute to a decrease in breast cancer mortality but is limited in breasts with large amounts of dense fibroglandular tissue. The abnormal vascularity induced by cancers allows their detection using contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (CE MR imaging). Similarly iodinated contrast medium used with digital mammography can show breast cancers even within dense fibroglandular tissue. Two techniques have been reported. One uses temporal subtraction with imaging of the breast in the craniocaudal projection. Digital images are taken before and after the injection of contrast medium. Registration and logarithmic subtraction are performed with resulting images showing the lesions with increased iodine content. Kinetic curves are created by selecting a region of interest whose signal intensity is tracked over time. Combining this with tomosynthesis may provide further information. Another technique uses dual energy. Images are taken using energies above and below the k edge of iodine, before and after the injection of contrast medium. This has the advantage of having no breast compression during the injection and the use of the mediolateral oblique position which demonstrates more breast tissue. Both temporal subtraction and dual energy techniques have been successful in detecting breast cancers. They may find a similar role to CE MR imaging in the diagnosis of breast cancer but at a lesser cost. The enormous technological advances of CT and MR imaging have had an exceptional impact on the study of the urinary tract. Urography with multislice CT and MR imaging are gradually becoming the mainstay of imaging the urinary tract in many centres in the developed world. CT urography (CTU) refers to imaging the urinary tract with multislice CT following intravenous injection of water soluble iodinated contrast medium. Dynamic multiphase scans and multiplanar images of the urinary tract of almost isotropic resolution can be provided by this technique. However, no agreement has yet been reached on the optimal approach to perform CTU. The dose of the contrast medium, the number of phases that should be obtained after contrast injection, the induction of diuresis whether with intravenous saline or a small dose of diuretics, and the use of compression are some of the issues which remain contentious. There is also no universal agreement on the best approach to review the large number of images that are produced per examination, and which image reconstructions should be performed routinely. In this session different approaches to CTU will be presented highlighting the advantages and disadvantages of each technique. Clinical applications and concern about radiation dose will also be discussed. MR urography (MRU), either T2 MRU or excretory MRU are important techniques for imaging the urinary tract, particularly when there is contraindication for the use of ionising radi-ation or injection of iodinated contrast media. How to perform these examinations, clinical indications, advantages and limitations will be presented. The comprehensive approach to CT urography (CTU) images the urinary tract in each of three renal enhancement phases: Unenhanced, nephrographic, and excretory. This approach has been shown to detect malignant and benign abnormalities with sensitivities that are likely to exceed those of excretory urography (EU) and even retrograde pyelography. Appropriate patient selection for comprehensive CTU is important, since this technique exposes patients to more radiation exposure than EU or more limited CTU techniques. Fortunately, the majority of patients with suspected urinary tract neoplasms are elderly and the adverse effects of incremental radiation on this patient population are limited. Also, use of a separate nephrographic phase series does not increase patient radiation burden dramatically. Most CTU radiation exposure occurs during excretory phase acquisition (which is utilized with all CTU approaches). While standard threedimensional reconstructions (utilizing thick slabs or the entire data set) are aesthetically pleasing, they are insensitive in detecting urinary tract neoplasms. However, preliminary work indicates that coronal plane reconstructions utilizing image thicknesses of ≤ 2 mm are equally sensitive to axial images. These coronal reformatted images are preferred to axial images because they are fewer in number and they also take significantly less time to review. Awareness of pitfalls in CTU interpretation is important. False positive diagnoses most commonly result from ureteral kinks, prominent renal pyramids, or from volume averaging, all of which can simulate urothelial lesions. False negative diagnoses are more likely in unopacified or poorly distended portions of the renal collecting systems and ureters. Limited CTU is an effective replacement of intravenous urography for routine assessment of the urinary tract. Patients are scanned (4X2.5 mm) in the supine position (the upper abdomen pre contrast injection, and the whole abdomen 5 minutes after 50 ml of 300 mgI/ml non ionic contrast medium and 10 mg of frusemide). The patients are turned several times prior to the post contrast scanning. Contiguous axial images (5 mm slice thickness) of the abdomen and pelvis, contiguous thin coronal (3 mm slice thickness) and thick coronal (80 mm slice thickness) images of the kidneys and ureters using maximum intensity projection (MIP) are produced on hard copies. On average 6 to 8 films [30 x 40 cm, 20 frames/film] are produced per examination. Our experience so far suggests that limited CTU is adequate for assessment of patients with urinary symptoms including haematuria with good visualisation of kidneys, pelvicalyceal system, ureters and urinary bladder. The radiation dose, number of images, cost and time required for the examination is significantly less in comparison to multiphase CTU. The technique can be modified in selected cases if more information is required particularly in assessment of undetermined renal masses. The main limitations of the technique include suboptimal nephrogram and difficulty in assessing unexpected calcification of the ureters and urinary bladder. The principle indication for MSCT urography is the detection of urothelial tumours, which present most commonly with haematuria or more rarely with unexplained hydronephrosis. Secondary indications include detection and evaluation of a renal mass, investigation of loin pain, persistent urinary tract infection, pelvic tumour staging and 3D planning for percutaneous procedures. Absolute contra-indications include known contrast allergy and pregnancy. Relative contra-indications are presented in terms of risk versus benefit. For example the justification of the use of MSCT urography in the case of a 28-yr female presenting with microscopic haematuria and no other risk factors for urothelial cancer compared with a 78-yr male with macroscopic haematuria who has been a life-long smoker. Advantages and disadvantages of MSCT urography with respect to other diagnostic imaging tests depend on the sensitivity and specificity of the imaging tests for detection of upper tract urothelial tumours. The emerging evidence that MSCT urography compares favourably with other imaging modalities for the detection of urothelial cancer will be carefully examined. Economic, radiological and political reasons are limiting the use of MSCT urography in our institutions. A model incorporating all the above factors will be presented to illustrate how the use of MSCT urography may fit into established pathways of patient investigation. During the past decade, MR urography has emerged as a potential clinical alternative to conventional intravenous urography (IVU) and CT urography (CTU). The concept of MR urography (MRU) intends to obtain typical urographic views without resorting to radiation exposure. Moreover, MRU provides different approaches for imaging the upper urinary tract in a comprehensive way neither achievable with IVU nor CTU. One MR urographic strategy applies heavily T2weighted turbo spin-echo sequences for obtaining unenhanced static-fluid images of the urinary tract independent of the renal function. The second MR urographic strategy is based on the acquisition of fast T1-weighted gradient-echo sequences after renal excretion of an intravenously injected gadolinium chelate and is referred to as excretory MRU. A basic knowledge of the diverse examination techniques makes it easy to put MRU into operation. To date, MRU offers several firstchoice applications in adults and children and its indication should not be confined to patients who do not tolerate iodinated contrast agents. MRU will probably not compete with CT in the diagnosis of urolithiasis, but MRU should always be considered as alternative to IVU and CTU for imaging congenital anomalies, disorders affecting transplant and postoperative urinary tracts, intrinsic and extrinsic tumor diseases. MRU especially features the option to be combined with other MR examination techniques in a single session such as standard abdominal MR imaging, MR angiography or MR nephrography. In the near future, this integrative approach of MR imaging in modern uroradiology may obviate the need for multiple separate, costly, and time-consuming diagnostic procedures. In the past few years liver transplantation has become a definite approach to cure adult and pediatric patients with several diffuse liver diseases and even with primary liver neoplasms. Imaging plays a key role in the pre-operative evaluation of: 1. patients with diffuse and focal liver disease, possible candidates for liver transplantation; 2. possible living liver donors. In patients with diffuse liver disease the possible presence of focal lesions must be evaluated; in presence of focal lesions, their identification, the correct assessment of their number and their characterization is absolutely crucial. The identification and especially the characterization of focal lesions can become extremely complicated in these patients, in whom the liver is involved by a diffuse disease; the integration of different modalities allows in most of the cases, to reach a preoperative diagnosis. In this setting the role of US, CT and MR imaging will be evaluated. As a consequence of the limited number of available organs, worldwide it is becoming everyday more diffuse the use of liver transplantation from living donors. In this setting, apart from the evaluation of recipient, it is crucial to correctly assess the donor, in order to avoid all possible complications related to anatomic variants and presence of diffuse or focal diseases. It is now possible to be extremely precise in the definition of the correct organ volume and define preoperatively which type of resection will be made during surgery. The role of all imaging modalities will be evaluated and their role will be defined. Liver transplantation is the accepted treatment of patients with irreversible liver cell failure, some metabolic disorders and a selected group of patients with hepatocellular carcinomas. Over the last decade, the major transplant centres have reported improving survival rates even though during this period they have developed more complex surgical techniques including split-liver, auxiliary and liverelated transplantation, and have treated more marginal higher-risk patients. This successful outcome has been dependent on appropriate recipient selection, robust surgical technique, improvements in immunosuppression and intensive care management and prompt recognition and treatment of complications. Diagnostic and interventional radiology have been core specialties in achieving the goals of improved graft and patient survival. Improvements in surgical technique have decreased the more common vascular and biliary complications but the newer surgical techniques present differing diagnostic and interventional challenges particularly in paediatric recipients. Developments in MR and MDCT allow many of these vascular, biliary and infective complications to be diagnosed non-invasively. Vascular techniques of angioplasty and stent placement may reverse the sequels of graft ischaemia or portal hypertension. MRC allows the diagnosis of biliary strictures that may be treated by dilatation or stent placement. Imaging is also important in the diagnosis of recurrent disease and the acquired diseases of prolonged immunosuppression including atypical infection and the post transplant lymphoproliferative disorders PTLD. This presentation will review the current status of these techniques and review the European experience. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the developments in surgical technique and their appearances on post-operative imaging. The evolution of atherosclerotic plaque is represented by accumulation of lipoprotein in the intima. Oxidative stress induce local leukocyte migration into the intima with development of foam cells and growing of atherosclerotic plaque. In this manner the fatty streak can evolve into a fibrofatty lesion. In the later stage calcification can occur and fibrosis continues, yielding a fibrous capsule surrounding a lipid-rich core. Two-thirds of myocardial infarcts involve a fracture of the plaque's fibrous cup. The so-called " vulnerable" plaque shows a relative lack of smooth muscle cells due to inflammatory mediators, the prominent accumulation of macrophages and large lipid pool. Thus, the imaging modality of choice should be useful to distinguish lipid core and inflammatory reaction. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) is an invasive modality considered useful to distinguish fibrous and calcified plaques with respect to "soft" or "mixed" plaque with higher spatial resolution than any other imaging modality. MDCT has the ability to provide high definition and thin section images. Low attenuation values are related to "soft" plaque. The main advantage over IVUS is related to its ability to visualize the entire coronary tree and its burden plaque. Radionuclide imaging of vulnerable plaques is focused on targeting the lipidic core, the macrophage infiltration or the proliferating smooth muscle cells by means of SPECT and PET-CT. A new horizon in the imaging of atherosclerotic plaque is the use of MR imaging contrast enhancing agents to investigate molecular and cellular marker also using a self contained intravascular magnetic resonance imaging probe. Since coronary calcification often can be depicted on plain film chest X-ray, there has been a interest in quantifying these calcifications and in using them as a predictive factor to assess the risk of a future cardiac event for a long time. With the advent of electron beam computed tomography (EBCT) and multidetectorrow CT (MDCT), the near-isometric, ECG-gated CT-acquisition of the whole heart in one breathold and the quantitative measurement of coronary calcifications became feasible and available for a larger patient population. Due to the high attenuation of calcium, CT is extremely sensitive in depicting vascular calcifications in unenhanced scans. At least for the quantification of coronary sclerosis an unenhanced scan is mandatory, because iodinated contrast material would impair any quantification method. For coronary calcium screening using MDCT at least 4 detector rows should be used. Acquisition should be performed ECGgated to avoid motion artifacts. Reconstructed section thickness should not exceed 3 mm. An automated or semi-automated quantification tool should be used to ensure an examinor-independent evaluation. While Agatston score has been initially designed for use with EBCT, absolute calcium mass equivalent to calcium hydroxyapatite (CaHA) should be used with MDCT to quantify coronary sclerosis. Coronary calcification is not a X-ray sign of a specific disease but a marker to assess risk of future cardiac events. It has to be valued in due proportion to age and sex of the screened individual. Recommendation for changes in lifestyle or pharmaceutical intervention also depend on other known cardiac risk factors. Cardiovascular risk factors fail to identify up to half of all asymptomatic individuals who will suffer a coronary event. Especially in subjects at intermediate risk of coronary heart disease (CHD) on the basis of cardiovascular risk factors, added information from a noninvasive test of atherosclerotic burden may be helpful in guiding decisions on preventive measures. Assessment of the presence and extent of coronary calcium by new CT techniques may improve risk assessment for primary prevention of CHD. A number of studies has shown that increasing amounts of coronary calcium are associated with a strongly increased risk of coronary heart disease. Information on the ability of coronary calcification to improve risk prediction based on cardiovascular risk factors is scarce. In a recent prospective study, a high calcium score altered predicted risk of CHD in subjects considered to be at intermediate risk on the basis of the Framingham risk score. In the Rotterdam Coronary Calcification Study, the calcium score added information to cardiovascular risk factors and improved cardiovascular risk prediction. There is increasing interest in the possibility to use CT-detected coronary calcification as screening method for primary prevention of CHD. However, the predictive value of coronary calcium beyond risk factors and the role of coronary calcium scoring in preventive strategies are still undefined. If non-invasive assessment of coronary calcium improves identification of high risk subjects, coronary calcium scoring may be implemented in preventive strategies. Risk factor modification or further diagnostic work-up can then selectively be applied to those who benefit most. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the shortcomings of coronary risk assessment based on cardiovascular risk factors. 2. To discuss the current evidence on the predictive value of coronary events when calcium scoring is added to risk factor assessment. 3. To discuss the possible role of calcium scoring in cardiovascular risk assessment. MR spectroscopy allows the examination of tissue biochemistry, which adds to the diagnostic information obtained by e.g. conventional radiology, angiography, CT and different MR modalities. As MRS techniques have become more user friendly and reliable, clinical in vivo applications are increasing, more metabolites can be included in data analysis, and confidence of interpretation increases. When investigating patients with focal brain lesions, the use of single volume short TE methods for lesion characterization combined with multiple volume methods adding spatial information is advantageous. In focal brain lesions difficult to classify based on imaging characteristics, MRS often can optimize the reliability of diagnostics and prognostics. However, the sometimes only subtle MRS changes, as well as small differences and large overlaps in spectra of different pathologies demand careful interpretation of MRS findings and correlation with MR imaging features. This presentation will focus on metabolites and general aspects, spectral features, differential diagnosis and diagnostic pitfalls of brain disorders presenting with focal lesions: Tumours and tumour like masses -including characterisation, grading and recurrence and radiation changes, infectious and inflammatory diseases, and diffuse or disseminated CNS diseases partly presenting with focal lesions. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn about basic information on metabolites relevant for the interpretation of proton MR spectra in focal brain lesions. 2. To understand the typical spectral features of focal brain lesions. 3. To get some clues for differential diagnosis. 4. To understand the necessity to appreciate MRS as a complement to MR imaging and not a substitute for MR imaging for differential diagnosis. A-313 C. Clinical applications of MRS: Diffuse lesions P.J.W. Pouwels; Amsterdam/NL (pjw.pouwels@vumc.nl) Although not specific, MRS does provide characteristic metabolic information in many inborn errors of metabolism, that may be complementary to MR imaging, clinical, and biochemical examinations. Examples include white matter disorders such as adrenoleukodystrophy and metachromatic leukodystrophy, in which MRS can be valuable to determine whether a bone marrow transplantation should be considered as treatment. Characteristic spectra may also be obtained in patients with disorders with a disturbed energy metabolism such as mitochondrial diseases. Leukodystrophies with demyelination are generally characterized by an increase of Cho and myo-Ins and a reduction of tNAA due to axonal damage. Hypomyelinating disorders may have other spectroscopic patterns, such as normal levels of tNAA and Cho, and an increase of myo-Ins and tCr, due to gliosis. However, there are many differences between the leukodystrophies with regard to the severity, the location and the extent of spectroscopic abnormalities. Furthermore, within each disorder large variations are observed, depending on the stage of the disease. Follow-up studies in particular have provided knowledge on metabolic changes during disease progression, which can often be interpreted in terms of structural and/or functional changes such as gliosis, demyelination and neuroaxonal damage. Accurate identification of these dynamic metabolic abnormalities by MRS may be used for early prognosis which may help the choice of therapy, and is also being applied to investigate therapeutic effects. Considering the fact, that 35 -40 % of the elderly population in nursing homes die from chronic aspiration, the clinical need for swallowing investigations is underestimated. Reflux induced swallowing disorders are an increasing problem with the modern lifestyle. Moreover, especially in Europe, there is a lack of trained radiologists in this field. In the last 10 years the number of publications in this field has dramatically increased (1200%!). The usual applied technique is videofluoroscopy at 25 images/s. The development of a low-dosage DSI at 8-24 frames/s will be the future. Dynamic MR imaging is an upcoming technique of which we will present our first clinical results. In cases of motor disturbances, dynamic imaging is the only valid assessment. Some morphologic changes can be visualised by conventional static imaging. In order to control expenses, according to Donner, it is essential to apply a "tailored" examination, centered on the individual patient's complaint. This may include the use of different consistencies and different contrast agents. The efficiency of the optimised imaging strategies will be demonstrated in differ-ent pathologic entities, including neurologic dysphagia, reflux-associated impairments and post-surgical patients including laryngectomized patients with special diagnostic approaches for dysphagia in newborn and children. An explanation of pathophysiology in each type of disturbancy will be given. Also, the on-line testing of therapeutic approaches for the different types of disorders based on the radiologic findings will be explained. Swallowing disturbances require a dedicated multidisciplinary diagnostic and therapeutic team, consisting of at least: A radiologist, a voice/speech pathologist (and/or phoniatrician), and an ENT surgeon. Diagnostics often require a combination of static and dynamic examination of the upper digestive tract in all stages of swallowing: A. oral phase B. pharyngeal phase C. oesophageal phase Leading symptoms of swallowing disturbances eligible for medical or surgical intervention are problems of bolus passage and aspiration. Problems of bolus passage Many obstructions or anatomical anomalies in the upper digestive tract (webs, stenoses, benign or malignant tumours, osteophytic cervical spine protrusions, diverticula or pharyngoceles, dysfunction of UES or LES) are eligible to surgical treatment. Besides level, severity, location (intraluminal, intramural or external) and type of obstruction (static or dynamic), possible compensatory mechanisms are also evaluated. Aspiration Aspiration may remain unnoticed by the patient (silent aspiration) and presents a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge. Dynamic evaluation with different bolus consistencies is required, to determine severity, level and patho-physiological background. Timing, contact, duration, distance and coordination of movements of important structures (mobile tongue, base of tongue, velum, constrictor pharyngeus muscle, epiglottis, hyoid and thyroid cartilage) should be evaluated, as well as developed compensatory mechanisms, to determine the best treatment options. Many surgical interventions to prevent aspiration interfere with phonation and/or respiration and require adequate pre-operative planning and patient counselling, which can only be correctly executed following detailed radiological evaluation. Background: The interdisciplinary management of oropharyngeal dysphagia falls within the competence of ENT, phoniatrics and speech language pathology. Oropharyngeal dysphagia/aspiration may be due various etiologies including structural abnormalities of the upper aerodigestive tract, neurological diseases or psychogenic disorders. If no causal therapy of the disease is necessary/possible, functional (logopedic) treatment may be indicated. To establish an individually tailored treatment program of the dysphagic patient, the pathophysiology of dysphagia and the type and degree of aspiration should be sought. For this purpose, the dynamic instrumental diagnostic methods of fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES) and videofluoroscopic swallowing study are used. Procedure Details: FEES "as first line examination" analyses morphology and function of the oropharyngeal swallowing phases. However, limitations of endoscopy have to be taken into account, which include no direct visualization of the bolus on its entire way from the oral cavity to the stomach as is offered by videofluoroscopy, non visualization of aspiration during the swallow, of laryngeal closure, hyoid/laryngeal elevation, upper esophageal sphincter and of the esophagus. Therefore, videofluoroscopy as "golden standard" is necessary in many cases. In the radiological examination, compensatory treatment techniques proposed by the phoniatric-logopedic team, are assessed to see if they improve swallowing function. Conclusion: Together with FEES, videofluoroscopy is indispensable for the management of oropharyngeal dysphagia. Therefore, the knowledge of swallowing disorders enables the radiologist to provide the diagnostic information needed by the phoniatrician. A close cooperation between phoniatrician and radiologist is required. This presentation reviews technical approaches to whole body scanning using a quadrature body coil and moving tabletop. The talk reviews technical issues such as patient positioning, acquisition time, acquisition parameters, and image post processing using ViewForum software. The second part of the talk focuses on clinical application of whole body scanning in oncology, as an alternative to bone scan in detection of skeletal metastases, as an alternative to PET scanning in tumour staging, and in the evaluation of patients with both lymphoma and multiple myeloma. The third part of the talk focuses on potential improved whole body scanning using intravenous iron contrast pre-administration. In this section the talk will focus on administration techniques, imaging protocols, and timing of image acquisition following ionic agents. As demands for urologic CT-scans continue to increase, more departments implement a "scan and send" policy. Therefore the radiographer will have more responsibility for the whole examination process. This includes designing the protocols, contrast administration, quality assurance, secondary reconstructions, taking decisions about supplementary scans etc. To minimize the number of recalls, radiographers must have an intimate understanding of the technical, antatomical and pathological aspects of urological CT imaging. The radiographer's role in the CT work-up of urological patients will be discussed in general, including (but not limited to): dose, contrast, patient cooperation, technical considerations, reconstructions, impact on patient flow in radiological as well as clinical departments. The following CT protocols will be examined in more detail: -CT urography -CT of the bladder -CT angiography of the kidneys There is a variety of different applications for digital techniques in the field of radiology, and each application has specific requirements for the X-ray equipment. It is characteristic for any digital-radiography device that the X-ray detection stage, the final storage, and the means for displaying the image are physically separate components. This is of importance for a definitive understanding of the differences between analogue and digital-radiography systems for the practical application as well as for quality control. From that perspective the principles of the most popular technological solutions for radiography applications (photostimulable plates, electro-direct flat panel detectors, opto-direct flat panel detectors) are discussed. The principles of X-ray detection and signal processing will be shown on a physical level as well as its impact on practical applications. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the basics of X-ray detection: What happens in the scintillators, what is the captured "signal" and which processes of signal deterioration exist (noise, flare etc). 2. To learn the principles of available technological solutions (photostimulable plates, electro-direct flat panel detectors and opto-direct flat panel detectors). 3. To understand the differences in physical imaging performance. Practical considerations with respect to application fields will also be discussed. B. Managing patient dose in digital radiology E. Vano; Madrid/ES (eliseov@med.ucm.es) The International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) approved in 2003, a document on "Managing patient dose in digital radiology", which was published in 2004. The ICRP report is structured as four chapters and three appendices. Diagnostic information provided by modern digital detectors can be equal or superior to conventional film-screen systems, with comparable patient doses. However with digital systems, an overexposure can occur without an adverse impact on image quality. This overexposure may not be recognised by the radiologist or radiographer and a tendency to increase doses can therefore occur. The ICRP document summarizes actions that can influence image quality and patient doses and includes an assessment of the impact of each action. The document includes eight formal recommendations dealing with: 1) training aspects; 2) review of diagnostic reference levels; 3) patient dose audits; 4) availability of the original image data to the user; 5) optimisation when new digital systems or new post-processing software are introduced; 6) procedures for quality control; 7) justification criteria; and 8) role of the industry promoting tools to know and control the exposure parameters. It is expected that the ICRP report helps to profit the benefits of this important technological advance in medical imaging with the best management of radiation doses to the patients. It is also expected to promote training actions before the digital techniques are introduced in radiology departments and to foster the industry to offer enough technical and dosimetric information to radiologists, radiographers and medical physicists to help in the optimisation of the imaging. The aim of all imaging methods is to answer the diagnostic question with sufficient quality. Decoupling of image acquisition, image processing and image documentation leads to new possibilities and risks for the quality of digital radiography. The aim of image quality optimisation is to reach the necessary quality with the lowest possible dose. The following concept shows the strategy for optimization and quality assurance in digital radiography. 1. Optimisation: Optimal postprocessing is not independent from the dose range. Therefore the necessity exist to optimise the quality depending on the dose and the clinical situation. 2. Objectivation: A strategy for quality management can be performed for each kind of examination in different centres. Afterwards the result will be objectivated by phantom exposures. 3. Standardisation: The range of results, which corresponds to a sufficient image quality, will be defined by these reference centres; and for an unknown equipment image quality can be determined by evaluation of similar phantom exposures. Dose and quality management means, that in a broad range the dose and quality can be optimized and adapted to the clinical question. For the future optimisation, objectivation and standardization will be necessary in the framework of European quality assurance programs like "SENTINEL". With the advent of modern therapeutic procedures such as functional sinus surgery (FSS), sectional imaging modalities have assumed major importance in diagnosis as well as treatment planning, especially in patients with chronic inflammatory diseases such as maxillary, ethmoid and frontal sinusitis. Today treatment planning is done with a CT examination, which affords maximum spatial resolution for defining key bony structures and aerated spaces. Several pathologic entities including inflammatory processes, benign or malignant tumors lead to the unspecific symptom of nasal obstruction. In general, disturbances of the epithelium in acute and chronic sinusitis lead to mucus retention and possible superinfection. In problem cases such as chronic inflammation or complete paranasal sinus obstruction, MR imaging makes an excellent adjunct for differentiating inflammatory and neoplastic processes. The understanding of normal anatomy, anatomical variations and physiology within the nasal cavity, the paranasal sinuses and its adjacent structures is a prerequisite for the radiological diagnosis of sinus disease. It will help to determine the location and nature of the ostiomeatal obstruction in sinusitis and is necessary for accurate tumor staging in the paranasal region. The role of different imaging techniques will be discussed. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the normal anatomy and anatomical variations of the paranasal sinuses. 2. To understand the state of the art imaging technique in the paranasal region. 3. To review the most common imaging findings in patients with nasal obstruction. 4. To review typical radiologic features of benign and malignant tumors. 5. To recognize CT and MR appearance of chronic sinusitis. The typical imaging appearance of mucocele, sinonasal polyposis, and post-surgical infection will be presented.  A 103 B C D E F G an increasingly important role in the objective assessment and treatment of psychiatric patients. In recent clinical trials, these modalities have been used not only to refine our subject inclusion/exclusion criteria but also to evaluate whether a drug has reached the target organ and whether it has produced the desired biological effect. During this session we will present a series of recent examples where imaging has dramatically improved our understanding of the underlying neurobiological deficit in a range of psychiatric indications. The psychiatric conditions that will be reviewed include developmental disorders, schizophrenia, addiction, depression and dementia. Some examples where imaging has helped to facilitate the translation of pre-clinical disease models to the clinical environment will also be discussed. Whilst the use of MRI techniques has become a cornerstone of the neurology clinic, the application of such methods in psychiatry was rather limited until the advent of functional magnetic resonance imaging. Functional MRI has, over the past decade, superseded radionuclide imaging techniques and blossomed into a widely used psychiatric research tool. This presentation will review the neurobiological findings from FMRI research in a wide range of less well documented psychiatric disorders. Despite the disparity in earlier findings, greater standardisation of image acquisition, analysis, paradigms and improved clinical classification is leading to greater convergence in observations from different laboratories. FMRI is also beginning to realise its potential as an important mediator between genes and phenes and may thus contribute to a better understanding of the pathophysiology of major neuropsychiatric diseases. The role of FMRI in the objective assessment of therapeutic intervention and early prediction of response to treatment is also discussed. Learning Objectives: 1. To gain an appreciation of the latest research in functional MRI of psychiatric disorders. 2. To learn where FMRI may play a role in the objective assessment of psychiatric treatments. 3. To understand how imaging preclinical models of disease can inform our clinical observations. Advanced MR imaging and diffusion and perfusion imaging E.-M.B. Larsson; Lund/SE (elna-marie.larsson@med.lu.se) High resolution structural MR imaging in combination with improving segmentation techniques allow detailed morphological information and volume determination of specific regions of the brain. Functional MR imaging techniques such as diffusion MR imaging including diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and perfusion MR imaging add valuable physiological information. There is, however, a discrepancy between the large number of published papers on these MR methods in psychiatric disease and the clinical application of the results for patient management and treatment follow-up. The volumetric data from studies of psychiatric diseases are often non-specific and not always concordant. Volume determinations probably need to be combined with connectivity studies using DTI in order to better recognize the pathology of these diseases. In patients suffering from depression, reduced hippocampal volume as well as reduced fractional anisotropy (FA) in the frontal and temporal white matter have been described. In bipolar mood disorders enlargement of the right lateral ventricle has been found. In schizophrenia reduced grey matter volume has been found in the prefrontal gyrus and dorsomedial thalamus. DTI has shown decreased FA in the white matter of the left internal capsule, middle frontal gyrus and superior temporal gyrus in first-episode schizophrenia. Degenerative and vascular dementia disorders at later stages usually show evident structural and perfusion MR findings, but now the focus has increasingly shifted to the detection of the earliest phase of the illness. Decreased entorhinal cortex and hippocampal volumes may for example predict which patients with mild cognitive impairment will develop Alzheimer's disease. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand how high resolution structural MR imaging, diffusion MR imaging and perfusion MR imaging can be used and critically evaluated in psychiatric disease. 2. To learn the main findings which have been described in psychiatric diseases using these MR imaging methods. 3. To learn how the combined use of structural and functional MR imaging methods may be used for early detection of psychiatric disease, especially dementia. Chemical imaging D.P. Auer; Nottingham/UK (Dorothee.Auer@nottingham.ac.uk) Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) affords noninvasive assessment of regional cerebral metabolic profiles, 'chemical imaging'. The revealed metabolites depend on the nucleus chosen for MRS; most studies focus on proton MRS and its major metabolite, N-acetyl-aspartate (NAA). NAA is a neuronal viability marker and has been found to be reduced in various brain regions in a number of psychiatric disorders, drug abuse, and personality disorders. More recently, NAA reduction was also seen in healthy subjects carrying genes predisposing to such disorders. The underlying pathology explaining NAA reduction includes neurodevelopmental disorders, acquired neurodegeneration or toxicity leading to neuronal cell loss or reduced neuronal density. There is some controversy about the regional specificity of the findings, whether they predate the disease onset and to what degree they may reflect medication status, comorbidity, phenotypic subtypes, genotypic predisposition or morphometric variation. Careful control of such factors and adequate power is required to yield reliable answers to these remaining issues. Recent advances in data acquisition and processing, in particular the availability of field strengths ≥ 3 Tesla enable the assessment of amino acids such as glutamate, glutamine and GABA. These metabolites are of particular pathobiologic interest in psychiatric diseases as they may reveal focally altered neurotransmission. Specific patterns related to hypoglutamatergic or altered GABAergic transmission, have been identified in major depression, schizophrenia and panic disorders. This emerging application of high field neurospectroscopy shows also promise to predicting and possibly monitoring therapeutic responses. To be an adequate partner for thoracic surgeons and pulmonologists, the radiologist must be familiar with the principles of operations for lung resection. They vary widely, from a small pneumotomy for enucleation of a benign peripheral tumor to a radical pneumonectomy. Some complications my be anticipated, whereas others are purely random. To minimize them, radiologists play an important role in the postoperative care and have to know more than the two clinical adages, that "pneumonectomy is greater than the sum of its parts" and that "pneumonectomy itself is a disease". The three major complications during the operation are injury to a major vessel, cardiac arrhythmias and myocardial ischemia, and the development of a contralateral pneumothorax. More important for radiologist are the postoperative appearances and complications. In the early group hemorrhagic, cardiac (herniation, tamponade, ischemia, shunt), pulmonary (postpneumonectomy pulmonary edema, atelectasis, torsion, pneumonia, air leak, and fistula), pleural (persistent residual spaces, effusion, empyema, chylothorax), esophageal, and neurologic (injury to intrathoracic nerves, spinal cord injury) complications are important and possibly life threatening. Late complications to be familiar with are the postpneumonectomy syndrome and superimposed late infections. B. Non-accidental head injury/child abuse O. Flodmark; Stockholm/SE (olof.flodmark@karolinska.se) To the radiologist, neuroradiologist in particular, physical abuse of infants and babies is of great interest since neuroradiology is often the only means by which the diagnosis of abuse can be suspected and subsequently proven. Small infants are most often shaken while larger infants are more often submitted to shaken/ impact injury. The resulting brain damage is devastating. The infant presents with most non-specific symptoms, making the clinical diagnosis of abuse extremely difficult. The repeated accelerations and decelerations and rotations associated with repeated shaking of a small baby will cause venous haemorrhage into the subdural space, a very important marker indicating that the baby has been shaken. Repeated instances of abuse will cause haemorrhages of different ages. The same treatment will also cause tearing injuries seen in the white/grey matter interface, often with small haemorrhages as well as retinal haemorrhages. Hypoxic/ischaemic brain injury added upon the tearing injuries aggravates brain oedema. The finding of subdural haemorrhages, brain oedema and retinal bleeds in combination mean child abuse is the only clinically reasonable diagnosis. The most important method used to diagnose abuse of infants is CT-scanning. It is an effective way of showing subdural haemorrhage and can give an indication of the age of the haemorrhage. MR imaging has a superior sensitivity in detecting collections of haemorrhage in the subdural space. It has a superior ability to demonstrate brain injury. The only, but most important weakness of MR imaging is its inability to accurately indicate the age of a subdural haemorrhage. 3. To understand the mechanisms behind skull fractures and brain injury following child abuse. 4. To know how these injuries can and should be imaged. 5. To understand how to interpret the imaging findings of skull and brain injury in child abuse. 6. To discuss briefly the role of the radiologist in the legal process often following on detection of child abuse. A-351 C. Hydrocephalus S. Cakirer; Istanbul/TR (scakirer@yahoo.com) Hydrocephalus is a condition in which there is increase in ventricular size due to an imbalance between the production of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and its drainage by the arachnoid villi. The result is increased intracranial pressure. Three major mechanisms account for the development of hydrocephalus. The first mechanism is obstruction to CSF flow, which is usually secondary to conditions such as a congenital stenosis/web of the aqueductus Sylvii, inflammatory conditions such as tuberculosis, meningitis, granulomatous infiltrations, blood clot, and various tumors. The second mechanism is decreased absorption of CSF by arachnoid villi, which is seen in subarachnoid and intraventricular bleeding, inflammatory conditions, and tumoral seeding to subarachnoid spaces. The third mechanism is the overproduction of CSF, unique to infants and young children and caused by choroid plexus papillomas and carcinomas. While congenital anomalies, infections and hemorrhagic insults are leading causes in newborns and infants, infections and tumors are more common in older age groups. Hydrocephalus may be classified on the basis of the level of obstruction as communicating (extraventricular) or noncommunicating (intraventricular) hydrocephalus. The situation might be compensated or noncompensated depending on the presence of transependymal CSF migration. All of the above will be discussed during the lecture with their corresponding neuroimaging findings, including antenatal and postnatal transcranial ultrasound, computed tomography, magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and advanced techniques. Differential diagnoses for neuroimaging findings and for age groups, as well as neuroimaging findings following therapeutic shunting operations, with their complications, will be discussed briefly as well. The role of liver resection for benign and malignant liver diseases is expanding because of the markedly reduced operative mortality in recent years, improved surgical techniques, and better perioperative management. Development of local ablative therapies for liver tumors, such as radiofrequency (RF) ablation, is posing a competition to liver resection. However, such techniques also have allowed expansion of indication for hepatic resection to patients with bilobar tumors, where one lobe is resected and small neoplasms in the other lobe are treated with RF ablation. On the other hand, when there are limitations of imaging to monitor treatment, an intraoperative technique may have greater treatment success than a percutaneous technique. Another advantage of surgically assisted ablation is the ability to more easily perform inflow vascular occlusion, and the possibility of using intraoperative US to detect occult foci of tumor and treat them. Laparoscopy may be used to treat superficial lesion o lesions located adjacent to anatomical structures that should be preserved, such as the small and large bowel. Strict cooperation between surgeons and interventional radiologists is mandatory in order to select patients who will benefit from combined procedures. Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) has demonstrated a good local efficacy for small hepatic tumors. However many reports underlined the difficulties to achieved complete ablation of tumors larger than 30 to 35 mm or when tumor are smaller but in contact with large hepatic vessels. Angiographically-assisted tumor ablation has been used to try to overcome these difficulties in ablation. Vascular occlusion of the inflow or the outflow to the tumor will decrease perfusion mediated tissue cooling due to tumor tissue microperfusion and thus allows larger volumes of ablation. In clinical practice, percutaneous arterial embolization or venous occlusion could be used according to the type of tumor treated. Pringle maneuver during peri-operative RFA produce the same effect. Vascular occlusion of a large vessel in contact with a tumor will avoid "heat sink effect" due to convective cooling of the tumor portion close to the large vessels. Experimental studies have demonstrated that any vessel 3 mm or larger can induce incomplete ablation and clinical series have demonstrated that presence or absence of a peritumoral vessel 3 mm or larger, is an independent predictor of treatment outcome. We demonstrated that vascular occlusion of this vessel can improve RF ablation outcome. In a similar manner, vascular occlusion has been used to improve outcome of renal ablation by increasing the volume of ablation. More recently, experimental work demonstrated that bronchial occlusion during RF increases the volume of ablation by decreasing both air flow and also blood flow. Capabilities for local tumor control are rapidly advancing, especially to minimal invasive procedures and thus inducing a change within the working environment. In particular, navigational aid is requested in order to minimize trauma to collateral tissue. Steadily increasing computational power of today's computers, as well as recent advances of virtual reality devices enables challenging applications including robotics. In order to use such complex systems basic knowledge of their functionality is mandatory. Within this course an overview of augmented reality systems will be given and special focus will be drawn to their usage as a navigational aid in liver tumor treatment. Learning Objectives: 1. To explain basics of augmented reality and how to set up an augmented reality system. 2. To illustrate the clinical application of an augmented reality system for visualization and virtual intervention planning in the treatment of liver tumors. 3. To discuss potential application of an augmented reality system for navigation in interventional procedures. Monda Monday y y y y A 107 B C D E F G Stavros has published extensively on assessing a variety of sonographic features to distinguish benignity from malignancy, including: -Mass morphology -Acoustic shadowing -Echogenicity -Spiculation -Microlobulation -Angular margins, echogenic halo, duct extension, branch patterns, calcification -Width measurements Whilst Stavros emphasises reliance on a single parameter will result in misleading conclusions, complex interpretation of all modalities can result in an accuracy of 98%. Recognising that histological grade determines the degree of desmoplastic response, cellularity, vascularity and tissue necrosis, it is established that differences in sonographic appearances occur reliably enough for the sonographer to suggest histological grade. The sonographic appearances of unusual changes associated with common breast tumours will be discussed along with the differential diagnosis of atypical appearances e.g. pseudocystic and hyperechogenic lesions. Whilst the sonographic features of rare forms of breast malignancy frequently have no specific appearances, consideration of a number of rare breast tumours will be given including granular cell tumour, phyllodes, lymphoproliferative malignancies and sarcoma. The contribution of triple assessment process will be emphasised throughout the presentation. Learning Objectives: 1. To set the context of the use of ultrasound in diagnostic breast imaging. 2. To describe briefly the most frequently noted ultrasonic features of breast malignancy. and their incidence. 4. To produce clinical algorithms for their management. A-360 C. US-advanced technical aspects and future trends G. Rizzatto; Gorizia/IT (grizzatto@libero.it) Major breakthrough to help radiologists in breast US is mostly linked to the increasing computing capability of new systems and their digital scans. CAD applications use sophisticated image analysis scheme and advanced decision engine to help differentiate benign and malignant lesions. They may integrate a variety of features such as automated segmentation, characterization, classification, annotation and report generation. Elastographic score is a new feature, easy and quick to be integrated with all other US and imaging signs. Adequate patterns are obtained in over 96% of all patients. Significant increase in diagnostic accuracy is obtained mainly in BI-RADS™ 3 and 4. Real time sonoelastography significantly reduces the biopsy rate in cystic lesions and may suggest appropriate intervention for malignancies with less typical basic features. Perfusion ultrasound with continuous low mechanical index and contrast agents may add useful information in: 1. Advanced cancers treated preoperatively and receptor positive cancers in elderly patients. Perfusion shows changes in vascular clusters and kinetics that are predictive for outcome parameters and are earlier detectable than volume reduction. 2. Patients with metastatic lymph nodes. Tumor foci mostly result in a lack of perfusion; smallest detected lesions are 3 mm. Sentinel node procedure may be saved in 25% of patients. Positive cases are straight scheduled for axillary dissection; the use of operating room is maximized. Multi-modality "fusion" breast imaging systems are developed to co-register different modalities (US, MR imaging, mammography, optical imaging) to increase both the sensitivity to breast cancer and to maximize the procedures performed under US guidance. Cross-sectional imaging (MR and CT) has improved dramatically over the last few years, and will have an important impact on the imaging protocols of many congenital heart diseases. In particular, the creation of 3D anatomical images, which can be interpreted by all, is extremely useful for making diagnoses and planning treatment. In general, the investigation of children with congenital heart disease should be integrated, utilising the best of echocardiography, CT, MR and cardiac catheterisation. However, the accessibility, speed and relative ease of performing cardiovascular multi-detector CT (MDCT), means that an increasing number of patients are being referred for this investigation. It is now possible to acquire MDCT images of the entire thorax in 3-10s, and using dose optimisation techniques, the radiation dose can be limited to 1-2mSv. Furthermore, many neonates and infants, who may require general anaesthesia to undergo an MR scan, can be assessed using either 'feed and wrap' or sedation. The aim of this presentation will be to: Define the role of MDCT as part of an integrated imaging approach for congenital heart disease, Outline the current indications for MDCT in this setting, Describe an imaging protocol for cardiovascular MDCT (including pitfalls and how to address them), Describe methods of radiation dose reduction, and Demonstrate imaging of common pathologies affecting the aorta (vascular rings, airways imaging), pulmonary arteries and pulmonary veins (total anomalous pulmonary venous drainage). It is hoped that following this presentation, the audience will have a more thorough understanding of cardiovascular MDCT. Learning Objectives: 1. To discuss indications for cardiovascular CT in the pediatric population. 2. To describe CT protocols for optimal cardiovascular imaging in the pediatric population. 3. To present cardiovascular CT images from a variety of common pediatric cardiovascular conditions. B. Cardiac MR imaging in children with congenital heart disease C.J. Kellenberger; Zürich/CH (christian.kellenberger@kispi.unizh.ch) In children with congenital heart disease, cardiovascular anatomy and function need to be repeatedly assessed for follow-up and planning of surgical or catheter-guided interventions. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (MR) complements echocardiography and angiocardiography by non-invasively providing reproducible morphologic and functional information. Cine MR imaging with gradient echo or steady-state free precession sequences allows delineation of complex cardiac anatomy and is recognised as the most accurate technique for quantifying ventricular volumes, function and mass. Gadolinium enhanced MR angiography is used for assessing anatomy and pathology of pulmonary and systemic arteries and veins. Phase contrast MR imaging provides velocity and volume flow information which can be used for quantifying valvular insufficiency, the degree of stenosis, shunts, and differential pulmonary blood flow. Routine MR evaluation of most patients can be performed in under 60 minutes. Neonates, infants and small children require sedation or preferably general anaesthesia. At our institution, cardiovascular MR is performed when echocardiography does not provide sufficient information and diagnostic catheterisation can be avoided. The advent of endovascular stent graft technology provides a less invasive alternative for thoracic aortic injury treatment. The precise evaluation of the thoracic aorta and branches as well as the diameter of the pelvic arteries obtained by spiral CT with 3D-reconstructions is certainly one of the most critical points of these endovascular procedures. The delay and the choice of treatment are dictated by the general condition of the patient, the surgical risk factors, and the type of aortic trauma. The endovascular procedure is performed under general anesthesia with a femoral arteriotomy. After implantation, anticoagulation is maintained for 48 hours and then followed by aspirin (250 mg/d). Patient surveillance must be strict to ensure that a false aneurysm is properly excluded. As expected from other studies in the literature, our comparative study confirms that stent-graft therapy is an advantageous alternative to open surgery (the mortality and the paraplegia rate was 21% and 7% respectively for the 35 patients surgically treated compare to 0% for the 29 patients treated with a stent graft with a mean follow-up of 46 months). No significant complication, endoleak, pseudoaneurysmal expansion, or rupture was observed. The potential limitations to endovascular treatment are the site of the rupture in regards to other anatomic landmarks, the difficulty of vascular access and the availability of the device in an emergency situation. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the principles and techniques of imaging in the assessment of the acute patient who may have thoracic aortic damage. 2. To be familiar with the associated problems of imaging and patient stability. 3. To understand the principles of stent graft sizing, planning and patient suitability. 4. To understand the principles, equipment and technique of thoracic aortic stent graft placement. 5. To understand the importance and components of the "team" approach. 6. To understand the imaging and assessment of follow-up. The Olivier Interactive image teaching Musculoskeletal lesions: Mistakes you shouldn't make K. Bohndorf 1 , J. Hodler 2 ; 1 Augsburg/DE, 2 Zürich/CH (radiol-klin.augsburg@gmx.de) Imaging findings are rather commonly overlooked or misinterpreted. The number of errors can be reduced by training, experience, concentration and work organisation. Most of the remaining errors are caused by one or several of the following problems: 1) Insufficient consideration of history, symptoms and other clinical information. 2) Jumping to conclusions, uncritical acceptance of previously made diagnoses. 3) Interpretation without previously obtained or complementary imaging methods. 4) Interpretation solely based on necessarily limited own experience. 5) Interpretation without systematic approach to findings. 6) Insufficient knowledge of rare but typical diagnoses. 7) Clinical relevance of imaging abnormalities not known or not taken into consideration. 8) Influence of technical factors on imaging findings not sufficiently known. What is the result? Typical examples of errors include: 1) Missed or underestimated fractures. 2) Infection mistaken as neoplasm, enchondroma as an infarct. 3) Missed changes of the diagnosis over time (such as malignant degeneration of Paget's disease or bone infarcts or dedifferentiation of relatively benign neoplasms). 4) Incorrect diagnosis instead of characteristic image appearance (such as osteoid osteoma, osteochondroma, non-ossifying fibroma, bone infarct, myositis ossificans). 5) Potentially meaningless imaging abnormalities overemphasized, leading to overtreatment (disk protrusion, small amounts of fluid in tendon sheaths, increased signal within tendons and fibrocartilaginous structures). 6) Missed diagnoses at the borders of the image. 7) Artifacts mistaken as relevant findings. Learning Objectives: 1. To discuss bone or joint lesions as seen on radiographs, CT of MR imaging which may be interpreted incorrectly. 2. To discuss, based on clinical cases, the principal errors of imaging interpretation. 3. To become familiar with common "leave me alone lesions". Five different infiltration patterns of multiple myeloma can be differentiated on MR imaging: 1. Normal appearance of bone marrow despite minor microscopic plasma cell infiltration, 2. Focal involvement, 3. Homogeneous diffuse infiltration, 4. Combined diffuse and focal infiltration, 5. "Salt and pepper" pattern with inhomogeneous bone marrow with interposition of fat islands. For the correct staging of patients with multiple myeloma sensitive detection is mandatory in order to estimate prognosis and to decide for adequate therapy. MR imaging is superior to radiography for both, focal and diffuse involvement. With parallel imaging and special coil devices, such as total imaging matrix (TIM-Siemens) a screening of the whole red bone marrow cavity for myeloma infiltration is possible within a reasonable time. Patients without bone marrow infiltration have a significantly longer survival than patients with bone marrow infiltration in MR imaging at the time of diagnosis. However, even in stage I disease (Durie & Salmon) and negative X-ray films bone marrow infiltration in MR imaging may be detected in 29-50% of patients. Those patients typically show an earlier disease progression. Recently, MR imaging has been implemented in the clinical staging of patients with multiple myeloma. MR imaging may also monitor response to therapy. Signs of good response in cases with focal involvement include reduction of signal intensity on T2-weighted spin echo images, lack of rim-like enhancement after contrast material injection or even a normalisation of bone marrow signal. In case of diffuse involvement a partly patchy reconversion to fatty marrow can be seen. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with the different infiltration patterns of multiple myeloma in MR imaging. 2. To outline the sensitivities for the detection of osteolyses of X-ray, MR imaging and MDCT. 3. To define the staging of patients with multiple myeloma. to define the precise local extent of clinically overt disease; to identify clinically occult disease elsewhere; to identify prognostic factors that will influence intensity of therapy (such as the presence of bulk disease, the number of nodal sites of disease and the presence of extranodal disease); to give a baseline assessment of all nodal sites in the body; and to identify factors that might influence the delivery of therapy. CT is currently the modality of choice for staging of HD and NHL. It performs well in the detection of nodal enlargement and of most sites of extranodal disease. There are areas where it is relatively insensitive and the role of other imaging modalities such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) will be discussed. Knowledge of the differences in the biological behaviour and mode of spread of HD and NHL facilitates the choice of the most appropriate test to stage the disease accurately. The development of positron emission tomography (PET) and PET-CT has resulted in renewed interest in functional imaging in the staging of lymphoma and its place will be discussed. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the common staging classifications in use for the lymphomas and understand the implications for patient management. 2. To appreciate the differences between Hodgkin's disease and the non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. 3. To understand the role of imaging in staging and the rationale behind the use of the various imaging modalities. 4. To recognise common pitfalls and problem areas in staging. Room C Cardiac CT and MR imaging is gaining acceptance for routine clinical application in patients with ischemic heart disease. The latest CT technology now allows routine evaluation of the anatomy of the coronary arteries with high accuracy. In particular, 64-slice CT technology has been demonstrated to be very reliable for excluding significant coronary lesions. MR imaging is still under development for optimal coronary artery imaging, although 3 Tesla MR imaging shows promise in this respect. MR imaging is especially well suited to assess the viability and function of the myocardium. The role of MR imaging and CT for the assessment of specific questions in patients with ischemic heart disease is still evolving. Both CT and MR imaging show promise not only for demonstrating coronary anatomy, but also for vessel wall imaging and plaque characterization. The current role of CT and MR imaging will be reviewed. In addition, the future role of this technology for plaque imaging will be discussed.  Coronary artery MRA M. Stuber; Baltimore, MD/US (mstuber@MRI.jhu.edu) The current gold standard for the diagnosis of luminal coronary artery disease is X-ray coronary angiography. However, this test is associated with a small but significant risk of complications, patient and operator are exposed to ionizing radiation, the test is expensive, and patient discomfort has to be considered. While coronary CTA is a very powerful method that is thought to replace X-ray coronary angiography in part, there is still the issue of X-ray exposure and nephrotoxic contrast agents while complementary information about the coronary vessel wall and coronary flow may not easily be obtained. Therefore, coronary magnetic resonance imaging is an alternative that has to be considered. Using MR imaging, the coronary lumen blood pool, the coronary vessel wall, contrast agent uptake in the coronary vessel wall, and coronary flow can be investigated and quantified. Furthermore, multicenter experience exists for coronary MRA while first results are still expected for CTA. However, coronary MR imaging is technically very challenging. A high spatial resolution, substantial volumetric coverage and a high contrast between the coronary lumen blood-pool and the surrounding tissue is mandatory while substantive extrinsic and intrinsic cardiac motion has to be suppressed. With contemporary MR imaging hardware, software, methodology, contrast agents, and high magnetic field strength, these issues are being addressed and first patient studies look very promising. In particular, the use of contrast agents for the characterization of coronary atherosclerosis is a rapidly evolving area of research. -Pre-operative in non-coronary surgery to screen the patients without CAD. -Patients with known CAD and chronic total occlusion of one vessel before coronary intervention for revascularization. -Patients with previous coronary intervention (stents) and/or bypass surgery. During the last year, several manufacturers introduced 64-slice scanners with different technical solutions. Overall, a significant improvement in performance is expected. Mostly, temporal and spatial resolution are the parameters that have been improved. Future developments are going to bring more spatial and temporal resolution to CT scanners, regardless of the number of slices, which will be a lower priority for cardiac imaging with CT. Learning Objectives: 1. To provide an overview of the current knowledge on cardiac CT with the available literature. 2. To define the current role of cardiac CT in cardiovascular medicine. 3. To describe the latest technical developments in multislice CT which impact the performance of coronary CT angiography. 4. To give an insight into future developments and applications of cardiac CT. Plaque imaging C.R. Becker; Munich/DE (christoph.becker@med.uni-muenchen.de) Vulnerable plaques may rupture when exposed to shear stress and the thrombogenic lipid material may enter the bloodstream. In the most unfortunate event, thrombus progression may turn the vulnerable plaques into culprit lesions that occlude the coronary vessels, leading to myocardial ischemia, ventricular fibrillation and death. In the initial stages of atherosclerosis, the coronary vessel widens at the location of the atherosclerotic plaques. The phenomenon is called "positive remodelling" and explains why such plaques may not be seen by cardiac catheter. Non-fatal plaque rupture or erosion at end stage may heal, organize and subsequently calcify. Fibro-calcified lesions may reduce vessel lumen diameter (negative remodelling) with consecutive reduction of blood flow and myocardial ischemia. Only CT and MR imaging may have the ability to non-invasively assess the extent of the atherosclerotic plaque burden in the coronary arteries. MR imaging is superior to CT in terms of soft tissue differentiation. However, CT is currently superior to MR imaging in terms of spatial and temporal resolution to image the small and constantly moving structures such as the coronary arteries. The entire extent of coronary atherosclerosis with calcified and non-calcified Knowledge and understanding of the advantages and drawbacks of current radiological techniques is essential to establish the most cost-effective diagnostic strategy, a factor that will avoid redundant information and unnecessary risk and inconvenience to the patient. Learning Objectives: 1. To be familiar with the current tools available to acquire and process images in the setting of vascular brain disease. 2. To understand the advantages and drawbacks of the various radiological techniques for imaging the brain parenchyma and the intracranial and neck vessels. 3. To be able to establish a cost-effective diagnostic strategy in patients with suspected vascular brain disease. The optimal treatment for soft tissue sarcomas is initial wide surgical excision. Post-operative imaging concentrates on the detection of local recurrence and metastases, typically pulmonary. For local recurrence ultrasound and MR imaging may be used. The former technique has its advocates but is operator dependent and it is difficult to compare serial examinations. MR imaging with predetermined protocols allows for accurate assessment of the surgical site and easy comparison of serial scans. There are limitations to the use of MR imaging in the early post-operative period. The fundamental feature suggestive of tumour recurrence is the identification of high signal intensity on T2-weighted or STIR images with mass-effect. Post-operative complications which may also be associated with high signal intensity, with or without mass-effect, will be discussed as will the role of paramagnetic contrast medium. Finally, the potential of diffusion weighted MR imaging and PET scanning will be covered. Female pelvic pain is extremely common and has a huge social and economic impact. Its diagnostic and therapeutic assessment remains difficult, given the variety of possible causes. Diagnostic imaging plays a key role along with clinical examination. Imaging modalities are essentially US and MR imaging. In many cases they will be used along with, or instead of, diagnostic laparoscopy. New techniques have recently emerged, driven by radiologists and aimed at relieving pelvic pain by treating specific causes of pelvic pain. Embolization of pelvic and ovarian varices is an established treatment for pelvic congestion syndrome, uterine arterial embolization to treat uterine myomata is now a recognized alternative to myomectomy or hysterectomy. Embolization of uterine arteries in the treatment of pain caused by adenomyosis is an emerging technique, with results that are promising but in need of further assessment.  To create a quality system in order to increase safety and quality for patients and staff. Methods and Materials: Decisions were made concerning range of the accreditation, which resulted in 24 methods representing about 70 percent of our total volume. A group consisting of radiographers and radiologists were responsible for describing each method. The entire department was mapped by checking the flow of patients, receipts and images. Written routines were made for as many steps in the organization as possible. The work from start to our first goal took us approximately four years. Results: The Department of Radiology within the Center for Medical Imaging and Physiology is the first radiological department in Sweden and Europe to achieve accreditation by SWEDAC. Bonus effects were better organized work with less error, updated routines concerning medication and radiological protection, easier to follow processes, routines for handling maintenance concerning technological parts and IT, better information about the examinations both to patients and remittents and increased competence for all of us. We achieved the sometimes insuperable goal and created a quality system for our X-ray department. The quality system has already given us obvious improvements -more and better routines in different areas. A quality system is an absolute condition for increased patient safety. Patients' safety is improved as a result of identification and rectification of bottlenecks and weaknesses in our work. The entire chain is quality assured. The main value lies in the requirement for constant improvement. A-443 C. Self assessment within clinical radiography P. Wood; Tehy/FI The core of radiography is the base line from which our work based, i.e., correctly performed examinations, diagnosis and treatment. With the self-assessment (S-A) process you learn to understand more about your working environment and the work processes. Self-assessment results will indicate if changes are necessary in the work process. Total quality management (TQM) is needed to prevent mistakes. Full scale clinical audits are needed to analyze the whole radiological process, to analyze personnel's professional skills and highlight where they lack the required proficiency level. Self-evaluation or self-assessment can be performed in various ways; which could for example be customer, economical, internal processes orientated, and can focused on learning and performing. S-A can be aimed towards the organization -from the bottom up, the radiological department processes or it's out-put. The departments technical ability, diagnostic ability diagnostic effectiveness, or critical events analyzes is also assessable. A practical example of where S-A could be used is in lumbar spine examination. Background for this chosen type of examination is the high number of examinations performed, giving fairly high dosage levels where its effectiveness is dubious. Indications for this could consist of the following -reference levels, national recommendations, EU recommendations and EU 118, national reference levels etc. Implementation of this study could be performed by retrospective sampling on 25 -50 consecutive studies focusing on images (quality, number of projections, projection accuracy and dose). Results -adjustments can be then used as a feed back to referring doctors, on exposure factor changes, patient handling on projections and on examination method changes. Learning Objective: 1. To explain the advantages and benefits of systematic self-assessement on the whole imaging protocol process. Increased use of mammography and population screening means that many cancers now present when small with good survival. Current treatments are also improving the survival of larger lesions. This means that relative survival for the best prognostic groups is approaching 100% at both 5 and 10 years. The conventional prognostic indices (using size, grade and node status) break down and fail to identify the small numbers that still "inexplicably die" from breast cancer. After all, 95% survival still means 5% mortality. Is the presence of microcalcification a better prognostic indicator for small cancers? Is screening itself an independent factor or are we just over-diagnosing? It is clear that both ultrasound and MR imaging are better than conventional X-ray mammography at detecting both multi-focality and bilateral cancer, but this is at the risk of too many false positives. There is always the possibility that by detecting sub-clinical disease we are advising over aggressive surgery. This could also be true for distant staging, as currently there is limited evidence that detection of metastasis at a pre-clinical stage alters outcome and can, of course, lead to inappropriate use of aggressive treatment. In this talk I will review the evidence, but the answers are far from clear. Perhaps treatment needs to be re-thought. Our challenge is to identify the small number of women who presently lie in the good and moderate prognostic groups, who would benefit from intensive diagnosis and treatment, as opposed to the majority who perhaps just suffer. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand factors affecting breast cancer survival, specifically relating to small cancers. 2. To review indications for different imaging modalities in local and distant staging of nonpalpable breast cancer. 3. To re-assess current treatment paradigms in the light of improved survival. B. New preoperative localisation procedures A. van Steen; Leuven/BE (Ingrid.Fruyt@uz.kuleuven.ac.be) Due to the experience with the sentinel node procedure, some new techniques using radiopharmaceuticals have been developed. With the radioguided occult lesion localisation (ROLL) procedure, macroaggregates of technetium-99m labelled human serum albumin are injected into the lesion, instead of the introduction of a wire hook or carbon injection. The sentinel node and occult lesion localisation (SNOLL) is a combination of the ROLL-and sentinel node procedure. The technique of these procedures will be explained in detail. The benefits of these procedures are: -the possibility to combine two procedures in one, which is more comfortable for the patient, -the surgeon has the possibility to choose the incision, without taking into consideration the site of injection. Thus the extracted tissue will be smaller and the lesions are more centrally located. Learning Objectives: 1. To describe the radioguided occult lesion localisation (ROLL) procedure. 2. To describe the sentinel node and occult lesion localisation (SNOLL) procedure. 3. To emphasize the benefits of these procedures. 
