70ccd1af33f49cfeb0c4fdddad4f72934800eef4
AI I UNDIFFERENTIATED SARCOMA OF THE LIVER IN CHILDHOOD -SUCCESSFUL MANAGEMENT IN 4 PATIENTS
Ch  Mache Ch  Urban H  Sauer G  Brandesky H  Mebner H  Grienberger H  Becker 


In this randomised prospective study we investigated whether treatment results of maximal androgen blockade (MAB) in patients with metastatic prostatic cancer can be further improved by additional Methotrexate therapy (MTX). A total number of 61 patients (stage T1 or '1"2) have been included and 31 were randomised to arm A receiving MAB, i.e. orchiectemy + flutamide (3x250 rag/d). In group B 30 patients were treated with MAB + 50 mg{m 2 MTX (once weekly for 4 months). 53 patients are evahiable for response criteria. Patients in group B (/dAB +MTX) showed a higher response rate (CR +PR), i.e. 42,2 %, in comparison to group A, where remission rate was 29,6 %. Median duration of response was 18,3 months in group B and 17,2 months in group A. Pain relief as judged by pain scale, was more frequently observed in patients receiving no MTX treatment. Hematologic toxicity was present only in patients receiving additional chemotherapy. Six patients (23,1%) had leukopenia -5 grade 2, 1 patient grade 4-; 4 patients (15 %) had thrombopenia (grade 1-2) and 2 patients anemia, (grade 1). Incidence of non-hematological toxicity was similar in both treatment arms. In conclusion, patients with metastatic prostatic cancer treated with MAB and additional MTX therapy showed and increased response and improved pain palliation in comparison to those receiving MAB alone. So far, no influence on overall survival has been documented. Undifferentiated (embryonal) sarcoma of the liver is a rare, highly malignant, mesenchymal tumor presenting predominantly in late childhood. Four girls, aged 6 to 13 years, are reported. The first patient underwent complete resection by hemihepatectomy and received polychemotherapy for 16 months. In the second patient initially only partial resection could be accomplished. By synchronous radio-and chemotherapy the tumor decreased to a size, that it could be resected completely and was totally devitalized on biopsy specimens. Postoperative chemotherapy was finished after 8 weeks. In the third case hemihepatectomy resulted in complete removal of the tumor and chemotherapy was administered for 15 weeks postoperatively. The tumor of the fourth patient was irresectable at diagnostic biopsy. Polychemotherapy led to a significant [eduction of the tumor size and resection with clear margins could be performed subsequently. Since histological devitalization amounted to about 95 %, postoperative chemotherapy was discontinued after 6 weeks. All 4 patients remain well without evidence of tumor recurrence after 48, 18, 18 and 3 months of follow-up, respectively. The term "microangiopathic hemolytic anemia" (MAHA), first described by Brain et al 1962, is characterized by the intravascular fragmentation of erythrocytes due to vessel wall changes or fibrin deposits in the microcirculation. In Nov. 1989 a 54 year old woman had a lumpectomy of the left breast and axillary lymph node-dissection (undiff.ductal carcinoma PT2N1MO, estrogen receptor expression was weakly pos., progestogen receptor was neg.) Postoperatively she underwent locoregional radiotherapy and adjuvant Tamoxifen (20 mg daily) was started. In Oct. 1991 the patient was admitted with signs and symptoms of anemia. The peripheral blood count and smear showed: Hb 9,0 g/dl, MCV lo4 11, Hematocrit 26%, teticulocytes 8%, fragmentocytes 6% with marked polychremasia and occasional microspherocytes. The haptoglobin level in the serum was trace positive, serial serum LDH and bilirubin levels were normal. There was no concomitant disseminated intravaseular coagulation. Coombs tests were negative. A diagnosis of MAHA was made. Thorough invasive and noninvasive investigations ( including a bilateral lilac crest biopsy) dislosed no tumor despite a serum CEA level ot 46o ng/ml. Eventually a blind liver biopsy (with all liver function tests being normal) showed a disseminated purely intravascular invasion of carcinoma cells. 4 cycles of CMF chemotherapy only brought about a minor response .We then changed to high dose monotherapy of Epirubicine 11o mg/m2 every 4 weeks. As of this writing 2 cycles produced a complete disappearence of the MAHA with no more fragmentocytes being discernible on the blood smear. Further follow up will be presented. Brain tumors are the most frequent group of solid tumors in children and comprise 20 % of all childhood malignancies. Despite substantial progress in the treatment of patients wlth certain forms of brain tumors the overall prognosis of patients with malignant brain tumors is still worse than that of children with malignant tumors outside the central nervous system. Therefore a combined effort of neurosurgeons, neuroradiologists, radiotherapists and pediatric oncologists is necessary to improve the long-term survival and quality of life of these patients. From January 1987 to December 1991 72 patients with brain tumors were diagnosed, 67 had primary manifestations and 5 had relapsed tumors. The diagnoses were medulloblastoma (n=IO), brain stem glioma (n=8), cerebellar astrocytoma (n=9), ependymoma (n=7), astrocytoma (n=12), optic pathway glioma (n=5), craniopharyngeoma (n=3), and others (n=18). Treatment consisted of surgery (n=21), observation (n=4), surgery and radiotherapy (n=7), radiotherapy (n=1), chemotherapy and radiotherapy (n=3) and surgery or biopsy plus chemotherapy and radiotherapy (n=36). TO date 19 patients died, 4 perioperatively and 15 of tumor progression, 2 patients are lost of follow-up and 51 patients are alive with a median follow-up period of 116 weeks. The resistance of tumor cells to fluoropyrimidines is a complex phenomenon which has been only partially elucidated. The cytotoxic effect of 5-fluomuracil (5-FU) is mediated by several anabolic steps and a subsequent incorporation into nucleic acids. Additionally, cells are depleted of thymidine by inhibition of the enzyme thymidilate synthetase, which is efficiently blocked by 5-fluomdeoxyuridinemonophosphate in combination with tetrahydrofolate. We investigated the impact of the activating steps of 5-FU on cytotoxicity in four colorectal tumor cell lines in vitro (CCL 227, CCL 228, HT 29 and CaCo2) and the contribution of the biochemical modulation by reduced folate to the cytotoxic action. The results revealed the differential sensitivity of the single tumor cell lines: every cell line expressed an individual resistance pattern to 5-FU and its anabolites as well as to the modulating agents [R,S]-leucovorin, [S]-leucovorin and [R,S]-5-methyltetrahydrofolate. The anabotites of 5-FU can be effectively modulated in CCL 227, but not in CaCo2. The most effective fluoropyrimidine as single agent is not necessairily the most cytotoxic one in combination with tetrahydrofolates. In all ceil lines, at least one anabolic step is limiting the cytotoxic action of 5-FU. In CCL 227 this is e.g. the conversion of 5-FU to 5-fluomuridine and to 5-fluomdeoxyufidinemonophosphate via 5fluorodeoxyuridine. HT 29 on the other hand is sensitive to all anabolites of 5-FU, but can be hardly modulated by folate indicating limitations in the folate activating steps rather than in 5-FU activation. Further studies will focus on the correlation of enzymatic activities and cytotoxicity in vitro. The confirmation of this results in vivo could contribute to the individualization of the chemotherapy with antimetabolites in colorectal cancer. To determine the maximum tolerated dose of epirubicin for use in combination with 5-fluorouracil (FU) and low dose leucovorin (LV), we conducted a phase I/II trial in 37 patients (pts) with advanced gastric carcinoma. The doses of FU (425 mg/m2) and LV (20 mg/m2) both given intravenously on days 1 to 5 were held constant, while the dose of epirubicin was escalated in cohorts of patients beginning at 50 mg/m2 on day I. Cycles We review our experience with 82 patients with nongenital cancers metastatic to the ovary. All patients were referred for evaluation of an ovarian mass. The patients had primary carcinoma of the breast (n=28), colon (n=23), stomach (n=22), pancreas (n=7), or gallbladder (n=2). The overall actuarial 5-year survival rate was 10%. 5-year survival was significantly higher in patients with metastatic colon cancer (23%) than in patients with metastatic cancer of the breast, stomach, gallbladder or pancreas, all of whom died within 58 months (p < 0.05). Patients with unilateral metastatic ovarian involvement had significantly better 5-year survival than those with bilateral involvement (28% vs. 5%; p= 0.003). 5-year survival was significantly higher in patients with disease limited to the pelvis than in those with abdominal spread (22% vs. 6%; p< 0.04). The 5-year survival of patients with residual disease < 2 cm or > 2 cm in diameter was 18% vs. 4%, respectively (p= 0.002). This pattern applied mainly to differences in patients with primary cancer of the breast or colon (p < 0.008). These data suggest that an aggressive surgical effort seems to be indicated in colon cancer metastatic to the ovary, as some of these patients may survive 5 years. 12 patients (pts) with advanced colorectal cancer entered a phase I trial for IFN sq added to standart 500 mg/m2 LV (2hour infusion iv)+600 mg/m2 FU (midpoint-injection) once weekly for 6 weeks q 8 weeks. 3 pts were enrolled at each dose level of IFN (1 MU, 3MU, 5MU and 10 MU 3x/week). WHOgrade III/IV toxicity (diarrhea, leucopenia) occured only at 10 MU, while toxicity was insignificant at doses of 1 MU and 3 MU, and was acceptable at 5 MU. Therefore 3 x 5 MU/wk of IFN were chosen to be added to the standard FU/LV regimen in a phase II trial. 30 pts (colon:n=14, rectum:n=15; male:n=14, female:n=16; age:med.58.5 yrs ; prior treatment:n=7; med. observ, time:7.5 mo [3-21+] ) were on treatment for a total of 490 wks (med.22.4 [16-112+] ). Who-grade III toxicity for diarrhea (2.4%), stomatitis (2%), thrombopenia (2%}, hand-foot-syndrom (2%) and nausea/vomitus (1.6%) occured during 10% of the cycles. No grade IV toxicity was seen and 9/30 pts had no side effects at all. Response evaluation showed no CR, 9 PR (30%), 4 SD (13%) and 17 PD (57%), resulting in a response rate of 13/30 (43%). Kaplan-Meier plots of survival [S) for pts with PR vs. SD/PD favored PR pts statistically significant (med. S for PR: 14.9 mo, SD/PD: 5.53 mo; Mantel-Cox [MC]: p=O.O004, Sreslow [S]: p<0.004). Separate analysis for rectal cancer pts (PR: n=7, SD/PD: n=9) showed also a statistically significant benefit in S for pts with PR (med. S for PR: 13.09 mo, SD/PD: 5.89 mo; MC: p<=0.01, B: p<0.03). The phase I study shows that 3 x 5 MU/wk sq is the maximal tolerable dosis for IFN when added to FU/LV as described and that this regimen can be administered feasibly on an outpatient basis. The phase II trials proves FU/LV/IFN to be active in colorectal cancer with a remission rate of 30%, a response rate of 43% and an acceptable toxicity profile. A significant benefit in S for all pts responding to this FU/LV/IFN regimen and in particular for rectal cancer pts with no prior treatment could be revealed in this study. Thus, further phase II studies are necessary for colon cancer pts and phase III studies are warranted for pts with advanced rectal cancer. s regarded as the only therapeutic approach with curative potential. However, disease recurrence after BMT remains a major clinical problem. Early identification of patlents who will eventually relapse is therefore an important challenge in the follow-up of patients after BMT. The detection of residual leukemic cells carrying the bcr/abl rearrangement by highly sensitive techniques such as qualitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was shown to be of limited value in predicting disease progression. We have adapted the PCR for quantitative assessment of bcr/abl rearranged cells and applied the new technique to the monitoring of residual disease in CML patients after BMT. This approach was designed to provide information on the proliferative activity of the residual leukemic cells. Twenty six CML patients were monitored by qualitative and/or quantitative PCR during a follow-up period of up to 7 years after BMT. In the majority of these cases, enzymatic amplification of the bcr/abl rearrangement by PCR turned negative within 4 months posttransplant. In four cases, increasing numbers of leukemic cells were detected Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) represents a unique disease model for studying molecular events which are associated with response to IFNtherapy and which may enable prediction of sensitvity. The constitutive and cytokine-modulated expression of certain growth regulatory genes was assessed by Northern blot analyses. Bone marrow and peripheral blood mononuclear cells of 26 Ph 1+ chronic phase CML patients were examined for the hybrid bcr/abl, c-myc, c-fos and p53 mRNA levels both before and after a single exposure to as also after three months of IFN-~ therapy. The relative abundance of the different transcripts was correlated with prognostic disease parameters and response patterns. Results indicated that (i) constitutive mRNA levels of the hybrid bcr/abl, c-myc and p53 are positively correlated with each other but failed to relate to disease parameters (WBCC, spleen size and proportion of immature cells), (ii) constitutive c-fos transcript levels are significantly higher in patients subsequemly responding to IFN-cc therapy (p<0.01) and are positively correlated with the proportion of lymphocytes (r=0.673, p<0.001) and negatively with the proportion of immature cells (r=-0.568, p<0.01) contained in the pbmc preparations tested, (iii) acute and chronic in vivo exposure to IFN-c~ is accompanied by upregulation of c-fos and down-regulation of c-myc mRNA levels in responder patients, and (iv) unresponsiveness is not caused by impaired targetting or subsequent signalling because the IFN-cc induced expression of 2'-5'OAS is as high in non-responder as in responder patients. Overexpression of the MDHI gene that codes for a P-glycoprotein is one of the mechanisms involved in resistance to anticancer drugs. This protein exports alkaloids, anthracyclins and podophyllotoxins from cells. It has been shown that verapamil inhibits the efflux of anticancer drugs, but its side effects have prevented treatment of human cancers. The purpose of our investigations was to look for useful alternatives to verapamil. We found that 0.i ~M of B8509-035 (Dexniguldipine-HCl) the R-enantiomer of niguldipine, reverses resistance to adriamycin in multidrug resistant KB-8-5 cells to the sensitivity of the parental KB-3-1 cells. The fluorescent dye rhodamine 123 is transported by the P-glycoprotein. 0.i ~M B8509-035 increases the intraoellular accumulation of rhodamine 123 to a greater extent than 1 ~M verapamil, as determined by measurement of the fluorescence with a flow cytometer. B8509-035 exhibits antiproliferative effects in some tumors. It is an inhibitor of protein kinase C. Another new anticancer drug and inhibitor of protein kinase C, the thioether phospholipid derivative ilmofosine (BM 41 440) also reverses multidrug resistance at therapeutic doses by blocking the drug efflux as shown by the intracellular accumulation of rhodamine 123. Our results illustrate that there are coumpounds which are very potent in reversing multidrug resistance Activation or inactivation of the X-chromosome is a random event and is associated with methylation of certain DNA regions. Analysis of the methylation patterns surrounding the X-chromosome locus DXS 255, which contains a hypervariable DNA region, provides a novel method for identification of clonality of haematologic diseases. Using probe M278 and the restriction enzyme PstI, 76% -80% females are heterozygous at the locus DXS 255 (paternal and maternal X-chromosome can be distinguished). Methylation of Che two chromosomes at the DXS 255 locus can be studied by parallel digestion of a PstI predigested DNA with the restriction enzymes MspI and its isoschizomer HpaII (MspI cleaves methylated and unmethylated DNA sequences, HpaII can cleave only unmethylated sites. In an investigation of 60 heterozygous females, all 49 healthy females followed the normal X-chromosome inactivation pattern. Paternal and maternal X-chromosomes were present in active and inactive form at about the same level, which indicates a random inactivation and represents a polyclonal cell population. Of 11 heterozygous females with malignant diseases all showed a disproportional level of inactivation of one X-chromosome, thus indicating a monoclonal or oligoelonal cell population. In conclusion, analysis of the methylation pattern at locus DXS 255 allows identification of clonal cell growth. Christine Mannhalter, Clin. Inst. Med. Chem. Lab. Diagnosis, University Vienna Medical School W~hringer G~rtel 18-20, A-I090 Wien Monitoring of minimal residual disease and early detection of relapse in CML patients following non T-cell depleted brat using the PCR. A.Gaiger, T.Lion, P.Kahls, G.Mitterbaner, T.Henn, O.Haas, W.Hinterberger, W. Linkesch, C.Mannhalter, K.Lechner. We have performed a two step PCR to detect bcr-abl specific m-RNA in 350 peripheral blood and/or bone marrow samples of 27 CML patients (median 10 samples, range 2 to 48 samples of each patient) following non t-cell-depleted allogeneic (n= 25) and syngeneic (n= 2) bone marrow transplantation (brat). In 12 of our patients (44%) bcr-abl specific m-RNA could be detected following brat. In the 2 patients after syngeneic bmt bcr-abl positive cells were detected frequently (UPN 73: observation time 25 months, 6 of 6 samples bcr-abl positive, UPN 131, observation time 23 months, 6 of 18 samples were bcr-abl positive). Both patients are in hematological remission 56 and 26 months after bmt. In 13 patients in whom serial samples were studied after some time following bmt (first sample between 6 and 78 months after bmt) bcr-abl positive cells were detected at least once in 5 patients. In 5 of 12 patients, where samples were analysed before and serially after brat bcr-abl positivity was found in at least one sample. Bcr-abl positivity was rare in patients, who were in hematological remission for at least 2 years (2/13). Hematological relapse occured in 4 patients, all became bcr-abl positive before relapse (UPN 99:7 of 14 samples analysed, UPN 120:5 positive of 7 samples, UPN 123:6 positive of 7 samples and UPN 133:7 positive of 14 samples). Bcr-abl positivity in consecutive samples indicated a high risk of relapse (4/4), whereas the risk of relapse was low in patients, who had positive and negative results in consecutive samples (0/6). 5 (33%) of 16 patients with GVHD, but 7 (77%) of 9 patients without GVHD had bcr-abl positive cells at least once. This data indicate: 1) Transient bcr-abl positivity is usually not followed by hematological relapse, while patients, who are positive in serial samples have a higher risk of relapse 2) Syngeneic patients remained bcr-abl positive but did not relapse so far. Functionally equivalent genetic material can be marked and utilized differentially depending upon its maternal or paternal origin. This phenomenon is known as genomic imprinting and has been shown to play an important role in certain cancer praedisposition syndromes and sporadic tumors characterized by loss of genetic material. We were interested whether such imprinting effects might also play a role in the genesis of acquired chromosome abnormalities characterizing specific haematological neoplasms. We have therefore studied the track of inheritance of the translocated chromosomes 9 and 22 in 15 cases of Philadelphia-(Ph) chromosome-positive leukaemia utilizing unique specific chromosome band polymorphisms. We show that the translocated chromosome 9 was of paternal origin in all eleven informative cases. In contrast, the translocated chromosomes 22 were derived exclusively from the maternal copy in eleven cases with reliable polymorphisms. There was no evidence suggesting any involvement of the maternally inerited chromosome 9 or of the paternally inherited chromosome 22 in these cases. Our data therefore provide the first evidence that imprinting phenomena may play an important role in acquired tumor-specific chromosome rearrangements. Moreover, the confined participation of the paternal and maternal genetic components suggests that the bcr and abl genes which are juxtaposed by the reciprocal translocation t(9;22) may be oppositely imprinted. Glanzmann's thrombasthenia (GTA) is a well defined inherited disorder of platelet function. It is caused by a deficiency or abnormality of the membran glycoprotein GP lib/Ilia complex with bleeding due to defective platelet plug formation. Because of their bleeding disorder patients with GTA may require repeated tranfusions and are therefore at risk for alloimmunization. Of interest is alloimmunization against platelet antigens, in particular the HPA-1 system, which is expressed on GPIHa. The formation of antibodies would render these patients susceptible to posttransfusion purpura. Because of the diminished amount of platelet GPIIIa, patients with GTA often cannot be typed for HPA-1 serologically, however. These platelets are regarded to be HPA-10. We therefore investigated the possibility of genotyping patients with GTA for their HPA-1 alloantigens. DNA was extracted from 7 patients with GTA and controls of known HPA-lafo type. A 23-base and a 24-base oligonucleotide primer pair flmddng a region of the gene for GPUIa containing the allelic polymorphism were used for PCR amplification. The resulting PCR products were digested with NciI restriction enzyme and analyzed on a 10% polyacryl-amide gel. In addition, platelet binding of anti-HPA-1 antibodies was tested by platelet immunofluorescence test (PAIFr) and the monoclonal antibody-specific immobilization of platelet antigen test (MAIPA), using various anti-CD41 and anti-CD61 MoAbs. Genotypically, all 7 patients with GTA were found to be homozygous HPA-la. Genotyping confirmed the serological results in controls. Platelets from patients with GTA did not react with anti-HPA-la antisera when using the PAIFT; by MAIPA HPA-la expression was revealed in 6 patients; results varied however, depending on the applied MoAb. No reactivity was found in the seventh patient. We show that patients with GTA can be genotyped for their HPA-1 alloantigen even when serological tests fail. Institute of Blood Group Serology, and First Department of Internal Medicine, University of Vienna, A-1090 Austria. The incidence of posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD) after lung transplantation is about 7%. It is the third leading cause of mortality outside the perioperative period. Although the immunosuppression regimen did not differ from our transplant group at large, PTLD developed in three cases since September 91. The patients varied in presentation and in the course of disease and showed nonuniform response to reduction of immunosuppression. Hence, our patients with PTLD represent a synopsis of diagnostic possibilities, therapeutic approaches and clincal outcomes. 10 months after single lungtransplantation (LTX) patient "Nol" showed nodular infiltrates m the transplanted lung. On cytogenetic analysis the presence of clonal aberrations among a majority of diploid mitoses pointed to an early stage of transformation. Lymphoproliferation resolved completely after three months of reduced immunosuppression. Patient "No2" was seen with massive pleural effusions, hilar masses and a diffuse involvement of both lungs soon after a blood type mismatched double LTX. She was diagnosed as monoelonal PTLD. No tumor response could be obtained with radiation therapy. Vascular lesions and high mitotic activity of the tumor, seen in biopsy specimens, revealed transformation to highly malignant NHL. She was sucessfully treated with CHOP in addition to a monoclonal antibody specific for CD24. Jaundice and subsequent liver failure were primary symtoms of PTLD in the third patient "No3" occuring 4 months after single LTX. Reduction of immanosuppression produced no effect on the tumor but caused organ rejection. She had a rapid course and died ten days after diagnosis of monoelonal PTLD. Clonality of PTLD was determined by morphology, immunoperoxidase s*ainiag, cytogenetic evaluation and immunglobulin realrungement analysis of biopsy specimens. In conclusion, our series showed that monoclonal tumors run an agressive and rapid course and did not respond to reduction of immtmosuppression. Clonality seems to determine malignancy of PTLD and has presumably prognostic value. 18 pts.; CODBLAM IV: 14 pts.; PROMACE-CYTABOM: 21 pts.). Overall 72% reached a complete remission (CR), with a continuous complete remission of 64%. The overall survival was 69% at 12 months and 41% at 48 months. A comparison between the three therapeutic regimens revealed comparable remission rates with CODBLAM IV being the most effective induction treatment ( CR: M-BACOD: 72%; CODBLAM IV: 78%; PROMACE-CYTABOM 66%). The highest, though non-significant, continuous complete remission rate (CCR) at 12 months was found in the PROMACE-CYTABOM group (CCR: M-BACOD: 62%; CODBLAM IV: 59%; PROMACE-CYTABOM: 71%). Despite the fact that this was not a randomized study, our data indicate that all three protocols are highly effective as first line treatment of high-grade NHL. However, the long term survival of these patients is still below 50 % after 4 years and needs to be improved by a more aggressive post induction management such as bone marrow transplation. Although several therapeutic approaches for conventional salvage therapie in non Hodgldn lympli6ma have been made, successful treatment is still lacking. The combination of etoposide, ifosfamide and mitoxantrone showed a high effectiveness in relapsed and refractory NHL. During 1986 and 1992, 56 patients (36 males, 20 females) with a median age of 66 years (range 18-89 years) were treated with a combination of etoposide (100 mg total,ilosage), ifosfamide (lg total dosage) and mitoxantrone (3mg/m L) given on three consecutive days. Mesna was given as uroprotector. Stages according to the Ann Arbor classification were I/7, I1/3, III/6 and IV/40 patients. 33 patients suffered from high grade, 23 from intermediate grade non Hodgkin lymphoma. Toxicity according to the WHO recommendation was as follows: Anemia grade I was observed in 10 patients. Leukopenia grade I/2 patients, grade II/1 patient and grade IV/4 patients. Thrombocytopenia was not observed. Overall response was 32% (9 CR and 9 PR). High grade NHL showed a better response rate (18/33 patients) compared to the intermediate grade NHL's (7/23 patients). Bulky disease was a significant adverse prognostic factor, response was observed in 3/15 cases. It seems noteworthy that 15/31 cases refractory to evious treatment responded. e combination of ifosfamid~ mitoxantrone and etoposide is active in pretreated refractory and relapsed patients with non Hodgkin's lymphoma and has tolerable toxicity. In both studies response appeared to correlate with median cumulative dose (>450MU for patients achieving CR or PR). 30 patients from the i st study were followed off treatment: the majority relapsed within one year. Relapse was relatively delayed in those achieving a major antileukaemic effect (<5 % bone marrow HCs). Following maximal response 18 patients in the 2 nd study went on to 3 MU weekly maintenance, and 37 observation off treatment, 7 (39%) of 18 on maintenance showed haematological relapse [5 (28%) only minimal], whilst 32 (86%) of 37 on observation relapsed [2 (5%) minimally], a highly significant difference (Chi 2 11.09, p-0.0009). (These differences held good throughout all response categories.) 75 patients' sera were screened for neutralising antibodies: all were negative. No patients developed refractory disease whilst on treatment. R. Scherrer, P. Bettelheim, K. Geissler, H. Gisslinger, U. J~ger, P. KnSbl, P.A. Kyrle, K. Lazcika, G. Mitterbauer, I. Schwarzinger, C. Sillaber, H. Watzke, K. Lechner. 14 consecutive patients with ALL (12 de novo, 2 relapsed)median age 42 years (18 to 69), i0 e-ALL (2 bcr-abl positive), 2 pre-B ALL (i bcr-abl positive), 1 early Bprecursor ALL and one T-ALL were treated according to the chemotherapy protocol described by Hoelzer et al. In addition r-metHuG-CSF (Neupogen R) was given at a dose of 200 ug/m2 iv. in phase 1 from day 2 to day 21, and thereafter until neutrophil counts were >1000/ul on two consecutive days. In phase 2, G-CSF 200 ug/m2 sc. was started on day 2 (after CP) and continued until neutrophils recovered to more than 1000/ul on two consecutive days. These patients were compared to a historical control group treated with the same chemotherapy protocol but without G-CSF. It included only patients, who achieved CR within 4 weeks (median age 27 years, 22 c-ALL, 3 pre-B ALL, 3 early H-precusor ALL and i0 T-ALL). -13/14 patients achieved complete hematologic remission (i0 within 4 weeks and three at the end of induction treatment). One patient died because of fungal septicemia. G-CSF treated patients had a shorter duration of granulocytopenia ( 14.5 days vs 21.5 days) in phase i. In phase 2 the median granulocyte count during weeks 3 and 4 was significantly higher compared to the historical control group. The number of days with fever in phase 2 was lower in the G-CSF group (1,5 days vs 0,8 days) . The full dose of chemotherapy (anthrecyclins, cyclophosphamide, ARA-C and purinethol) could be given in 11/13 G-CSF treated patients, while in the control group only 23 % of the patients received the protocol without dose reduction or delay. These data indicate, that, (i) G-CSF can be given along with chemotherapy in induction treatment without compromising efficacy, (2} the time of grauulocytopenia in phase 1 is shortened by 7 days and the degree of granulocytopenia is amelioreated in phase 2 and (3)  Multiple in vitro test systems have been studied which may indicate sensitivity or resistance to cytostatic agents in vivo. We have evaluated the applicability of the measurement of drug-induced inhibition of NPI into cellular RNA/DNA to test for chemosensitivity in acute leukaemia. The reliability of recently established criteria for the evaluation of in vitro results was determined. 69 blast cell samples from 61 patients with acute leukaemia were tested with a panel of 4 to 6 drugs prior to initiation of chemotherapy. In 40 cases the assay revealed sensitivity to at least one drug used for therapy in vivo. In this group, complete or partial remissions were achieved in 23 and 8 patients respectively (positive predictive value 89%; "early deaths" excluded). From 24 patients with resistance to all drags 16 failed to respond to therapy (negative predictive value 76%). Five patients were classified as "possibly sensitive". Using actuarial survival analysis, patients with in vitro sensitivity showed a significantly better survival compared to patients with in vitro resistance (p<0,005 up to 10 month; chi-square). Mean survival time of patients with in vitro sensitivity and resistance amounted to 367+341 and 127_+203 days, respectively (p<0,003; Kruskal-Wallis). Our data demonstrate the prognostic relevance of the NPI-inhibition assay in acute leukaemia and seem to permit the prospective use of this assay to design individual therapeutic regimens. Myelodysplastic syndromes /MDS/are clonal disorders characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis, peripheral blood cytopenias, normo-or hypercellular bone marrow and maturation abnormalities, frequently in all the three haematopoietic cell lines. 12-38% incidence of transformation to ANLL is noted. The prognosis is generally poor, the median survival is 7.5-29 months. A retrospective analysis of 19 consecutive patients / period: from May 1985 through May 1992, mean age: 67. 1-412.2 year, sex: 11 men and 8 women/ were performed. Patients were classified according to the FAB proposals: refractory anaemia/RA] in 10, refractory anaemia with ring sideroblasts /RA-S/in 1, chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia/CMML/in 1, refractory anaemia with excess of blasts /RAEB/ in 3, RAEB in transformation /RAEB-t/in 3 cases. In 1 patient the diagnosis was ANLL following MDS. In 36% of all cases/7 pts./leukaemic progression could be observed. From . ,aol;+i ..... ;r~. .... h,~, tried in bEDS 84% of our patients were treated with RBC transfusion, 31% with platelet transfusion, 37% with low-dose ara-C, 26% with steroid, 26% have got oral iron and vitamin supplementation. 9 patients /47%/ died during the observation time, the median survival was 14.5--q8 months. Conclusions: 1) There was an increase in the number of patients having MDS in the last years. 2) A high number of transformation to ANLL /36%/could be observed in our material and 71% of the patients with transformation previously belonged to the RAEB and RAEB-t groups /high risk patients/. 3) The median survival of the patients was similar to the data of the literature. 4) It is necessary to introduce the latest therapeutic modalities /bone marrow transplantation, differentiation induction, human-recombinant GM-CSF/to improve the results. With the improved prognosis of patients treated for solid tumors and hematologic malignancies, the clinical importance of treatmentassociated secondary leukemias has increased. We therefore present two children, a 13 year old boy and a 5 year old girl, with a secondary AML and trisomy 11. The boy developed an AML-M4 60 months after diagnosis of a synoviosarcoma of the left shoulder. The girl developed AML-M2 40 months after diagnosis of an anaplastic ependymoma. The tumors were resected and treated with respective polychemotherapy and radiation regimens (CWS81 and SlOP II medulloblastoma trial). Both children were treated with multiagent chemotherapy for AML. However, the girl died due to septicemia 4 weeks after diagnosis and the boy due to a relapse 40 months after diagnosis of AML. With approximately 50 cases reported so far, trisomy 11 remains a rare nonrandom karyotype abnormality. It has mainly been described in elderly patients with various myeloid malignancies and occurs commonly following treatment of malignant diseases and/or carcinogenic exposure. To date, our patients are the youngest in whom trisomy 11 has been reported. Within the 420 cases of childhood AML which we have successfully studied, these two patients arethe only cases displaying this abnormality. In order to determine the clinical and biological significance of our observation, the acrual of additional cases with this rare abnormality is necessary. A monoclonal antibody termed 7F7, which recognizes the intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM -1), has been used in our experiments to modulate the influence of autologous T-lymphocytes on committed haematopoietic progenitor cells. Using a microagar culture system for human haematopoietic progenitor cells and for T-lymphocyte colony formation we demonstrate that BFU-E, CFU-Meg, CFU-GM derived colony formation was not directly affected by 7F7 antibody treatment. PHA-induced Tlymphocytic colony formation, however, was markedly suppressed by 7F7 mAb. In coculture studies between monocyte and T-lymphocyte depleted bone marrow and peripheral blood MNC and autologous T-lymphocytes preincubated with the 7F7 mAb we were able to demonstrate that ICAM-1 is involved in T-lymphocyte mediated modulation of BFU-E, CFU-Meg and CFU-GM proliferation. To further clarify the question if this effect on progenitor cell proliferation is mediated by cell adhesion blocking between Tlymphocytes and progenitor cells or by direct Ab-mediated effects on Tlymphocytes and monocytes, the 7F7 mAb was used to investigate the role of ICAM-1 in cytokine production by T-lymphocytes and monocytes. Production of TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma and IL-1 was significantly inhibited (p<0.01) by the incubation of roAb 7F7 with PHA activated blood MNC or isolated E rosette positive T-lymphocytes. The maximal level of inhibition was reached using saturating concentrations of 400 p.1/ml of mAb 7F7 hybridoma supernatant corresponding to an inhibitory activity of l~tg of purified mAb. In contrast, GM-CSF release showed a heterogenous response over 5 experiments with an increase found in 3 experiments and a decrease in 2 experiments. Addition of increasing concentrations of supernatant or purified mAb to unsfimulated MNC or T-lymphocyte cultures had no effect on cytokine release. Our studies show that ICAM structures are involved in the T-cell mediated modulation of normal haematopoietic progenitor cells and that ICAM-1 exerts its regulatory effect via the lymphokine cascade. Recent data suggest, that SCF (stem cell factor) / KL is a major regulator of human mast cells (MCs) and upregulates MCs releasability. The aims of this study were to analyze the effects of cyclosporin-A (CSA) and FK-506, two potent antiinflammatory drugs, on SCF induced activation of human MCs. For this purpose we isolated mast cells from uterine (n=6) and lung tissue (n=4) and carried out histamine release experiments. CSA and FK-506 were found to downregulate MC histdmine release induced by dnti-lgE or recombinant human (rh) SCF as well as SCF dependent releasablity in a dose dependent way. Complete inhibition was observed with > 0.3 ug/ml of CSA. In lower concentrations, CSA was found to be a deactivator of unstimulated MCs, whereas rhSCF (10-100 ng/ml) was found to counteract CSA induced deactivation of MCs. CSH (cyclosporin-H), a CSA derivative with low affinity for cyclophilins (CSA R) did not alter mast cell histamine releas(ability)e induced by anti IgE or rhSCF. No effects of CSA or FK-506 on expression of SCF R (c-kit receptor) or SCF dependent formation of cAMP in human mast cells could be observed. Together our data suggest that CSA and FK-506 interfere with SCF induced activation of human mast cells presumably by interacting with cyclophilins.  Passive immunotherapy with intravenous immunoglobulin (WIG) has been successfully employed in primary and secondary antibody deficiency syndromes. In more recent years WIG has been shown to also be of benefit in the treatment of various autoimmune diseases including immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and Kawasaki syndrome. In order to better elucidate the mechanisms involved in the immunomodulatory activity of WIG, we investigated the influence of Gamimune (7S-lgG; Cutter), Gamma-Venin (5S-F(ab')2; Behring) and heat-stabilized Fc fragments (Behring) on in vitro proliferative and cytotoxic immune cell response, focusing primarily on the action of WIG on cytoldne release. Intact immunoglobulins (Gamimune, 1-10 mg/ml) reduced alloantigen-induced proliferation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) by more than 60% in a dose-dependent manner, whereas F(ab')2 fragments and Fc fragments suppressed mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) only at the highest dose level tested (10 mg/ml). In a similar fashion, WIG suppressed lectin-induced proliferation of PBMC, interferon-induced MHC antigen expression on a colon carcinoma cell line and interferon-induced macrophage activation. WIG preparations containing the Fc fragment of the immunoglobulin molecule also inhibited the cytoloytic activity of NK cells. Immunosuppressive activity of WIG was mediated by selective cytokine modulation. Secretion of T cell-derived cytokines such as intedeukin 2 (IL-2) and granulocyt-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) was significantly inhibited in the presence of IVIG, whereas monocyte/macrophagederived tumor necrosis factor a was induced. Release of IL-1, IL-6 and interferon-g during MLR was not significantly affected by IVIG. We conclude that immunoglobulins have potent immunomodulatory properties mediated in part by selective inhibition/stimulation of endogenous cytokine production. Div. Clin. Immunobiology, Dept. Internal Medicine, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria, *Dept. Hematology, Klinikum der Johannes Gutenberg Universit&t, Mainz, FRG. EXACERBATION [, Ch. Lor~r, I(. Lechner Reco~W~inant interferon alpha (rIFR aLpha) is of increasing cLinical importance. In perticular, it has been shown to be effective in the treatment of neoplastic he~toLogicaL diseases and virat hepatitis. In the earty phase of this treatment, the most prominent side effects are inftuenca-tike symptom, which can be attributed to an irm~noalodulatory effect. ALthough long-term toLerance of rIFN alpha is usually goed, there have been some reports on the occurrence of auto-ir~nity associated with its long-term aplolication. We therefore examined 65 patients (16 mate, 49 fellmle, age: 18-89 years) who had been treated for hematological disorders, for the occurrence of autoimmunity during treatment with rIFN alpha. Their diagnosis were: myetoproLiferative disorders (57 pts), myetedysplastic disorders (7 pts) and hypereosinophiLic syndrome (I pt). The treatmentduration ranged from 1.5 to 48 months~ the rIFR alpha dosage ranged from 6 to 25 megaU/week. EvaLuation was carried out with regard to signs arw:l syraptoms of autoimr~ne disease or development of autoantilzw~ies to thyroid and nuclear antigens. In 17 patients, a thyroid autoilr~nity was observed, 3 of these showed signs of hypothyroidism concurrently with the thyroid autoimmunity, and one patient became hyperthyreot. Some of the patients who developed autoirr~nity during IFN aLpha were examined using a highly sensitive assay for thyroid antibodies (TPO and TgAb), which indicated autoilmlunity at the beginning of rlFN alpha ti'oatment. Furthermore, in two patients with psoriasis, and 1 patient with CoLitis utcerosa, rlFN alpha had to be withdrawn due to exacerbation of these diseases. These data suggest that patients with serotogicatiy dectabte autoimmunity or a history of autoilmunity may develop an exacerbation of autoim~ne disease during the treatment with rlFg alpha. The Alkyl lysophospholipid ET 18-OCH3 (ALP) is supposed to selectively inactivate leucemic cells and to activate the monocyte macraphage system. We tested the purging effect of ALP for CML by short time incubation of CML bone marrow with ALP 50ug/ml for 30 rain. ALP reduced colony growth of CML but did not affect normal progenitors. TNFa pruduction was increased in both normal and CML bone marrow after ALP treatment, as a possible mediator of ALP activity. TNFa was measured in the supernatant of 24 hour cuktures. Addition of a monaclonal TNFa antibody supressed the cytotoxic effect of ALP on CML progenitors. It had no effect on normal progenitors. ALP treated CML cells were kept in long term bone marrow culture for four weeks and assayed for clonogenicity. During the first week of culture there was additional supression of CFU-C growth but after four weeks of culture they showed about the same CFU-C recovery as the untreated control. Single colonies of ALP treated CML bone marrow were still PH positive. Pancytopenia is one of the most characteristic findings in HCL Inhibitory factors released by hairy cells might be responsible for haematopoietic failure in this disease. It has been suggested, however, that HCs alone are incapable of synthesizing potent inhibitors of myelopoiesis, and that they rather act synergistically with T lymphocytes. Therefore, we investigated the effect of the removal of HCs and/or T cells on the number of circulating progenitor cells in 6 HCL patients. The results demonstrate that the removal of either HCs (by complement mediated lysis) or T cells (by E-rosette formation) clearly improves the growth of BFU-E, CFU-GM and CFU-mix. In comparison, under the same experimental conditions, these effects could not be observed in healthy donors. Since none of the procedures was sufficient to increase colony numbers to normal levels we determined whether or not the supplementation of the culture medium with haematopoietic growth factors (rh GM-CSF, rh IL-3) could further increase colo~y lqumbers Wlaen the co!~ny forming ~ssays were perfo~led gluer the removal of HCs, and upon the addition of GM-CSI~/1L-3, nonnai colony numbers were achieved in most patients. Similar increases were observed after the depletion of T cells, and addition of growth factors. We conclude that in HCL an inhibitory effect on haematopoiesis is exerted by HCs, but that T lymphocytes also play role in the mechanism of suppression, probably by synergizing with HCs. In addition, we postulate that a deficiency of haematopoietic growth factors contributes to the failure of the haematopoietic system. A likely candidate for an insufficient supply of growth factors is the monocytopenia usually observed in HCL. Supported by "Fends zur FSrderung der wissensch. Forschung" P 7040 and P 8283. Pentoxifylfine (PTX) has-recently been shown to modulate TNF-(~ production and to reduce the incidence and severity of all major complications after bone marrow transplantation, including mucositis, veno-occlueive disease, renal insufficiency, hypertension and graftversus-host disease. In order to analyze in detail the effect of PTX on immune complications after BMT we investigated the immunomodulatory effect of PTX on immune response in vitro. Continuous presence of PTX significantly reduced the proliferative response of peripheral blood mononuclear cells to stimulation with phytohemaggtutinin and alloantigens (MLR) in a dose-dependent manner. In MLR a significant suppression (13+7%) was already achieved with 10~g/ml PTX. The concentration of 10011g/ml PTX was able to inhibit and at 1000p.g/ml almost block both reactions. The inhibitory capacity of PTX in the MLR was increased by monoclonal antibodies against TNF-c{ (34+_5% additional suppression at 100~g/ml PTX) and not reversed by the addition of rTNF-~. PTX 100p.g/ml also significantly inhibited (p=0.0178) the in vitro generation of cytotoxic T-lymphocytes, when PTX was added to the culture on day 0. Profound modulatory properties can also be seen in the NK assay with a reduction of 23_+3% in specific lysis at 10p.g/ml and maximal reductions of 88_+3% at t000p.g/ml PTX. Immunomodulatory properties of PTX were not only associated with blockage of TNF-c(, but also with an impaired production of IFN-y and neopterin. PTX treatment, however, did not affect IL-2, IFN-c(, 13-2 microglobulin or IL-lJ} production, IL-6 release was even increased. PTX has therefore profound immunomodulatory properties in vitro, which are associated with selective inhition of cytokines release and can be enhanced by the addition of monoclonal antibodies against TNF-c(but not reversed by the addition of rTNF-c(. We have shown previously that CD7 and CD 19 may be coexpressed on lymphoid cells in fetal bone marrow (FBM). By transformation of CD7+ and CD7+CD19+ cells from FBM with the Epstein-Barr-Virus three cell lines were established. All three cell lines are CD7+CD 19+ and express the B cell differentiation antigens CD20, CD21, CD22, CD40 and are HLA-DR positive. Cell line A10 expresses also surface immunoglobulin (Ig) with kappa light chains. Cell line NC3 differs from A10 because it lacks surface Ig, but has cytoplasmic mu. The third cell line (OC3) expresses, in addition to CD7, antigens of mature thymocytes (CD2+, CD3+, T-cell-receptor (TCR) ab+). These cells also express the cortical thymocyte antigen CD1, the stem cell antigen CD34, and the early lymphoid associated CD10. All cell lines are negative for the pan-myeloid antigen CD13 and the early myeloid antigen CD33. All. three cell lines have the Ig heavy chain genes rearranged. A10 and NC3 have the TCR genes in germline eonfiguration, while OC3 has TCRb and d genes rearranged. Thus, we have shown that i) CD7 and CD19 may be coexpressed on very immature cells carding the stem cell associated antigen CD34, ii) CD7 is coexpressed on B cells, which are cytoplasmic or surface Ig positive, and iii) CD19 and other B cell associated antigens are coexpressed on T-ceils. Results of immunophenotyping and eytogenetic studies and rearrangement patterns of TCR and Ig genes from acute leukemias coexpressing CD7 and CD19 are reported and discnssed in the context of their normal counterpart. HIV and HIV-proteins have some direct effect on the haematopoietic system. However, the pathogenesis of HIV associated anaemia is still far from being understood. Recent data suggest a role of immune activation phenomena. We performed a crosssectional study comparing blood cell counts, haemoglobin (hb) and erythropoietin levels of 63 HIV seropositive individuals with immune activation markers (IFN-~, serum and urine neopterin, S2-microglobulin) and with parameters of iron metabolism (serum iron, transferrin, ferritin). Compared to HIV-serogenative controls, neopterin, IFN-~, 62-microglobulin, as well as erythropoietin and ferritin were increased in the majority of patients, whereas transferrin was decreased. In addition, we found significant inverse correlations of hb with neopterin, IFN-~and B2-microglobulin levels. Significant correlations existed also between erythropoietin, the parameters of iron metabolism and hb. Finally, ferritin correlated inversely with transferrin. Thus, in patients with HIV infection low hb levels are associated with enhanced cellular immune activation and with changes of iron metabolism: lower hb is associated with lower transferrin and higher ferritin levels. The data suggest that endogenously released cytokines like IFN-~, which inhibit erythropoiesis, may be one cause of anaemia in HIV infection. Institute for Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, *Department of Dermatology and Venerology, #Institute for Hygiene, University of Innsbruck, Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of AIDS-Research, Innsbruck, +Department of Internal Medicine, University of Graz, Graz, Austria. 2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine (CdA) is a new promising substance especially developed for the treatment of lymphoid malignancies. As neutropenia and bone marrow suppression has been observed during CdA treatment, we performed Dexter-type human LTBMCs to investigate the myelosuppressive effect of CdA. In order to mimic the in vivo situation, where patients are treated with a eontinous infusion of CdA over a period of 7 days, LTBMCs were incubated with varying doses of CdA (5 -20nM) during the first week. After week 1, LTBMCs were washed free from CdA and with weekly 1/2 medium change (MC) non-adherent cells were counted and analyzed for clonogenity. At a low CdAMose of 5aM, where we did not find an additional cell loss compared to untreated controls, numbers of CFU-GM and BFU-E were already reduced to 50% at week 1, but recovered after 4 to 5 weeks of culture (Inhibition 0 -20%). In contrast, at higher doses of CdA (10, 20 aM), the reduction in the number of myeloid progenitor cells was 60% and 85%, respectively during the whole observation period (8 weeks). Concerning the composition of the adherent stromal layer, no difference between CdAtreated and normal LTBMCs was found. In order to exclude, that in CdA-treated cultures a functionally defective stromal layer was the reason for the reduced progenitor cell growth, we performed LTBMCs + CdA on preformed irradiated stromal feeder layers. Similar results were obtained whether LTBMCs +_ CdA were done on already formed stmmal feeder layers or not. As it is known that low doses of CdA reduce the release of IL6 from mor, ocytes, and IL6 is secreted from the adherent layer after each weekly medium change to stimulate clonogenic hematopoietic progenitors with a high proliferative potential in LTBMCs, we analyzed, whether reduced progenitor cell growth might be a result of a possibly reduced secretion of IL6 or GM-CSF from the adherent layer. Therefore, concentrations of IL6 and GM-CSF were measured in the supernatant 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours after 1/2 MC. The results show, that the levels of cytokines investigated were similar in normal and CdA-treated cultures. Therefore it can be suggested, that the dose dependent myelosuppressive effect of CdA is mediated by a direct action on progenitor cells and not by a functionally defective stromal layer. Interferon alfa significantly alters FU-PK by enhancing AUC of FU, addition of FA was shown to lower this effect (ECCO 6, 482) . The question is open whether FA itself may have any influence on the kinetic behaviour of FU. Therefore in 12 patients with advanced colorectal carcinoma we tes(ed two common dosages of FA and additionally L-FA with regard to their potential effects on FU-PK. FU schedule consisted of 370 mg/m 2 iv bolus daily x 5q 4 wks, in 3 consecutive monthly cycles FA was givren at 200 mg/m 2 (HD), 20 mg/m 2 (LD) or L-FA 100 mg/m 2 bolus respectively immediately before FU. Fu plasma levels were determined by HPLC over 60rain on d 1 as baseline (B), analysis repeated on d 5 of each cycle. Results of FU-PK parameters: In a prospective study we analyzed karyotypes of lymph-node biopsies from I00 patients under suspicion of malignant lymphoma. 23 cases were subsequently not confirmed pathohistologically. 12 were CLL, 9 patients suffered from Morbus Hodgkin. 42 (75%) of the remaining 56 biopsies from different non-Hodgkin lymphomas could be successfully karyotyped. The obtained data confirm the hypothesis that regardless to histologic diagnosis in non-Hodgkin lymphomas aberrations leading to loss of material from the long arm of chromosome 7 or the short arm of chromosome 17 are associated with poor prognosis. Affected patients show high tumor burden, elevated levels of serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH 656 + 167 U/l) as well as poor response to therapy and short survival periods. It seems noteworthy that the same patients often showed additionally aberrations on chromosome 3. 14 of 24 follicular lymphomas, 2 T-cell lymphomas, 2 high grade precusor B-cell lymphomas showed clones with t(14;18)(q32;q21). Additionally we found in the two patients with high grade precusor B-cell lymphoma a specific Burkitt translocation. 6 biopsies from follicular lymphomas did not yield any mitoses. Del(18)(q21), 14q  t(14;15)(q32;q23), inv(14)(qllq32) were observed in one case each. High karyotypic complexity was correlated with shortened survival in lymphomas bearing t(14;18). TMA, a term that encompass thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and the hemolytic uremic syndrome, is a rare disorder of unknown cause with a high mortality rate. TMA is characterized by hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, neurologic symptoms, fever and renal dysfunction. In two TMA patients vWF multimers and subunits were investigated at the time of diagnosis, following successful treatment and in one patient during relapse. A lack of the large vWF multimers was seen before treatment and during relapse whereas unusually large vWF multimers were demonstrable following successful therapy. Thus, unusually large vWF multimers may have a crucial role in the pathomechanism of TMA by inducing platelet aggregation and deposition of platelet aggregates in the microcirculation. In both TMA patients proteolysis of the vWF subunits was observed at the time of diagnosis but no longer after therapy. It is not clear whether vWF proteolysis is a primary event or occurs secondary due to endothelial cell injury. 5 patients with TMA (associated with bone marrow transplantation (BMT) in 2 and pregnancy in 1) were treated with exchange plasmapheresis 60 ml/kg/d, methylprednisolone 0.75 mg/kg i.v. 2x daily and vincristine 2 mg i.v. day 1, 1 mg days 4, 7, and 10. Treatment was successful in all patients with a normalization of all blood parameters except in 2 patients in whom persistent thrombocytopenia was due to recent BMT rather than TMA. In i patient 2 relapses were successfully controlled with the above regimen. We conclude that exchange plasmapheresis and administration of methylprednisolone and vincristine are effective in TMA. In this report the successful treatment of severe factor II deficiency in a seventeen year old male patient with systemic lupus erythematodes (SLE) and a lupus anticoagulant (LAC) is described. The patient presented with fever, malaise and joint pain, and had neither a history of bleeding nor of thromboembolic events. On admission the aPTT was 142 seconds and factor II clotting activity and antigen were lower than 2%. Anticardiolipin antibodies (ACA) were considerably elevated. Other clotting factors were within the normal range. During the course of therapy with prednisolon and azathioprin an improvement of the patients clinical condition and normalization of the aPTT, an increase of factor II and a decrease of ACA (IgG and IgM) were observed. After two years of treatment with prednisolon and cyclophosphamide the aPTT was slightly prolonged (50 seconds) whereas factor II activity and antigen and ACA had completely normalized. This case shows an excellent response of lupus dependent coagulation abnormalities to immunosuppressive treatment. Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), a distinct subtype of AML, is frequently associated with disseminated coagulopathy (DIC) causing a higfi incidence of fatal bleeding complications. APL is cytogenetically characterized by the translocation t (15;17) involving the region of the retinoic receptor cz gene. In vitro all trans retinoic actd (ATRA) exhibits a differentiation-inducing and antiproliferative capacity on APL-celllines. Similar effects were observed when ATRA was administered to APL-patients, who achieved complete remission without any cytostatic therapy. We have treated 10 patients with APL ( 5 males and5 females, median age: 36 years, range 22 -60 years). The cytogenetic translocation t (15;17) was observed in all patients, 3 j)atients, had additional karyotypig abnormalities. ATRA was administered as capsmes (45mg/m z divided in two daily doses) for 90 -106 days. 4 primarily untreated patients, 1 patient in 1 st relapse after autotogous transplantation and one patient with a chemotherapy-resistant relapse received ATRA without any cytostatic treatment. Two patients wcsre treated with a combination of 2~TRA and "3+7" induction (60 mglm ~ Datmorubicin dl-3, 100 mg/m Ara-C,2dl-7 ) and two patients received additional chemotherapy (4 x 3g/m Ara-C) due to excessive hyperleukocytosis developing during ATRA-treatment. Clinical and laboratory signs of DIC (fibrinogen level, fibrinogen degradation products) improveu rapidly in all patients. Complete hematological, immunological and cytogenetic remission was obtained in all patients within 4 to 12 weeks therapy. Hyperleuk~cytosis developed in 3 patients and was treat~ in 2/3 with 4 x 3g/m Ara-C. Other ATRA side effects (_dryness or skin, alopecia, bone pain) were mild and improved durhi-g continuing ATRA-treatment. 7/10 patients are still in remission for 1 + to 8+ months after starting treatment. 3 patients receiving ATRA as salvage therapy after treatment failure relapsed after 2 -7 months in complete remission. Our results indicate that ATRA therapy for APL is safe and highly effective. The prognostic value of diagnosis-remission interval on leukemiafree survival after BMT was investigated retrospectively in all 193 adult patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) transplanted in first remission and reported to the EBMT between 1979 and 1986 . Patients achieving remission within eight weeks of diagnosis ("fast responders") had better leukemia-free survival after BMT than those with remission after eight weeks ("slow responders"): leukemia-free survival at three years was 43% vs 32% for fast and slow responders, respectively (p=0.04). The effect on leukemia-free survival was particularly severe for slow responders transplanted within three months of remission. Only 17% of the slow responders with short remission-BMT interval survived at three years. Decreased leukemia-free survival was caused by both, excess of transplant-related mortality and increased relapse incidence. In a multivariate analysis, time intervals (both, diagnosis-remission and remission-BMT) were the strongest independent prognostic factor for leukemia-free survival, probability of relapse and transplant-related mortality. We conclude that the intervals from diagnosis to remission and remission-BMT have a strong prognostic value in adult patients with ALL not only for remission duration after conventional treatment, but also for leukemia-free survival after bone marrow transplantation. This work was financially supported by EC Grant No MR4"-0216-S Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is associated with disseminated intravascuar coagulation (DIC), which can be accelerated by induction of cytostatie chemotherapy and causes a markedly risk for (intracerebral) hemorrhage. Complete remissions of APL can be achieved by differentiation-inducing therapy with aU-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). We studied activation markers of the coagulation system (thrombin-AT III complex (TAT), D-Dimer) in 3 patient with APL treated with ATRA. All patients had signs of DIC before induction of therapy (low plasma fibrinogen, low platelet-count) and moderate to severe bleeding tendency, activation markers were elevated (TAT >15 /~g/L, D-Dimer >1500 /~g/L). DIC was treated with fresh frozen plasma (3-9 U/d), no heparin was administered. APL was treated with ATRA (45 mg/m2/d). D-Dimer levels decreased rapidly to values <300 /~g/L, TAT <8 /~g/L within I week of ATRA therapy, after 2 weeks activation markers were in the normal range (D-Dimer <100, TAT <3 ~g/L). No platelet substitution was necessary during ATRA therapy, FFP substitution could be stopped after at least 4 days. Our data show, that treatment with ATRA can reduce the coagulation disorder and the risk for severe bleeding in patients with APL. (21 males, 13 females) with AML in first remission (n=lS) and advanced disease (n=16) underwent allogenic bone marrow transplantation (BMT). 32/34 pts. were transplanted from an HLA identical sibling, 2 pts from 1 ag-mismatched sibling. Conditioning consisted of either Cyclophosphamide (120mg/kg) + TBI 10Gy single dose (n=29) or 12Gy in 8 fractions (n=3) or Vepesid 60 mg/kg + TBI 13,LGy in 9 fractions (n=l) or Cyclophosphamide 50 mg/kg + Busulfan (Tmg/kg over 4 days) + TBI 10Gy single dose (n=l). GVHD prophylaxis was performed using MTX alone (n=12), CsA plus MTX (n=20) or CsA plus methylprednisolon (n=2 probability of relapse are 15% and 33%. Acute GVHD grade II-IV occured in 11/40 pts (28%); limited chronic GVHD was seen in 5/26 pts (19%) and extensiv chronic GVHD in 9/26 pts (35%) at risk. Transplant related mortality was 32% for the entire group. Twenty four of the 25 living pts (96%) have a Karnovsky score of 80-100, 1 pt has a Karnovsky score of 60. Our results confirm that a substantial proportion of pts with CML can be cured by allogeneic BMT, a therapeutic goal that currently cannot be reached by any other form of treatment. Eight patients with CML in chronic phase (age 3-40 yrs, median 25 yrs) were transplanted with allogeneic HLA-identical bone marrow 2-51 months (median 5 months) after diagnosis following conditioning with busulfan 4 mg/kg/day over 4 days and cyclophosphamide 50 mg/kg/day over 4 days. The age of the donors was between 10 months and 38 yrs (median 22 yrs). The transplanted ~ucleated cell dose Consiste~ of 0.8 -4.9 x 10~ recipient (median 4 x I0~). Gvhd-prophylaxis was cyclosporin A and prednisone. 7 of 8 patients survive 150 -2466 (median 560) days. I patient died from multiorgan-failure. The results and side effects of the BU/CY regimen do not seem to differ from classical conditioning regimens including total body irradiation. (BMT) were performed for treatment of hematological malignancies (total n=76; AML=24, CML=21, ALL=13, lymphoma=12, MDS=3, multiple myeloma=3), solid tumors (n=6; breastca=4, colorectalca=l, Ewing Sarcoma=l), severe aplastic anemia (n=4) or thalassemia (n=l). Standard risk, defined as AML in 1st remission, ALL in 1st or 2rid remission, CML chronic phase, HLA-identical sibling and 1st BMT was present in 39/87 patients (pts). Pts with hematological malignancies were conditioned with cyclophosphamide (CTX) (2x60 mg/kg/d) and total body irradiation, whereas pts with severe aplastic anemia w e r e pretreated with CTX 50 mg/kg/d x 4. Pts with lymphoma received either TBI, VP-16 and CTX or BCNU, VP-16 and CTX as conditioning regimen. Marrow was harvested from HLA-identical sibling donors in 56 pts, from HLA-mismatched family donors in 7 pts and from 5 unrelated HLA-identical bone marrow donors. In the remaining 19 patients autologous marrow was reinfused. Cyclosporine was used as graft-versus-host disease (GvH-D) prophylaxis either alone (n=59) or in combination with metbotrexate (n=9). Overall survival probability for allogeneic BMT was 46.8%, being 74.7% for standard risk and 24.8% for high risk pts. Survival probability after autologous BMT was 31.4%. The highes~ survival probability was observed in pts with CML in chronic phase (78.5%), followed by 71% in pts with standard risk AML and 60% in pts with standard risk ALL. Survival probability in advanced lymphoma pts (n=12) reached 55.5%. Relapse was the most frequent cause of death (n=16) followed by CMV interstitial pneumonia (n=7). GvH-D > II was seen in 22/68 patients and cause of death in 2/22. 3 (43 %) 3 (43 %) 6 (85 ~) Patients treated with escalated M-VAC regimen in combination with GM-CSF showed an incredsed response rate, i.e. 85 %, in comparison to those treated with conventional regimen (40 %). In non of the patients with additional squamous cell metaplasia a complete remission was achieved. Side effects were comparable in both groups. Nausea end vomiting was present in 5 patients, mucositis in 3 patients, nephrotuxieity in 3 patients (1 grade 3); 1 patient had an apupleetie insult. Hematologic toxicity was present in 13 patients. Eleven patients had leakopania (4 patients grade 1, 4 patients grade 2, 3 grade 1); 7 patients developed thrompopahia (3 patients grade 1, 2 patients grade 2, 2 patients grade 3); 2 patients had anemia grade 1, 2 patients grade 2. The median duration of leukocyto nadir was 8,3 (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) days in group A and 5,3 (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) days in group B (+GM-CSF). From these results it may be concluded that escalated M-VAC with GM-C.SF supply results in increased response rates with similar incidence of side effects, but a tendency towards a shorter leukopenie phase in comparison to conventional M-VAC. Further patients' recruitment is ongoing in order to osess these initial findings. Anemia, a common complication of malignant disease, often impairs the patients' qualitiy of life and diminishes their subjective sense of well-being to a considerable degree. We studied 24 consecutive patients (10 male, 14 female) with various neoplasias and moderate to severe anemia who were treated with 150 U/kg erythropoietin (Erypo, Cilag, Vienna), 3 x/week. Before the start of that therapy and after 8 and 12 weeks of treatment the patients responded to a questionaire. It consisted of 10 items covering physical capacity, emotional state, and social activity. Self-assessment was performed on a graded linear analogue scale ranging from very favorable (starting point 1) through neutral (point 3) to very poor (end point 5). In addition, the WHO performance status was evaluated and hemoglobin values were monitored. Response to the treatment was defined as an increase of the initial hemoglobin level by at least 20 g/l At the start of therapy non-responders differed from responders only by a significantly higher pain score. After 8 weeks of treatment most parameters had improved in responders, but not in non-reponding patients. At that point of time we observed the highest correlation between mood and hemoglobin level (r=-0.572, p<0.001) indicating a positive emotional reaction to both the objective improvement of the initially hacapacitating anemic state and the subjective perception of that progress. After 12 weeks of therapy all items showed significant improvements in responders. Even the non-responders revealed significant gains in their subjective sense of well-being, physical capability, and social activity. In contrast to responders, however, they reported no relief of anxiety and perceived pain and nausea as unchanged. In conclusion, successful treatment of tumor-associated anemia with erythropoietin significantly improves the patients' quality of life as well as their subjective sense of well-belng; to some degree psyehosoeial improvement seems to occur even if the patient fails to fulfill the objective response eiteria. Individuals with cancer have previously been shown to suffer from suppressed immune functions, e.g. monacyte chemotaxis. Surgical removal of the tumor often resulted in normalisation of this monocyte function, which suggested that products of the neoplasms might he responsible. A soluble factor with such an inhibitory effect on monocytes is the retroviral structural protein pl5E, produced by murine leukemia viruses. Similar factors are produced by diverse human tumors. This study examines the presence of p15E like factors in sera and urine of breast cancer patients. Thirty patients (pts) with breast cancer, 29 pts. with benign breast masses and 28 healthy controls were tested blindly with the monocyte polarisation assay, using Nformyl-methionyl-leucylphenylalanine as chemoattractant. Sera of the malign tumor patients inhibited the monocyte polarisution significantly (mean inhibition 2596, SD 12.8) compared to sera of benign tumor patients (7.2%, SD 4.6) and of controls (5.1%, SD 4.2). The observed inhibition of ehemotaxis could he neutralized in vitro by a monoelonaI antibody to pl5E. Surgical removal of the tumor resulted in a restoration of the monocyte polarisation in 18 out of 21 (86%) pts of the breast cancer group. Results testing urine samples correlated well with those of sara. These data give additional support to the concept that tumor-derived plSE-like factors are responsible for the inhibitory effect on monecyte chemotaxis in breast cancer patients, and that these factors can be found in serum as well as in urine. A fifty-one-year old male was admitted to hospital for investigation of fever, progressive weight loss, stool irregularities and generalized fatigability. The patient's past medical history was non contributory. Physical examination revealed a pale, subfebrile, and almost cachectic patient. Laboratory investigations disclosed an elevated ESR, leukocytosis, thrombocytosis and a severe microcytic, hypochromic anemia. The patient underwent a complete gastrointestinal diagnostic workup. Radiologically, there was evidence of a characteristic involvement of the terminal ileum with cobblestoned appearance of the mucosa as well as a 5-6 om stenosis proximal of the bauhini valve. Abdominal computed tomography suggested the presence of a large intraluminal tumorous lesion. Because of crescent symptoms of intestinal obstruction, laparotomy was performed with resection of the terminal ileum. Pathologic examination revealed a tumour of 6 cm in diameter within an ulcerative chronically inflammed mucosa. Histology revealed a leiomyosarcoma in a typical Crohn's disease affected terminal ileum. Although malignant small bowel tumours have been described in association with regional enteritis, and leiomyosarcomas, in fact, account for approximately 15% of all small bowel neoplasms, there are some specialities in this case. First, no concurrent incidence of leiomyosarcoma and Crohn's disease has ever been i:eported before. Furthermore, malignant tumours in inflammatory bowel disease usually arise after long immunosuppressive therapy and/or in a defunctioned ileum. The main reason to creat a computer-assisted system for cancer patient care at the onkology department of the university hospital in Graz were the following: (1) The continously growing number of cancer patients (2) the limited number of staff and rooms and (3) the idea of gaining more time for treating each patient. At the beginning of 1989 an expert team of Joanneum Research, Institut for information systems, and the permanent staff of the oncological department started with design and development of this system. Using the relational database management system "ORACLE" and software tools such as SQL*FORMS and SQL*MENU a system was created which immediately supplies all information of the individual patient. The integration of this system in the hospital network improves the efficiency of administration and exchange of online information (e.g. radiological or histological findings) as other clinics are involved in dignosis and treatment. The "heart" of this system is the database in which all information on the patient (stock data, anamnesis, therapy, blood chemistry, etc.) is stored. An electronic appointment book has been installed. For improved information exchange with other departments and general practitioners about 100 predefind forms have been designed and can be printed out on demand. Word-Perfect has been integrated for textprocessing of medical reports. The whole system is controled via menues.Using Oracle the system runs on different hardware configuratons which is important if studies will be carried out in cooperation with other departments. This system has been in use on VAX with 7 terminals and 1 integrated PC since April 1990. Of 23 patients who were treated with mastectomy, 22 had modified radical mastectomy and postoperative irradiation to the chest wall +-peripheral lymphatic areas,one patient underwent radical mastectomy and postoperative irradiation.Another patient had an excision biopsy only, followed by irradiation. One patient received tamoxifen, another one CMF-regimen in an adjuvant setting.Local recurrence developed in 1 /23 patients (4%) treated with mastectomy and radiation therapy to the chest wall and peripheral lymphatics.Four patients (17%)developed distant metastases Five-year and 10-year overall survival (Kaplan-Meier) is 93% and 87%,respectively,when all causes of death are included.As observed in former reports,the stage of disease at initial presentation seems to be a parameter that significantly contributes to survival in male breast cancer patients.To what extend improved local control by adequate local therapy, as surgery and postoperative radiotherapy,may improve overall survival,remains to be discussed. In patients with breast cancer no satisfying tumor markers were found, yet. The aim of our investigation was to compare the usefulness of newly developed tumor markers with the most common combination carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) with cancer antigen (CA) 15-3. We evaluated the concentrations of tumor associated antigens in the sera of 153 female patients with histologically proven mammary cancer. In 84 of these patients evidence or progression of disease was clinically confirmed, whereas 69 patients after mastectomy without any evidence of disease served as control group. The following tumor markers were determined: CEA, CA 15-3, the mucin markers CA 549, carcinoma-associated mucin antigen (CA M) 26, CA M 29 and the proliferation markers tissue polypeptide antigen (TPA) and tissue polypeptide specific antigen (TPS  We made some haemorheological examinations in patients, suffering from malignant tumors. We used the following examinations: whole blood viscosity, yield shear stress, plasma viscosity and three tests for erythrocyte deformability: initial filerability rate /IRFR/, clogging particules /CP/, red cell transit time /RCTT/. These three parameters were examined by St. George s filtrometer. In 3 cases the whole blood viscosity was elevated and in 9 patients the yield shear stress too. In the half of the patients the plasma viscosity was elevated, due to elevated fibrinogen concentration and abnormal protein fractions. We found an interesting phenomenon examining the erythrocyte deformability. If we used buffer erythrocyte solution /10 %/ the deformability was decreased only in six cases. On the other hand if we used the own plasma the erythrocyte deformability was abnormal in 12 patients. In seven cases the erythrocyte deformability was normal in buffer solution s but was abnormal in plasma soiution. We think: in malignant tumersthe abnormal erythrocyte deformability due to abnormal plasma factors. Yet, their effects on nonhematopeietic cell growth are poorly explored. To investigate the implication of HGFs in regulation of mammary epithelial cell growth we have studied the effect of IL-3, IL-4, IL-6 and GM-CSF on anchorage-independent growth properties of 4 cell lines constituting a novel in vitro model system for mammary epithelial cell tumorigenesis. The human breast epithelial cell line Hu-MI was established by microinjection of SV40 DNA into milk epithelial cells, the precursor cells of breast cancer. Hu-MI cells grow strictly anchorage-dependent and do not induce tumors in nude mice. In none of our experiments the tested HGFs could induce clonogenic growth of such cells. From this cell line we have selected sublines HuMI-T, HuMI-TFul and HuMI-TTu2, reflecting different stages of transformation. HuMI-T ce]ls grow anchorage-independent but do not induce tumors. Their clonogenic growth is significantly inhibited by IL-3, IL-4 and IL-6. HuMI-TTul and HuMI-TTu2 ceils are clonogenic as well as tumorigenic; yet, they show distinct stages of tumoral differentiation. Both tumorigenic lines are growth inhibited by IL-3 and IL-6. IL-4, however, inhibits clonogenic growth of HuMI-TTul but stimulates proliferation of HuMI-TTu2 cells. None of the tested lines was responsive to GM-CSF. Our results indicate that responsiveness of human breast epithelial cells to HGFs might be in relation with their transformational stage. We investigated the effect of 2.5S NGF purified from mouse submaxillary glands on the clonal growth of various human malignant cell lines. Cell lines included the following: 2 myeloid leukemia cell lines, 2 lymphoma cell lines, 10 glioma cell lines, 2 neuroblastoma cell lines, a colorectal cell line, a breast carcinoma cell line, an ovary carcinoma cell line, an osteosarcoma cell line, 2 lung carcinoma cell lines, a hepatocellular carcinoma cell line. NGF was tested (0,5-500 ng/ml) in human tumor cloning assays (HICA) in agar. The cells were continuously exposed to the growth factor for the complete HTCA period. NGF showed growth stimulation in two gliomas and in two lung carcinomas (twofivefold). Growth stimulation was dose dependent and could be abolished by preincubation of NGF with neutralizing antibody. Single colonies stimulated by NGF had a high secondary plating efficacy arguing against an induction of differentation by the factor. In the other cell lines there was no significant growth modulation by NGF. Since NGF will be investigated in clinical trials, this observation should be further studied in vitro and in vivo. Since the beginning of the year 1991 we have had opportunity to use Intron-A in the treatment of multiple myeloma (13 cases),essential thrombocytaemia (2 cases), hairy cell leukaemia (3cases) and chronic granulocytic leukaemia (4 cases). In multiple myeloma 1 patient's disease progressed during the 5 month periode. Eight of them could have been treated for more than half a year, 3 of them treated with combined M-2 proto-col+Intron-A induction therapy improved rapidly and later could have been taken on Intron-A maintenance monotherapy. One patient was treated with Intron-A between M-2 regimens only, 2 was given Intron-A induction therapy without any cytostatics and another one maintenance Intron-A treatment after completion of cytostatic induct, ion. During the treatment of 2 patients with essential thrombocytaemia the platelet count decreased in a fortnight followed by improvement of splenomegaly as well. Three patients with hairy cell leukaemia had been treated successfully:pancytopenia improved significantly in all cases,the splenomegaly in twoo. Among 4 patients with CGL one had been treated with Intron-A induction monotherapy achieving complete remission in 4 months. In 3 cases Intron-A was given as maintenance therapy. The most frequent side effects were:increase of bone pain (i case),mental depression (2 cases), fever ( 5 cases),leukopenia (2 cases) and thrombocytopenia (i case). In previous studies, elevated levels of the cytokines interie-kin-6 (IL-6) and turnout necrosis factor (TNF) have been found to correlate with poor outcome of h, ma, malaria. In this work, heatstable antigen preparations of Plasmodium vinckei were used to study antigen dependent cytokine production of routine peritoneal macrophages. For determination of IL-6 and TNF activities, the cell lines B9 and Weld 164 were used in bioassays as previously described. A significant production of IL-6 and TNF could be registered after 2 hours and I hour stimulation, respectively. When stimulation was performed in presence of polymyxin B, the antigen dependent production of IL-6 and TNF was reduced by 20 %. The patterns of IL-6 and TNF secretion after -miArial antigen stimulation were compared to those obtained with endotoxin stimulation and differences could be observed. Maximal secretion levels for IL-6 were not reached after 6 hours stimulation whereas TNF showed its maximum secretion rate between 1.5 and 2 hours. In the presence of anti-TNF antibody, the antigen dependent IL-6 synthesis was lowered, indicating TNF dependency of IL-6 synthesis upon antigen sldmulation. At concentrations higher than 0.5 mglml, it was found that pentoxyphi|llne (PTX) inhibited TNF secretion, but in contrary IL-6 secretion was clcarly increased by PTX. were observed with exogenous antigen preparations of Plasmodium falciparum on human macrophages, when the production of IL-6 and TNF were studied. These kinetic studies provide new perspectives about the importance of macrephages as a source of cytokines in ma'lnria comlmred with other parasitic diseases. Bioassays are used for detection and quantification of polypeptide regulatory factors such as cytokines and tumor growth factors in biological fluids. We have been dealing with a bioassay (mink lung cell growth inhibition assay) for detection of TGF-~like activity in malignant effusion. Both methods used, i.e. ~H-thymidine incorporation as well as MTT-test showed great variations in sensitivity over the time, when recombinant human (rh-)TGF-S was used for establishing standard test conditions. In order to improve test results several clones with 3 distinct morphologies were developed out of the original cell line. These clones differed in sensitivity to the growth inhibitory effect of rh-TGF-S as well as in autocrine growth factors supply and response to them, as detected by neutralisation with monoclonal antibodies (MoAb). Most constant results were obtained when Cl/C2-clones were used as targets in growth inhibitory assay. Repeated testing with rh-TGF-B showed good reproducibility and an ED 50 of< 20 pg/ml. With this assay we are able to detect TGF-~-like activity in malignant effusions derived from cancer patients. Specificicity controls are performed by neutralisation with anti-TGF-B-MoAb. This assay provides a useful tool for detection and quantification of TGF-Slike activity in clinical samples such as malignant effusions and in tumor cell culture supernatants or extracts. ~upported by Jubiliumsfonds der ~st. Our preliminary data indicate that the membrane microviscosity and the proportion of polyunsaturated C18 fatty acids are lower, the lipidperoxidation capacity and the proportion of arachidonic acid (20:4n-6) are hioher in neonatal calf erythroeytes as compared with the values that have been found in adult cattle. Lipid peroxidation capacity (LP c) has been estimated by comparinB the malondialdehyde (MOA) content of the erythrocytes before (LP o) and after (LP24) the autoxidatire test: LPc=LP24-LP o. The results were expressed as nmol MOA x g-lHb. In the autoxidative test, a 10% suspension of washed erythrocytes has been incubated in isotonic NaCI solution containing i0 mH Veronal-Na-HCl buffer (pH 7.4) in air atmosphere for 24 hours at 57~ The lipids have been extracted from the erythrocytes by isopropanol-chloroform ll:7 (v/v) without previous hemolysis. Fatty acid methyl esters were separated on i0% OESS-PS column usin9 a Hitachi MOO 263 gas-liquid chromatograph connected to data processor. Hembraoe microviscosity was estimated by measuring the emission anisotropy of the fluorescent lipid probe 1,6diphenyl-l,3,5-hexatriene (DPH) at two different temperatures (2g~ and 37~ The autoxidative test resulted in the significant enhancement of lipidperoxidation and the remarkable decrease in the proportion of polyunsaturated fatty acids in calf erythrocytes. The high sensitivity of red cell membrane and fetal hemoglobin against autoxidation could explain the faster ageing and the shorter lifespan of neonatal cells. The administration of Anti Rhesus D specific IgG has been shown to be an alternative a'eatment possibility for immune thrombocytopenia. The therapeutic effect is mediated byblocking of the RES. We report on the results of Aria D treatment in 6 patients with therapy refractory ITP. All patients had previously received corticosteroids, 5 patients had received interferon tx, 2 patients in addition ,mmunoglobulines, 2 immunosuppressants and/or chemotherapy, 2 patients had undergone splenectomy. The 6 patients received totally 7 cycles Anti D, doses ranging from 1200 to 6000 u~g. Patients after splenectomy and/or immunosuppressive therapy vnth Imurek or cytostatic agents (n=3) did not respond to the administration of Anti D, in contrast to the other patients. The response was short rived in 2 patients, long term rennssion was observed in one patient, one patient was not evaluable because of early splenectomy after Anti D treatment. Responders showed decreases of serum hemoglobin indicating mild hemolysis. Response occured at dose levels from 1200 to 6000 ug. We conclude (1) that only patients with cell sequestration into the ~leen will respond to Anti D, (2) that previous chemotherapy blocks Ant! D effects and (3) Serum cholesterol level of 27 patients suffering from primary myelofibrosis was studied between 1980 and 1991. Their mean age was 64.2 years. Diagnosis was based on the generally accepted criteria including the histological examination of bone marrow. The mean value of the total cholesterol was 3.4 mmol/l (range 1.8-5.06 mmol/l). This cholesterol level proved to be significantly lower than that of healthy persons and of a group of patients suffering from chronic idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP). Mean cholesterol value of 29 patients with chronic ITP proved to be 4.95 mmol/l. Similar data have been described by Marini et al in 1989 . A further decrease of serum cholesterin was observed during the disease process and a relation between the degree of cholesterol lowering and the fibrotic process seems to be very probable. Similar tendency in the change of cholesterol level could be observed in chronic myeloproliferative disorders such as polycythaemia vera and chronic granulocytic leukaemia. Our data suggest that the cholesterol metabolism is influenced by the abnormal function of the megakaryocytic cell lineage manifesting in myelofibrosis. Patients with acute leucemia are not only compromised by bacterial but also by fungal infections. Fungal colonization and subsequent infections can be promoted by the use of antibiotics, corticosteroids and immunosuppressive drugs. According to epidemiological data of Candidoses, Candida albicans and Candida tropicalls cause more than 90% of all nosocomial fungal infections. We examined the sensitivity of clinical isolates of C. albicans and C. tropicalis against amphotericin B, ketoconazole, fluconazole and 5-flucytosine (5-FC) by means of MIC determination. The used media were Sabouraud -Glucose-bouillon for amphotericin B, nitrogen base-bouillon for 5-FC and a chemically defined medium for ketoconazole and fluconazole. The MIC 90 for Candida albicans wer~ for amphotericin B 0.63 mg/l, for 5-FC 2.5 mg/l, for~ ketoconazole 0.3 mg/l and for fluconazole 0.31 mg/l. New experimental data show that sensivitytesting for 5-FC and fluconazole are necessary. isolated by density centrifugation of cord blood and normal bone marrow samples, and of peripheral blood (PB) from patients treated with GM-CSF, were double stained with anti CD34 MAb (8G12) versus CD45, CD45-RB, CD45-RO and CD45-RA, respectively, and analyzed by flow cytometry. In all specimen, CD34 + MNC expressed CD45 at a low to very low level, while the expression of CD45-RB was similar or slightly higher. In contrast, CD45-RO and CD45-RA can subdivide the CD34 + population into fractions negative, dim (+) and normal positive (++) for these subgroups. In bone marrow, the majority of the CD34 + MNC is RA ++ and RO-, but there are also 34+/RA + and 34+/RAcell fractions. In PB, most cells are 34+/RA -with varying proportions of 34+/RA + and 34+/RA ++ and a variable expression of RO. In cord blood, the hematopoietic progenitors are usually 34~/RA -and 34+/RO -. Culture of sorted MNC in semisolid medium revealed that clusters and dispersed (late) CFU-GM originated from 34+/RA ++ cells, while the 34+/RA -MNC formed compact and multiple centre, white and red colonies derived from early progenitors. Addition of 20 ng SCF (Amgen) per ml of medium containing 34+/RA -sorted cord blood MNC led to a change of many BFU-E to CFU-mix which was not, to this extent, seen in blood and bone marrow. We conclude that early hematopoietic cells are CD34+/CD45-RA-/CD45-RO -and that differentiation leads to CD45-RA expression detectable by flow cytometry. Implantable catheter devices are increasingly used for systemic and regional chemotherapy. As we know about possible complications beside of well known advantages, incidence and sort of problems in these systems will be studied. From january until december 1991 117 patients received implantable catheter devices and where included in this investigation. Pharmacia (Port a Cath) and PFM (Jet Port) systems were used and placed via central venous access, as well as intraarterially (A.hepatica propria, Truncus coeliacus, A. mammaria int., intraaortic). 99 out of 117 (84,6%) received an intravenous system, 18 patients (15,3%) an intraarterial. Catheterassoclated problems were observed in a total of 23 patients (19,6%), 16 (69,5%) of them had i.v. and 7 (30,5%) had i.a. catheters. In the i.v.section mechanical problems (75%) predominated septical complications (25%), whereas all i.a. Catheter associated problems turned out to be caused mechanically. 11 in a total of 23 complications had to be treated by surgical intervention, deaths associated with catheter/port complications had not to be observed. In summary it can be stated that totally implantable intraarterial catheter systems provide application of highly efficient regional chemotherapy, whereas devices with central venous access facilitate systemic therapy and supportive care. Results of our investigation show the possibility of severe complications in several cases, which can be reduced to acceptable dimensions by interdisciplinary cooperation, use of adequate catheter systems, and furthermore carefull handling by experienced and skillful staff. cell concentrates (buffy) collected for autologous transplantation are comprised of 95% to 99% erythrocytes most of which will lyze during the freezing/thawing procedure. We studied the recovery of CFU after purification of such cell concentrates via density centrifugation and examined 21 leukapheresis products obtained from 5 patients during recovery from myelosuppressive treatment. Using cell counting, clonogenic assay and flow cytometry, the results were compared with those obtained from the low density MNC preparations of peripheral blood (PB) samples drawn prior to each apheresis. Both the MNC and CFU were enriched by 40 to 300 fold per ml of buffy compared to 1 ml of PB, and very similar distributions of CFU-mix, CFU-GM, and BFU-E were found after culture of PB MNC, unseparated buffy MNC and low density buffy MNC. Most erythrocytes were pelleted into the high density cell fraction during density centrifugation. Compared to the original buffy cell suspension (=100%), the recovery of total cells (= volume) in the interface cell fraction ranged only between 1%-10%, whereas 49%-68% of the MNC and 68%-92% of the CFU were recovered. Only 0.1-1% of the CFU were grown from the high density cell fractions. In conclusion, we recommend density separation of cells collected by leukapheresis since most of the CFU are recovered whereas the volume of the transplant to be frozen (and thus the amount of DMSO to be infused during transplantation) is reduced to 10% or below. The lymphocytotoxic effect of chlorodeoxyadenosine (CdA), a purine analogue resistant to adenosine deaminase, requires the phesphurylation by the enzyme deoxycytidine kinase. This effect on lymphocytes can be antagonized by coadministration of deoxycytidine (dCy0, a competitive substrata of deoxycytidin ldnese. Recent in vitro studies 1 have shown, that not only growth of lymphocytes but also colony formation by myeloid progenitors derived from normal human bone marrow is dose dependently inhibited by CdA. The aim of this study was to examine the effect of various doses of dCyt (10 -6 to 10-3M) on CdA mediated growth inhibition of myeloid progenitor cells in vitro. Our results show that coadministration of dCyt (>10"4M) to CdA containing cultures (160nM) protected colony formation by human bone marrow derived progenitor cells (CFU-E, BFU-E, CFU-GM) in the methylcellulose system. However, the protective effect of dCyt was markedly different on the various subclasses of progenitor ceils depending on their maturation stage. Thus, coadministratioa of 10"4M dCyt completely reversed the growth inhibiting effect of CdA on CFU-E colony formation, whereas the colony formation of the immature progenitors BFU-e and CFU-GM was onl3Y restored to 50% of control cultures. If the concentration of dCyt Was increased to 10" M, the protective effect for BFU-E and CFU-GM in the presence of a maximally growth inhibitory dose of CdA (160nM) reached almost 80% of control cultures. The fact that CdA mediated growth inhibition of CFU-E could be completely restored, but that of BFU-E and CFU-GM only incompletely despite a higher concentration of dCyt (10-3M), led us to the suggestion, that beside phosphorylatioa by dCyt kinase additional mechanisms may be operative for the toxicity of CdA in the more immature progenitors (BFU-E and CFU-GM). 1 Petzer A., Bilged R., Zilian U., Geisen F., Haun M., Konwalinka G.: Inhibitory effect of 2-CdA on granulocytic, erythroid and T-lympbocytic colony growth. Blood 78,1992 Blood 78, :pp 2583 Blood 78, -2587 This work was supported by the "Fonds zur FOrderung der wissensehaftiichen Forsehang", P8718. Hemostasis alterations have been investigated in some hematological malignancies but not in CLL. We e how hemostasis is affected in CLL and the connection between the progression of the disease and the hemostasis disturbances. In 80 CLL cases belonging to stages of Rai O-IV, prothrombin activity (PT), activated partial thremboplastin time (APTT), thrombin time (TT), fibrinogen level, antithrombin III (AT III) activity, ethanol gelation test (EGT), FOP, platelet count, ADP, epinephrine and collagen induced platelet aggregation were examined. We also measured the ATP release from the platelets in 25 patients. We found that there were various hemostasis alterations in CLL already in early stages. We observed a gradual decrease of platelet aggregation and AIP release from the platelets in stages O-III, when the platelet count was within the normal range. ES/ became positive and AT III activity decreased in more advanced stages (II-IV), Pf decreased only in stage III-IV. Fibrinogen, TT and APTT did not change with the progression considerably. Oecreased platelet functions occured more frequently in patients with high WBC count. With the improvement of the disease hemostasis alterations improved as well. With respect to the causes of blood clotting abnormalities, the bone marrow in lower stages, the spleen and liver involvement, the activation and consumption of some coagulation factors in higher stages can be taken into consideration. Hemostasis examinations may help the staging and indicate the progression and also the regression of CLL.  Restrictive cardiomyopathy in AL-~myloid and LCDD Restrictive cardiomyopathy is observed in cases of endc~yocardial fibrosis, endocarditis fibroplastica LSffler, Boeck' s disease and metabolic disorders. As paraproteinamic haemoblastosis can coincide with amyloidosis especially in the final phases echocardiographic and bioptic myocardial damages are not surprising accordingly. Lately, casuistics on cardial Participation in the so-called LCDD of various etiologies have multiplied. Thus, we consider the diagnosis by echocardiography of the early phase of paraproteinosis coinciding with LCDD to be of great importance. The casuistics of a first diagnosis of a lambda-chain Bence-Jones plasmozytoma reached by the findings of a restrictive cardic~yopathy is presented in the following. In November 1990, we admitted a 67 year old female patient for the clarification of cardial insufficiency symptcms ~%ich had been existing for month. Echocardiography revealed a restrictive cardicrayopathy; etiology showed an lchain pla~nozytc~a of the lambda type with extended infil-t_ration of the bonemarrow-radiologically nofoci in the bones; results of peripheral blood-count end retention parameters stage I; protein analysis showed a distinct nephrotic syndrome or fhp ha~fs c,f ~h eyaretJ<~n of ]ight chaiDg~ h[~i ~ f~ L.C., in rectal biopsy histologically and i~nunohistological ly we found minimal deposits of amyloids in suhaucosa. Up to present under therapy of melphalane (Alkeran R) , prednisone and colchicine satisfactory general condition; no hae~atological progression of the plasmezytc~m; beginning decrease of clinical and echocardiographical cardial symptcms as well as a slight improvement of the nephrotic syndrcme. The following consequences resulting fr~ this casuistics: In the diff. diagnosis of restrictive cardiomyopathy early forms of paraproteinamic hae~oblastosis with LCDD should be taken into consideration. A cardial indication for plasmozytoma therapy, particularly that of a light chain plasmozytcma must be propounded. These circum~stences necessitate myocardial biopsy in order to clarify the question of LCDD or amyloid. Echocardiographic results concerning restrictive cardicrmyopathy which until now have been related to amyloidosis must be verified with regard to LCDD. Is combined modallty treatment superior to radiotherapy alone for CS IA-IIB Hodgkin's disease Radman I, Kova#evi6-Metelko Jasminka, Labar B, Boqdani6 V, Nemet D, ZupanSi6-~alek Silva, Mrsi6 M, Jaki6-Razumovi6 Jasminka From January 1979 to December 1988 34, patients (15 males and 19 females) were pathologically staged as IA -liB Hodgkin's disease and treated with radiotherapy (RT) alone (22 pts) The release of soluble cytokine receptors has been suggested to represent a mechanism of cytokine regulation. Recently, a soluble form of tumor necrosis factor receptor (sTNF-R) has been discovered. This TNF binding protein is probably involved in the modulation of TNFactivity in many diseases. To investigate its possible diagnostic and prognostic value in lymphoproliferative disorders we studied sTNF-R in CLL and HCL. Levels of the 60 kDa sTNF-R were determined by an ELISA technique (GR Adolf et al, J. Immunol. Meth., 1991) in the serum of 22 patients with CLL and 6 patients with HCL, and compared with healthy donors (HDs) (n=26). The following results were obtained: B-CLL 5,03 _+ 2,18 ng sTNF-R/ml, HCL 4,74 + 1,56 ng/ml, HDs 2,24 +0,54 ng/ml. The levels in B-CLL and HCL were significantly higher than in HDs ( p < 0,01). The concentration of sTNF-R in serum correlated well with activity and stage of disease. Interestingly, the only patient with T-CLL, studied so far, showed normal levels of sTNF-R with no change during the progression of the disease. The findings indicate that sTNF-R is a disease parameter in B-cell leukaemias. It has to be determined, however, whether an increase of sTNF-R represents a physiological breakdown of surface receptors or whether sTNF-R is released to bind and thereby to neutralize TNF in these disorders. Supported by "Fonds zur F6rderung der wissenschaftlichen Forschung" P 8283. Though great achievement in the treatment of NHL has been made, salvage therapy is still necessary for patients having a refractory or relapsed course of disease. Most published schedules have considerable toxeity and poor long term outcome. So we deviced a regimen of compar&ble low toxicity, consisting of bleomycine (15 rag) and eldesine (5 tug) combined with irradiation (16 pts.) or eytostatics non cross resistant to firstline therapy (asparaginase and methotrexat, 56 pts.). Most patients were pretreated with regimens including anthraeyclines. Bleomycme and eldesine were given as a 2 -24 hours continuous infusion. Influence of the different infusion durations will be discussed. Prophylactic antipyretics were given in all patients. The medical records of 100 patients, 55 male and 45 female with a median age of 59 years (range 21-88) treated at our department between 1.1.1985 and 1.5.1992 were analysed retrospectively. Ann Arbor stage was I/5, II/8, III/17 and IV/70 patients. 6 patients suffered from low grade, 48 from intermediate grade and 46 from high grade non Hodgkin lymphomas. Overall response was 38%(13% CR, 25% PR). There was no difference m the response between the histological subtypes. Toxicity measured according to the WHO-recommendation was as follows: Leukopenia grade I/5 patients, grade II/8 patients and dc IV/7 patients. ombocytopenia grade 1/2 patients, grade II/4 patients and grade III/l patient. Anemia grade I was seen in one patient, grade II/3 patients,grade I lI/1 patient and grade IV/I patient. In contrast to published data short time infusion of bleomycine/eldesine was superior and therefore this treatment can be easily applied in ambulatory patients. In a multicentre study the data of 131 consecutive patients were analyzed retrospectively to get information about the prognostic importance of age in patients with high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. The median age at presentation was 57.3+16.3 years. Sixty five percent of the patients belonged to stage I and II, 35 % to stage III and IV. Patients were treated according to different protocols (CVP, CHOP-Bleo, Pro-MACE-COPP) without any reduction of dose in elderly. Remission was achieved in 90 cases (81 complete and 9 partial remission). The mean follow-up time 44 months, the median survival 19.8 months. At 7 years 24% of the patient is alive. To see the effect of age on response rate and survival patients were divided into three groups: 1. patients younger than 60 years of age: 2. patients between 60-70 years: 3. patients older than 70 years. Overall response rate was slightly better in patients above 60 than in younger ones, 74% and 63% respectively. However, the survival did not differ significantly. Multivariate analysis revealed that the most important predictive factors for survival are remission and stage of disease. Only above 70 years get the age some prognostic relevance. Our results indicate that advancing age is not an absolutely poor prognostic factor and, that high-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphomas could be treated effectively in the elderly. Among the NHL, T-cell malignant lymphomas are of lesser proportions, 10-20 % in the Western hemisphere. They require special attention due to their poorer prognosis and variable therapeutic response. Outing the past five years, we cared for 22 T-cell malignant lymphomas (17 males, 5 females). The average age of the patients was 42,6 years (20-71 years). At present six patients are living, 16 have died. Histologically, there were high grade nonclassified: 9, T-lymphoblastic lymphoma: 6, Lennert lymphoma: 4, T-angioimmunoblastic:l, T-CLL: l, T-zona lymphoma: 1. The most commonly employed treatment was CHOP and ProMACE. Average survival was 25,0 months (3-75 months) . The expected outcome of the treatment was made worse by the fact that 3/4 of the patients were already in stage III and IV at the time of the diagnosis (stage tI-6, stage III-lO, stage IV-6). 55 % of the patients exhibited B symptoms. Out of 14 post-mortem examinations, 6 patients showed severe infections as contributing to their death; we lost one patient in CR as a consequence of infection, which demonstrates the importance of good supportive therapy. Oespite the treatment less than half of the patients could be brought into complete remission and 6 patients were non-responders, demonstrating the difficulties encountered in the treatment of this group of patients. In serum of patients suffering from multiple myeloma were determined the concentrations of tryptophan and neopterin. Tryptophan levels were significantly reduced and neopteri, levels significantly elevated both in grotips of patients in progression and in remission when they compared in controls. The degree of difference was the most expressed in the advanced stage of disease. The ser,m protein level was not influenced decisively to the statistically results. According to %heir results beside neopterin level the cheeper sod seeming more sensitive serum tryptophan determination may be suitable too for the investigation of the cellular immune reactions, and so among others for the determination of the clinical status in the multiple myeloma. Results: The incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) was 2+0.6% 10 years after seroconversion. The annual ~ncidence of NHL rose from 0.04% to 2% per year over the 12-year period following seroconversion. The greatest absolute risk of lymphoma was in the oldest age group, the relative increase was 38-fold in subjects < 40 years and 12-fold in older patients compared with the normal population. The incidence of Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) was increased 200-fold. The incidence of cancers other than NHL and KS was not increased in HIV-positive hemophiliacs. HIV-negative subjects had no significant increase in cancer incidence. Conclusion: HIV-infection has restricted effects on cancer incidence. Improvements in therapy of HIV-infection prolong survival and may lead to further increases in HIV-associated lymphoma. Frizzera et al. first described Angioimmunoblastic Lymphadenopathy (AILD) as a systemic disease characterised by generalised lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, fever, weight loss and frequently appearance of skin rashes. The lymph node histology shows diffuse obliteration of architecture by heterogeneous proliferation of immunoblasts and small blood vesel endothelium. Investigators found that most of patients had remission and recovered but about 35% of cases transformed to malignant lymphomas. Because the malignant progression couldn't be recognised early by histology we worked up retrospective the histories of our 35 patients with AILD. Our aims were to find early signs of worse prognosis. We found that the 13 patients with developed malignant lymphomas were significantly younger, their lymphadenopathies started as localised and some laboratory dates showed early specific abnormalities as signs of transformation to malignant tumors. School of Debrecen In the past therapy for cure for multiple myeloma has only been possible with continued high-dose chemotherapy, radiotherapy and allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Intensified chemotherapy using high-dose melphalan and/or adriamycin can lead to partial remission in up to 74% of patients.Nine patients with multiple myeloma stages II and III received chemotherapy according to the VAD-regimen. In three patients (one pretreated with standard therapy and two receiving only the VAD-regimen) a complete remission was achieved. The M-gradient was abolished in these cases and the plasma cell count in bone marrow biopsies was less than 5% of total cells. In six patients a partial remission was obtained. Only mild side effects (nausea, vomiting, myelosuppression -WHO -grade 2) were observed but did not necessitate a change in the drug administration regimen. Longterm observations are necessary to study the duration of remission and the effect on quality of life and survival time. To get further information on the role of sCD23 and the in vivo mechanism of its regulation, we repeatedly investigated 40 cases of B-CLL with RAI stages O-IV. Additionally to the measurement of sCD23 serum levels, we examined the expression of CD23 on MNCs in 17 cases. The results indicate that in all patients with B-CLL sCD23 was highly elevated (median 4544, range 284-20200) as compared to normal individuals (median 113, range 27-1504) and other lymphoproliferative disorders (HCL, T-CLL, HL, low grade/high grade (lg/hg) NHL, ALL, MM). Only within the group of lg NHL of B-cell phenotype similar serum levels to B-CLL were measured. Serum concentrations of sCD23 correlated with disease activity as evaluated by RAI stage, lymphocyte doubling time and distinction between active and indolent forms of B-CLL, but not with absolute lymphocyte counts. The response induced by chemotherapy was reflected by a decrease of sCD23 serum levels. The FACS analysis revealed that 75% of MNC in B-CLL were CD23 positive. The CD23 antigen was located independently of stage on the malignant CD19/CD5 positive population. While in lymphomas the CD23 antigen was restricted to the CD19/CD5 positive population, it was found only on CD19 positive cells in healthy donors. Since sCD23 serum levels were only weakly correlated to the absolute numbers of CD23+ MNC in peripheral blood and neither related to the density of CD23 molecules on the celt surface of MNC nor to the product of these two parameters, sCD23seems to reflect the tumor mass rather than the number of leukaemic cells. Supported by "Fonds zur FSrderung der wissenschattlichen Forschung" P 7040. Haemorrhagic tendency is a frequent manifestation of acute leukaemia, in particular APL. Procoagulant substances released from leukaemic blast cells may induce DIC by activating conventional coagulation pathways or primary fibrinolysis. Between 1981 and 1991 we diagnosed 42 adult patients with acute myelocytic leukaemia. We treated 6 acute promyelocytic leukaemias, using different chemotherapeutic regimens. Three of the six patients /50 %/ hat major bleeding at diagnosis. We found hypofibrinogenaemia, elevated fibrinogen /fibrin degradation product level, prolonged PTT, TT and clotting times. Our main strategy in the management of the DIC complicating acute leukaemia is to eradicate the underlying cause. Induction chemotherapy was administered immediately after diagnosis. These patients received platelet transfusions to correct thrombocytopenia, fresh frozen plasma to replace clotting factors and cryoprecipitate to correct hypofibrinogenemia. Complet remission was obtained at 4 of these 6 patients. In two cases we achieved p~rtial remission. The mean duration of survial is 24.5. months. Detailed study of uncommon forms of chronic leukaemias including hairy cell leukaemia (ten cases), T-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (twocases), B-cell prolymphocytic leukaemia (twocases), adult T-cell leukaemia-lymphoma (one case), Ph chromosome negative chronic granulocytic leukaemia (three cases), and eosinophil leukaemia (one case) are presented. Morphological, cytochemical, conventional immunological markers and monoclonal antibodies were used for the diagnosis of lymphoproliferative disorders. Splenectomy was the treatment of choice for hairy cell leukaemia, some refractory cases were treated with interferon. Combined chemotherapy produced variable responses in the other lymphoproliferative processes, but the single adult T-cell leukaemia-lymphoma showed rapid progression. Patient with eosinophil leukaemia proved to be Ph chromosome negative confirmed by molecular genetic analysis. In this case a long haematological improvement was achieved by interferon therapy. Twelve cases of familial malignant haematologic diseases were found by authors. Demonstrating the clinical pictnres and the development of eleven pairs (Hodgkin's disease -non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, Hodgkin's disease -chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma -acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, hairy cell leukaemia -acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia -acute myelogenous leukaemia, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma -chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma -non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, chronic myelogenous leukaemia -non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and three times chronic lymphocytic leukaemia -chronic lymphocytic leukaemia) and one triad (non-Hodgkin's lymphoma -acute myelogenous leukaemia -acute myelogenons leukaemia) of cases authors want to give data about occurrences of familial leukaemia/lymphoma in their county. Oncology, Pediatric Clinic, ~alata University Hospital in Zagreb, from Ist January, 1984 to 31st December, 1989 . The results of treatment were analysed in order to determine which of the 2 protocol applied was the most effective. 82 children were treated with protocol YU-84 from Ist January, 1984 till 31st May, 1987. 77 children were treated with protocol YU-87 from Ist June, 1987 till 31st December, 1989. The first complete remission was achieved in 64 (78%) of the children treated with protocol YU-84; and in 73 (94.8%) of the Children treated with protocol YU-87; the differences are highly significant statistically (p<0.01). The first relapse occured in 25 (39%) of the patients treated with protocol YU-84 and in 18 (24.6%) of those treated with protocol YU-87; although differences exist they are not statistically significant (p = 0.06). Survival probability of 48 months was 50% for the patients treated with protocol YU-87 and 73.5% for the patients treated with protocol YU-87; the differences are statistically highly significant (p<0.Ol). The t (15;17) which juxtaposes the PML gene with the gene encoding the retinoie acid receptor alpha (RARalpha) is the chromosomal hallmark of acute promyelocytic leukemia (M3). The transloeation creates PML-RARalpha fusion RNAs which can be specifically detected by a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using 5'primers from PML and 3'primers from RAR (deThe et el., Cell 68: 675-684, 1991) . We have used this technique to analyze samples of three patients with M3 and t(15;17) before, during and after treatment with all-trans retinoie acid (ATRA) and conventional chemotherapy. PCR was positive at diagnosis in two of the three patients. One of the two PCR-positive patients had a short clinical remission, but relapsed early and died of a cerebral hemorrhage due to DIC after 6 months. Residual t(15;17) cells could be detected in blood and bone marrow samples of this patient at any time. The other patient is still in remission after 8 months. Interestingly, t(15;17) cells disappeared from the peripheral blood of this patient after chemotherapy, at least at a detection level of approximately 1/104 cells. Our data indicate that (1) t(15;17) PCR can be used for the diagnosis of M3 in many, but not all patients, probably due to a certain heterogeneity of breakpoint location; (2) it is useful for the detection of minimal residual disease, especially since there may be a group of patients whose blood samples become negative after treatment. Granulocytic sarcoma (myelosarcoma) are localized tumors containing myeloblasts without evidence of leukemia in blood and marrow. Hyelosarcoma is the first clinical manifestation of AML in about 0.5% of cases. Typical sites include the respiratory and urogenital tract, orbita, lymphoid organs, small bowel and soft tissues. Most of these patients develop typical AML with bone marrow involvement after a median time of 13.7 months but some patients who received chemotherapy were apparently cured. -We studied the incidence of myelosarcoma in patients with AML who achieved complete remission after chemotherapy. Over a period from 1979 to Igg2, 100 patients with relapse were studied. In 2 (2%), the relapse oceured as myelosarcoma. -Case I is a 68 years old male with AML (FAB M2). He achieved complete remission after 3 courses of DAT and received two cycles of consolidation treatment. He was in unmaintained complete remission for 9 years. In 1992, he was admitted because of obstructive renal failure. ACT scan showed a tumor of the prostate which infiltrated the seminal vesicle and extended to the orifices of both ureters. A biopsy of the prostate showed an infiltration with myeloblasts. The peripheral blood counts were normal and the bone marrow contained < 5% blasts. After treatment with mitoxantrone and ARA-C the tumor regressed, no infiltration with myeloblasts could be demonstrated in the prostate tissue which was obtained by electroresection. -Case 2 was a 20 years old male with AML (FAB M2). He achieved complete remission after I cycle of "3+7" in 1/88. After consolidation he underwent allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. 9 months later (3/8g) he developed myelosarcoma of the stomach and the bladder. No involvement of the bone marrow could be demonstrated. However, 1 month later he developed full-blown AML with bone marrow involvement and died in 5/8g. -In the literature (MED-LINE research between 1969 and 1991) we found only 2 published similar cases. Our data suggest that this pattern of relapse may be more common. Multidrug resistance is a major problem in the treatment of leukaemic patients. One of the major causes of both the primary and secondary multidrug resistance is the presence of the MDR1 gene product, the P-glycoprotein, actively extruding several kinds of drugs, in the plasma membrane of the leukaemic cells. In order to estimate the amount of this protein in the blast ceils present in peripheral blood, we have developed a quantitative immunoblot technique in which the electropboresed and electroblotted cellular proteins of ficoll-separated leukocytes are detected by various monodonal and polyclonal anti-MDR1 antibodies, generated against specific peptide regions of the MDR1. The amount of the MDR1 mRNA measured in the leukocytes by Northern blotting is compared with the amount of the MDR1 protein on the immunoblots and with the clinical, cytochemistry and FACS cell typing data of the respective patients. Initial studies were performed on the cells of 37 patients with diagnoses of AML, ALL, CGL and CLL, and the relationship between the level of MDR1 and the response to chemotherapy is currently analyzed. The in vitro expression system, in which Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) cells are infected with the MDR1 recombinant baculovirus and produce a large amount of the MDR1 protein, can be utilized as a quantitative control for the protein in the immunoblot method. The in vitro expressed protein is also used to generate further polyclonal antibodies against the full length protein, since such antibodies are expected tO recognize the MDR1 protein with a greater sensitivity and specificity. The bcl-2 major breakpoint region (mbr) is a chromosomal hotspot involved in the transloeation t(14;18) which is the most frequent translocation in human lymphoma and occurs at the pre-B cell stage of development. 70% of follicular lymphomas break within this remarkably well focused region which comprises only 150bp. We hypothesized that the mbr must have certain structural features or contain DNA elements which make it a preferred target for illegitimate recombination. We first tested the region for its nuelease sensitivity. Incubation of nuclei from a B-cell line with $1 nuelease produces a band on Southern blots which maps to the mbr, indicating the vulnerability of the chromatin in this region. Using supercoiled plasmids containing the bcl-2 3'end as a substrate we also detected an endogenous nuclease activity in extracts from early Bcells which is able to cleave the mbr. Moreover, a 68bp DNA fragment from the 5'end of the mbr specifically binds to at least one protein present in these extracts. These findings suggest that the bcl-2 major breakpoint region is a preferred target of endogenous enzymatic cleavage in early B-cells and that protein-DNA interactions may facilitate the translocation process by alteration of the chromatin structure. Multidrug resistance (MDR) is characterised as an intrinsic or acquired resistance of cells to cytotoxic activity of a group of structurally and functionally diverse chemotherapeutic agents. Recently, the clinical importance of the MDR phenomenon and its reversion has been stressed by several preclinical and clinical studies. We present evidence that Cytochalasin B and D (CCB, CCD) are substrates for the MDR efflux pump and act as specific and sensitive indicators for MDR pheno-typ~ and its modulation. MDR (KBCI) and MDR-(~B3-1) human cancer cell lines were exposed to H-CCB or unlabeled CCD: Accumulation of H-CCB was significantly higher in sensitive KB3-1 than in resistant KBCI cells. This e~rresponds to the antiproliferative effects of CCs ( H-thymidine uptake, eolorimetric assay) in these cells lines. Furthermore, as a direct measure of the significantly higher intraeellular CC concentrations in the sensitive parental cells, a significantly higher number of bi(multi-)nucleated cells -cytokinesis block due to the CC's mierofilament activity -has been demonstrated at significantly lower CC concentrations as compared to their resistant counterparts. This MDR dependence of the CC's inhibiting effect on cytokinesis was then used to study agent~ with MDR reversing activity. Treatment of MDR-KBCI cells with Verapamil, Quinidine, or Staurosporine during exposure to CCs resulted in similar patterns of both CC retention and cell division block as detected in the sensitive parental line. Thus CCs offer a suitable tool for detection and quantification of MDR phenotype and potential reversing agents. Inst.of Applied &Exp. Oncology, Vienna University These point mutations have been demonstrated to occur in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) or myeloyly~l~c ~yndrome (MDS). In this study we compare cytogenetic clam ol patients with MDS (RA,RAEB or CMML) or AML secondary to MDS with the results of the molecular biological analysis. 20 bp long fragments of the c-fins oncogene containing codon 301 were specifically amplified from DNA isolated from patients with MDS using the polymerase chain reaction. Dot blots were hybridized with endiabelled wild type and mutant oligonucleotides. DNA frompatients with a 5q deletion hybridized only with the wild type ofigo, indicating the absence of a mutation m this fins region. Quantitative PCR using the co-amplification of part of the beta globine gene as reference confirnied observations of fms hemizygosity in 5q-patients already found by quantitative Southern blotting. DNA from 2 of 4 patients with translocations involving chromosome 5q showed cohybridization with both wild type and mutant allele. This might indicate the possible involvement of the fins oncogene in this lranslocation. Sequencing of the mutation positive PCR products in order to confirm the nature of the point mutation is in progress. The t(14;18) which juxtaposes the be/-2 oncogene with the immunogiobulin heavy chain (IgH) locus represents a model system for chromosomal recombination in neoplasia. While the break on ehr.14 occurs during the attempted DH to JH rearrangement and is probably mediated by V(D)J-reeombinase, the actual mechanism of transloeation is still unclear. Using gel retardation assays as well as Southwestern blotting we have identified a 45kDa protein (bp45) which binds to a homopurine-homopyrimidine stretch in both major (mbr) as well as minor breakpoint regions (met) of bcl-2. The sequence contains a human analogue of the recombinatoriai element CHI in E. coll. Homologous sequences from the immunoglobulin DH and JH regions cross-compete for the binding of bp45 indicating that this protein specifically binds to the breakpoints on both chromosomes. The protein is highly expressed in early B-cells at a time when the t(14;18) translocation takes place. The tissue distribution of the protein as well as the localization of the binding sites suggest that bp45 is involved in the translocation and that sitespecific homologous recombination is part of the process. Since the DNA binding motif is also found at breakpoints of other translocations bp45 may possibly play a more general role in illegitimate recombination. Depending on the methods used there exist contradicting data concerning the incidence and clinical relevance of multldrug resistance (MDR) in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL). Using two different methods we studied 22 consecutive patients suffering from B-CLL for the expression of MDR. In a first step we applied a functional, flow cytometric assay to peripheral blood samples of all B-CLL cases which accurately detects the retentlon/efflux of the dye rhodamine 123 (Rh123). For d~al fluorescence analysis the leukemic cells were stained with a phycoerythrln-conjugated, B-cell directed MoAb (LeuI2/CDIg, Becton Dickinson) Thereafter fluorescence gates were placed around the PE-laheled cells and Rh123 efflux was selectively assessed in these cells in the presence or absence of MDR inhibitors Byk Gulden, Konstanz) . 16 (73Z) B-CLL cases showed a significant Rh123 efflux which was completely abolished in the presence of MDR Inhibitors. The percentage of Rh123 effluxins cells ranged from 13 to 70% (median 37%). 6 (27%) cases showed no efflux. In a second step we analyzed the expression of MDRI mRNA using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in 16 samples to confirm the results of the functional Rh123 assay. To quantitate the PCR-products we separated the MDRI-and B-mikroglobulin-products (internal control) by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The sel was stained, photographed and the bands were quantitated by a computer assisted imagine system. The MDRI mRNA levels ( standardized to that of multidrug-resistant KB-8-5 cells) correlated well with the results of the Rh123 efflux assay. MDR expression, obtained by both methods, was neither correlated to Rai staEe nor to prior treatment or disease proEression. We conclude that the flow cytometric measurement of cellular Rh123 retention/efflux is an efficient and sensitive tool to assess the functional activity of P-Ep in tumor samples. We have previously demonstrated that human malignant melanoma cell lines (MML) produce in~nune and growth regulatory peptides such as IL-I,IL-3 and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). In the present study we extended our recent finding that MML produce and secrete IL-6. Seven of 10 MMLculture supernatants contained IL-6 (22pg-800pg/ml) as detected by RIA. IL-6 production and release could be increased by incubation of ~94L with PMA, IL-I~ and TNF-~ -but not with Interferon-~ (IFN-~), IFN-gamma and bFGF -in % of 7 lines tested. IL-6 was also shown to be present in these MML by in~nunoperoxydase staining with MoAb. Furthermore we found by FACS analysis that MML express the binding capacity for fluoresceine-conjugated IL-6 suggesting the expression of IL-6 receptors on these cells. Preincubation of MML with IFN-ga~a and/or TNF-~ resulted in an upregulation of the binding site for IL-6. The latter was also substantiated by competition studies with unlabeled IL-6. Additionally we have evidence that recombinant IL-6 acts under certain conditions as a negative gro~-hh signal for MML in vitro. Our results suggest, as human MML produce and respond to IL-6, that this cytokine has a role in melanoma biology. ~ upported by Anton-Dreh~r-Ged~chtnisschenkung. A 60 year old man was admitted to the medical academy hospital, Dresden, because of a hepatosplenomegaly, weight loss and weakness that had presented 4 weeks before. Physical examination showed that the liver was 4 cm at the MCL and spleen 2 cm and abdominal lymphadeopathy confirmed by sonography. The ESR was 90 mm/hour. Hemoglobin was 6,4 mmol/i; leukocyte count 7.9 * l0 g/l. Bone marrow cytology with cytochemistry and histology including elektronmicroscopy confirmed the presence of malignant mastocytosis. By monoclonal antibodies CD2 and CD4 antigens (FACS and APAAP) could be found on the mast cell surface. Severe neutropenia occurs as a rare reaction to a variety of drugs and is the principal undesirable side effect of antithyroid therapy with Methimazole. Here, we report on a 26year-old female patient with leucopenia and agranulocytosis induced by Methimazole. Because of Basedow's disease diagnosed 2 years ago, she was treated with Methimazole for 18 months. With a daily dose of at least 15 mg an eumetabolic state was obtained. A severe tonsillitis and gastroenteritis with high fever and an initial leukocyte count of 800/ul with total absence of neutrophils as well as a typical bone marrow (exhibiting a complete arrest of myelopoesis at the stage of promyelocytes with a normal megakaryo-and erythropoesis) lead to the diagnosis of an antlthyroid therapy induced agranulocytosis. The Methimazole therapy was immediately stopped. After one week of antibiotic treatment, the lymphocyte counts ranged from 1.700 to 2.900/ui, neutrophils still absent. Therefore, a treatment with G-CSF (granulocyte colony-stimulating factor) in a dose of 480ug/d s.c was started and well tolerated without any side effects. 24 hrs after the first application the leukocyte count rapidly rose up to 7.700/ui consisting of 57% granulocytes with a maximum of 47.100/ui (87% granulocytes) after the 3rd injection. As the patient showed a good recovery from her infections, G-CSF therapy was stopped after the 3rd day of application. In the following 7 days the leukocyte count gradually fell to normal numbers, stabilizing at about 6.500/ul (61% 9ranulocytes). In parallel, the platelet counts rose from initlally 228.000/ui to 743.000/ui after the 3rd day of G-CSF treatment and gradually declined to normal numbers within the following week. Up to now, G-CSF has not been described as a major stimulating factor in megakaryopoesis. Thus, the concomittant increase of platelets might be explained by the rapid marrow recovery after depression caused by the severe infection and/or by possible toxic side effects of the antithyroid treatment.We conclude that G-CSF is a potent agent for shortening the period of drug induced neutropenia complicated with severe infections thus leading to an earlier recovery of the patient. Bactericidal activity and the production of oxygen radicals by isolated monocytes were investigated in 37 patients was impaired in late stage (p<0.01> and was normal in patients in early stages and ill remission. Both INT and chemiluminiscence were significantly lowered and delayed (p<0.001 in INT and p<0,Ol in cl), with respect to normal control. I0 mg/ml zymosan corrected the INT to normal. Indomethacin at 1Mg/ml corrected the monocyte deficiency increasing the cl response to near normal. CONCLUSION: 1-Bactericidal activity decreased in late stage of NHL and were normal in early stages and in remission. Cytoreductive effects of interferon (IFN) alpha in myeloproliferative diseases are well established. In subpopulations of patients with Phl+ CML treatment with IFN alpha results even in a reduction or disappearance of the malignant cell clone which might protect patients from progression to the lethal blast crisis. However, the mechanism of action of IFN in CML remains to be elucidated. Beside antiproliferative activity against hemopoietic progenitor cells regulation of the cytokine network can be responsible for clinical efficacy and certain side effects of IFN alpha. We therefore studied regulation of gene transcription of several cytokines with proinflammatory or antiproliferative activity by type I interferons after in vivo application and in in vitro models: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMNC) from patients with Phl + CML in chronic phase were seperated 4-6 hours after application of IFN alpha or beta. For in vitro examination PBMNC from CML patients or normal volunteers were incubated with various doses of IFN alpha or beta with or without hemopoietic growth factors. Furthermore, the monocytic cell line THP-1 was studied for monokine regulation by IFNs. RNA separated from such cell samples was examined for transcription of TNF ~, IL-1/Y, IL-6 and IL-8. After application of IFN to CML patients in vivo a reduction of mRNA transcripts for IL-8 was observed, whereas message for TNF-e was induced. In vitro experiments in the MNC from CML patients or normal controls revealed upregulation of TNF and IL-6 and downregulation of IL-8 and IL-I-# suggesting that shifts of the mononuclear cell population under treatment with IFN was not responsible for the observation in vivo. In THP-1 cells a comparable regulation of monokine transcription was seen as in MNC populations thus providing evidence that the differential regulation of cytokine cascades by IFNs may occur in the same cells rather than in different monocyte subpopulations. In view of recently reported pathsphysiologic implications of various cytokines in progression of CML understanding of the regulation of cytokine production by type I IFNs increasingly gains importance and represents the focus of further detailed studies. Impairment of the fibrinolytic system is generally accepted to contribute to the development of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). However, limited information is available concerning the time-dependent evolOtion of hypofibrinelysis. 187 patients (110 females, 77 males, aged 15 -63 years) who had suffered from DVT were investigated 2 years after the thrombotic occurrence. Laboratory investigation included the assessment of the total fibrinolytic capacity (fibrin difference assay, euglobulin clot lysis time, fibrin plate method) and measurement of tissue-type piesminogen activator (t-PA) and plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1). Hypofibrinolysis was found in 27 % of all patients. Patients who had suffered from recurrent OVT demonstrated higher PAI-1 activities compared to patients with one thrombotic event (p < 0,001). 54 patients were reinvestigated two years later. 17 patients who had been classified in the first investigation as Nonor Poor-Responder demonstrated permanent hypefibrinolysis. In contrast, from 30 patients who had been classified in the first investigation as Responders only 11 patients showed normal fibrinolytic capacity. In conclusion, a dynamic fellow-up of the fibrinolytic capacity is recommended in order to obtain detailed information about the evolution and significance of hypofibrinolysis. Clinical trials are rarely designed with the main aim of determination of prognostic factors. Such analysis is usually exploratory in nature and may be helpful in hypothesis generation and design of further trials. The aim of this paper is to investigate two methods for the identification of prognostic factors with censored data-the Cox proportional hazards regression model and the Classification and Regression Tree (CART) technique. The Cox-model is used to assess the impact of independent risk factors on the outcome variable, while CART is concerned with extracting prognostically homogeneous subgroups of patients. This method separates the population into two groups in each of a series of steps using each potential prognostic variable and the "best" split is selected based on a "goodness of split" statistic. The terminal nodes of the tree indicate the prognostic subgroups which can then be ranked. The CML-study is a muhicentre three-arm randomized clinical trial (Busulfan, Hydroxyurea, IFN-o0, in which a total of 624 patients from 60 centres in Germany and Switzerland were randomized. An initial pool of 17 potential prognostic factors for survival time in the Ph-positive population was selected by combining clinical relevance (clinicians" opinion) and statistical significance (univariate Kaplan-Meier analysis). Since missing values lead to exclusion of patients from the analysis for both techniques, completeness of data also played a role in the initial variable selection. Of 427 Ph-positive patients, 367 patients had complete data for all 17 variables and were included in the analysis. Of seven prognostically significant variables, five were common to both methods -age, Karnofsky-Index, blasts, erythroblasts in peripheral blood and organomegaly-related symptoms. The results complement each other in the sense that a maximum of information is gained about the study population. Biometric Centre for Therapeutic Studies, Pettenkoferstrasse 35, 8000 Munich 2, Germany The role of ABMT in prolonging EFS in ALL is still a matter of debate. From 1985 to 1991, 20 ALL patients (17 adults and 3 children, 14 male and 6 female, median age 18 years, range 10-39) underwent autografting. In 7 adult patients, at high risk of relapse according to conventional prognostic factors, ABMT was performed in 1st CR as late intensification, 9 1o 16 months (median 10) after achievement of CR; previous chemotherapy included aggressive regimens. In 6 adult patients, ABMT was performed soon after liquoral remission (median 1 month) following isolated central nervous system (SNC) relapse. The remaining 7 patients, including the three children, received ABMT in CR after one or more hematological relapses. In all but 3 cases, bone marrow (BM)was harvested in the same phase in which ABMT was performed. In all patients conditioning regimen included HD Ara-C (3 g/m 2 every 12 hours over 2 consecutive days), HD cyclophosphamide (60 mg/m2/day over 2 consecutive days) and TBI, 1000 cGy fractionated over 3 consecutive days. No transplant related deaths were recorded; recovery of peripheral blood values occurred in all cases. As at March 31, 1992, the median follow-up from ABMT was 54 months (range 6-66). Four patients transplanted in 1st CR were in continuous (C) CR and 3 had relapsed; tile ,'ned~an F_.FS had not been reached aud the 5-yeai EFS chanue was 57%. Four patients transplanted after meningeal relapse were in CCR and 2 had relapsed (1 CNS and 1 BM); the median EFS had not been reached and the 5year EFS chance was 53%. One patient transplanted after hematological relapse was in CCR and 6 had relapsed; the median EFS was 6 months.The present experience emphasizes the role of ABMT in prolonging I::FS after isolated meningeal relapse; the results of our small series are far better than expected from conventional rescue chemotherapy. The antileukemic activity of previous chemotherapy on BM disease, as well as of the conditioning regimen on extramedullary disease, may have contributed to the above figures. Although regarding high-risk adult ALL cases, the results of the 1st CR series do not allow any reliable conclusion on ABMT in this disease-phase. The discouraging EFS in patients transplanted in CR after hematological relapse is in agreement with other reports in the literature and is mainly attributable to the difficulties in managing poor quality CR with a heavy residual disease-burden Substantial improvements in grafting techniques are therefore required to hypothesize a less fortuitous role for ABMT in these patients. Patients presenting with synchronous and metachronous metastases of nonseminomatous testicular tumors are candidates for pulmonary metastasectomy after definitive primary treatment, which includes semicastration, eventually retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy, and definitely chemotherapy. 87 such patients aged from 14 to 79 years (m : 27 yrs) were channelled to pulmonary metastasectomy from 1972 -1989, this number representing 15.8% of the pulmonary metastasectomy performed during the same period. Of the 96 operations performed, 9 were redo operations.Both median sternotomy and posterolateral standard thoracotomy and later transverse thoracotomy were standard surgical approaches used to remove the single and multiple metastases randomly distributed in both lungs. Wedge and atypical segment resections (75%),lobectomy (13.5%),segmentectomy (7.3%), pneumonectomy (4.2%) and mediastinal lymphadenectomy (100%) were performed.Of the 96 patients, metastasectomy was radical in 67 and non-radical in 20. The 30-day mortality was 2.5%. The life table shows a survival rate of 79%, 64% and 58% at i year, 3 resp.5 years. A comparison of the 5 year survival rate following pulmonary metastasectomy for other malignancies -breast cancer: 33%, hypernephroma: 38%, colorectal carcinoma: 19%, and osteosarcoma: 22% -shows good prognosis for testicular tumors. Of all the prognostic factors examined, radical operation seems to be the most significant factor influencing the prognosis. A distinct syndrome called hepatosplenic or chronic visceral candidiasis is increasingly described in patients with acute leukemia. According to previous reports this infection is characterized by persistent fever unresponsive to antibiotics, abdominal symptoms, often with elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels, and typical ultrasonographic and CT findings. Standard therapy is amphotericin B and flucytosine, but some authors recently described superior results with long-term high-dose fluconazole treatment. We report our experience in 5 patients with that syndrome during the last two years. All patients suffered from acute leukemia (AML = 4, ALL = 1) and had fever during chemotherapy-induced bone marrow aplasia. Ultrasonography and CT scanning demonstrated typical lesions in liver and/or spleen. Three patients had significant increases in the candida titers, two patients had elevation of alkaline phosphatase levels. Three patients received triazoles for treatment (1 patient itraconazole 500mg/d for 9 days, two patients 400 mg fluconazole/d for 13 d and 29 days, resp.). Two of them defervesced within two days, one had a prolonged critical clinical course with defervescence after two months of treatment, but death due to sudden cardiac death occurred eight weeks later. Two patients received intravenous amphotericin B and flucytosine. One had a good response with defervescence within three days, the other had a prolonged febrile course for three weeks before defervescence. The radiologic abnormalities disappeared completely in two patients within three months, while in the other three radiologic abnormalities persisted for more than 9 months, but without clinical signs of ongoing infection. We conclude that hepatosplenic candidiasis is a syndrome which covers a spectrum of disease activity ranging from asymptomatic radiologic abnormalities slowly regressing after achieving complete remission without long-lasting antifungal therapy to a life-threatening disease despite specific treatrnent. Therapy should be individual for each patient and adjusted to the clinical course of disease. In our experience defervescence is the critical factor which may allow cessation of further antifungal treatment after recovery of the neutrophil count. Heinrich-Heine-University Medical Center, Dep. of Hematology, Mooren-straBe 5, D-4000 Diisseldorf Numerous chemotherapy regimens provide adequate levels of circulating stem cells in the peripheral blood (PBSC) for collection via the cytapheresis technique. We evaluated six patients with non-seminomatous germ cell tumors (NSGCT) treated with a minimum of 4 chemotherapy cycles of CDDP, VP16 and Ifosfamid (0.15, 1.0 and 8.0 g/m 2 total dose per cycle for 5 days; PEI) followed by GM-or G-CSF (5 pg/kg BW/day for an average of 10 days). The average duration of the neutropenia (<0.5 x 109/I) after chemotherapy was 5.5 days (range 1-19 days). With increasing number of treatment courses a tendency to prolonged and deeper aplasia was observed. The flow cytometrical investigation (dual-color staining) of the circulating CD34 + cell recovery yielded the highest values after the second chemotherapy course (1-2.5% of the total WBC). The peak values of CD34+ cells were reached simultaneously with the monocyte peak and after the WBC's had recovered above 1.0 x 109/I. G-CSF contributed to higher cell counts as compared to GM-CSF (18.3  3.2; n=15 vs 6.7  1.3 x 109 WBC/I; n=10; mean  SD and up to > 1000 x 10 ~ platelets/IL Due to the small number of patients evaluated the clinical relevance of this phenomenon remains unclear. A mean of 5.8 stem cell aphereses per patient (range 2-10) after PEI-chemotherapy cycles was performed. Initially a minimum of 2.5 x 108 MNC's, 8.0 x 104 CFU-GM's was collected. Currently 2.0 x 106 CD34+ cells per kg BW were determined as the lowest limit of hematopoietic progenitor cells to be collected. Thus it can be concluded, that in patients with metastatic NSGCT the escalated PEI regimen followed by hematopoietic growth factors provides appropriate counts of circulating stem cells, The collection of PBSC for autografting should be performed during the early chemotherapy courses, thereby reducing the number of necessary apheresis procedures. The retransfusion of PBSC combined with GM-or G-CSF may enable to further escalate the PEI regimen without increasing treatment morbidity and to achieve a higher dose intensity, which may result in a higher cure rate for patients with far advanced germ cell tumors. Transplant related mortality and relapse after brat has a negative influence on the outcome of patients transplanted for acute leukaemia in first remission. Transplant related mortality includes graft-versus-host disease, infections and graft failure. To prevent gvhd and associated infections without increased graft rejection, a protocol of combined in vivo/ex vivo Tcell depletion (Campath IgG 20 mg i.v. for 5 days and Campath IgM T-cell depleted graft with no further immunosuppression was initiated. Up to now 15 adult patients (median age 39 years, 21-51) were transplanted. No rejection and no acute or chronic gvhd occured. 2 patients relapsed after brat and died. 1 further patient died due to interstitial pneumonitis. 12 patients are alive in CR. With a median follow up of 9 Mo (1-21) probability of survival is 72%, disease free survival is 77% and transplant related mortality is 7%. We compared these results to 3 historical control groups with different regimens of gvhd prophylaxis. 1. MTX greup (n = 15): With a median follow up of 127 (108-140) months after brat probability of survival is 40%, dfs is 40% and transplant related mortality is 60% (mainly gvhd + infection). 2. Campath group (only ex vivo T-cell depletion, n =25}: With a median follow up of 79 (55-95) months probability of survival is 52%, dfs is 43% and transplant related mortality is 35% (mainly rejection and infection). 3. MTX/CSA group (n =30): With a median follow up of 40 mo (4-59) after brat probability of survival is 72%, dfs 57% and transplant related mortality is 17%. In comparison to the historical control groups combined T-cell depletion effectively prevents acute and chronic gvhd without increase of graft rejection and transplant related mortality is reduced. Survival and dfs is at least comparable to the MTX/CSA group and longer follow up is needed for definite analysis. 1Depts. of Internal Medicine III and 2Transfusion Medicine, University of UIm, Robert-Koch-Str. 8, 7900 UIm, FRG, and 3Dept. of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Great Britain. MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES: RESPONSE TO AGGRESSIVE CHEMOTHERAPY AND PROGNOSTIC FACTORS FOR TREATMENT OUTCOME C. Aul, V. Runde, A. Heyll, and W. Schneider 50 patients with advanced MDS presenting with a Karnofsky score of at least 60% were treated with conventional antileukemic therapy. The median age of patients was 52 years (range, 16-72) . MDS subtypes at the start of treatment were RAEB in 2 and RAEB-T in 17 cases. 31 patients were treated after transformation of MDS to AML. For remission induction the following protocols were used: TAD-9 n=40, double induction TAD-9/HAM n=2, double induction TAD-9/TAD-9 n=2, HAM n=l, Ara-C/idarubicin n=5. In this series, 28 patients (56%) entered CR, and 7 patients obtained a PR, defined according to the CALGB criteria. Early death occurred in 5 cases, and 10 patients (20%) had refractory disease. No unusual toxicities of chemotherapy were noted. The median duration of bone marrow aplasia (leukocytes < lx109/1 and/or platelet count < 20x109/1) for patients achieving CR after TAD was 19 days (range, 6-39). Despite maintenance treatment, the median duration of CR was relatively short (11 months). The factors most strongly associated with successful remission induction were: 1. a comparatively low blast count (< 30%) at the start of therapy (CR rates: 82% vs. 31% ) 2. presence of Auer rods in granulocyte precursors (61% vs. 38%). We conclude that intensive chemotherapy can be successfully administered to patients with MDS. Treatment is particularly successful in younger patients with Auer rod-positive blasts and should be commenced before patients transform to overt AML. Deoxythymidine kinase (TK) which catalyses the phosphorylation of deoxythymidine to deoxythymidine monophosphate is an important salvage pathway enzyme in the synthesis of DNA. Previous studies have shown that measurements of the serum TK (sTK) activity provide prognostic information in patients with Hodgkin's disease, Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, multiple myeloma and acute leukemia. The aim of the present study was to examine the value of sTK in the myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). Using a radioenzyme assay, sTK was determined in 114 patients classified as having RA (n = 17), RARS (n = 15), RAEB (n = 35), RAEB/T (n = 22) and CMML (n = 25). Compared to 69 healthy probands (mean + SDM: 3.1 + 1.2 U/gl), 87 (76%) MDS patients presented with pathological sTK levels at the time of diagnosis. Excessively elevated enzyme activities (> 100 U/lzl) were measured in 16 patients, all belonging to advanced subtypes of MDS (RAEB, RAEB/T and CMML). sTK levels were not found to be correlated with known risk factors in MDS, such as peripheral leukocyte counts (r = 0.29), hemoglobin concentration (r = 0.12), platelet counts (r = 0.12) and percentage of medullary blast cells (r = 0.17). As shown by life table analysis, the sTK activity had a statistically significant influence on the survival probability of MDS patients. The median survival of patients with sTK levels < 10 U/gl was 40 months, as compared to 11 months in patients with sTK levels > 10 U/gl (Breslow: p < 0.005, Mantel-Cox: p = 0.001). Raised sTK levels were not correlated with an increased risk of AML transformation (p = 0.44). These data suggest that the serum TK activity may be used as an independent prognostic parameter for assessing the survival of MDS patients. Although most haematologists perceive a rising prevalence and incidence of MDS, reliable epidemiological data on these disorders are largely lacking. The bone marrow register of the University of Diisseldorf allowed us to assess among other epidemiological features the incidence of MDS, which was compared to that of AML. Among a total of 18,416 different patients registered between 1975 and 1990, 584 cases of MDS (3.2%) and 506 cases of AML (2.8%) were identified. Over the study period, the percentage of newly diagnosed MDS rose from 1.3% to 4.5%, while there was no upward trend for AML. Among all patients undergoing bone marrow biopsy, the proportion of those over 60 years of age increased from 41.9% in 1975 to 54.1% in 1990. We found a strong correlation between the proportion of elderly patients and the relative frequency of MDS diagnoses. 31 patients (5.3%) were classified as secondary MDS because of previous treatment with cytotoxic chemotherapy and/or irradiation for a variety of malignancies. 12 patients were identified in whom occupational exposure to organic solvents could not be ruled out. For calculating age-specific incidence rates, the analysis was confined to the town district of Dtisseldorf (575,000 inhabitants), because exact demographical data were available for this population. In the last quinquennium of the study period (1986 -1990) , myelodysplastic syndromes were more frequent than AML in the age group 50 to 70 years (4.9 vs. 1.8/100,000/year). In patients over 70, the incidence of MDS was more than three times that of AML (22.8 vs. 6.7/100,000). In this age group, men had a higher incidence of MDS (33.9/100,000) than women (18/100,000). Crude annual incidence (all age groups) was also higher for MDS (4.1/100,000) than for AML (2.1/100,000) in recent years. We conclude that MDS are relatively common haematological neoplasias. The rising incidence in recent years is probably not due to changes in etiological factors, but may reflect increased awareness on the part of physicians and extended use of diagnostic procedures in elderly patients. The efficacy of sequentially applied GM-CSF and EPO was examined in 7 patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). GM-CSF was administered subcutaneously at a dosage of 150 gg/m2/d for 10 days. EPO was given subcutaneously at a dosage of 100 U/kg/d from day 11 to day 38 or longer if response occurred. FAB-subtypes were: RA n=3, RARS n=2, RAEB n=2. All patients were transfusion-dependent (2-6 units of packed red blood cells per month) and had markedly increased serum EPO levels (range, 159-3618 mU/ml). Prior to therapy and 4 to 6 weeks after initiation of treatment, ferrokinetic studies including red cell iron utilization, plasma iron clearance rate, red cell life span studies and whole body iron distribution analysis were performed in each patient. At present, one patient is not yet evaluable. Another patient died on day 39 of treatment due to septic complications. Of the remaining 5 patients two patients became transfusion-independent after 2 months of treatment with EPO. In 3 cases no increase in hemoglobin concentrations was found. With respect to the responde~:s' delayed improvement in hemoglobin values, we cannot exclude that the beneficial effect resulted from the administration of EPO alone. Side effects, only observed during ap-pli-cation of GM-CSF, included fever in all cases, bone pain in 3 cases and pleural effusion and arrhythmia in one patient. Additional patients will be required to evaluate the efficacy of this treatment protocol. Treatment of chronic phase CML results in cytogenetic remissions in 20 % of the patients. The fact that in this group of patients an excellent long term survival has been demonstrated suggests that induction of eytogenetic remissions might protect patients from progression into blastie transformation. Recently increased cytogenetic response rates has been reported after combined therapy with rlFN alpha and low dose ara C. We report on the results of the pilot phase of a multicenter trial with rlFN alpha 2b and low dose ara C in 34 patients with chronic phase CML. Treatment consisted of 5 MU rlFN alpha 2b/d s.c. and 20 mg Ara C for 14 days every fourth week. Combined therapy of rlFN and low dose Ara C was tolerated and the toxicity profile moderate. Major side effects were flu like syndrome, thrombopenia (1 > WHO 2) and mucositis (1 > WHO 2) . Preliminary clinical results indicate e hematologic response rate of 60 %. Reduction of the Phl positive clone of more than 10 % was observed in 50 % of the patients (median observation time 3 months). The confirmation of this increased cytogenetic response rate and the question whether these patients are also protected from progression to the blast crisis will be the objective of a consecutive clinical trial. Synergism of specific antigen and cytokines for cl0nal expansion and differentiation of CTLp has generally been accepted. However, the primary effect of cytokines on CTLp without challenge byspecific antigen remains unclear. We investigated, wether systemic treatment with cytoldnes affects the clone size of circulating atloreactive CTLp in man. We used limiting dilution analysis to determine CTLp frequencies in patients with nonhematologic diseases before and after three days of subcutaneous application of either I[,-3 (2.5, 5.0 or 10.0 #g/kg/d), GM-CSF (5#g/kg/d), IFN 7 (400/~g/d), IFNa (Sx10 ~ IU/d) or IL-2 (4,8x106 IU/m ~ BD). Simultaneously clone sizes of circulating autoreacfive CTLp wexe determined by split well analysis. Preliminary data suggest only minor influences of low dose tL-3 on CTLp frequencies. Intermediate dose IL-3 reduced numbers of circulating CTLp. Further escalation of dose interestingly overcame this effect and lead to significant expansion of these cells. Significant expansion was also observed under systemic treatment with IL-2. In contrast IFN~, markedly diminished the clone size of circulating alloreactive CTLp. GM-CSF and IFNu did not exhibit measurable effects. Furthermore we could not find autoreactive CTLp at any time tested. In conclusion systemic application of IL-2, IFN~ or IL-3 differently affects circulating precursors of CTL in man. This may have impact on the responder status to specific antigens in vivo. Immunoscintigraphy uses radiolabelled monoelonal antibodies against tumor associated antigens (e.g. CEA, CA 12-5). After i.v. injection antibodies bind at antigen positive tumor sites and can be localized by gamma camera imaging. Relevant findings could be obtained in local reeurrencies of colorectal (differentiation between tumor and scar) and ovarian carcinomas (peritoneal spread). Successful tumor detection can also be achieved by receptor scanning after administration of radiolabelled ligands such as diestradiol (breast cancer) or somatostatin analogs (GEP-tumors, malignant lymphomas). PET using radiolabel!ed substrates of carbohydrate, amino, or nucleinic acid metabolism yields quantitative informatSon on metabolic and/or proliferative activity of tumors. Clinical studies in patients with pancreatic cancer or malignant lymphomas indicate that improved tumor detection and treatment monitoring can be achieved by measuring uptake of 18-F iahelled deoxyglucose. Thus, immunoscintigraphy, receptor ~canning, and PET complement conventional diagnostic procedures 5=, oncology and may help to optimize treatment by specific tumor data (receptor/antigen status, metabolic activity). The clinical efficacy of two empiric antimicrobial treatment regimens for infection in neutropenic patients with acute leukemia during induction and intensification therapy was evaluated. The first program of therapy, applied in 38 patients, consisted of three sets of antibiotics (gentamycin + carbenicillin or azlocillin, amikacin + cefradine or cefuroxime, netilmycin + cefotaxime or ceftazidime) used one after another in case of persistent fever in spite of treatment for 72 hours. In addition, flucytosine was applied after 72 hours of antibiotic therapy. It was replaced by amphoteriein B after next 72 hours in case of ineffective treatment. In the second program, used in 22 patients, amikacin with piperacillin or azlocillin were applied. Amphotericin B was given after next 48 hours if no response was observed. Vancomycin was added after 72 hours of persistent fever. Ureidopenicillin and amikacin were then replaced by cefoperazon or ceftazidim with netilmycin, and in case of lack of improvement imipenem was given after next 48 hours. The response rates in patients during induction and intensification therapy for the first regimen was 68% and 96%, and for the second 75% and 95%, respectively. Leukemogenesis has long been thought to be a multistep process. The advent of molecular biologic technology now has provided the tools to characterize several of the genetic alterations that cause disorders in the control of cell proliferation, differentation, and intercellular communication, and in turn lead to malignant transformation. Two sorts of genomic lesions have emerged as the salient components of this process: the activation of oncogenes coupled with the inactivation of tumor-suppressor genes. Relatively few of these genetic defects are exclusively associated with a specific leukemia subtype, such as the PML-RARe recombination underlying t(15;171 in AML-M3. Chimeric oncogenes as e.g. BCR-ABL or DEK-CAN corresponding to t(9;22) and t(6;9) are observed in different myeloid and lymphoid neoplasias. A third category of tumergene alteration is not only present in a broad spectrum of hematopoietic malignancies as well as solid tumors, but is also detectable in premalignant states (e.g. myelodysplastic syndromes) and even in clinically normal individuals. Cases in point are RAS gene and P53 mutations. These data, complemented by cytogenetic and X-chromosome inactivation studies, suggest that the accumulation of genomic lesions constitutes the critical determinant for the manifestation of myeloid neoplasias. Respective molecular genetic parameters bear major clinical significance for the subclassifieation and monitoring of leukemia patients. Cytologically undifferentiated bone marrow blast cells from 12 patients with MDS (RA,RARS) who consequently developed a secondary acute myeloid leukemia (AML) were analysed by high resolution image analysis including texture and color features of cell nucleus and cytoplasm. All features were calculated in a decision tree algorithmn to determine the subtypes of blast cells. No significant differences in blast cell morphology between MDS blasts and subsequent AML blasts were found, in contrast we found significant differences between blasts from secondary AML and primary (de novo) AML. The results suggest, that clonal evolution of blast cells in MDS might be a prerequisite for the progression into acute myeloid leukemia. The clear distinction of blast morphology between primary AML and secondary AML points to different entities of leukemia. Morphology of blast cells determined by image analysis might be a useful tool to distinguish blast subtypes especially in myeloid malignancies. In 1988 at the age of 54 he received a cardiac transplant for ischemic heart disease foliowed by immunosuppressive therapy with azathioprin, prednison and cyclosporin. In 1989 a fracture of the thoracic spines 11 and 12 was noted. In 1990 an increase of the light chains type kappa was found. In 7/91 his condition deteriorated with back pain, nausea, hematemesis and impairment of renal function. Clinical examination revealed no lymphadenopathy, no hepatosplenomegaly. The main laboratory findings were: LDH 7920 U/l; creatinine 3.9 mg/dl; BUN 134 mg/dl; hemoglobin 8.6 g/dl;^WBC 14xi09/I with 29% immature plasmacells, platelets 40x10~/l. Immunphenotyping of peripheral blood mononuclear cells showed that 50% of them expressed cytoplasmatic kappa light chains and CD 38. The bone marrow differential revealed 57% of the nucleated cells to be plasmablasts and plasmacells. Chromosome analysis of peripheral mononuclear cells demonstrated a clone with trisomy 13 and a translocation 8;14. On the day after his admission he required laparatomy for a massive upper gastrointestinal bleeding. A tumor in the bulbus duodeni was resected, histologic examination showed a Burkitt's lymphoma. Chemotherapy with vincristin, adriamycin and steroids was started but his condition deteriorated and he died. Post mortem examination showed infiltration of the lungs, the liver, the kidneys and the bone marrow by plasmacells. This case is unusual as two different B-cell neoplasms developed in a immunosuppressed patient. Another unusual finding is the diagnosis of a Burkitt's lymphoma which is infrequently found in transplant patients. with chromosome specific probes is a promising tool for detection of numerical chromosome aberrations in interphase nuclei and terminally differentiated cells. By bypassing the need for metaphase preparations it may avoid the bias resulting from the analysis of merely proliferating cells and provide useful clinical information in hematological disorders. We studied peripheral blood and bone marrow nuclei of 15 previously karyotyped cases of monosomy 7 associated myeloid disorders [3 childhood myeloprolilerative disorders, 2 myelodysplastic syndromes, i0 acute myeloid lenkemias (AML)] using a chromosome 7 speciiic centromeric probe (7ZI/2, ONCOR). Validation of optimized hybridization conditions on 32 disomic controls produced two signals in 96,8%  2,1% of nuclei. Monosomy 7 was readily confirmed in all study cases (13% to 95% of nuclei) during active disease. In two remission samples of AML, 3% and 4% of nuclei respectively had one signal only, therefore ranging below the established detection threshold for monosomy 7. In 3 cases a minority (23% to 32%) of nuclei were found to be monosomic by FISH, while virtually all metaphases were so by standard cytogenetics. In two of them, the discrepancies between both methods can be explained by a more active proliferation of the malignant clone. Metaphases of the third contained a small acrocentric marker, which by FISH could be identified as pericentromeric region of chromosome 7. Interphase nuclei here were indistinguishable from normal cells. Conclusions: FISH yealds rapid and important complementary results to classical karyotyping. However, in this setting, it is not suitable for the detection of minimal residual disease. Combining FISH with membrane immunophenotyping should considerably strengthen the power of the methodstudies using this strategy are currently in progress. Multiple mechanisms are involved in the pathophysiology of hypercoagulability in cancer due to balance between coagulatory and anticoagulatory system. Protein S (PS) and protein C (PC) are vit. K dependent coagulation inhibitors. Bound to C4b-binding protein (C4bBP) PS, looses its cofactor activity for the anticoagulatory and profibrinolytic active PC but is now able to influence local activation of complement system on phospholipid bilayers. Therefore PS functions as a link between coagulation and complement system. Pulmonary Cancer patients are known to have an increased risk of thromboembolic complications.ln the present study we have investigated the role of PC, PS and C4bBP in patients suffering from small-cell (SCC, n=30) and non-small-cell (NSCC, n=50) pulmonary cancer. The Philadelphia (Phl)-chromosome is the result of a reciprocal translocation between chromosomes #9 and #22 (t(9;22)(q34;ql 1)). It is present in 95% of patients with CML and is an important marker of this disease. In adult ALL, the Phi-chromosome is the most frequent chromosomal abnormality and associated with poor prognosis. For the rapid detection of the t(9;22) fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) could become an invaluable tool. So far, approaches using chromosome specific DNA libraries and flanking cosmid probes have been used. We report preliminary data on experiments using the yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) clone D107F9 (kindly provided by Dr. H. Riethman, Philadelphia and Dr. T. Cremer, Heidelberg) for the detection of the Phi-chromosome in a patient with Ph 1-positive ALL with the breakpoint in the major breakpoint cluster region of the BCR gene. The insert of this clone is 215 kb in size and contains genomic sequences of the BCR gene (Lengauer et al., Cancer Res., in press ). In situ hybridization resulted in specific signals on chromosomal band 22qll on the normal homolog, on the telomeric part of the Phl chromosome and on the 9q+ chromosome. In this patient, the signals in the cell nuclei were of limited quality and not sufficient for interphase diagnostics. Further studies including two color hybridization with additional cosmid probes mapping to the c-abl protooncogene and more patient material are in progress. These analyses will prove, if the YAC clone D107F9 also spans across the minor breakpoint cluster region and thus is a suitable tool for the general detection of the bcr-abl fusion in acute leukemia. May, E.-D. Kreuser, and E. Thiel A new mini-port system (Pharmacia Deltec, Freiburg, FRG) was used for central venous access in 37 pts. Fifteen pts. (with solid tumors x8, lymphomas x4, acute leukemias x3) had the port positioned on their proximal forearm, 22 pts. (with solid tumors x13, lymphomas x7, acute leukemia xl, CML xl) on the chest wall. Observed life-span of mini-ports was 201 days (range 28-549) for the peripheral access (P.A.S.) port and 87 days (range 0-480) for the chest wall port with cumulative observation periods of 3778 and 3358 patient-days respectively. Mini-ports were used for chemotherapy, supportive treatment including parenteral nutrition and transfusion of blood products and for taking blood samples. No complications were observed in 8 of 15 pts. with the P.A.S. port and 18 of 22 pts. with the chest wall-positioned miniport. There were 6 pts. with peripheral vein thrombosis, 3 pts. with reversible port occlusion, 3 pts. with port infections for the P.A.S. port and 1 pt. with port infection, 1 pt. with dislocation of the catheter tip, 1 pt. with unsuccessful implantation, 2 pts. with paravasations, 1 pt. with port occlusion for the chest wall position. However, loss of function and/or explantation were the consequences for only 5 mini-ports (P.A.S. port x2, chest wall port x3). A new electromagnetic catheter tracking system (Cath-Finder, Pharmacia) was used in 8 pts. for implantation of P.A.S. port. When compared with x-ray detection the system predicted the catheter tip accurately in 7 pts. and changed surgical procedure by predicting wrong positioning in 3 pts. In conclusion, the new mini-port can be used like the older and larger systems with less cosmetic damage. Chest wall positioning of the port was accompanied with less frequent complications and thus, acceptance for the central chest wall position was better than for the position on the proximal forearm by 22 pts., 9 physicians, and 8 nurses interviewed. At the moment we are testing positioning of the mini-port on the distal upper arm. With the development of fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), "interphase cytogenetics" has become possible. So far, only scarce data on the application of this technique to previously stained blood smears have been reported and a systematic assessment of the hybridization quality on peripheral blood smears has not been performed. In this study we used FISH with an alphoid probe (D8Z1) for the detection of trisomy 8 on previously stained peripheral blood smears. The results were compared with hybridization experiments performed on slides with chromosome spreads prepared for G-banding analysis (methanol/acetic acid fixed slides = MAFslides). In parallel, each patient was examined by conventional cytogenetic techniques. So far, 5 healthy volunteers (controls) and 15 pts. have been examined, 9 with AML, 4 with CML-blast crisis and 2 with RAEB. In the controls, similar results were obtained for blood smears and MAF-slides (2 signals: 92.8%+/-3.1% vs. 92.2%+/-4.2%, 3 signals: 2.1%+/-0.9% vs. 1.5%+/-0.6%). 11 pts. did not exhibit a trisomy 8 on classical cytogenetic analysis. Their FISH results did not show any significant differences on peripheral blood smears and MAF-slides. Again, the frequency of nuclei exhibiting three signals was low (1.9%+/-0.6% vs. 2.2%+/-0.8%) and two signals were seen in 92.2%+/-4.2% (blood smears) versus 89.1%+/-6.3% (MAF-slides) of the nuclei. Two pts. had a trisomy 8 in all metaphases. Using FISH three signals were detected in the majority of cells in these cases (82.6% and 67.1% on blood smears, 79.1% and 52.3% on MAFslides). In the remaining two pts. a subclone with three (pt.14) and four (pt.15) chromosomes #8 was present. Again, these abnormalities were detected equally well on blood smears and MAF-slides. We conclude that using a chromosome #8 specific alphoid probe FISH can be performed on blood smears with the same sensitivity and specificity that is achieved by using MAF-slides. As morphological features of the cells remain preserved, a correlation of phenotype and karyotype in blood smears is possible. Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik V, Hospitalstr.3, 6900 Heidelberg and *Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, 6900 Heidelberg, Germany The prognosis of high-grade non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs) depends on the induction of an early initial complete remission (CR). Several trials therfore focus on dose itensification of the induction therapy by addition of hematopoetic growth factors for reduction of hematotoxicity. We conducted a phase II trial in patient with high-grade NHLs except lymphoblastic lymphomas using high-dose chemotherapy + GM-CSF applicated in a short intervall. In detail, 2Patients ~ceive vincristine 2mg ~1, adriamycin 25mg/~ dl-3, cyclophosphamide 800 mg,~m" dl, prednisone 60 mg/m L p.o. dl-7 and etoposide 120mg/m" dl-3. in patients >60 yrs adriamycJ~] is only applicated on dl +2 and etoposide reduced to 100mg/m on dl-3. This cycle will be repeated every 3 weeks up to 5 cycles in stages I-III and 6 cycles in stage IV. Additionally, radiotherapy will be applicated for consolidation. Up to now, 40 patients (pts.) with newly diagnosed high-grade NHLs are included into the study. 9/40 pts. are too early for follow-up and 3/40 pts. had early deaths. 28/40 pts. (11m, 15f) are evaulable for response. Most histological subtypes are centroblastic (12/28), pleomorphic T-cell lymphoma (3/28), immunoblastic (3/28) , anaplastic Kil + (2/28) and 6 others. 4 pts. had stage I, 7 stage II, 6 stage III and 9 stage IV. In 21/28 (81%) a CR could be achieved. The median relapse free survival is not yet reached. The probality for CCR is 63%. The toxicity was moderate and may be reduced by GM-CSF. VACPE is a highly effective schedule in high-grade NHLs. Despite intensification of chemotherapy in acute myelocytic leukemia (AML), the remission duration remains unsatisfactory due to persistance of minimal residual disease (MRD). Here, the induction of graft versus leucemia (GvL) like reactions with interleukin-2 (IL-2) is an interesting new therapeutic approach. Therefore we conducted a multicenter phase II trial with IL-2 late consolidation in patients (pts) with 1st relapse of de novo AML. The patients receive two cycles of IDAraC (2x60Omg/m 2 dl-4) and VP-16 (100mg/m 2 dl-7) as relapse therapy and a third cycle as early consolidation. After a rest of 4 weeks, IL-2 is administered in a dosage of 9x10 IU/m 2 rlL-2 (EuroCetus, Frankfurt, FRG) as lh infusion on day 1-5 and 8-12. After a rest of 4 weeks, this cycle will be repeated up to 4 cycles totally. Patients undergoing ABMT BMT receive IL-2 staring latest 6 weeks after ABMT, too. Up to now, 31 patients were included into the study. 18/28 (64%) evaluable patients achieved CR after chemotherapy. 9 pts received IL-2 late consolidation, 3 after ABMT. 3 pts relapsed before IL-2 therapy, 2 pts refused further therapy and 4 pts are too early for evaluation. The median remission duration of pts, who received IL-2, is 14 months. 3 pts relapsed after 5,11 and 13 months. 6 pts have an ongoing remission (3+, 9+, 10+, 16+, 19+, 27+). The toxicity was moderate, so that the, schedule could be applicated in most cases in an outpatient manner. Only two patients both after ABMT developed severe infections (sepsis, pneumonia) after IL-2. The follow-up of immunological parameters revealed a significant lymphocytosis with an increase of CD56 + cells, induction of endogeneous TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, tL-6 and adhesion molecules. 3/8 patients meanwhile exceeded 1st remission duration indicating a benefit of 11-2 for relapse free survival in AML. Prolonged periods of neutropenia after intensive chemotherapy or bone marrow transplantation (bmt) are the major risk factor for invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA). Between 8/89 untiI 2/92 we used aersol amb in 40 pts undergoing autologous bmt to obtain pharmacological data and to investigate it's clinical use. Amb was dissolved in sterile water at 10 mg / 5 ml and nebulized using a "lifetec jetair 6 10 R" air compressor with a "respirgard II R" nebulizer at a flow rate of 8 ml/min. Pts started inhalations 6 days prior to brat and continued twice daily for 20 rain Until leucocytes > 1.0/nl were reached. In 15 pts amb serum levels were regularly monitored. In 4 healthy volunteers the organ distribution of radiolabeled amb was studied. Results: Radiolabeled amb showed a homogeneous pulmonary distribution. Of the total activity a median of 2.6% (range 2.4-3.3%) were found in the lungs immediately after inhalation and 1.4% (range 1.1-1.6%) at 14h post inhalation. Serial amb serum levels in pts pre-and lh post inhalation were < 0.1 pg/ml in 150/168 (89%) samples. Between 0.1 pg/ml and 0.2 pg/ml of amb was measured in 18/168 (11%) samples. Treatment was well tolerated with minimal toxicity (nausea and bad taste). Inhalations had to be discontinued in 10 pts with WHO IV o stomatitis or for other reasons. In one pt in whom aerosol amb had to be stopped on day -3 after only five inhalations, IPA was documented after his death on day +21 despite i.v. amb treatment. There were no other cases of IPA. Conclusions: lack of toxicity, absence of relevant serum levels and good pulmonary distribution warrant prospective evaluation of aerosol amb as prophylaxis of IPA in neutropenic pts. High dose chemotherapy (HDT) with autologous stem cell rescue (ASCR} is increasingly used for the treatment of solid tumors and hematologic malignancies. Beside dose, schedule and drug combination in a HDT regimen, pretreatment is one major factor that influences the incidence of non-hematological side effects. Between 8/89 and 3/92 we treated 12 pts with germ cell tumors (GCT), 7 pts with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) and 3 pts with Hodgkin's disease (HD) with identical doses of carboplatin 1500 mg/m 2, etoposide 1200 to 1600 mg/m 2 and ifosfamide 10 g/m 2 followed by ASCR. Of the pts with GCT who all had intensive cisplatin pretreatment 8/12 (67%) had a rise in serum creatinine > 1,2 mg/dl and 1/12 (8%) required temporary hemodialysis. Mucositis >-WHO Ill ~ occured in 11/12 (92%), diarrhoea -> WHO III o in 4/12 (33%), hepatic toxicity -> WHO I11 o in 2/12 (17%) and peripheral nervous toxicity >_ WHO I ~ in 4/12 (33%) pts. Pts with NHL/HD who had all received only non-cisplatin pretreatment and irradiation, tolerated the HDT better. Only 1 pt (10%) had a rise in serum creatinine > 1,2 mg/dl and no pt required hemodialysis. Mucositis -> WHO III ~ occured in 6/10 (60%) and diarrhoea -> WHO III ~ in 1/10 (10%). No hepatic toxicity -> WHO III o or peripheral nervous toxicity _> WHO I o was observed. CONCLUSION: Carboplatin, etoposide and ifosfamide can be used in a HDT combination. Manageable, but substantial side effects occur. Pretreatment with cispiatin results in a significantly higher incidence of renal toxicity. HDT should not be routinely used before trials have shown it's superiority over standard-dose treatment. The lymphocytotoxic effect of chlorodeoxyadenosine (CdA), a purine analogue resistant to adenosine deaminase, requires the phosphorylation by the enzyme deoxycytidine kinase. This effect on lymphocytes can be antagonized by coadministration of deoxycytidine (dCyt), a competitive snbstrate of deoxycytidin kinase. Recent in vitro studies 1 have shown, that not only growth of lymphocytes but also colony formation by myeloid progenitors derived from normal human bone marrow is dose dependently inhibited by CdA. The aim of this study was to examine the effect of various doses of dCyt (10 -6 to 10-3M) on CdA mediated growth inhibition of myeloid progenitor cells in vilro. Oar results show that coadministradon of dCyt (>lO-4M) to CdA containing cultures (160nM) protected colony formation by human bone marrow derived progenitor cells (CFU-E, BFU-E, CFU-GM) in the methylceUulose system. However, the protective effect of dCyt was markedly different on the various subclasses of progenitor cells depending on their maturation stage. Thus, condministration of 10"4M dCyt completely reversed the growth inhibiting effect of CdA on CFU-E colony formation, whereas the colony formation of the immature progenitors BFU-e and CFU-GM was only restored to 50% of control cultures. If the concentration of dCyt was increased to 10-3M, the protective effect for BFU-E and CFU-GM in the presence of a maximally growth inhibitory dose of CdA (160nM) reached almost 80% of control cultures. The fact that CdA mediated growth inhibition of CFU-E could be completely restored, but that of BFU-E and CFU-GM only incompletely despite a higher concentration of dCyt (10-3M), led us to the suggestion, that beside phosphorylation by dCyt kinase additional mechanisms may be operative for the toxicity of CdA in the more immature progenitors (BFU-E and CFU-GM). 1 Petzer A., Bilged R., Zilian U., Geisen F., Haun M., Konwalinka G.: Inhibitory effect of 2-CdA on granulocyfic, erythmid and T-lymphocytic colony growth. Blood 78,1992 Blood 78, :pp 2583 Blood 78, -2587 This work was supported by the "Fonds zur FOrdemng der wissensehafdichen Forschung", P8718. To study safety, tolerance and biological effects of IL-1 administered subcutaneously, patients with advanced malignancies are assigned to receive rhlL-11~ at dose levels of 10, 30, 60, and 100 ng/kg (6 patients per dose level). IL-1 (E.coli; Syntex/Behringwerke) is given once daily for 7 days, followed by 21 days of monitoring. Up to now, 6 patients entered dose level I (10 ng/kg) and 4 patients entered dose level II (30 ng/kg). Patients who responded to IL-1 by tumor regression or stable disease received additional cycles of IL-1 at the same dose (dose level I, n=16 cycles; dose level II, n = 5 cycles). One patient had WHO grade Ill fever (30ng/kg), all other displayed grade II fever. Two patients had grade II hypotension without need for therapy. Other side effects (all grade I) included chills, local erythema at the site of injection and herpes labialis. One patient with malignant melanoma had a partial remission (dose 10 ng/kg), and 5/10 patients had stable disease (2 malignant melanoma; 2 renal cell carcinoma; 1 parotic carcinoma). An acute phase response was induced in all patients. IL-6 reached maximum serum levels 4-6 hours after IL-1 administration (up to 200 pg/ml following 10 ng/kg IL-1 ). Sustained thrombocytosis -starting at day 5-7 for up to 4 weeks -was observed in 18/21 treatment cycles. Considering the induction of high-levels of IL-6 by IL-lr~, the increase in platelets might be mediated by IL-6. Peripheral blood progenitor cells were not significantly increased by IL-1 when compared to pretreatment levels. This study indicates that IL-1 I~ can be given safely to patients and stimulates a sustained rise in platelet counts. Medical Center, Department of Hematology and Oncology, Hugstetter Str. 55, D-7800 Freiburg, FRG and 1Behringwerke Marburg B6hme,A. 1-, Jnst,G. 2, Bergmann,L. 1, Shah,P. 2, Hoelzer,D. 1, StiUe,W. 2 A prospective, randomized trial was designed for investigating CefotaJ6me/Piperacillin (Cef/Pip) vs Imipanem/Cilastatin (Imi/Cil) as empirical therapy and Itraconazole as early antifimgal treatment in febrile neutropenic patients. Totally, 139 patients were included. 43/"/0 patients receiving Cef/Pip (61%) and 40/69 patients treated with Imi/Cil (58%) responded. Episodes with fever of unknown origin (FUO) had the best response with 82% (23/28 pat.) under Cef/Pip, 79% (19/24 pat.) under Imi/Cil. Nonresponders got additional therapy with Geutaminine and were randomly assigned to treatment with or without Intraconazole. The overall response of FUO was 100%. In 30 patients, bacteremia was diagnosed without any localization of infectious focus. 7/12 pat. (58%) responded with Pip/Cef, 11/18 pat. (61%) with Imi/Cil. By adjusting treatment to antibiogram the response was increased to 90% (27/30). In 25 episodes a pneumonia developed after start of fever. A complete recovery oecured in 11% (119 pat.) unter Cef/Pip, in 12,5% (2/16 pat.) under Iml/Cil. By further therapy according to antibingram or with Amphotedein B/5-Flucytosine the response was elevated to 76% (19/25 pat.). 28 patients with initially diagnosed pneumonia were randomized to treatment with Imipenem/Cilastatin or with Imipenem/Cilastatin/Itraconazole. The response was 50% (9/18 pat.), and 70% (7/10 pat.) respectively. By supplement of the antibiotic combination 93% of patients responded. In conclusion there was no difference in efficacy between Cefotaxime/Piperacillin and Imipenem/Cilastatin in the treatment of FUO and secondarly documented infections. The preliminary results of initially diagnosed pneumonias suggest a benefit of the combination with Itraconazole. It is necessary, however, to await results in further infection cases. The investigation of the metabolism of the anticancer drug mitoxantrone received an additional impetus since evidence was found for a new metabolic pathway in man, pig and rat which based on the oxidation of the phenylenediamine moiety of mitoxantrone. A naphthoquinoxaline derivative of mitoxantrone which was detectable in the urine of patients, rat and pig was the unequivocal proof of this biotransformation. This metabolite is the product of an intramolecular cyclization reaction occuring either in a quinone-diimine intermediate or alternatively, in a radical cation of mitoxantrone. Both intermediates could be formed in vitro via enzymatic or non-enzymatic oxidation of mitoxantrone and are potentially capable to act as alkylating agents as proved by their reaction with glutathione after enzymatic activation of mitoxantrone with activated horseraddish peroxidase. Evidence for the alkylating property of oxidized mitoxantrone has been achieved after incubation of primary cultures of rat hepatocytes. By action of the hepatocytes mitoxantrone is transformed into the corresponding mono-L-cysteine-and the monoglutathione conjugates. The biotransformation products have been identified by high-performance liquid chromatography and spectral comparison with authentic reference compounds prepared by chemical synthesis. Structural proof of the reference compounds has been obtained by application of nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and electrospray mass spectrometry. Medizinische Klinik Tt3bingen, Otfried-M011er-Str. 10, W-7400 T0bingen *lnstitut for Organische Chemie. Auf der MorgensteUe 18. W-7400 T0bingen It has been shown that bispecific antibodies which recognize epitopes on the CD3-complex and tumor-antigens can force pre-activated T-cells to react against tumor cells. For the activation of resting T-cells, however, a second activation signal is required. In this study this signal was given by crosslinking of the CD28 molecule on T-cells. Monocyte depleted peripheral blood leukocytes from patients with CLL and cell lymphomas (leukemic phase) were cocultured with anti-CD3xanti-CD19 bispecific antibodies together with anti-CD28 antibodies. FACS analysis after 8 days of culture showed that the total number of tumoral Bceils decreased by 40-90%. Simultaneously the IL2-receptor (CD25) and the CD38 activation marker on T-cells were upregulated. Further analysis of the T-cell subsets revealed that CD4 positive T-cells were markedly overrepresented in the stimulated cultures (CD4/CD8 ratio-range in 6 patients: 6-15 fold). PBLs stimulated with anti-CD3xanti-CD19 bispecific antibodies and anti-CD28 were assayed after 5 days for specific cytolysis against autologous B-lymphoma ceils. 25% specific cytotoxic activity against autologous B-lymphoma cells could be detected when anti-CD3xanti-CD19 bispecific antibodies were added, whereas the parental antibodies showed only background activity. To demonstrate the efficacy of this protocol in vivo SClD-mice were subcutaneously transplanted with human B cell lymphoma tissue. After visible tumor growth the mice were treated with autologous purified Tcells(lxl07/mouse) and subsequently injected with anti-CD3xanti-CD19(251ag/mouse each) plus anti-CD28 (group I), anti-CD3xanti-CD19 alone (group II) or parental antibodies (group III). A significant delay in tumor growth of 50% on day 30 could only be detected in 3/5 mice from group I which had been treated with bispecific antibodies and anti-CD28 T-cell activating antibodies. With the use of combination chemotherapy (c-rx) 80 -85 % of patients (pts) with testicular germ cell tumours can expect to be cured from malignant disease. For the subgroup of pts with "low risk" NSGCT, cure rates up to 95 % can be achieved and current improvements in therapy for this group of patients aim at the reduction of toxicity without compromising long term survival. However, different definitions of "low risk", taking into account metastatic sites only (Indiana University), additional tumour markers (EORTC) or LDH-levels (MSKCC) complicate the comparison of treatment results. Between 10 -20 % of pts will be assigned to another "risk group" when analysed according to the different definitions of "low risk" trials. In "low risk" pts 3 cycles (cy) of Platin (P), Etoposide (E) and Bleomycin (B) have been demonstrated to be as effective as 4 cy of the same regimen and are regarded as "standard" (92 % cont. CR/NED; Indiana University). The omission of B in 3 cy of PEB resulted in significantly worse results (67 % vs 86 % cont CR/NED; Indiana University), while 4 cy of PE were equivalent to 4 cy of PEB (88 % vs 92 % cont. CR/NED; EORTC). The substitution of cisplatinum (P) by carboplatin (C) in combination with etoposide gave inferior results in a randomized trial comparing 4 cy of CE-to 4 cy of PE-chemotherapy (78 % vs 87 % cont. CR/NED; MSKCC). Promising results were obtained in a phase-II-study of 4 cy of CEB treatment (90 % cont. CR/NED; MRC). This regimen of 4 cy CEB is currently compared to 3 cy of "standard" PEB (Indianaregimen) in a randomized phase III study of the German Testicular Cancer Study Group. Outside of clinical studies 3 cy of the PEBregimen should be regarded as standard treatment for pts with "low risk" NSGCT. Leydig-cell tumours (LCT) constitute 1.6 -3.6 % of all testicular neoplasias. Only 10 % of these are malignant with the potential for metastases (METS), which predominantly involve regional lymph nodes (LN), liver, lung or bones. Fifty percent of LCT have altered estrogene (ES) and/or androgene (AN) serum levels. From 1990-92 3 pts with metastatic LCT were treated at Hannover University Medical School. Pts age at diagnosis: 54, 62 and 65 years. Hormone parameters: normal in 1 pt, decrease of AN and elevation of gonadotropins in 1 pt and increase of AN and ES in 1 pt. Metastatic sites, treatment and outcome: Pat 1: Retroperitoneal LN METS at first diagnosis (FD); tumour free after surgical resection for 6 months (MO). Pat 2: METS in retroperitoneal LN, liver and lung 7 years after FD; chemotherapy (CTX) (first line: platin(P)/etoposide(E); second line: epirubicin), followed by incomplete resection and subsequent hormonal therapy (1.: tamoxifen; 2.: Ionidamine); PD and death 8 years after FD (1.5 years after detection of METS). Pat 3: Retroperitoneal LN METe 6 MO after FD; incomplete resection, chemotherapy (P/E/Bleomycin(B)); minor response and alive with disease for 17 MO after FD. The three cases reported confirm the large variability of the time interval between FD and development of METS in pts with LCT. Although one pat achieved a minor remission after treatment with platinum-based combination CTX, no effective CTX is established for metastatic LCT and responses to standard regimens used for testicular germ cell tumours (PEB) have only rarely been reported. For cases with completely resectable metastases surgery offers the most effective treatment option. Address: Abt. H&matologie/Onkologie I und Urologie 2, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, 3000 Hannover 61, FRG. C. Bokemeyer, A. Schrader, J. van Rhee, H. KShne-W6mpner, H.-J. Schmoll, H. Poliwoda 83 consecutive patients (pts) out of 219 pts treated for HD between 1965 and 1988 at Hannover University Medical School, who had been in continuous CR for more than 24 months (too) were evaluated for late cardiotoxic effects of therapy. The pts received an electrocardiogram (ECG) and a measurement of left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) and an echocardiograrn in selected cases. Pts characteristics: Median age: 37 years (18-74); median follow-up: 96 mo (27-243). Risk factors for cardiac disease: diabetes 3 pts, hypercholesterinemia 4 pts, hypertension 13 pts. 48 of 83 (58%) pts were non-smokers (NS), 19/83 (23%) smokers (S) and 16/83 (19%) gave up smoking more than 5 years ago (FS). Treatment consisted of radiotherapy (RTX') in 27% of pts, chemotherapy (CTX) in 15% and combined CTX and RTX in 58% of pts; 63/69 pts (91%) with RTX had received mediastinal RTX. Results: 18/83 (22%) pts had a pathological EF (7 pts) (ejected left ventricular blood-volume lower than 50% or decreased regional wall.motility) or borderline (11 pts) EF (EF between 50 and 55%). Echocardiography performed in 4 cases showed no specific changes attributable to prior therapy. 13/83 (16%) pts showed ECG-changes only (left ventdcular repolarization disturbances (7 pts), AV-block (4 pts), incomplete right bundle branch block (4 pts), left ventricular hypertrophy (2 pts), extrasystoles (2 pts), left anterior hemiblock (2 pts), myocardial infarction (f pat), LGL-syndrome (1 pat). In 6/13 (46%) pts more than one ECG-alteration occurred. Additionally 9/81 (11%) pts showed abnormalities in both EF and ECG. 31 of 81 (38 %) pts complained about subjective cardiac signs. Conclusion: Significant or borderline reductions of cardiac EF occurred in 27/81 (33 %) pts after treatment of HD. They were not associated with potential risk factors for cardiac disease, but appeared to be more common in pts receiving combined RTX and CTX, particularly after the use of anthracycline containing regimens (ABVD). Prospective studies are needed to determine the incidence and to define the potential of "cardioprotective substances" for the prevention of late cardiac toxicity in pts with curable malignant tumors. 83 consecutive patients (pts) (43 women, 40 men) (median age 37 years (18-74)) of 219 pts treated for HD at Hannover University Medical School between 1965 and 1988, who were in CR/NED for more than two years, were evaluated regarding sex hormone status, fertility and influence on relationship. Treatment consisted of chemotherapy (CTX) in 16 % of pts, radiotherapy (RTX) in 26 % and combined CTX and RTX in 58 % of pts. Results: Of 26 eligible women (17/43 excluded for: age > 47 years 4 pts; current contraceptive medication 12 pts;, ovarectomy 1 pat) 13 (50%) showed signs of ovarian insufficiency (OI): Elevated follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) and decreased estradiol (E2). 10/26 (38 %) had persistent, 1 (4 %) transient amenorrhea for 9 months. A~e at the end of therapy appeared to be important with OI occurring in 1/8 women (13%) younger than 25 years compared to 11/18 (61%) women older than 25 years. 26/40 men (65 %) showed elevated FSH-levels as an indicator of testicular tubular damage (median 13.4 mU/ml (1.5 -32.3) ). Median values of LH and androgenes were within the normal range (8/40 (20 %) with decreased androgene levels), in 12 men undergoing sperm analysis 25 -180 mo after therapy for HD, 7/12 (58 %) were infertile (CTX only 14 %, combined CTX + RTX 86 %). 2/12 were classified as subfertile. In 6/7 (86 %) men infertility was associated with elevated FSH levels. 3/40 (8 %) men fathered healthy children, 3/43 (7 %) women became pregnant, but lost their children due to spontaneous (1) or voluntary (2) abortion. 14/83 (17 %) Lots reported a negative influence on sexual function and relationship after treatment for HD. Conclusion: OI associated with amenorrhea after treatment for HD represents a common problem in about half of the pts. It appears to be significantly more common in women older than 25 years at the end of treatment. In 65 % of men treated for HD elevated FSH was found, indicating testicular tubular demage and possibly infertility. Sperm banking should be routinely offered to male pts with the wish to procreate children. Furthermore, pts should be counselled concerning possible distress on relationship and sexual activity caused by treatment of HD. The precondition for the antineopIastic effect of ifosfamide (ifo) is the oxidation of the oxazaphosphorine ring system. The 'ring oxidation; leads to the formation of alkyIating mustard by severa] steps, 'Side chain oxidation' produces the cytostatically inactive metabo-]ites 2-and 3-dechIoroethyI-ifosfamide. This metabo]ic pattern gains growing interest in the discussion of ifosfamide-reiated nephro-and neurotoxicity. The metabolic capacity of rat liver, kidney, brain and lung, therefore, was investigated. ifosfamide (ifo) and the metabolites 4-hydroxyifosfamide (4-OH-ifo)/a]doifosfamid, lfosfamide-mustard, Carboxyifosfamide, 4-Ketoifosfamide, 2-deschIoroethylifosfamid (2-d-ifo) and 3-desch]orethyI-ifosfamide (3-difo) were determined in microsoma] preparations by HPLC. In rat liver microsomes formation of Carboxyifosfamide and 4-keto-ifosfamide could not be demonstrated. The maximum velocity of the formation of 3-d-ifo exceeded the 2-d-formation fourtimes. In supernatant all metabo]ites were formed. Predominating metabolite of the 'ring oxidation' was carboxyifosfamide. Preparations from rat and rabbit lung tissue were incubated and the formation of a]] metabo]ites with the e~ception of 4-ketoifosfamide could be observed. Neither braiu from the rat nor kidney from rat and rabbit demonstrated metabo]ic activity. We have identified a novel transcription factor termed NF-jun which regulates transcriptional activation of the c-jun gene. Expression of c-jun is associated with cellular proliferation. NF-jun can be isolated from nuclear proteins of rapidly proliferating ceils such as vadous human myeloid leukemia cell lines and pdmary AML sample, but is not detectable in nuclear extracts of peripheral blood monocytes or growth-arrested diploid fibrobiasts. NF-jun shares several biological features with the ubiquitous transcription factor NF-KB, including its subcellular iocalisation which predisposes NF-jun to function as a molecule which transduces signals from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. We have cloned the NFjun encoding gene by screening an expression library. Prelimiary sequence data indicate that the genes encoding NF-KB or various other members of the c-rel family and the NF-jun encoding gene are distinct. The NF-jun is transcribed into a 2.4 kB mFINA which iS constitutively expressed by various human my~,:c, id leukemia cells. NF-jun transcript levels in these cells are augmented by TNF-~ treatment. In contrast, peripheral blood monocytes and non proliferating diploid fibroblasts fail to synthesize NF-jun transcdpts irregardless of the presence or absence of TNF*c~. Taken together, our data indicate that NF-jun acts as a sequence specific transcription factor regulating proliferation-associated expression of the c-jun gene in myeioid leukemia cells. Abt. H~matoibgie und Onkologie, Universit~.tsklinikum Freiburg. 7800 Freiburg LBr. A. Borstel, A. Franke, G. MUller, R. Uhle, W. Weise Results of the study about the reproduetionability of patients with hemablastosis are evaluated. 1079 patients wich the diagnosis of hemoblastosis were treated with a chemotherapy in the Department of Hematolegy/Oncology of the clinics of Internal Medicine of the Medical Academy of Magdeburg. Within this number were 147 female end 191 male patients in the age of reproductionability. 16 deliveries and 7 abortions of the females occured and 5 of the male patients got 6 children. The natural course of lymphogranulomatosis is not affected by pregnancy. In contrast the course of an untreated high malignant NHL can be affected in a prognostically unfavourable way. There is no diaplacental affection of the child by the lymphoma. The manifestation of an acute leucaemia in early pregnancy in general leads to abortion, a manifestation in late pregnancy mostly results in early delivery. Application of antineoplastic chemotherapy in the first third of pregnancy results in a remarkable risk of teratogenicity and abortion. That's why it is suggested to perform an abortion after regression of diseases or remission. During polychemotherapy in late pregnancy there isn't an increased risk of malformed off spring, low birth weight and premature are possible.  Polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN) play a central role in inflammation. During the inflammatory response PMN leave the circulation upon appropriate stimulation and enter the inflamed area to exert their biological function. A variety of chemotactic factors, including N-formylated bacterial beptides, C fragment C5a, Transforming Growth Factor-~, and IL-8 are responsible for recruitment of PMN at the site of inflammation. Vadous cytokines released during inflammation in an autocdne or paracdne manner may then regulate the survival of PMN in the lesion either by promoting or by inhibiting their death. It has been recently shown that aging PMN undergo characteric changes indicative of the so-called programmed cell death (PCD) or apoptosls, including cell shrinkage, nuclear c,,c..,a~'~ co,~l~sat;on m",d DNA fragmentation into nucleosome-length fragments. The process of PCD may then allow recognition and ingestion of apoptotic cells by macrophages and thus may represent a mechanism by which PMN are cleared from the inflammatory site. We show that Granulocyte-Macrophege Colony Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF), but not the chemotactic factors formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (FMLP), recombinant human (rh) CSa, Transforming Growth Factor (TGF) -6l, and Intedeukin (IL)-8, or other cytokines including IL-3, IL-4, IL-6, G-CSF, maintains viability of PMN in culture by preventing these cells from undergoing PCD. Prevention from PCD by GM-CSF was associated with induction of RNA and protein synthesis in PMN. Inhibition of RNA and protein synthesis by Actinomycin-D (Act-D) and Cycloheximide (CHX), respectively impeded the protection of apoptosis by GM-CSF. Similarly, neutralization of GM-CSF biologic activity by a specific antiserum abrogated GM.CSF-mediated inhibition of PCD. Abt. HSmatologie und Onkologie, Universitatsklinikum Freiburg. 7800 Freiburg i.Br. LINE  MO7  TO  HUMAN  STEM  CELL  FACTOR,  GRANULOCY1"  Ulrich 8rennscheidt, Detlev Riedel, Walter K01ch, Renate Bonifer, Roland Mertelsmann, and Friedhelm Herrmann The product of the c-raf-1 proto-oncegene, Raf-t, is known to encode a 74-kd ubiquitously expressed cytoplasmic serinelthreonine kinase. Various growth factors including epidermal growth factor (EGF), acidic fibroblast growth factor (a FGF). platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), insulin as well as the hematopoietins granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and interleukin-3 (IL-3) have been shown to induce phosphorylation of Raf-1 and therby activating Raf-1 kinase. Raf-1 may thus play a role in coupling some growth factor receptors to proliferation. We have examined the role of Raf-1 in the mitogenic response of factor-deprived human megakaryoblastic leukemia cell line MO7 to recombinant human (rh) GM-CSF, IL-3, IL-9, and stem cell factor (SCF) employing c-raf antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotide. Proliferation of MO7 cells (3H-thymidine incorporation) upon exposure to these growth factors was substantially reduced when c-tar antisense oligedeoxyribonucleotide which specifically decreases intracellular Raf-t levels was added to cultures, but not in the presence of sanse or nonsense oligedeoxyribonucleotides. C-raf-1 antisense failed, however, to alter DNA synthesis and proliferation of myeloid leukemia HL-60 cells known to be drivenby amplified c-myc and thus by an alteration downstream of c-far-1. Alot. H~natologie und Onkologie, Universit~ttsklinikum Freiburg. 7800 Freiburg i.Br. Clinical evidence suggests that coagulation is frequently activated in cancer patients. In comparison to healthy volunteers or even other patients without a tumor diagnosis, thrombotic episodes are more frequently found in tumor patients and are demonstrated in up to 50 % of autopsies. Up to now the significance of these phenomena is largely unclear. Application of chemo-and/or radiotherapy (ct, rt) furthermore leads to a reinforcement of the thrombophilic development possible via release of procoagulatory factors. We studied coagulation parameters in two groups of patients with a recently diagnosed malignant process, which, according to different protocols, were either treated with ct or, in the second group, solely underwent rt. The first group comprised 48 patients. In those patients blood samples were drawn directly before initiation of ct, 3 days afterwards as well as at the end of the course. The second rt group comprised 22 patients. Here the blood samples were drawn directly before and directly after the first radiation treatment (3 hours later) as well as on the second day of the complete radiation cycle. The most important results, especially in regards to new parameters, can be described as follows: In rt patients TAT complexes remain within normal limits whereas in ct patients they were significantly elevated from the beginning. In both groups tat increased even further 3 days respectively 3 hours after initiation of therapy. A similar development was observed for D-dimers which were significantly elevated at beginning and rose even further during both regimens. Tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) concentrations were elevated before therapy started, increased even further during therapy, but had dropped to significantly lower levels when the last blood sample was drawn.The acute phase proteins fibrinogen and factor VIII partially showed high activity during the course.FPA, plasminogen activators and PAI-1 did not show any significant changes.With these results we were able to show that before and at least during the first stages of ct respectively rt a significant higher level of the procoagulatory status is present and even reinforced. In acute myeloid leukemia cytotoxic activity of peripheral mononuclear cells is suppressed. This phenomenon might be due to synthesis and release of immunosuppresive agents by AML blasts. As TGF-81 is known to be an inhibitor of LAK cell activity and Ii-10 has been characterized to suppress cytotoxicyty promoting cytokine release, the present study was designed to investigate the potential of AML blasts to synthesize TGF-B 1 and Ii-10 on the mRNA level. To this end AML blasts were isolated from bone marrow or peripheral blood of patients in leukemic phase of AML and cellullar RNA was prepared. Northern blotting and PCR were performed for TGF-B 1 and Ii-10. In 7 / 8 patients studied, specific transcripts for TGF-81 were detected by PCR. These results were confirmed by Northern blotting. When Ii-10 specific mRNA was assessed in blasts by PCR in 4 / 4 preparations a specific band could be amplified, indicating the presence of Ii-10 specific transcripts in these cells. Our observations suggest that the production and release of suppressive mediators to cellular effector phase within the AML microenviroment could play a crucial role in the inhibition of autologous cytotoxic mechanisms in these patients. iDept of Internal Medicine, Div. of Hematology and Oncology I , J.W. Goethe Universit~t Frankfurt/M; 2Max-Planck-Institut for Biophysik, Frankfurt am Main, FRG. OF PURIFIED CD34 + PERIPHERAL HEMATOPOIETIC PROGENITOR CELLS IN VITRO. W. Brugger, W. Moecklin, R. Mertelsmann, and L. Kanz BLOOD Peripheral blood progenitor cells were mobilised following standarddose VIP chemotherapy and filgrastim (G-CSF) administration in 12 cancer patients with metastatic solid tumors. At day 8-12 after chemotherapy, CD34  cells were isolated from peripheral blood by using an avidin-biotin immuno-affinitiy column. Isolated CD34 + cells were more than 90% pure as determined by morphology, flow cytometry and immunophenotyping of single cells. The cloning efficiency of CD34 + cells in unseperated blood was 0.2% as compared to 5% (range 1.3-11 ) in purified CD34 + cell populations. Purified CD34 + cells were cultured up to 16 days in liquid culture and shown to proliferate when stem cell factor and interleukin-3 were present in the culture media. The proliferation of CD34 + cells was highly variable and dependent on the day of progenitor cai! collection and the number of CD34 +, lineage negative (CD33-, CD38, HLA-DR-} cells. Maximal proliferation occured at day 10-12 with a more than 500 fold increase in cell numbers. Expanded CD34  cells were clonogenic in vitro, producing large numbers of myetoid, erythroid, multilineage as well as blast cell colonies. The enrichment factor for clonogenic cells was up to 1000 fold. Replating assays of blast colonies revealed only myeloid progenitor cells. Our data indicate that chemotherapy + G-CSF mobilised CD34 + cells from cancer patients can be enriched and succesfully expanded without loosing their clonogenic capacity in vitro. Clinical trials with purified CD34 + cells as supportive agents following highdose chemotherapy will be started. High-dose chemotherapy is potentially curative in some solid tumors and lymphomas, but is mostly limited by severe myelosuppression. In order to facilitate dose intensification, we used hematopoietic growth factors together with peripheral blood progenitor cells (PBPC) to shorten the period of severe pancytopenia after high-dose chemotherapy. PBPC were mobilised following a 1 day course of VIP chemotherapy and filgrastim (G-CSF) treatment (n =40). PBPC were evaluated by the expression of CD34 antigens as well as their clonogenic capacity in vitro (CFU-GM, BFU-E, CFU-Meg, CFU-GEMM). A median of 415,000 CD34 + cells/mL, 9,000 CFU-GM/mL, 3,500 BFU-E/mL and 200 CFU-GEMM/mL were recruited. One single leukapheresis yielded a median of 8 x 106 CD34 + cells/kg body weight. Fourteen patients eligible for dose intensification were subsequentlytreated with high-dose VIP [cumulative doses of VP16 (1,500 mg/m2), ifosfamide (12 g/m 2) and cisplatin (150 mg/m2)] with (n=8) or without (n=6) PBPC support in addition to hernatopoietic growth factors (IL-3 and GM-CSF). Neutrophil recovery as well as platelet recovery were significantly faster in patients receiving PBPC support with a median of 6.5 days below 0.1 x 109 neutrophils/L and 3 days below 20 x 109 platelets/L, as compared to 10.5 days and 8 days in control patients receiving IL-3 and GM-CSF only (p < 0.005). These data demonstrate that G-CSF mobilised PBPC accelerate both, neutrophil and platelet recovery following high-dose chemotherapy. Cell surface bound peptidases of immune cells have been found to be involved in regulation of activation and proliferation in vitro. In this paper the expression and activities of DP IV and AP N were studied by flow cytometric detection, measurement of hydrolysis of specific substrates and in situ hybridisation. It was Shown, that both enzymes are present in NK cells. During incubation with IL-2 the expression of CD26 and the enzymatic activity was increased. The enzymatic activity of AP N was not affected under this condition. In presence of specific inhibitors of these enzymes and anti-DPIV antibodies the DNA synthesis was decreased and the cell cycle progression of NK cells was blocked at G1/S-phase. There was no difference in cytotoxic activities of DP IV-positive and DP IV-negative NK cells. This results considered as basis of further investigations on the role of these peptidases in regulation of proliferation of malignant lymphoide and myeloide cells. Medical Academy Magdeburg, Dept. Int. Medicine, Div. Exp. Immunol., # Div. Hematology, Leipziger Str. 44, 0-3090 Magdeburg, Germany 'Dept. Immunol. and Cell Biology, Forschungsinstitut Borstel, Parkallee 22, W-2061 Borstel, Germany Doses of racemic verapamil required to achieve concentrations that reverse multi-drug-resistance (MDR) usually exceed therapeutic doses and are associated with severe cardiovascular side effects. R-Verapamil has less cardiovascular activity but is equipotent to racemic verapamil with regard to reversal of MDR. Therefore, R-verapamiI might be superior to racemic verapamil in modifying MDR in cancer chemotherapy. We have investigated the pharmacokinetics and cardiovascular effects of R-verapamil in 33 patients who were treated with chemotherapy. The R-verapamil doses ranged from 800 to 2400rag per day. Maximal R-verapamil concentrations between 531 and 5489 ng/mI were achieved. The cardiovascular side effect limiting further dose escalation was arterial hypotension. In none of the patients did congestive heart failure develop. In all patients modest prolongations of PR-interval were observed, which were closely related to plasma concentrations. The R-verapamil concentration which elicited a 20 % prolongation of PR-interval was 630 ng/ml. Only 2 patients showed second-degree AV-block, one showed junctional rhythm. Most of the patients developed a significant increase in QT c time, which was related to plasma concentration of R-verapamil. In conclusion, R-verapamil concentrations achieved in vivo are in the same order of magnitude as those which reverse MDA in vitro. Compared to racemic verapamil, R-verapamil caused less severe side effects. Supported by Robert Bosch-Foundation, Stuttgart, and Knoll AG, Ludwigshafen, Germany. Dr. Margarethe Fischer-Bosch-Institut fiir Klinische Pharmakologie, Auerbachstr. 112, 7000 Stuttgart 50, Germany. *Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus, Abteilung fiir Onkologie und H~imatologie, Auerbachstr. 110, 7000 STU'ITGART 50, Germany. GULATION AND PROLIFERATION Hans-J6rg Bfihring', Virginia C. Broudy ~, and Leonie K. Ashman~; The combined regulatory effects of steel factor (SLF) and three monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) recognizing distinct epitopes of the c-kit receptor were investigated. Binding of biotinylated SLF to AML ceils expressing high levels of ckit receptors was abrogated by Mab SR-1 and reduced to about 50% by Mab YB5.BS, while Mab 17Fli did not significantly influence ligand binding. As a consequence of its blocking effect, Mab SR-1 inhibited SLF-mediated proliferation and receptor downregnlation. Mab YB5.B8 blocked ligand-induced proliferation only at high titers (1:50 dilution of ascites) and did not significantly influence receptor downregulation. In contrast, Mab 17F11 caused a strong enhancement of SLF-mediated proliferation at low concentrations (I-2 #g/ml) and was almost as potent in its capacity to downregulate c-kit receptors as the ligand itself. Sequential incubation of AML cells with two different Mabs revealed that Mab YB5.B8 blocked the binding of Mab 17F11, but not vice versa. This might be explained by the possibility that Mab YB5.B8 induces conformational modifications of c-kit receptors and thereby eliminates the epitopes originally recognized by Mab 17F11. The binding of Mab SR-1 is not significantly affected by either antibody nor does Mab SR-1 influence the binding of Mabs YB5.B8 and 17FI1. In summary, three recently identified Mabs SR-I, YB5.B8 and 17Fll, which recognize different epitopes of c-kit receptors, show functional heterogeneity: Mab SR-1 strongly inhibits receptor-ligand interactions, Mab YB5.B8 shows a less pronounced blocking effect, and agonistic Mab 17Fll synergizes with ligand activity. M. Bark, V. Runde, H. Kunecke, C. Dumont, G. Meckenstock, A. Heyll, W. Schneider The induction of cyclophosphamide (CP) metabolism by itself is a well known phenomenon. It results in an enhanced metabolic clearance and a shortened half-life of cyclophosphamide on second and subsequent treatmen t days. To further elucidate this relationship, we studied blood levels of the "activated cyclophosphamide" (4-OH-CP) in 10 patients undergoing allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. The conditioning regimen consisted of fractionated total body irradiation and CP, dose 60 mg/kg body weight, as 1-hinfusion. Blood levels of 4-OH-CP were monitored by means of a spectrofluorometric method. Individual blank values for each time point were used. Maximal care was taken to immediately proceed blood probes avoiding loss of instable metabolites. Peak blood concentrations of 4-OH-CP were reached at 2 to 4 h after end of infusion on day 1, and between 0 and 1 h after end of infusion on day 2. Mean peak concentration was 4.6 (S.D 2.1) nmol/ml on day 1, and 13.1 (S.D. 5.0) nmol/ml on day 2, respectively (p<0.001, paired t-test). Area under the concentration-time curve was 41.2 (S.D. 17.8) nmol*h/ml on day 1 and 69.9 (S.D. 19.5) nmol*h/ml on day 2 (p<0.001). There was considerable interindividaal variation: Peak blood levels of 4-OH-CP-ranged from 2.2 to 7.9 nmol/ml and from 7.3 to 20.2 nmol/ml on day 1 and 2, respectively. Neither peak blood levels on day 2 nor area under the curve were significandy associated to VOD, occurence or grade of GvHD or duration of mucositis. As it is known that bioavailability of cyclophosphamide is only insignificantly increased on subsequent treatment days, our data suggest an altered metabolism or distribution of 4-OH-CP after the second dose. Whether this change of pharmacokinetic behaviour may be due to saturable metabolic processes is unclear. Pharmacokinetic studies of the active metabolite phosphoramide mustard are underway to further address this problem. In the patient population presented up to now no influence was observed of blood levels of 4-OH-CP on several clinical parameters after bone marrow transplantation. The ability to accurately evaluate the process of tumor dissemination in the preclinzcai phase of malignancy is of utmost importance for proper diagnosis and therapy. The purpose of our study was to clarify the early dlagnostlc gnssibihties of the monoclonal antibody HEA 125 (Progen, Heidelberg, F.R.G. ), when applied to bone marrow aspirates of SCLC. Ninety patients where included in our study (M: 74, F: 16; age: 58 years (40 -77); stage: LD 47, ED 43). The bone marrow was removed from the iliac crest at the time of Initlal tumor staging. Specimens were evaluated utilizing both conventional methods (biopsy: undeca]cified bone sections, Masson-Go]dner, PAS, Giemsa: asDzrates: May-Gr~nwald-Giemsa} and i~unocytological tests. High-dose regimens of cytosiu-arabinoside (Ara-C) are evaluated in the therapy of acute leukemias in order to overcome the problems resulting from resistent leukemic cell clones. It is expected that high plasma concentrations result in increased intracenular levels of the active metabolite. Therefore it is interest in evaluating the interpatient variability of Ara-C plasma concentrations and its metabolism. To further elucidate Ara-C pharmacokinetic behaviour we analysed plasma concentrations of Ara-C and its inactive metabolite, Ara-U in 13 patients with acute leukemia. In the context of complex aggessive chemotherapy protocols three patients were treated with Am-C, dose 1.0 g/m 2. In 10 patients Ara-C was applied at a dose of 3.0 g/m 2. Ara-C was given as 3-hintravenous infusion, twice daily, on 3 or 4 days. Pharmacokinetie plasma samples were drawn into heparinised tubes containing tetrahydrouridine during and after the first treatment cycle. Concentrations of Ara-C and Ara-U were analysed by an own high-performance liquid chromatographic method with UV-detection. Mean plasma concentration of Ara-C at steady-state was 8.1 p.g/ml (S.D. 6.6, range 2.6 and 25.0), of Ara-U 31.5 ~tgJml (S.D. 11.0, range 12.6 and 49.6). Mean area under the concentration-time curve during and post infusion (AUC) for Ara-C was 25.6 p.g*h/ml (S.D. 17.2, range 8.7 and 64.6), for Ara-U 248 lag*h/ml (S.D. 110.1, range 84.3 and 455.7). Patients with a 3 g/m2-regimen had significantly higher plasma levels and AUC of Ara-U (p<0.05, and p<0.05, respectively, F-test). No difference was observed for Ara-C concentrations or AUC. There was no statistically significant correlation of AUC (Ara-C) and AUC (Ara-U). In our patients high-dose Ara-C treatment resulted in a considerable variation of Ara-C plasma levels, which were not correlated to dose. A strong correlation was observed between dose and concentrations/AUC of the incative metabolite Ara-U. These results are to be proved by greater patient numbers. Further studies are needed to define correlations of pharmacokinetic parameters and clinical outcome or toxicity. Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome (IHES) is defined by unexplained eosinophilia (eosinophil count > 1.5x109/L) lasting more than six months. Standard treatment regimens are based on prednisolone, vincristine and hydroxyurea. We initiated IFN-ot therapy in three patients with IHES not manageable by conservative treatment. These patients had IHES according to standard criteria, and chromosomal abnormalities had been ruled out by repeated cytogenetic analyses. Organ involvement included restrictive endomyocardiopathy and right ventricular failure in all patients, one patient also developed recurring diarrhea interpreted as gastrointestinal manifestation of IHES. Therapy with interferon-c~ ( 0.5-1.0 xl06U/d) was initiated after unsuccessful treatment with hydroxyurea and after the development of severe vinca polyneuropathy. All patients responded with decreasing absolute eosinophil counts, stable or rising platelet counts and improved clinical performance status. While two patients remain stable after more than two years on interferon-c~, the third patient developed a clinical picture similar to CML blast crisis after one year. We conclude that interferon-c~ may benefit patients with some variants of IHES, particularly those who cannot be managed by conventional therapy. Since 1976, all patients with newly diagnosed stage IA and IIA of CB-CC NHL have received extended field radiotherapy (EF-RT) only. In 1982, the protocol was changed. Primary chemotherapy (CHOP) was given to all stages IIA followed by EF-RT. All patients with staqe IA (n=42) attained a complete remission (CR). 13 relapsed, 12 outside of the irradiation field. The latest relapse occured after 7 years. 13 patients had an initial extranodal or large nodal (>10cm) disease. 6 of the relapses belonged to this group and 5 of them succumbed to their disease. 6 relapsed patients achieved a second persistent CR. The relapse-free survival curve falls to 54%, the survival curve forms a 7 to 15-years plateau of 81%. 33 of 34 patients with stages IIA treated with EF-RT only achieved a CR. 22 relapsed, the latest after 7 years. Only 3 of them arose within the irradiated field, i0 patients achieved a second persisting CR, 9 died. The disease-free survival probability falls to 29%, the survival curve has a 7 to 15-years plateau of 67%. Of the 26 stages IIA patients treated with CHOP and EF-RT, 25 attained a CR, 4 relapsed, only 1 patient with initial large tumour mass died. The survival probability curve forms a 4 to 10-years plateau of 90%. These long-term results convincingly support the combined modality approach in stages IIA. EF-RT alone seems to be an adequate treatment for stages IA without extranodal or large initial tumor only. Increasing attention is now being focused on the possibility that asbestos is a lymphoid carcinogen. Supporting evidence came from case-control and animal studies. However, cohort studies have been inconsistent so far. This is explained by the use of the inadequate ICD classification in such studies, the rarity of lymphoid neopiasias, and the supposed only small increase (2-3fold?) of asbestos associated disease risk. Therefore interest has been concentrated upon analysis of casuistics. From routine patient investigation, medical expert's reports, the German occupational asbestos cancer study and a Swedish pleural plaque cohort data of 81 patients were accumulated. They were suffering from plasmacytoma (23), CLL (16), nodal NHL (3), extra-nodal NHL (20), disseminated NHL (6) and NHL of yet unknown Iocalisation (13). All patients were occupationally exposed to asbestos, usually over many years and in median 25 years ago (range 3-38 y). This remarkably high preponderance of initial extra-nodal solitary involvement among the lymphomas is also found in other casuistics. So far, data of at least 64 cases of lymphoplasmacellular malignancies have been reported in the literature (15 plasmacytomas, 13 CLL, 10 nodal, 16 extra-nodal, and 3 disseminated NHL and 7 of unknown Iocalisation). Of together 58 NHL with known primary Iocalisation 36 were extranodal. Of them 8 emerged in the lung and 5 were solitary lymphomas of the pleura, an otherwise extremly rare place of lymphoma origin, but one of other site-specific asbestos malignancy (mesothelioma) as is also the lung (carcinoma). 12 NHL occured in the orogastrointestinal tract, another region highly supected to be a target of asbestos carcinogenesis. These observations and in particular the striking occurence of solitary pleural lymphomas substantially support present evidence that asbestos is an lymphoid, possibly site-specific carcinogen. Multitransfused patients with congenital clotting disorders are at risk of being exposed to viruses contaminating plasma pools. Parvovirus B19 is a candidate virus since the prevalence of infection is high, most infections are asymptomatic, viremia exceeds 10 ]2 genome copies/m1, and the virus is very stable. We analyzed 41 batches of factor VIII, factor IX, and PPSB from 5 manufacturers for B19 DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Viral DNA could be demonstrated in 18 samples (44%) at a concentration of 103-106 genome copies/ml. Positive batches came from each manufacturer and there was no obvious prevalence in a specific factor preparation. We are currently purifying viral particles to answer the question of infectivity in vitro. To address infectivity in vivo, single sera from 62 transfused patients with hemophilia or factor VII deficiency were analyzed. B19-DNA could be demonstrated in 12 sera (19%) at concentrations below l0 s genome copies/m1. DNA could also be detected in 2 of 16 sexual partners suggesting intrafamilial transmission. None of 24 normal blood donors or 34 multitransfused patients was positive for viral DNA. Anti B19-IgG was present in 74% and antiviral IgM in 5% of the patients as compared to 42% and 0% in untransfused controls. There was no correlation of B19-results with the incidence of active HBV-, HCV-, or HIV-infection as analyzed by PCR (0% HBV-positive and 56% HCV-positive) or serology (16% HIV-positive). Retrospectively, there were no clinical symptoms of active B19 infection in any DNApositive patient. This data suggest that these patients are frequently exposed to parvovirus B19 through contaminated factor preparations. If infections occur, they do not seem to cause significant disease. There is evidence that marrow-purging with mafosfamide (mafo) improves survival in AML patients (pts) autotransplanted in CR1, but not in CR2. Individually adapted mafo-doses appear to be superior to fixed mafo-doses. For adapted-dose purging the dose inhibiting the growth of 95 % of the individual patient's bone marrow CFU-GM (ID95) is determined in vitro > 2 weeks prior to bone marrow harvest. If ABMT in AML patients is not performed in first but in later remission, autologous bone marrow may be collected either prophylactically in CRI or in later stages of disease before ABMT. To evaluate whether conditions for mafo purging vary with stages of disease and accumulating pretreatment, we determined the ID95 in 3 different groups of a total of 21 pts: 1.) 7 pts with AML-CR1 prior to HDAC consolidation; 2.) 7 pts with AML after HDAC consolidation and/or in >CR2; 3.) 7 pts with nonmyeloid malignancies (5 ALL and 2 NHL). The median ID95 was 140/xg/ml (range 110-190 #g/ml) in group 1, 75 #g/ml (range 55-110 #g/ml) in group 2, and 100 #g/ml (range 80-160 #g/ml) in group 3. For adapted dose purging significantly higher mafo doses could be used in patients with less pretreatment. Our purging experience in 18 autologous bone marrow harvests is as follows: The median CFU-GM growth after bone marrow purging was 4.2% for adapted dose (n=9, median mafo-dose 100 p.g/ml, range 80-140 #g/ml); 24% for standard dose (n=4, mafo-dose 70/zg/ml); and 17,5 % in a heterogeneous group of 5 pts whose marrow was purged with a mafo-dose of 90-160 #g/ml, median 95 #g/ml, which was below the individual ID95. Despite the higher median mafodose in the latter group, purging was less efficient than in the adapted dose group. Since early CR1 marrow allows the highest adapted mafo-doses, we conclude that purging is more effective, even if ABMT is performed in later stages of disease. This may offer an explanation why a clinical benefit of purging CR2-marrow has not yet been proven. Whether survival after ABMT in CR2 is improved by using adapted-dose purged CR1 marrow remains to be demonstrated. Address: Abt. Hiimatologie, Klinikum der J.W. Goethe-Universitiit, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, W-6000 Frankfurt am Main 70, FRG M.R. Clemens, and 8. Schmid Numerous investigations indicate the involvement ot tree radical reactions in the pathogenesis of hemolytic diseases; i.e. in vitamin E deficiency, abnormal glutathiooe metabolism, decreased NADPH production (e.g. glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency), catalase deficiency, sickle cell disease, thalassemia, and paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (1) . Other conditions leading to lree radical mediated anemia may be the anemia of chronic renal failure and Fanconi's anemia. Many drugs induce oxidative hemolysis in both healthy individuals and in patients with a defect in red cell antioxidant capacity, such as G-6-PD deficiency and vitamin E deficiency. Clinical studies with the antioxidants vitamin E and deferoxiamine have been performed, however, results are conflicting. N-acetylcysteine and thioctic acid are two clinically used substances, which antioxidant properties emerged in the last years. The present study was designed to investigate their antioxidant capacity in an erythrocyte system, in which isolated cells are exposed to oxidant stress by acetylphenylhydrazine, phenylhydrazine, t-butylhydroperoxide, and cumene hydroperoxide. Lipid peroxidation in the membranes following oxidant stress has been monitored by measurement of loss of membrane polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) and c~-tocopherol (vitamin E). Oxidation of the intracellular compartment has been monitored by the measurement of loss of reduced glutathione (GSH). Nacetylcysteine efficiently protected GSH against oxidant stress in a dose dependent manner, however it did not influence the extent of membrane lipid peroxidation (loss of PUFA) and loss ol cHocopherol, respectively. Thioctic acid exhibited no protective effect against membrane peroxidation or GSH oxidation. Trolox exhibited a very efficient protection against membrane peroxidation. Erythrecytes obtained from G-6-PD deficient subjects have been efficiently protected against GSH oxidation by Nacetylcysteine, whereas this antioxidant was not able to protect the membrane 0t those patients against peroxidation. In summary, N-acetylcysteine exhibited the best antioxidant property in respect of GSH oxidation, which implicates a potential role for this clinically well-known drug in the treatment of hemolytic crisis in G-6-PD deficient subjects and other conditions with oxidation-related hemolysis. Bone marrow transplantation IBMT) follows high-dose chemotherapy generally in combination with total body irradiation (TBI). This conditioning regimen approaches the limit of tolerance for several tissues. Lipid peroxidation has been shown to be significantly increased after conditioning therapy (1, 2) , while lipid-soluble antioxidants in blood exhausted (3) . Those conditions implicate that peroxidation processes may be involved in organ toxicity of high dose chemotherapy and TBI. The present study was designed to investigate, whether a high dose supplementation of antioxidants can diminish conditioning therapy's toxicity. 17 consecutive patients (pts) undergoig BMT were studied and divided into two groups: 10 pts without (BMT-) and 7 pts with (BMT+) supplementation of 825 mg DL-(~-tocopherylacetate (TOCcc), 45 mg 8carotene (CARB), and 450 mg ascorbic acid daily p.o. for the average period of 20 days between day -28 and day -7, e.g. 3 weeks belore the beginning of conditioning therapy. Blood was analyzed on day -28, -7, 0, and 14. Measurements of antioxidants TOC(~ und CAR8 were performed by HPLC as previously described (3). Lipidhydroperoxides (LOOH) in serum as marker of total body lipid peroxidation were estimated by using a CHOD-Iodide method as described previously (1, 2) . Lipidstandardized plasma TOCa expressed as molar ratio with cholesterol was 2.6 fold higher in group BMT+ after antioxidant supplementation (day -7) compared with group BMT-without supplementation. In erythrocyte membranes a 2.2 fold increase was found for the molar ratio of TOCc( with cholesterol. Lipid-standardized plasma CARl] expressed as molar ratio with cholesterol was 8.3 fold higher in group BMT+ on day -7, whereas LOOH were 78% less in group BMT+ after antioxidant supplementation (day -7) compared with group BMT-. Following conditioning therapy TOCc~ in plasma and erythrocyte membrane and CAR8 in plasma decreased and LOOH increased in both groups BMT+/-. However, the loss of antioxidants and augmentation of lipid peroxidation was significantly lesser in group BMT+, as well as some side effects (mucositis, erythrocyte deformability, lipid abnormalities, and liver toxicity). Genetic defects in the platelet glycoprotein (GP) Ib/IX/V complex are the cause of some rare bleeding disorders. The best known of these are the Bernard-Soulier syndrome (BSs) and "platelet-type" von Willebrand's disease (PvWd). In classic BSS GPIb~, Ibm, IX and V are missing from the platelets which fail to adhere to exposed subendothelium at high shear. A wide range of variants have been described, either with normal amounts of the GP and a functional defect due to a point mutation, or with drastically reduced but still detectable amounts of the GP due to a mutation in one of the chains. The origin of an example of classic BSs has not yet been described but this is understandable as it could be due to a defect in the gene for any of the chains or in its promotor. The genetic defect in PvWd lies in GPIb~ causing spontaneous binding of von Willebrand factor to platelets and leading to platelet aggregation and thrombocytopenia. In extreme cases thrombi may form. All patients so far identified were heterozygotes and the defects were due to point mutations within the 40 amino acid disulphide-linked loop of GPIb~. Other rare bleeding disorders are linked to extreme forms of size polymorphism in GPIb~. Normal polymorphism in GPIb~ leads to single, double, triple or quadruple copies of a 13 amino acid sequence in the O-glycosylated domain, each containing 5 putative O-glycosylation sites. Genetic defects in GPIIb/IIIa lead to the bleeding disorder, Glanzmann's thrombasthenia, with defective platelet aggregation. Variants have been described but the origin of the Type II where up to 20% of apparently normal GP are expressed is still unclear. Standard treatment of seminoma stage I is adjuvant radiotherapy with usually 25-30 Gy in the retroperitoneal field. After this treatment, 95-100% of patients survive more than 5 years. Risk factors are described, such as lymphatic or vessel infiltration, testis histology, hOG levels, infiltration of epididymis or spermatic cord, or preceeding operations.ln a current study of radiotherapy with 26 Gy, the influence of risk factors and field reduction to a paraaortic field is being tested in view of efficacy and side effects. Because of the high cure rate and possible side effects of radiotherapy, surveillance protocols are being carried out. With the nonseminoma patients, the calculated relapse rate is 10-40%, whereas for seminoma patients the relapse rate was observed at 20%. Yet the data is still in a preliminary stage and requires confirmation over a longer period of time. The risk of distant metastases and the need for intenisve treatment at relapse (radiotherapy or highly effective chemotherapy) has to be taken into account. Combination chemotherapy with cisplatin is very effective in metastasized stage of seminoma, carboplatin monotherapy also achieves nearly 90% complete remissions. The two treatment protocols are currently being compared in a randomized German trial. After preliminary reports of cisplatin therapy, in low stage seminoma (1) carboplatin studies are now in progress. In 2 trials, with a total of 37 patients, only 2 relapsed within 2 years. These results need further confirmation and should be the basis for a trilinear randomized study comparing carboplatin monotherapy with radiotherapy and surveillance strategy in seminoma stage I. Das yon HippeI-Lindau (VHL) Syndrom ist ein pleotropes, autosomal-dominant vererbtes Tumorsyndrom mit nahezu kompletter Penetranz. Gentr~ger entwickeln sowohl gut-, als auch b6sartige Tumoren in verschiedenen Organsystemen: ZNS-Neoplasien, einschlie(~lich Augen-Tumoren und Ph~iochromozytome werden neben zahlreichen Zysten in parenchymat6sen Organen gefunden. Aul~erdem erkranken zwischen 17 -55% der VHL-Patienten an NierenzelI-Karzinomen, welche zu den ernsthaftesten Komplikationen dieses Syndroms mit h~ufig t6dlichem Ausgang geh6ren. Wir konnten vor kurzem zeigen, dal~ sich die genetische St6rung im VHL Syndrom in einer einzelnen chromosomalen Region Iokalisieren I~l~t. Epidemiologische und von uns erhobene tumorgenetische Daten erlauben die Annahme, dab es sieh bei dem VHL Gen um ein neues Tumor Suppressor-Gen handelt. Wir m6chten in diesem Beitrag unsere j0ngsten Daten der Gen-Kartierung und der tumorgenetischen Studien mittels klassischer und molekularer Zytogenetik darstellen, Fluoreszenz in-situ Hybridisierungen konnte erfolgreich bei der Suche nach chromosomalen Deletionen eingesetzt werden. Doppelmarkierungen mit differentiell fluoroehrom-markierten DNA-Sonden liel~en eine eindeutige Festlegung der Reihenfo{ge unserer das VHL-Gen am engsten flankierenden Marker zu. Auf dem Weg zur Klonierung des VLH Genes, konnten wir mittels 'genetic linkage' in den Chromosomenbanden 3p25-p26 einen Bereich yon etwa 8 cent{Morgan zwischen den flankierenden DNA-Markern abgrenzen. Da auch f0r sporedische Nierenzellkarzinome die am h~iufigsten beschriebene chromosomale Aberration Deletionen im kurzen Arm des Chromsoms 3 darstellen, ist es m6glich, dab das VHL Gen auch for die viel h~ufigeren sporadischen Nierenzellkarzinome eine kausale Rolle spielt. Alternativ dazu k6nnten sich aber auch mehrere Tumor Suppressor-Gene auf 3p befinden. Dieses Problem wird sich erst klw lassen, wenn des VHL Gen (oder Gencluster) isoliert und n~iher charakterisiert ist. We have performed a clinical phase I trial of doxorubicin (DOX) coupled to dextran (70000 m.w.) (IV every 21-28 days). 12 patients (pts) have received a total of 24 courses (median 2; range 1-3). The starting dose was 40 mg/m 2 DOX equivalent (DOXeq) corresponding to i/I0 LDI0 in mice. Grade IV thrombocytopenia was noted in 2/2 pts. Grade IV hepatotoxicity and grade III cardiotoxicity were noted in a pt with preexisting heart disease. 5 pts were treated with 12.5 mg/m z DOXeq. Maximal toxicity was grade III thrombocytopenia and grade III vomiting in one pt each. 5 pts received 20 mg/m 2 DOXeq. Hepatotoxicity was noted in 5/5 pts (i x grade IV, ix grade III) and thrombocytopenia in 3/5 pts (i x grade IV, 2 x grade III). One pt receiving 12.5 mg/m z of DOXeq showed stable disease for 4 months. Pharmacokinetic analyses of total and free DOX were performed in plasma and urine using reverse phase HPLC and gel permeation chromatography. A dose-dependent linear increase of mean peak plasma concentrations was observed for total DOX (2.9 -11.8 ~g/ml) with <2% free DOX. AUC ranged from 33.9-83.6 ~g/ml*h with dosedependent elimination half lives (t,/2=: 0.21-0.64 h; t11~: 2.86-10 h; t+12T: 61.2-137.5 h). We conclude that the MTD of AD-70 using this schedule is 40 mg/m 2. The recommended dose for clinical phase II studies is 12.5 mg/m2 DOXeq. Recently established evidence proved an important role for leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) as hematopoietically active cytokine. The present study utilized two different murine bone marrow stromal cell lines, +/+-I.LDAII and MBA-13, to define regulatory mechanisms of LIF mRNA induction. LIF mRNA was not detected in uninduced stromal cells under serum free condition. Incubation with interleukin-i (IL-I), tumor necrosis factor-~ (TNF-~) or 8BrcAMP alone resulted in weakly induced LIF mRNA levels. Coincubation of combinations of the used stimuli increased LIF mRNA expression supraadditively. LIF mRNA stability, even after stimulation, was low with a half life of about 30 min, indicating a functional effect of known AU-rich motives in the 3' untranslated LIF mRNA region. Transcriptional activation was found to be the main mechanism leading to LIF induction by IL-I, TNF-u and 8BrcAMP. Induction of transcription was detected 45 min post stimulation and showed peak levels at 90 min. Kinetics of LIF transcriptional activation showed high similarities with the kinetics of the transcription factors jun-B and c-fos, suggesting a possible role for these proteins in signaling transduction leading to LIF expression. Fludarahine phosphate is a fluorinated adenine nucleoside which has major activity in patients (pts) with de novo or refractory B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. In order to investigate this agent in other lymphoid malignancies, we have treated 18 pts with advanced stages of low grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Thirteen pts were male, and 5 were female, ranging in age from 38 yrs to 74 yrs (median 56 yrs). The histologic classification was as follows: immunocytoma (ic), n=4; centroblastic-centrocytic (cbcc), n=5; centroeytic (cc), n=7; MALTOM, n=l; unclassified, n=l. One pt had stage III, and the remaining 17 pts had stage IV disease. Three pts had one, 8 pts had two, and the other 7 pts had more than two prior chemotherapeutic regimens. LDH levels were <240 U/1 in 6, and >240 U/1 in 12 pts. Fludarabine phosphate was supplied by the Division of Cancer Treatment, NCI, Bethesda, MD; the compound was administered at a dosage of 25 mg/m2 at a 4 week interval up to a maximum of 12 cycles. Two pts had intercurrent therapy with prednisone and cyclosporin A because of hemolytic anemia. Responses were seen in 5/18 (28%), including one CR (NHL ic) and 4 PR (NHL cbce, n=3; MALTOM, n=l). Durations of response are 3m, 4m+, 5m+, 7m+ for the pts achieving PR, and 4m+ for the pt with CR. There was one early death (NHL cc) most likely due to a tumor lysis syndrome. The major hematologic toxicity was thrombocytopenia in 10/18 (56%)pts and lenkopenia in 7/18 (39%) pts. Major nonhematologic toxicity was infection in 10/18 (56%) pts. In conclusion, fludarabine phosphate used as a single agent is active in some advanced-stage patients with low grade malignant lymphoma. Fludarabine deserves further investigation in pts with less prior treatment, and as part of combination chemotherapy regimens in pts with advanced stages of these diseases. Effective and safe depletion of lung cancer cells from normal hone marrow prior to cryopreservation appears to be important when applying autologous hone marrow transplantation in patients with lung cancer. Four cell lines of human lung cancer (HTB 53, HTB 56, and HTB 58, and CCL 185) were investigated for in vitro growth before and after incubation with the antineoplastic ether lipid ET-18-OCH 3 (ET) for 4 hours and at escalating concentrations (25, 50, 75, and 100 #g/ml), as well as with and without cryopreservation. The higher the drug dose, the higher was the antitumor effect when measured as cytotoxicity with the human tumor cloning assay in agar or methylcellulose, thus showing a steep in vitro dose response relationship. After a 4 hour-exposure to 75 #g/nil ET at a ceil density of 2 x 105/ml the number of colonies of HTB 53 decreased from 57 5:4/103 cells (100 %) to 1 + 1/103 cells (1,8 %) and after subsequent cryopreservation to zero colonies. To simulate the clinical condition in antologous bone marrow transplantation (ABMT) normal human bone marrow cells were mixed with malignant CCL 185 cells at a ratio of 100:1. After incubation with 75 #g/ml ET for 4 hours and subsequent cryopreservatiou the colony formation of CCL 185 was reduced to zero, whereas nearly half of the normal human hematopoietic progenitors (48 %) recovered. We conclude that the ether lipid ET may have potential value in purging human bone marrow of micrometastatic lung cancer cells before reinfusion in ABMT. The t(14;18) translocation can be detected in about 85% of follicular lymphomas. Applying a twostep PCR with nested primers we were able to detect minimal circulating t(14;18)+ lymphoma cells in 35% (7/21) of patients with cbcc NHL being in CR 2-12 years after radiotherapy for localized lymphoma. Four patients who relapsed 4-6 years after initial radiotherapy (2) or chemotherapy(2) had t(14;18)+ cells in their peripheral blood before relapse. After induction chemotherapy they were treated with autologous bone marrow transplantation. Three patients were transplanted with an histologically uninvolved, PCR+bone marrow,the forth received an immunopurged marrow because of histological involvment. One patient relapsed at day +280, t(14;18)+ cells could already be detected in the peripheral blood on day +192. The other three patients are still in CR(2) or stable PR(1): two are PCR negative 8 and 18 months after BMT, in one case t(14;18)+ cells reappeared again in the circulating blood 2 months after BMTduring stable PR lasting for up to 7 months. At the molecular level the t(14;18) translocation remained stable during the complete observation period in all patients (4-8 years). PCR analysis of peripheral blood orb One marrow cells allows the detection of minimal residual lymphoma cells,their prognostic significance with regard to relapse has to be evaluated in long term follow-up studies on patients in CR after radiotherapy, chemotherapy or BMT. Abt. H~matol. Onkol., Med. Universit~tsklinik, Hugstetter Str. 55, D-7800 Freiburg, Germany At present AIL is assessed as T-cell lymphoma of low grade malignancy although the progress can be rapidly fatal. Therefore we proofed the question to what extent histologlc criteria are of prognostic relevance. Mat. and Meth.: Retrospectively 40 lymph nodes with initially msnlfestatlon of typical hlstologie pzcture of AIL were semiquant~tatively analyzed with regard to amount of T-cells (UCHL 1), B-cells (L 26), CD 30 positive blasts, reticulum cells (MAC, S 100), eosinoph~lic leukocytes, venules, PAS-pos~tzve materzal and histologic subtypes. These parameters were correlated with surwval t~mes. Results: Only 5 of 40 pats. were still alive after a medzan follow up of 25 months. The median surwval time came to 17 months. The amount of venules, PAS-positive material, ret~culum cells and T-cells was wzthout correlation to surwval times. Partially preserved sinuses, more than 5 % B-lymphocytes and the subtype of mixed cellularzty gave a weak prognostic relatlonsship. Favourable surwval data correlated significantly with CD 30 positive blasts less than 5 %, low m~totic counts, few eosinophils and absence of mult~nucleated cells. Conclusions 1. The amount of blasts and m~toses are of prognostic relevance in AIL likewise in other NHL. 2. Nevertheless, already a relatively low number of blasts signaLzed an unfavourable course of AIL. 3. With respect of our results most cases of AIL progress rapidly like high grade malignant NHL. MOller-Ruchholtz, and Helmut L6ffler. Human recombinant growth factors are increasingly used for stimulating hemopoietic recovery after chemotherapy. However, their biological effects are not completely understood. Recent reports indicate that GM-CSF rapidly and strongly elevates the serum levels of soluble interleukin 2 receptors (slL-2R), suggesting lymphocyte activation mediated by this growth factor. In this context, we have studied the influence of G-CSF on sIL-2R levels in 19 patients who underwent autologous bone marrow transplantion (BMT) for treatment of Hodgkin's disease or non-Hodgldn's lymphoma. Twelve patients received granulocyte colonystimulating factor (G-CSF) from day O or day + 1 after BMT until the white blood ceil count had been stable for nine days above 1/nl, the remaining 7 patients did not receive growth factors. Results: The application of G-CSF after marrow infusion did not result in an immediate change of slL-2R levels (median 204 pM before vs. 256 pM after start of G-CSF, not significant). However, in all G-CSF-treated patients the slL-2R levels increased steadily in the early posttransplant course, even in the absence of infection. This increase was statistically significant two to four days prior to appearence of leukocytes in the peripheral blood (median 340 pM, p<0.025) and peaked with the appearence of first peripheral blood leukocytes (median 536 pM, p<0.001). Cessation of G-CSF administration resulted in a decline of sIL-2R levels. In contrast, 5 of 7 patients without G-CSF treatment did not exhibit an slL-2R increase before or at the time of engraftment. Infection was associated with a rise of slL-2R levels. A correlation between slL-2R levels and total leukocyte count, lymphocyte count, or CD25 + lymphocyte count was not evident. Conclusions: G-CSF induces increased slL-2R levels preceding engraftment in autologous BMT, which occur independent of lymphocyte activation. This may be compatible with involvement of activated myeloid bone marrow cells in G-CSF-indueed slL-2R release. K.Donhuijsen, Ch.Haedicke, M.Freund, S.Rattenberger We observed a patient with GM-CSF related eosinophilic leucocytosls for several months and the coexlstence of endocardltls parietalis fibroplastlca. Case report: A 66 year old man presented 1986 with neutrophilic agranulocytosis, fever and polyclonal gsmmopsthy w~thout evidence of toxic or infectious aetiology. The agranulocytos~s of bone marrow and peripheral blood continued to Sept.1990 . In Oct.1990 the patient was taken in a phase II study with G~-CSF. Now the leucocytes increased to a maximum of 22.3 10 /1 but with a percentage of over 80 eosinophils.GM-CSF-therapy was continued until Febr.1991 without efficacy concerning the neutrophil line. At autopsy, bone marrow revealed a total neutrophzlzc agranulocytoszs and a marked eosinophllla. The parietal endocardium of both ventricles was fibrous thickened and hned by large mural thrombl of different age. In increased Levels of the Mx-A protein were measured suggesting that the Mx-A protein level is m more sensitive parameter than IFN-~ level in detecting IFNproduction in vivo. The side effect profile of R-837 was different from that of IFN-~. The major dose limiting side effects were nausea end vomiting which led to interruption of therapy in three and dose reductions in six patients; these side effects occurred 2-C hours after mdministration of R-837 and did not correlate to the plasma levels of IFN-~ or Mx-A protein. Side effects typical for IFN-~ (fever, flulike syndrome, loss of appetite) were present in half of the patients and were usually mild (WHO grade I). No complete or partial response was observed; however in one patient with iLL peripheral bloo~ leukocyte counts dropped by more than 50% after R-837. These data demonstrate that R-837 induced IFN-m in all pa-tient~ studied. It remains to be established whether this oral interferon inducing activity can be used clinically. Areas in which progress can be made in AML are in improving induction therapy as well as enhancing post-remission therapy. Recent developments may affect both phases of AML therapy. Idarubicin is a new anthracycline which has produced a higher response rate when used in combination with AraC, compared to Daunorubicin and AraC. Idarubicin also appears to affect overall outcome, with enhanced survival among idarubicin treated patients compared to Daunorubicin treated patients. This improved result may reflect the additional activity of the alcohol (idarubicinol) observed against leukemia. Idarubicin is currently being used as firstline therapy in the ongoing U.S. Intergroup AML study. Interleukin-2 (IL2),T-cell growth factor, stimulates killer-cell mediated tumor kills, activating T-cells, NK cells and LAK cells. Antileukemic activity has been observed in vitro when LAK cells or NK cells are utilized. IL2 is being explored as post-remission therapy to stimulate an immune response to minimal residual disease. It is also being explored postautologous transplant in an attempt to induce graft versus leukemia effect. Preliminary data are encouraging. Data in support of these statements will be presented. . Toxicity (WHO grade): leukocytopenia 2 u 27%, 3 n 36%, 4 t' 5%: infection 2" 9%, 3" 4%; thrombocytopenia 2 ~ 16%, 3 n 20%, 4" 7%; anemia 2 qJ 22% , 3" 16%, 4 u 4%; 3 treatment related deaths: one due to myocardial infarction, two pts due to septicemia; allergic reactions to E 1" I pt , 2 n 1 pt , 3 ~s 1 pt: transient rise of creatinin above 1.5 mg/dl 2%; nausea/vomiting 1 a 38%, 2 u 16%, 3 n 4%; alopecia 3 n was observed in all pts. Conclusions: CEV is an active regimen in the treatment of ED SCLC and well tolerable with respect to gastrointestinal, renal and hematologic toxicity, However, because of V induced neurotoxicity, V had to be discontinued after a median of 10.5 mg total dose applicated. Close to 3000 children with ALL have been treated according to 6 consecutive BFM protocols over a period of two decades. This analysis focuses on the retrospective evaluation of 998 children with non-B-ALL in trial ALL-BFM-86. The intention was to define small subgroups of pts with a critically impaired prognosis as potential candidates for allogeneic BMT in first remission. Over 90% of children treated in this trial have cure rates in the range of 70-80%. There is, however, a group of patients (< 10%) with an unsatisfactory prognosis despite most intensive chemotherapy. This subgroup can be subdivided: 1) late-or non-responders not achieving remission within one month (EFS 19%), 2) t(9;22) ALL (EFS 31%), 3) inadequate response to initial steroid treatment, if combined with at least one additional factor such as: tumor burden > 1.7 (EFS 31%), T-ALL with at least one early T-marker (EFS 22%), coexpression of myeloid marker(s) (EFS 24%), and t(4; 11) in infants with null/mixed-lineage-ALL (EFS 20%). The validity of these criteria has to be proven in the ongoing trial ALL-BFM-90. At present, 41 children fulfil these criteria. 14 of these (34%), who were not transplanted, already failed experimental chemotherapy compared to 13/474 failures (3%) in the complementary group. Whether allogeneic BMT can improve EFS in these children is being investigated under controlled conditions. Twenty-five patients with chronic myeloid leukemia were transplanted from HLA-identical, MLC negative unrelated donors. Two patients were in refractory blast crisis, 6 in second chronic phase, 4 in accelerated phase and 13 in the first chronic phase. The age range was 8 to 55 years (median 29 yrs.). The conditioning protocol included fractionated TBI (12 Gy, lung shielding 10.5 Gy) and cyc!ophosphamide (+ etoposide in pts not in first chronic phase). Cyclosporin plus methotrexate was administered for GvHD prophylaxis; a murine monoclonal anti-IL2-receptor antibody (BB-10) plus eorticosteroids was added later on. The incidence of GvI-ID grade > =II was 65%. Causes of deaths were: GvI-ID and infection (7), infections (4) and relapse (2). On the basis of these data and other published work, a donor search should be done in all patients with CML in chronic phase under the age of 50 years. Pentoxifylline (PTX) has recently been shown to modulate TNF-r production and to reduce the incidence end severity of ell major complications after bone marrow transplantation (BMT), insluding musoeitis, vane-occlusive disease, renal insufficiency, hypertension and graft-versus-host disease. In order to analyze in detail the effect of PTX on immune complications after BMT we investigated the modulatory effect of PTX on immune response in vitro. Continuous presence of PTX significantly reduced the proliferative response of peripheral blood mononuotear cells to phytohemagglutinin stimulation end to alloantigens in a dose~dependent manner. Starting at concentrations of 100 p~g/ml, PTX was able to Inhibit and at 1000 i, tg/ml completely block mitogsninduced proliferation, Maximal inhibition of more than 90% (91+4%) was also observed at PTX concentrations of 1000 p,g/ml in the mixed lymphocyte culture. However, lower but still significant suppression (13 was achieved at concentrations of 10 ~g/ml PTX. The Inhibitory capacity of PTX was Increased by monoclonal antibodies against TNF-cz (34+5% additional suppression at 100 i, tg/ml PTX) and not reversed by the addition of rTNF-m The effect of PTX on the generation of cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTL) in vitro was studied in the CML assay. PTX 100 I~g/ml significantly inhibited (p=0.0178) the in vitro generation of CTLs, when PTX was added to the culture on day 0. PTX also showed profound modulatory properties in the NK assay with a reduction of 23+3% in specific lysis at 10 ~tg/ml PTX and maximal reductions of 88 at 1000 ag/mi PTX. Immunornodulatory properties of PTX were not only associated with blockage of TNF-~t as shown by decreased mRNA expression and TNF-r values in the culture supernatants, but also with an impaired production of other cytokines and secondary messages such as IFN-y and neopterin. PTX treatment, however, did not affect IL-2, IFN-~x, IL-113 or ~-2 microglobulin production, IL-6 release was even increased. PTX has therefore profound immunomodulatory properties in vitro, which are associated with selective Inhltion of cytoklnes release and can be enhanced by the addition of monoclonal antibodies against TNF-~t but not reversed by the addition of rTNF-m Interleukin-8 (IL-8) belongs to a group of 8kD-peptides, all produced by various cell types. Based upon structural similarities they were grouped in the so-called "small-cytokine" (scy)-superfamily. IL-8 exerts strong proinflammatory effects such as neutrophil activation and chemotactic activities. We studied the biological role of IL-8 and G-CSF in patients following ABMT or ABSCT. Using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) for IL-8 and G-CSF (Quantikine, R & D Systems), the median IL-8 serum level in 11 healthy volunteers was 33.8 pg/ml (range:19.5-50). G-CSF was detectable only in 7/11 volunteers with a median of 25 pg/ml (12.6-37.3). A total of 435 samples from 41 patients (13 female/28 male) was examined. Their median age was 38 yr (range:16-51). Autografting (29 ABMT/12 ABSCT) was performed in AML, ALL, Hodgkin's disease and Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. A strong correlation between IL-8 and G-CSF serum levels (R = 0.73, p < 0.05) could be demonstrated. Previously we have shown that G-CSF and WBC are inversely correlated reflecting the central role of G-CSF for neutrophil homeostasis. A similar relationship -although less pronounced -was found between IL-8 and WBC. Prior to autografting the median IL-8 serum level was 68.3 pg/ml (range: 13.3-3654). During marrow aplasia, a median IL-8 serum level of 422.9 pg/ml (range: 77.7-2866 pg/ml) was observed. A median 1.4-fold increase of IL-8 levels could be demonstrated in patients with fever (>38.5~ compared to non-febrile ones. The highest IL-8 levels ranging from 890.7 to 4150 pg/ml were observed in patients with extensive pulmonary infiltrates. In summary, the endogenous serum levels of IL-8 and G-CSF following autotransplantation are closely related depending on the absolute leukocyte count and intercurrent events such as fever and/or infectious complications. These data might reflect a synergy of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-8 with G-CSF on mature effector cells as well as on responsive hemopoietic progenitor cells. The latter hypothesis is supported by in-vitro studies of MIP-1 and MIP-2 demonstrating their colony-stimulating activity as members of the "scy"-superfamily. Dept. of Internal Medicine V, Hospitalstr. 3, 6900 Heidelberg, Germany Chlamydia pneumonia (TWAR) as a possible cause of pneumonia in immunocompromised patients M. von Eiff, A. Oehme, B. Roth, J. van de Loo Chlamydia pneumonia (TWAR) is a recently identified Chlamydia that causes both upper and lower respiratory tract infection including pneumonia. The etiologic role of this organism in immunocompromised pts. with pneumonia is not clearly understood. Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage was undertaken in 61 immunocompromised pts. with fever and radiologically confirmed pneumonic lesions for microbiological and cytological diagnosis. Chlamydia pneumonia was identified by a fluorescein-conjugated TWAR monoclonal antibody (Chlamydia TWAR-Antigen JF-Test Medac Diagnostika) in BAL of 13 pts. (6/21 acute leukemias; 4/14 other malignancies, 0/5 HIVinfections, other underlying diseases 3/21). Other organisms identified were gram-positive (n=52) and gram-negative (n=15) bacteriae, fungi (n=12) and viruses (n=3). The fatality rate of pts. with and without Chlamydia pneumonia was comparable (4/13 = 31%; 17/48 = 35 %). Conclusion: There is a strikingly high incidence of colonization with Chlamydia pneumonia in immunocompromised pts., its relevance as a causative agent of pneumonias has still to be clarified. Given the high cure rate of pts. with Rodgkin's disease and Non-Nodgkin-Lymphomas, the complications related to therapy take on great significance. We therefore studied 33 pts., median age 42 (13 -65 years, Hodgkin disease n=lb, Non-Modgkin-Lymphomns n=lS) for 12 to 36 months after polychemotberapy (n=13) and mantle irradiation (n=33) with pulmonary function tests (PFT), progressive exercise tests on a bicycle ergometer, arterial blood gas tests and diffusing capacity of carbon monoxide (DIX20). Mantle doses ranged between 26 and 40 Gy given at 1,5 Gy tumor dose per day. Irradiated lung volume was 30 -45 %. Magnetic resonance has become a powerful tool fur diagnostic imaging of soft tissue. Bone marrow differs from all other tissues in one important quality: In healthy persons there are nearly equal fractions of water and lipide. Separation of lipid and water signals is possible by the chemical shift difference. The larmor frequency difference of 215 Hz at 1.5 T allows to record alterations of the lipid/water content by imaging and 1H localized spectroscopic methods. In our experience with several patients with different haematological disorders of low and high bone marrow cellularity the increase of lipide in the bone marrow in vertebral bodies and the decrease of cellularity of iliae crest biopsies showed good correlation. Patients were analyzed following BMT by NMR chemical shift imaging and 1H localized spectroscopy and were seen after discharge from the marrow transplant unit and for further controls in the later post-transplant period. Patients after autologous and allogeneic BMT were analyzed for haematological reconstitution. Additionally the influence of acute GvHD on marrow reconstitution was assessed by NMR Spectroscopy of the bone marrow. The peripheral haematological parameters and the NMR data were compared in these patients. Additionally in some patients marrow cellularity could be determined by marrow histology. In spite of a rapid increase in the white cell count after autologous marrow transplantation, NMR spectroscopy revealed an marked increase in the lipid/water ration indicating a low cellularity in the early post-transplant period. In contrast after allogeneic marrow transplantation NMR analysis showed a normal or even decreased lipid/water ratio already in the early post-transplant period. Only in patients suffering from severe GvHD, especially patients after BMT from an unrelated donor, marrow cellularity remained low as indicated by an increase in the lipd/water ratio. Thus, magnetic resonance might allow rapid, non-invasive analysis of haematopoetic reeonstitution after BMT using chemical shift selective imaging techniques and 1H spectroscopy. patients occurring later than 20 days after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation is most likely due to either graft-versus host disease or an infection of the lower gastrointestinal tract. Apart from bacterial and fungal infections, viral disease, especially CMV enteritis, is a major cause of severe gastrointestinal symptoms after BMT. To further analyze the influence of CMV infection and graft-versus host disease on intestinal dysfunction after BMT, intestinal biopsies obtained from 27 patients suffering from diarrhoea around day +30 after allogeneic BMT were analyzed for the presence of CMV and GvHD-typical histological and immunohistological alterations. To exclude the influence of other infectious agents intestinal biopsies were only studied when no bacteria and fungi nor other viruses apart from CMV were grown from the stool or the biopsy specimens. During colonoscopy biopsies were obtained from different sites and analyzed for the presence of CMV and GvHD-associated histological and immunohistological alterations. In biopsy ~ecimens from 8 out of 19 patients analyzed by PCR and in situ hybridization assays CMV could be detected. Only in 6 of these 8 cases CMV could also be demonstrated by immunohistology using 4 monoclonal antibodies directed against different CMV proteins. Only in 4 biopsies cytomegalic cells could be found. CMV as well as histological and immunohistological lesions described as typical for acute GvHD were most often detected in biopsy specimens obtained from the ascending colon. Mfiller CMV infection and acute GvHD have been shown to be correlated with alterations of the re, constitution of the cellular immune system. Inconsistent data have been reported about the influence of GvHD and infections on the reconstitution of the humoral immune system after allogeneic BMT. In animal models GvHD as well as viral infections have been observed to be associated with the occurrence of autoantibodies after BMT. 71 patients undergoing allogeneic bone marrow transplantation were followed up for the occurrence of paraproteins as well as organ-specific and non-organ specific autoantibodies in the early post-transplant period. In serum samples of these patients autoantibodies could be detected in a significantly higher frequency than in normal control persons. No correlation could be shown between the occurrence of autoantibodies and the severity of acute graftversus-host disease. Symptomatic CMV infection was significantly associated with autoantibody production. Naturally occuring antimitochondrial antibodies and cytoskeleton antibodies were only observed among patients with symptomatic CMV infection. Similarly monoclonal, biclonal and triclonal paraproteins were only detected in patients with CMV disease. In all of these patients CD4-1ymphocytopenia indicated marked disturbance of cellular immune reconstitution. Oligo-and polyclonal stimulation of B-cells may thus be a sign of defective T-cell regulation of humoral immune responses during CMV infection after allogeneic BMT. Medizinische Klinik and Poliklinik, Abteilung II, and Sektion Transplantationsimmunologie und Immunh~imatologie, University of TiJbingen, D-7400 T~ibingen, Germany In 36 of these patients the virus could be additionally cultivated from blood and/or urine samples a median of 45 days after BMT. CMV infection was associated with severe acute GvHD. 28 out of the 46 patients developed symptomatic CMV infection. All the patients with symptomatic CMV infection showed a drop in the lymphocyte count several days prior to the onset of CMV disease. Antiviral therapy of CMV disease was followed-up by virus culture and PCR technique. In successfully treated episodes of CMV disease clinical improvement was associated with an effective suppression of virus replication as demonstrated by negative culture and PCR technique. Apart from PCR-positivity at the end of antiviral therapy, CD4+-lymphocytopenia was found to be a bad prognostic parameter for the outcome of CMV infection after allogeneic BMT. To further analyze host-and virus-specific parameters for their influence onthe development of CMV disease HLA-type and virus strain differences were analyzed in patients with symptomatic and asymptomatic CMV infection. Demonstration of mutations in the immediate early gene region and the a-sequence of the CMV strain in comparison to the CMV strain AD 169 could be found more often in patients with symptomatic than asymptomatic CMV infection. Due to the high rate of treatment failures in patients with CMV infection and persistent CD4+-lymphocytopenia adoptive immunotherapy should be considered in addition to treatment with nucle0side analogues. In the chemotherapy of high-grade malignant NHL a modification and intensification of standard regimens has led to an increase in complete remission rates achievable. However, relapse rates have not been reduced accordingly and a relevant improvement in survival is not yet discernible. A number of initial parameters present at the time of diagnosis influence significantly the long-term relapse-free and overall survival. Beside the general condition of the patient these factors include the pattern of involvement and the indicators of tumor volume and biological activity. Several models have been developed to quantify the individual risk. In order to increase the predictive power of such calculations for long-term prognosis, an overview analysis (16 centers from Canada, USA and Europe) with a total of 4,300 cases recruited between 1975 and 1987 and including the COP-BLAM/IMVP-16 study (BMFT) was performed. Parameters identified to retain highly significant prognostic value in multivariate analysis (age, performance status, stage, serum LDH, number of E-sites) were used to form a prognostic index defining four risk groups. Detailed results of the analysis (e.g. the persistent risk in the 'cured" patients) and an evaluation of the prognostic index in the COP-BLAM/IMVP-16 multicenter trial will be presented. To investigate the influence of the karyotype on the response to treatment with GM-CSF, G-CSF, I1-3 or Erytbropoietin the karyotype of patients (pts) with MDS was related to the hematological changes induced by cytokine therapy. During the time period between 1985-1992 a total of 48 pts with MDS was evaluated retrospectively: 26 men and 22 women; median age of 61 years (range 32-78). Morphological subtypes were refractory anemia (RA) in 28, RA with ringsideroblasts (RARS) in 2, RA with excess of blasts (RAEB) in 11, RAEB in transformation (RAEB-t) in 6, and CMML in 1 pt. 33 pts (69%) had chromosomal abnormalities. Out of the total of 48 pts, 34 pts were treated with cytokines, 7 of them received several growth factors sequentially (11-3: n=14; GM-CSF: n=18; EPO: n=4; G-CSF: n=7). Of the pts treated with 11-3, cytogenetic follow-up revealed evolution, i.e. appearance of further abnormalities or increase in percentage of abnormal metaphases in 3/6 pts. No new cytogenetic clones appeared in the other 3 pts. Cytogenetic follow-up was also done in 9/18 pts treated with GM-CSF. Of the 7 pts with abnormal karyotype the percentage of abnormal metaphases increased in 2 pts, remained unchanged in 2 pts and decreased in 3 pts. 4 pts treated with EPO retained their karyotypic pattern. 4/7 pts receiving G-CSF were followed cytogenetically and in 2 of these the percentage of abnormal metaphases decreased. There was no difference in the response pattern, i.e. increase of blood counts, in pts with or without abnormal karyotype. 6 pts (5 receiving GM-CSF, 1 11-3) had progression to AML; out of these 3 had an abnormal karyotype. Cytokine treatment stimulates both, cytogenetically abnormal and normal cell clones. Presence of chromosomal aberrations was not predictive for progression to AML during cytokine treatment and did not preclude hematopoetic response, e.g. increase of neutrophils or platelets. Adresse: Abt. H~imatologie, Klinikum der J.W. Goethe-Universi~t Frankfurt, W-6000 Frankfurt 70, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, FRG We report on a 61 year old farmer who became sick with fever, want of appetite, vomiting, weight loss, head-ache, cough, myalgias, and anemia. First a malignancy was suspected. Inspite of intensive diagnostic procedures the specific diagnosis could not be obtained. Assuming an arteritis cranialis Hortom steroids were given. This lead to a transient improvement. Because of adverse effects the patient discontinued the treatment and sought alternative therapies. 8 months after the initial onset of symptoms the patient was admitted to our hospital in a severely ill condition. A biopsy of the musculus suralis lead to the diagnosis pelyarteritis modes 9. Therapy with cyclophesphamide (800 mg / m-intravenously every three weeks) and steroids did not lead to a complete regression of clinical symptoms and pathological laboratory findings within three months. Thereafter, we started an intensified chemotherapy w~th cyclephesphamide and dexorubicine, 50 mg / m every three weeks up to a total dose of 430 mg hoping that this would suppress the overwhelming immunological process. The treatment was well tolerated; the main side effect was an alopecia grade III to IV. Shortly after starting the intensified chemotherapy a dramatic improvement occurred. Today, 20 months after discontinuation of treatment the patient is well. He is able to work on his farm again. Signal transduction by LFA-1 and its ligand ICAM-1 and gene regulation by nuclear proteins like c-MYC might mutually interfere and control complex physiological processes e.g. intercellular communication, localization of tumour cells, interaction with stromal cells and proliferation. We analysed bone marrow plasma cells of 40 patients with multiple myeloma, MGUS or reactive increase in plasma cells for the expression of these proteins by applying a double sandwich immunoperoxidase method. In the majority of cases independent of diagnosis and proliferative state plasma cells showed a marked expression of ICAM-1, with membrane and characteristic intracytoplasmic distribution. LFA-1 staining was observed in 30% of cases and was confined to small plasmacytic cells and type I myeloma. Although c-myc is usually expressed in Diffuse malignant mesothelioma is a rare disease with heterogeneous course and an overall median survival < 12 months, not convincingly altered by different treatment modalities. In 2/1982 diffuse malignant mesothelioma of the pleura was diagnosed in a 40-years-old man and treated by extrapleural pneumectomy and radiation therapy with 50 Gy. In 11/1989 Twelve patients, 19-53 years old, with acute and chronic leukemia (5 AML, 2 ALL, 5 CML), were given marrow transplants following intensive cytoreductive therapy (fractionated total body irradiation, and cyclophosphamide). The patients received an HLAidentical family unrelated donor marrow. The mixed lymphocyte cultures were either negative (7 patients) or slightly reactiv (5 patients). The prophylaxis for graft versus host disease (GvHD) consisted of cyclosporine (CsA) startet at day -3 at a concentration of 2,5 mg/kg, i.v. twice daily over a period of 4 hours in combination with prednisone (0,5 mg/kg) given at day 7 post grafting. All patients tolerated the immunsuppressive therapy, however some complained about nausea and headaches. At present time 7 patients are alive and well. 2 patients developed chronic graft versus host disease, grade II. One patient with AML transplanted in a second partial remission relapsed after ii months post transplant without any signs of acute or chronic graft versus host disease. One patient died at day 14 due the toxicity of the conditioning regimens. Two patients developed acute graft versus host disease at day 47 and day 68, respectively, and both died of uncontrolled aGvHD primarily with liver and bowel involvement. One patient with a very slow take developed chronic GvHD and died subsequently with uncontrolled cGvHD. The results suggest that bone marrow transplantation with HLA-indentical family unrelated marrow donors using a modified GvHD prophylaxis protocol might generate a similiar outcome compared with family related transplants. Adhesion molecules are a heterogenous group of surface receptors involved in cell-cell-interaction. Several cytokines including IL-1, IL-4, IL-7, TNFa, and IFNy are able to upregulate the expression of adhesion molecules LFA1 and ICAM-1. The influence of IL-2 on the expression of these molecules is still uncertain. In this study the effect of alFN and IL-2 on the expression of LFAla, LFA18, VLA1, and ICAM-1 was investigated. In 4 Patients with metastatic renal cell cancer an~2 patients with malignant ~elanoma receiving alFN 3 Mill. U/m" s.c. and IL-2 9 Mill. IU/m L i.v.(bolus) in a daily alternating schedule for 14 days the expression of adhesion molecules on peripheral blood lymphocytes was examined using flowcytometry. Same examinations were performed in 3 patients with AML in 2nd remission receiving IL-2 in a dosage of 9 Mill. IU/m 2 from day 1-5 and day 8-12. Soluble ICAM-1 was detected by ELISA. The cellular expression of LFAla, LFA18, VLA1, and ICAM-1 showed no changes during treatment, but was upregulated 7-14 days after each therapy. This corresponds to other biological effects of the IL-2/IFN therapy like rebound lymphocytosis, which occurred also 7-14 days following therapy. Soluble ICAM-1 serum concentrations increased in some cases with a maximum on day 8 of treatment. Following IL-2 bolus on first day of treatment slCAM-1 serum concentrations rose to a peak after 6-8 hours followed by a rapid decline. At this time the cellular expression of ICAM-1 remained unchanged. Immunotherapy with IL-2/IFN or IL-2 alone induces upregulation of adhesion molecules, which may induce antitumoral activity. Still uncertain is, whether IL-2 itself or through induction of secondary cytokines promote this effect. Within the last six years, a cooperative program between the EORTC New Drug Development Office and the Preclinical Anticancer Drug Development Group at the University of Freiburg was set up in order to provide a rational basis for further development of experimental agents. Potential antitumor compounds acquired by the NDDO from various sources are submitted for evaluation of antineoplastic efficacy in a combined in vitro/in vivo test system developed in Freiburg. New compounds are studied in vitro for anticancer activity in 6 human tumor xenografts using a modified colony forming assay. Agents demonstrating a cytotoxic effect on tumor cells are subsequently studied in a total of 20 xenografts in the clonogenic assay. For assessment of bone-marrow toxicity, the effect on colony formation (CFU-GM) of human bone marrow cells from healthy donors is evaluated. In parallel, the drug is studied in vivo using two or more in vitro sensitive xenografts transplanted subcutaneously into nude mice. Overall, a total of 138 compounds of various classes, e.g., classical cytotoxics, antibiotics, natural products, lipids, biological response modifiers and rationally designed drugs, have been studied for antineoplastic efficacy. 38/138 compounds (28%) have been further evaluated in vivo, 10/138 drugs (7%) have shown reproducible activity (regression to _<75% of the initial tumor size) in tumor-bearing nude mice. The data obtained are basic criteria with regard to the final decision of the New Drug Development Coordinating Committee on further development of the compounds tested. A total of 8 agents (6%) have been selected for clinical trials e.g. EO-9, Rhizoxin, Topetecan, Dabis maleat. Once preclinical activity is established, further steps covering formulation, animal toxicology and clinical trials are coordinated by the NDDO. This multicenter approach allows for highly effective evaluation of new anticancer agents and treatment strategies. 1 0). also known as cytokine inhibiting factor (CS IF) is a strong growth factor for activated human B lymphocytes. IL-10 has originally been identified as a product from TH2 helper T-cells able to suppress IL-2 and Ifngammaproduction. Human IL c 10showsstriking sequencehomologyto BCRF1. an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) encoded lytic protein, and infection of Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) cell lines with EBV induced ]L-10 production. Previously. it has been reported that murlne B lymphomas and normal peritoneal B cells produce IL-10 which is largely secreted by Ly-1 B cells. It has been shown that Ly-1 pos. chronic B cell leukemias (CLL) are generated in early ontogeny and the human equivalent are CD5 pos. B-CLLs that are known to have defective T cell responsiveness. Because of its B cell growth promoting and CSIF capacity a possible role of IL-10 in lymphomagenesis has been suggested. We examined clinical specimen of patients with CLL as well as acute (eukemias, and a panel of EBV positive and negative BL and lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL) for the expression of IL-10 by reverse transcriptase (RT-) PCR. All BL and most LCL strongly expressed IL-10 regardless of the presence or absence of EBV. No correlation was seen to the degree of activation of the cells suggesting an important role of I L-10 as an autocrine B cell growth factor in vitro. Eleven from 20 CD5 pos. CLL and half of the ALL expressed IL-10. The strongest signal was obtained inthe common-ALL subgroup showing about 10 fold higher levels as compared to CLL in dilution experiments. MOLT4 and Jurkat T cell lines were positive, and the myeloid derived cell lines HEL, K562, HL60 and all but one AML specimen were negative for IL-1 0 expression. Clearly, IL-10 expression is not restricted to B cells activated by EBV and can be seen even in the absence of CD40 in vitro. In contrast to previous findings in the murine system the human CD5 pos. B-CLL examined were strikingly heterogenous with regard to IL-10 production. Thus, this disease entity can be divided into two subgroups, however, correlation with clinical outcome remains to be shown. The same holds true for the different secretion of IL-10 by certain ALL but not others. IL-10 secretion by the malignant cells is likely to contribute to the genesis of certain lymphomas and leukemias. Abteilung H~,matologie und Onkologie, Medizinische Universit~tsklinik, Hugstetterstr. 55, D-7800 Freiburg Transrepression of the interferon-alpha response by transient expression of an interferon-stimulated-response-element binding protein Thomas Fischer*, Saikh J. Haque, Aseem Kumar, Michael N. Rutherford and Bryan R. G. Williams Interactions of cellular proteins with the cis-acting interferon (IFN)stimulated-response-element (ISRE) have been implicated in the transcriptional regulation of IFN-responsive genes. We have isolated a mouse cDNA from an expression library by using the ISRE as a recognition site DNA probe. This cDNA encodes a novel polypeptide of 976 amino acids (predicted molecular weight 108,715 Da), designated ISRE-binding factor-1 (IBF-1). ISRE-binding characteristics in vitro of bacterially expressed IBF-I fusion proteins indicate that the DNA binding domain of IBF-1 lies between amino acid residues 276 and 450. IFN-t binds to the truncated ISRE motif, GAAANN. The IBF-1 cDNA hybridizes with an approximately 4.4 kb mRNA, constitutively expressed in different mouse cell lines. The IBF-1 mRNA is not induced by either IFN-alpha or IFN-gamma; however the level of mRNA is differentially regulated in virus infected cells. Cotransfection experiments reveal that transient expression of IBF-1 suppresses the IFN-alpha induced transcriptional activation of an ISRE-containing, heterologous promotor. The level of this transrepression can be reduced by treating the cells with increasing concentrations of IFN-alpha. These data indicate that IBF-1 may be a constitutively expressed repressor of IFN-inducible promotors. Following Nowell's hypothesis of carcinogenesis as a result of genomic instability with the production of genetically abnormal clones of cells we perfo~,ed flow c~tric studies in 16 colorectal adencmas (>l.5cm) and 14 carcinomas. To study the frequency and distribution of aneuploid populations as well as the proliferative pattern 4.6 (2-13) specimens (o 2-3ram) were taken frcm each neoplasm in a grid array for flow cytcmetric and parallel histologic analysis. This way, maps illustrating DNA content abnonralities, cell proliferation and histology were assessed throughout the entire neoplasms. Samples for flow cytometry were minced, stained with DAPI as DNA dye and analyzed on a PARTEC II. 13/57 adenomatous specimens without dysplasia revealed a single aneuploid population of cells. Tetraploidy (4N>15% of cells analyzed) was present in 13 of these 57 cases. Of 6 adeno~atous fractions with high grade dysplasia 3 were aneuploid: two of them with multiple anenploid lesions (D.I. = 1.13/1.24 and 1.20/ .1.70, resp.). Single (n=34) and multiple (n=6) aneuploid populations were detected in 40/70 (57.2%) carcinc~.atous specimens. Tetraploidy was present in another 8 samples. DNA mapping of adenc~as and carcincmas revealed both distinct regions and extended areas of aneuploidy and tetraploidy, respectively. Overall, cell proliferation as determined by the percentage S-phase cells was significantly (p< 0.05) higher in carcinc[ratous specks (13.9_+ 0.9%; x_+ S~K) than in'adenc~satous fractions (7.3_+0.6%). The tumor adjacent colonic mucosa showed a S-phase of 5.0+ 0.6%. These data showing DNA content abnon~alities within the adenc[ca-carci-nc~a-sequence are consistent with Nowell's hypothesis of genomic instability leading to aneuploid clones in colorectal carcinogenesis. Supported by wilhelm Sanderstiftung, FRG. Cytokines produced by the malignant cell clone may be involved in dysregulated growth control of lymphoid malignancies. Recent reports suggest that TNF alpha plays a role as an autocrine growth factor in progression of B CLL. In this study we investigated the production of cytokines by B-CLL cells and their regulation by crosslinking anti-lgM antibodies and by the cytokines IL-2 and IL-4. Highly enriched B-CLL cells were obtained from peripheral blood mononuclear cells by depletion of T cells and adherent monocytes. First, effects of the various stimulans on proliferation of B-CLL cells was studied. Optimal proliferation of the malignant cells was obtained by anti-lgM and IL-2. IL-4 inhibited IL-2 induced cell proliferation without decreasing viability of B-CLL cells. Furthermore, IL-4 upregulated expression CD23 on B-CLL cells suggesting that the B cell population remained functionally active during exposure to IL-4. Under our culture conditions TNF-a failed to stimulate proliferation of B-CLL cells but rather inhibited IL-2 induced proliferation at higher concentrations. In freshly separated B-CLL cells transcription of mRNA for TNF, IL-6 and IL-1 was absent or -for TNF* in a few patients very low. In vitro incubation for 8 hours in culture medium alone resulted in upregulation of message for TNF a, which was further enhanced by anti-lgM and/or IL-2. By contrast,mRNA for IL-1 and IL-6 are not detected in presence of medium or IL-2 alone. However, costimulation with IL-2 and anti-lgM or LPS induced transcription of the IL-1 and IL-6 genes. In presence of IL-4, TNF, IL-1 and IL-6 were all downregulated as compared to appropriate control cultures. Our study demonstrates negative regulatory signals by IL-4 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia comprising both cell proliferation and production of cytokines involved in B cell regulation. Twenty-five patients (12 male, 13 female, mean age 42.9 yrs.; range 19. 1-63.8 yrs.) with CML in the chronic phase have been treated with a combination of interferon (IFN)a-2b and cytosine-arabinoside (ara-C). 7 patients were pretreated, most of them with busulfan, and 18 patients were without pretreatment. In pretreated patients, the time from diagnosis to admission was 36.3 months (range 6.7-106.3 months). IFN was started at a dose of 3 MU/m 2 SC daily. From the second week on ara-C was added at a dose of 20 mg/m 2 SC on 5 days per week. Lateron, the doses ,were adapted to response and side effects. Between the second and the 12th month, mean doses of IFN e administered were from 3.3 to 3.5 MU/m 2 daily and mean doses of ara-c from 50 to 70 mg/m 2 weekly. Prevalent side effects consisted in anemia, mild thrombocytopenia, fever, fatigue, nausea, weight loss and a mild alopecia. There were no life threatening side effects. Ten patients had a complete hematologic response with normalization of the WBC and the differential. Nine patients had a partial hematologic response with WBC <20.O00/pl and <50% of the initial value. Five patients had no major hematologic response and another is too early to evaluate. Nine of 10 patients with complete hematologic response had had no pretreatment. Four minor (35 -95 % Ph ~ + metaphases) and one partial (1-34 % phi+ metaphases) cytogenetic responses have been observed. We conclude that the side effects of IFN o and ara-C are tolerable. Although the recruitment continues and therefore the observation time is short, preliminary results are promissing but limited to patients without pretreatment. Departments of 1Hematology and Oncology, and 3Immunology, Hannover Medical School, 2Human Genetics Institute LObeck, Protestant Community Hospitals of 4Hamm and 6OIdenburg, and 5Dresden Medical School, Federal Republic of Germany. Mononuclear cells (MNC) isolated by density centrifugation of cord blood and normal bone marrow samples, and of peripheral blood (PB) from patients treated with GM-CSF, were double stained with anti CD34 MAb (8G12) versus CD45, CD45-RB, CD45-RO and CD45-RA, respectively, and analyzed by flow cytometry. In all specimen, CD34 + MNC co-expressed CD45 at a low to very low level, while the expression of CD45-RB was similar or slightly higher. In contrast, CD45-RO and CD45-RA could subdivide the CD34 + population into fractions negative, dim (+) and normal positive (++) for these subgroups. In bone marrow, the majority of the CD34 + MNC was RA ++ and RO-, but there were also 34+/RA + and 34+/RA -cell fractions. In PB, most cells were 34+/RA -with varying proportions of 34+/RA + and 34+/RA ++ and a variable expression of RO. In cord blood, the hematopoietic progenitors were usually 34+/RA-/RO -. Semisolid culture of sorted CD34 + MNC revealed that clusters and dispersed (late) CFU-GM originated from 34+/RA ++ cells, while the 34+/RA -MNC formed compact and multiple centre, white and red colonies derived from early progenitors. Addition of 20 ng SCF (Amgen) per ml of medium containing sorted 34T/RA -cord blood MNC led to a change of many BFU-E to CFU-mix which was not, to this extent, seen in blood and bone marrow. We conclude that early hematopoietic cells are 34+/RA-/RO -. Since this population excludes 34+/19 + B cells which are RA %+, two colour flow cytometric analysis using CD34 and CD45-RA facilitates the quantification of early myeloid progenitor cells. Clonal cell populations in tumor samples from patients with B cell Non Hodgkin "s lymphomas can be identified by unique rearrangements of immunoglobulin genes. Tumor cells can easily be sampled by fine needle aspiration (FNA). Since only small amounts of DNA can be extracted from FNA material, we have used polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify junctional sequences of the third complementarity-determining region of immunoglobulin heavy chain genes. Cells were scraped from stained FNA slides up to 12 years old. After lysis of the cells and using /3 globin as a single copy control gene, DNA could be amplified in 68% of the samples. By phenol-chloroform extraction, the proportion of samples with suitable DNA could be increased to 93%. Among multiple combinations of primers complementary to sequences of VH-and jn_ genes, we identified primer pairs that generated clonotypic bands in 72% of samples from 82 patients with Non Hodgkin "s lymphoma in a nested primer PCR. A distinct smear of bands derived from polyclonal B cells was seen in samples from 34 patients with nonmalignant lymph node hyperplasia. On polyacrylamide gels, more than one discrete band could be identified in 27% of the samples suggesting multiple clones or clonal evolution within single lymph nodes. Tumor cells from single sites showed a typical pattern of bands that could be distinguished from cells aspirated from other nodes at the same time or during followup. In the patients analyzed to date, direct sequencing of single bands suggests a sequence of somatic mutations over time. The combined use of FNA and PCR for analysis of rearranged antigen receptor genes or genes with possible function in oncogenesis will certainly help to clarify the natural history of Non Hodgkin "s lymphomas. The selection of CD34+ cells may be used as an alternative purging procedure for autologous transplantation in multiple myeloma (MM). However, normal hematopoietic progenitor cells can only be separated effectively from tumor cells if the latter do not express the CD34 antigen. As some reports suggested myeloma stem cells to be of pre-plasmaceil origin, we first investigated whether the CD34+ pre-B-cell compartment is expanded in MM. After informed consent bone marrow (BM) and peripheral blood (PB) was obtained from 14 MM patients and 5 healthy subjects. Specimens were subjected to ammonium chloride lysis or density gradient centrifugation and stained for the CD10, CD19, CD33, CD34, CD38 and CD45 antigens. Subpopulation analysis of gated CD34+ cells showed no significant difference between MM and controls. More CD34+/CD19+ cells were detected in BM (MM: 21% + 13% of CD34+ cells, mean + SD, n=14) than in PB (MM: 5% + 4% of CD34+ cells, n=l 3). Using tricolor flow cytometry, in BM the CD19 expression on CD34+/CD10+ cells was found to increase continuously from very low levels, whereas B-lymphoid progenitors in PB were mostly CD34+/CDi 0+/CD19-. For the preclinical assessment of imrnunomagnetic CD34+ cell enrichment in MM, BM from 3 patients (2 IgG, 1 IgA) and 4 healthy controls was obtained. CD34+ cells were selected with the HPCA-1 antibody and detached from the beads with chymopapain. In MM the plasma cell content in the initial mononuclear cell preparation (MNC) was 3%, 10% and 63% as compared to <1% plasma cells and 89% + 5% immature blasts in the CD34+ fraction. The plating efficiency was 9.7% + 2.8% (n=3) in this fraction which was 51-fold higher than in the starting preparation. Resultsin the control groupwere comparable except that the mean colony recovery was 30% + 19% (n=4) as compared to 19% + 13% (n=3) in MM. This was due to a higher frequency of cell clumping in MM BM. Mobilized PB may be an alternative source of progenitor cells for CD34-selection in MM. For clinical application upscaling of the procedure is required. A monoclonal antibody termed 7F7, which recognizes the intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM -1), has been used in our experiments to modulate the influence of autologous T-lymphocytes on committed haematopoietic progenitor cells. Using a microagar culture system for human haematopoietic progenitor cells and for T-lymphocyte colony formation we demonstrate that BFU-E, CFU-Meg, CFU-GM derived colony formation was not directly affected by 7F7 antibody treatment. PHA-induced Tlymphocytic colony formation, however, was markedly suppressed by 7F7 mAb. In coculture studies between monocyte and T-lymphocyte depleted bone marrow and peripheral blood MNC and autologous T-lymphocytes preincubaled with the 71:7 mAb we were able to demonstrate that ICAM-1 is involved in T-lymphocyte mediated modulation of BFU-E, CFU-Meg and CFU-GM proliferation. To further clarify the question if this effect on progenitor cell proliferation is mediated by cell adhesion blocking between Tlymphocytes and progenitor cells or by direct Ab-mediated effects on Tlymphocytes and monocytes, the 7F7 mAb was used to investigate the role of ICAM-1 in cytokine production by T-lymphocytes and monocytes. Production of TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma and IL-1 was significantly inhibited (p<0.01) by the incubation of mAb 7F7 with PHA activated blood MNC or isolated E rosette positive T-lymphocytes. The maximal level of inhibition was reached using saturating concentrations of 400 gl/ml of mAb 7F7 hybridoma supernatant corresponding to an inhibitory activity of lgg of purified mAb. In contrast, GM-CSF release showed a heterogenous response over 5 experiments with an increase found in 3 experiments and a decrease in 2 experiments. Addition of increasing concentrations of supematant or purified mAb to unstirnulated MNC or T-lymphocyte cultures had no effect on cytokine release. Our studies show that ICAM structures are involved in the T-cell mediated modulation of normal haematopoietic progenitor cells and that ICAM-I exerts its regulatory effect via the lymphokine cascade. We have performed a two step PCR to detect bcr-abl specific m-RNA in 400 peripheral blood and/or bone marrow samples of 30 CML patients (median I0 samples, range I to 48 samples of each patient) following non t-cell-depleted allogeneic (n= 28) and syngeneic (n= 2) bone m~rrow transplantation (brat). The mean observation time is 22 months. In 13 of our patients (43 %) h cr-ahl specific m-RNA could be detected following brat. Ire and post brat transcripts matched in all cases were pre brat material was obtained. The bcr 2/abl II rem'rangement was detected in I I patients, the bcr 3/abl II rearrangement in 2 patients following brat. In 6 patients after brat ber-abl positive cells were deteted frequently. Hematological relapse occured in 5 of these 6 patients. All of these 5 patients were analysed prospectively. First time of detection of serial PCR positivity was 4 months heforerelalasein UPN 99, 1 moat~ in UPN t:20, .~ mont~inUPN 123, 15 months in UPN 131 and 0,5 months in UPN 133. In 7 patients transient PCR positivity could be detected, none of these patieats relapsed during a mean observation time of 22 months, all ave in complete hematological remission. Bcr-abl positivity was rare in patients, who were in hematological remission for at least 2 years (3/14). B cr-abl positivity in consecutive samples indicated a high risk of relapse (5/6), whereas the risk of relapse was low in patients, who had positive and negative results in consecutive samples (OF/). Bcr-abl positivity was detected more frequent in patients without GVHD (9/I I), than in patients, who sufferred from GVHD (4/19). This data indicate, that transient bcr-abl positivity is usually not followed by hematological relapse, while patients, who ~re positive in serial samples have a higher risk of relapse. Secondary leukemia is a negative prognostic factor in patients with acute myeloid leukemia. It's defined by an antecedent hematologic disorder in the patient's history or exposure to mutagenic agents. By light microscopy, the residual normal hematopoiesis shows characteristic features of dysplasia, defined by the FAB group for MDS. In the present study, the bone marrow aspirates of 101 patients with AML were evaluated by light microscopy of Pappenheim -stained slides for the presence of dysplastic cells. These were defined by the presence of karyorrhexis, megaloblastoid features, multinuclearity or nuclear fragments in >__50 % of 25 red cell precursors; by the presence of agranular or hypogranular PMN, or Pseudo Pelger -Huet anomaly in >_. 50 % of 100 myeloid cells; by the presence of micromegakaryocytes, multiple separated nuclei or large mononuclear forms in at least 3 of 6 cells of the megakaryocytic lineage. Morphologic evaluation was performed retrospectively by two of the authors (GB, JMB) without knowledge of the patient's history and of the clinical outcome. All patients were treated between 4/89 and 12/91 according to the protocols of German AML Cooperative Group. Dysgranulopoiesis was found in 55, dysmegakaryopoiesis in 61 and dyserythropoiesis in 64 of the 10f slides. Patients with dysgranulopoiesis had a 55 % chance for achievement of CR and of 30 % for continuous CR (CCR) at 30 months, significantly worse than for patients without dysgranulopoiesis, who had a 69 % chance for achievement of CR and of 43 % lor CCR. No significant differences for CR were found for patients with dysplastic features in the other lineages, but a tendency for a shorter OR duration was visible. The results show that dysplaslic features are common in bone marrow aspirates of AML palients at diagnosis. Dysgranulopoiesis was the most significant negative prognostic factor. Further cell biological analyses for the elassificationof these cases as secondary leukemias. Light microscopic evaluation of the residual normal hematopoiasis provides additional informations for early identification of patients with unfavorable prognosis. Differentiation induction therapy has been studied in patients (pts) with myelodysplastic syndromes in various forms, e.g. treatment with interferons, retinoic acid, vitamin D, tow-dose ara-C, colony-stimulating factors (CSF). Since ATRA and G-CSF synergistically promote the differentiation of myeloid leukemic blast cells in vitro, we have started a pilot study of combined treatment with ATRA and G-CSF in pts with MDS, especially with refractory anemia without blast cells in the bone marrow. ATRA was given at 45 mg/m2/day PO from week 1-12 and G-CSF at 5 pg/kg/d SQ from week 5-12 with dose modifications according to the neutrophil counts (ANC). A total of 11 pts (median age: 66 years; range: 57-71) have been treated, 8 males and 3 females. During initial ATRA therapy, ANC increased in 3 pts, platelet count (pits) in 4 pts. During combined ATRA/G-CSF therapy, ANC increased in all pts, pits increased in 3 out of 10 evatuable pts but decreased in 1 pt. An increase in hemoglobin concentration occurred in one pt. In the bone marrow, the myeloid-erythroid ratio increased, but not the maturation index of myeloid cells. Cytogenefi c analysis demonstrated the persistence of the abnormal clones in all pts. Adverse effects included dermatitis and cheilosis in most pts. and a drop in pit. counts in 1 pt. The pilot study demonstrates that the combination treatment with ATRA/G-CSF is well tolerated in most pts, leading to normalization of ANC in the majority of pits and in a subgroup of pts. Two different treatment protocols were used to study whether IL-3 can restore hematopoietic function in patients (pts) with MDS: Protocol A consisted of daily SQ administration of high dose IL-3 (250 lag/m 2 and 500 lag/m z) for 15 days. Pts entering prot. B received 60 lag IL-3/m z three times per week SQ from week 1-6 and 125 lag/m 2 three times per week from week 7-12. Nine pts were treated in prot. A (6x refractory anemia (RA), 3x RA with excess of blasts), and 12 pts in protocol 8 (11x RA, lx RA with ring sideroblasts; 11 pts evaluable). Pronounced rises in total leukocyte counts, including neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, monocytes, lymphocytes, were seen in prot. A, e.g. a significant increase in neutrophil counts in 7/9 pts. In only 1 pt treated according to prot. B, the neutrophil counts increased. Platelet counts increased in 6/9 pts in prot. A and in 6/11 pts in prot. B. Reticulocyte counts increased in 2 pts in both protocols, respectiyely, but in only 1 pt on prot. A transfusion requirements decreased transiently. In both treatment regimens, the rise in platelet counts correlated inversely with the initial TNF-a serum levels and induction of TNF-u during IL-3 treatment. In vitro growth of hematopoietic progenitor cells did not improve in any pt on either protocol. Headache and bone pain only occurred in prot. A, while low-grade fever was seen in 9/9 pts in prot. A and in 8/11 pts,in prot. B. Progression of the disease with increase of blast cells was seen in 1 pt on prot. A, but not in prot. B. The data indicate that stimulation of thrombopoiesis can be obtained with both high-dose short-term (prot. A) and low-dose long-term (prot. B) IL-3 treatment. Since IL-3 mainly acts on progenitor and precursor ceils, combination therapy of low-dose IL-3 and late-acting cytokines should be tested.  Immune responses to Tetanustoxoid (TTx) and Polysaccharides (Pneumococci polysaccharide, PCP) were studied in 14 patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) and 32 patients with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) before and during chemotherapy by enzyme immune assay. The immune response to TTx was significantly lower in ALL patients than in controls. This may be due to elevations of sCD8, the soluble equivalent of the CD8 receptor on cytotoxic/suppressor T-lymphocytes, in the serum of 12 of the 14 ALL patients. Patients with AML had normal immune responses before therapy and the average TTx antibody titers rose during chemotherapy, while average antibody titers to PCP remained constant. In AML patients with septic complications the increase of antibody titers to TTx was lower than in patients without sepsis. The average antibody titer to PCP decreased in patients with sepsis while it increased slightly in patients without sepsis. There was no correlation of immune responses with levels of IL-6 in the serum of AML patients, but increases of IL-6 levels during chemotherapy were related to acute phase responses due to sepsis. Our results confirm previous observations that the humeral immune response in AML in contrast to ALL is largely unaffected by the underlying disease and aplasiogenic therapy. Medizinische Klinik I, Universit~it des Saarlandes, W-6650 Homburg and *Medizinische Klinik I, Universit~t zu Kiiln. The French-American-British (FAB) classification of acute leukemias requires more than 3 % of the blasts being positive for peroxydase for the morphological diagnosis of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) type M1 or M2. The treshhold of 3 % of peroxydase positive blasts had been chosen though lymphatic cells are uniformly negative for this enzyme. The rationale behind is that a small number of residual nonleukemic neutrophil blasts being positive for peroxydase may be mistaken as leukemic cells leading to an eronneous classification of a patient. From February 1 th, 1988 , to December 31 st, 1991 , smears of bone marrow and peripheral blood of 835 patients of the AMLCG and the German ALL study were examined prospectively by the central review institutions for immunological and for morpholoical/cytochemical workup. Immunological analysis established the diagnosis of AML in 347 patients. On morphological/cytochemical analys~s, 96 of this 347 cases presented as poorly differentiated leukemias fulfilling the morphological criteria of AML M1(44 pts) or AML M0/ALL (52 pts) and do represent the basis of the analysis of peroxydase activity. The percentage of blasts being positive for peroxydase was: no unequivocally peroxydase positive blasts 33 pts, 0,2-1% positive blasts 14 pts, 1,1-2,9% 5 pts, 3-6% 5 !0ts, 7-10% 4 pts, 11-30% 9 10ts, 31-50% 3 pts, 51-100% 23 pts. In all 19 patients with peroxydase positive blasts in the range from 0,2 to 3 %, the myeloid nature of the leukemia had been considered as certain on morphological grounds. These data show: (1) The cut off limit for classification as AML of 3 % seems to be biologically irrelevant. (2) The absence of blasts being positive for peroxydase is no reliable indicator for the lymphatic nature of a leukemia, even in case the PAS reaction is typical for ALL. The morphological diagnosis of ALL needs confirmation by immunology in any instance. (3) The FAB type M0 is much more common than suggested previously by the FAB group. Measuring increasing unresponsiveness towards antineoplastic agents during therapy of certain malignant diseases should allow an individual treatment design. Using 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide in tumor cell culture a colorimetric assay quantitates relative eytotoxicity of cytostatic drugs. Furthermore, by rtPCR and consecutive ion exchange HPLC the transcription of the mdrl gene was measured. This combined method allows experiments, monitoring the kinetics of resistance development and identification of p-glycoprotein mediated phenomena, which can be influenced by resistance modifiers. in bone marrow stromal cell structure and function have been considered as reason for bone marrow failure in progressive HIV-infection. Thus, in the present analysis the colony forming capacity of hamatos pr~nitor cells after lo~-t.erm ~ marrow culture (LTBMC) Was c(~npared in patients with AIDS and in haalthy c~rols. To thls end, 4x10 s light-density bone marrow cells Ware incut~ted in a micro-LTBRC-system containing 300 pL Mc Coy 5A medium with 12.St fetal calf serum, 12.5t horse serum, 10-6 M hydrocortisone, and 10 -4 M ~-thioglycerol per well in microtiter-plates. 50 t of the medium was changed Weekly witho~rL irritating the stromal layer. At weekly intervals, individual Wells were completely harvested for total cell count and enumeration of the colony-forming cells (CFC) in a methylcellulnse culture c(wTtaining IL-3, GM-CSF, G-CSF, and EPO. As result, the stroeal layers of HIV  patients needed more time to form and contained fewer cells than that of the healthy controls. The total number of cells cumulated from HIV  individuals (2.7xlO 6) were significantly (p(O.OS) higher than that from healthy controls (I.5xI06). In contrast, as c(~ared to initial colony gr(ywth (100~) Following bone marrow transplantation some patients have a decreased (gM production due to an intrinsic 13 cell defect. We investigated mechanisms by which IL-6 induces IgM secretion in human B cells. First we analyzed the role of the protooncogene e-los in IL-6 induced IgM secretion. The human, EBVtransformed t3 cell line SKW 6.4 was incubated with medium or IL6 (5ng/ml). After 10 to 120 minutes total cellular RNA was extracted and examined by Northern blot analysis using a radio-labeled anti-sense specilic RNA probe. Within 30 minutes IL-6 induced c-foe expression in $KW 6.4 col(s, the maximum enhancement was detectable after 1 h with a 3,5 fold enhancement over background (p< 0,01) and concentrations returned to basal levels after 2 hrs. A possible link between IL-6 mediated c-foe expression and IL-6 induced B cell differentiation was evaluated using anti-sense oligonucleotides to c-foe. After 48 hre of stimulation IgM secretion was detected by ELISA. Anti-sense otigonucleotides to c-los but not control oligonucleotides blocked II-6 induced IgM production in a dose-dependent fashion up to 55% (p< 0,001). Addition of Genistein (a specific tyrosine kinase inhibitor) or H7 (a protein kinase inhibitor that did not affect tyrosine phosphorylation in a mouse hybridoma cell (Nakajima et al., 1990) ) 30 rain prior to stimulation with IL6 significantly inhibited IL6-induoed c-foe expression (p<O.01). In conclusion, these results indicate that IL6 induced IgM secretion is mediated by activation el a tyrosine kinase and a H7 sensitive kinase followed by expression of c-los.These data may help to identify the molecular basis of intrinsic 13 cell defetcs in patients following bone marrow transplantation. The inhibitory effect of CD8+ lymphocytes on hematq~oietic colony growth constitutes one of the path~hysiological mechanisms re~ible for hematoFx)ietic failure in HIV  patients. In addition, the expansion of a CDB+ lymphocyte subp~ulation, namely the cytotoxic delta-TCS-l  gammadelta-T-cells, has been observed in these patients. Aim of this study therefore was to further analyze the inhibitory role of this delta-TCS-l-subp~ulation in severe HIVinfection. R panning depletion of T-lymphocytic subpopulatiofF~ from light-density non-adherent bone marrow cells of 6 HIV  patients (5 patients CDC-4, 1 patient CDC-3, according to CDC classification), and of 6 healthy controls was carried out. For enumerating the num~r of colony forming hematoFw~ietic pr~nitor cells, the remaining cells were incubated in a methylcellulose assay stimulated by IL-3, EPO, GM-CSF, and G-CSF. RT-PCR is an effective tool in detection of chromosome translocations, e.g. mRNA transcripts of the bcr-abl chimeric gene. Although it represents a fast and sensitive method the major technical problem in handling this method still remains contamination. Especially nested PCR, which can be crucial in order to obtain specific results, bears a great risk of contamination. Nested PCR so far is a three-tube-reaction consisting of the reverse transcription, a first and a second amplification protocol, the latter run with nested primers. A method has been developed to perform RT-PCR as a one-tube-reaction using a previously described thermostable recombinant enzyme from Thermus thermophilus (rTth). RTth has both reverse transcriptase and polymerase activity depending on the cations added to the enzyme. To unify reverse transcription and amplification protocols and in order to achieve a one-tube-reaction, a pair of hightemperature-annealing primers with a CG-4Omer attached to the 5"-end was used for reverse transcription and first amplification as well. A second amplification protocol was performed with low-temperature-annealing nested primers. The CG-4Omer, which does not anneal to mRNA, leads to amplification products containing CGMOmers at both the 3"-and the 5"-end. This results in the formation of double stranded cDNA amplifieates with melting-resistant CG-clamps flanking a melting-sensitive inner region. Consequently, the concentration of CG-primers diminishes by synthesis of stable specific products in the course of amplification, thus abolishing dilution procedures commonly performed in classical RT-PCR between the first and the second amplification protocol. PCR is completed by a second amplification protocol at different temperatures with a set of lowtemperature nested primers that anneal to the melting-sensitive inner region of the CG-clamp amplificates. In Philadelphia chromosome diagnosis RT-PCR with rTth and CG-attached primers resulted in the formation of specific products. Altogether the above described method showed equal sensitivity and yield in comparison to classical RT-PCR and was also tess time consuming. The risk of contamination is markedly decreased because of the reduction to a one-tube-procedure. We have developed a method to identify and quantify residual leukemia progenitor cells in complete remission of acute myeloid leukemic (AML) by immunologically staining clones cultured in agar employing an enzymeimmunoassay. Leukemic colonies (CFU-L) were specifically distinguished form normal clones by their positivity for "blast markers" like CD I0, CD 20, and CD 34. Clones of leukemic phenotype were found in all 32 cases of AML complete remission (CR) studied at a proportion of 5-40%. These included 14 cases of long-term remission (>24 months). CFU-L were prognostically relevant since patients relapsing within 5 months had significantly higher n~mbers (P=0.003). Lymphokine activated killer (LAK) cells were raised from AML patients in OR (n=9) and at relapse (n=3) by suspension culture of peripheral blood mononuclear cells with Interleukin-2 (IL-2, 100O units/ml). Coculture of LAK cells with autologous bone marrow (BM) cells obtained at the same time significantly inhibited the growth of CFU-L at BM to LAK cell ratios of 1:2.5 and 1:5 during CR (P=0.Ol at one-dimensional variance analysis) but not in relapsing cases (P=0.2S). Normal myeloid clones (CD 15-positive) were inhibited at a lesser extent only. These data show that CR of AML is a balance of normal and leukemic hematopoieses rather than eradication of leukemia which is maintained by the cytotoxic action of LAK cells. Using a murine leukemia model, we investigated (1) whether ex-vivo incubation of BM-grafts with IL-2 can induce GVL activity against otherwise resistant targets, and (2) whether in-vitro cytotoxic activity correlates with GVL effects observed in vivo. Experimental model: WEHI-3 is a myelomonocytic leukemia cell line of Balb/c (H-2 d) origin. Balb/c mice were inoculated with lx106 WEHI-3 cells which invadably lead to death with a median survival time of 21 days (n=48). After lethal irradiation (7,5 Gy) at day 5 post leukemia injection, 2x107 syngeneic or semiallogeneic (C57xBalb/c)F1 BM cells were transplanted either unmanipulated or after 24 hr incubation with 200U/ml IL-2. In-vitro cytotoxicity of donor strain cells was measured by a 4hr Cr-release assay. Results: Animals receiving unmanipulated syngeneic or semialiogeneic marrow showed a relapse rate of 37% (n=12) and 38% (n=17), respectively. Transplantation of IL-2activated grafts resulted in significantly (p<0.05) reduced relapse rates of 20% for syngeneic (n=25) and 19% (n=20) for semiallogeneic donors. In vitro tests for NK activity demonstrated that syngeneic and semiallogeneic effector cells were not able to lyse WEHI-3 targets. Whereas a specific lysis of 2.5% (E:T ratio 100:1; n=6) was observed after incubation with unmanipulated cells, IL-2 activated effector (LAK) cells exerted a specific lysis 15.7% of (E:T ratio 100:1; n=6). Preliminary data suggest that the effect of IL-2 can be markedly enhanced by the addition of either INF-gamma or TNF-alpha. Conclusions: (1) There is a correlation between in-vivo GVL effects against leukemia cells and in vitro lytic actNity of BM donors against these leukemia targets (2) The internal jugular vein (IJV) is a common access route to the central venous system. Anatomical landmarks are normally used for localization of the IJV (group I). We have compared the approach between the two bellies of the sternocleidomastoid muscle with a method using sonography to identify the IJV and the carotic artery (group II). Central venous catheters were placed with the Seldinger technique in all cases. Results of the IJV-punctures Group H pneumothoraces 0 In accordance with previously published data, our results demonstrate that the puncture of IJV using sonography has a low rate of complications. Using sonographically-guided puncture the success rate even is increased. Based on these findings we propose to establish the use of sonography in cannulation of the IJV as a routine method. Stromal cell dependent long-term cultures of Whitlock-Witte type provide a unique opportunity to study pre-B cell proliferation at a relatively mature level. However, only a few models using virus transformed cell lines or fetal liver derived cells exist which allow to study the regulation of earlier events in B cell development. We describe the development and characterization of murine early B progenitor cell lines which ere strictly dependent on direct stromal cell interaction for long-term proliferation. Initially, murine bone marrow cells were incubated in modified Whitlock-Witte cultures in presence of IL-4 which have previously been shown to promote the development of immature B lineage cells. Lymphoid cells derived from such cultures were transferred to a stromal cell line designated HS4-A8. This stromal cell line selectively enhances expansion of a subpopulation of immature cells which have been further characterized. These cells grow in close contact to the stromal cells and express the B lineage marker B220 whereas cytoplasmic #chains were not detectable. Southern blot analysis with a J-H probe and 5' D probes revealed an incomplete D J-rearrangement of the Ig heavy chain gene. There is preliminary evidence for a differentiating capacity of these cells to more mature B lineage cells under various culture conditions. The pro-B cell line H20 has been studied for growth factor requirements in detail. H20 cells are strictly dependent on stromal cells for long-term proliferation. Addition of IL-7 to the stromal cultures enhances expansion of H20 cells. In short term proliferation assays in liquid culture limited proliferation of H20 cells can be observed with stem cell factor (SCF) and IL-7 whereas either factor alone fails to stimulate H20. In clonal assays in soft agar H20 cells can not be induced to colony formation by SCF and IL-7. However, in agar assays performed on top of a confluent layer of HS4-A8 cells clonal prolfieration can be observed in presence of IL-7, IL-3, SCF or in combinations of these factors suggesting the release of an additional stromsI cell product with proliferating effects on early B lineage cells. Another cell line D4-C requires exogenous addition of SCF to the stromal cell cultures to maintain long term proliferation again demonstrating that other factors in addition to SCF and IL-7 are essential for early B progenitor cells. Considerable progress has been made in the treatment of childhood and adult ALL due to induction therapy intensification based on the stratification of high risk ALL. Yet, about 25% of children and 40% of adults suffer ALL-relapse after successlul induction chemotherapy. Sensitive detection of residual leukemic blasts may be of value for the prediction of clinical relapse and risk adapted postremission therapy. We have initiated a retrospective study of pediatric end adult ALL (mean follow-up 50 months) in an attempt to correlate clinical outcome with the persistence of residual leukemic disease using the polymerase chain reaction for the detection of clonal T-cell receptor delta (TCRS) gene rearrangements. In non-T, non-B-ALL, clonal TCR5 rearrangements frequently occur involving V62 and D63 which are highly diversified by the insertion of random N-nucleotides, Pnucleotides, exonucleolytic trimming of coding regions and additional diversity elements. 9 of 19 childhood and 4 of 9 adult ALL had monoallelic (an adults, 4 children) or biallelic (5 children) V52-(D)-D68 rearrangements . Synthetic oligonucleotides ("signature probes") complementary to the highly diversified clonal junctional regions of individual ALL were used for the detection o! residual leukemic cells in remission marrows 24 months after diagnosis. Specificity of the oligonucleotides was demonstrated, and sensitivity of the method was determined to be below 10-3 in all cases. Remission marrows at 24 months after diagnosis of 3 children in continuous complete remission for 39, 50 and 89 months, respectively were found to be pcr negative. Results of the remission marrows of the other 10 informative patients three of which relapsed will be presented. In conclusion, our results of 28 childhood and adult ALL off therapy show that a) leukemic clone specific TCR5 rearrangements were informative in almost 50% and b) CCR correlates with residual leukemic cells being undetectable by pcr at a sensitivity of at least 10-3 in remission marrow at 24 months. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) conditions and primer sequences for V and J regions of the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) or T cell receptor ~ chain gene (Ty) were chosen according to Trainor et al. (Blood 1991; 78:192-196) . DNA amplification products (AP) were separated by temperature gradient gel electrophoresis. Clonal B-/T-cell populations representing less than I% of the polyclonal lymphocytes were recognized using DNA extracted. In 31 nodal and extranodal lymphoma cases PCR analysis was performed from fresh-frozen as well as paraffin-embedded tissues with identical results except for two specimens where clonality was detected in the DNA from fresh-frozen tissue only. Clonality and lineage were confirmed in 92% (n=38) of different subclasses of Tlymphomas and 80% (n=108) of different B-cell lymphomas. Three of eight cases of AILD-type T-lymphomas had c]onal amplification products for both, Tu and igH, and immunohistochemically were shown to contain a monoclonal B-blast population. Among 19 paraffin-embedded specimens of large cell anaplastic lymphomas (LCAL), PCR studies confirmed clonality and immunohistochemical]y defined lineage in 12 of 13 cases, only one B-LCAL remained negative. Five of 6 LCAL without lineage-assignment had clonal amplification products either for IgH or Ty ( 2 and 3 cases, respectively). The results indicate that T-and B-cell genotyping in routinely processed specimens by PCR technique is efficient and reliable. It is a valuable adjunct in the diagnosis and disease monitoring of lymphoma patients. A new 21 kD protein (p21) was found in patients with proliferating urogenital and gastrointestinal tumors as well as in teratocarcinomas. The objective of the present study is to evaluate the prognostic value of p21 protein level in patients with liver cancer (i0 hepatocellular carcinoma, 1 cholangiocellular carcinoma, 1 carcinoid). Methods: P21 serum levels were measured by an ELISA in 12 liver cancer patients (median age of 55 years, 6 male, 6 female) during a period of a median of 8 months. Blood was taken before and after therapy. The measured values of p21 were compared with clinical stage, progression and response to chemotherapy (4-Epirubicin/ combination). Results: In 5 patients p21-1evel decreased under therapy (median 23%). Progress of disease correlated with increased levels of p21 in 4 patients (median 50%). Almost constant levels (+ 7%) were observed in 3 patients with stable disease. Highest amounts of p21 were mesured in patients with active, advanced disease. Conclusion: The amount of p21 protein correlated with the clinical course of disease%mder therapy. P21 maybe a useful parameter to control the outcome of treatment in liver cancer patients.  Hans-J~3rgen Grass, Gottfried D01ken, Marion A. Brach, Roland Merteismann, and Friedhelm Herrmann Soluble forms of the two molecular species of the cell surface receptors (Rs) for Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF) have been detected in normal urine and serum including type I and type II TNF-Rs. Using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) we have determined type I 60 kD sTNF-R levels in the sera of 45 age-and sex-matched healthy subjects and 106 patiems with Hodgkin's disease (HD). HD patients were either previously untreated (n= 76) or were in complete remission for at least 3 years after remission induction treab'nent (n= 30). The mean -+ SD concentations of the 60 kD type sTNF-R were significantly higher in HD patients than in baaltlz/corm'ols (1,3,@  <),t9-~ versus 0,6 +-O,13 ngtmt; p<0,001). The extent of increase correlated with the disease stage. Soluble 60 kD TNF-Rs were found to be significantly higher in stage III and IV (1,42 ,+ 0,21 ng/ml) than in stages I and II (1,08 ,+ 0,15 ng/ml). Patients with Bsymptoms (n= 33) had higher levels (1,67 + 0,20 ng/ml) than patients without systemic symptoms (1,02 + 0,11 ag/ml; p< 0,001). In 52 patients evaluable for response, the complete remission (OR) rate of patients with 60 kD sTNF-Rs < 1,2 ng/'ml was higher (88%) than in those with 60 kD sTNF-Rs > 1,2 ng/ml (64%; p_< 0,01). A significant increase in serum levels of 60 kD sTNF-R levels was also observed in HD patients in long standing CR (1,04 _+ 0,10 ng/ml). Our data suggest that the pretreatment serum concentration of 60 kD sTNF-Rs in HD may bear prognostic relevance. Increased 60 kD sTNF-R levels seen in HD patients in remission may point to t~e defect in cellular immunity charactedstic of HD patients. Abt. H&matologie und Onkologie, Univemit&tsklinikum Freiburg. 7800 Freiburg i.Br. Recent studies have indicated that the Leukemia Inhibitory Factor (LIF) induces secretion of IL-6 in myeloid cells. We here show that synthesis of IL-6 by human mononuclear phagocytes exposed to recombinant human (rh) LIF is preceeded by an increase of IL-6 transcript levels as a result of transcriptional activation of the IL-6 gene. Analysis of deleted fragments of the IL-6 promoter showed that transcriptional activation of the IL-6 promoter was associated with enhanced binding activity of the transcription factor nuclear factor (NF)-T<B. Binding of activation protein (AP)-1 and NF-IL-6. also .known to transcriptionally activate the IL-6 promoter, was not inducible by LIF. Furthermore, introduction of the NF-kB sequence, but not of AP-1 and NF-IL-6, confered inducibility by LIF to a heterologous promoter. Taken together, our results show that rhLIF induces IL-6 gene expression in mononuclear phagocytes through transcriptional gene activation involving NF-KB. In 13 cases of acute leukemia with a undifferentiated phenotype after extensive morphological, cytochemical and immunophenotyping studies (POX-, CD 1-, CD 2-, CD 3-, CD 10-, C/J-, SMIG-) the expression of GM-CSFR and peroxidase activity at the electron microscopical level (POEM) were analyzed. Human GM-CSF (Behringwerke, Marburg) was iodinated using Jodogen R reactant (Pierce R) with a specific activity of 60-110/JCi//Jg and a biological activity of more than 80%. After T-cells/monocytes were depleted, all samples consisted of >90% leukemic blasts and were subsequently incubated for lh with 500000 cpm radioiodinated GM-CSF. Ultrastructural demonstration of myelo-and platelet peroxidase was performed by incubating unfixed leukemic cells in a medium containing diaminobenzidine and H202 as-previously described. In 3/13 samples specific binding of ~2sj. GM-CSF (>50%) was detected. The immunophenotype of these cases was CD19+/CD 33+; CD 7+/CD33 + and in one case no lineage associated antigens were found. By the ultrastructural demonstration of myeloperoxidase activity in the leukemic cells, an early myeloid differentiation of these 3 cases could be clearly demonstrated. In Autografting with blood-derived stem cells (ABSCT) following highdose conditioning therapy was performed in a group of 7 patients with malignant lymphoma in sensitive relapse (5 Hodgkin's disease, 2 non-Hodgkin's lymphoma; 6 male/1 female; median age 38 years, range 27-51). All patients were heavily pretreated (on average: 9 cycles of 4 different chemotherapeutic regimens) and 5 had previous radiotherapy. To enforce the chemotherapy-induced rebound of hemopoietic progenitorst, during leukocyte recovery, we adminstered rhG-CSF (Neupogen') subcutaneously (5 /xg/m 2) starting 24 hours after salvage therapy. Using the total number of nucleated ce~ls (TNC) as an endpoint for blood stem cell collection (at least ~.6 x 10~/kg bw), the quantity_of TNC was between 0.6 -0.95 x 10Y/kg bw (median 0.69 x 109). However, this parameter proved to be not useful and even misleading, because the content of hemopoietic progenitors of the autografts varied considerably reflecting the unpredictable differences of the individual hemopoietic reserve in extensively pretreated patients. A 78 year old woman was in good health before she presented with sensory loss of the lower extremities. After a few days the disease progressed to incomplete tetraparesis. On physical examination, no Iymphadenopathy and no hepatosplenomegaly was found. There were no signs of a infectious or tumorous process. A cranial computered tomogram was normal, end so were all laboratory tests performed on cerebrospinal fluid. Neurological examination led to the diagnosis of a polyradiculitis with severe tetraparesis. Inspite of administration of high dose methylprednisone and plasmapheresis symptoms persisted. White blood cell count was 10,4 G/I. Examination of a peripheral blood smear by a hematologist revealed a moderate lymphocytosis with atypical lymphocytes with only moderate chromatin condensation and rare nucleoli. Bone marrow cytology and histology showed a diffuse infiltration of the marrow by lymphoid cells, immunophenoWping revealed kappa light chain restriction and absence of the CD 5 antigen. The diagnosis of an immunocytoma was made and Chlorambucil 0,1 mg/kg and prednisone 2 mg/kg was administered orally in two weekly intervals. The neurologic symptoms disappeared rapid}y and the patient was able to carry out normal activities again. 4 months after termination of the cyt0toxic therapy, she recognized again paresthesia of both legs. Physical examination revealed moderate lymphadenopathy. Chlorambueil was reinstituted for 3 months and the paresthesia disappeared promptly. The patient is now feeling well for one year. To our knowledge, tetraparesis as the primary symptome of an immunocytoma was not reported so far. In elderly patients with unclear neurologic symptoms atypical manifestation of a low grade NHL should be considered. -3) and Ara-C (100 mg/mL/d cont. i.v., d 1-7). Patients achieving complete remission (CR) or partial remission (PR) received another cycle of IDAC followed by I~OVE (Mitoxantrone, 10 mg/m*/d i.v., d 1-5 and Etoposide, 100 mg/mZ/d i.v., d 1-5). 54 p are evaluable for response (one toxic death and one early withdrawal). After 2 cycles of IDAC, 42 patients had attained a CR (78%). Of the 12 initial nonresponders to IDAC, 4 p obtained CR after NOVE. Thus, 46 of 54 p (85 %) achieved CR after sequential induction therapy with IDAC and NOVE. In the last 14 p who achieved CR or PR after the first cycle of IDAC, rhGM-CSF (3 ug/kg/d, ESSEX) was administered for 6 days starting 3 days prior to the second cycle of IDAC. For the consolidation cycle with NOVE, rhGM-CSF was administered with identical dose schedule. The WBC showed a 3.4-fold increase after 72 hours of rhGM-CSF treatment, without the appearance of myeloblasts in the peripheral blood. During the sequential induction chemotherapy, no significant complications were observed. Patients received either post-remission therapy consisting of BMT or high-dose Ara-C/Mitoxantrone or were followed without any further treatment. Out of 46 p evaluable for disease-free survival, 21 p (51%) are in unmaintained CR after a median follow-up of 15 months (range: 3 -38). The response-adapted treatment with IDAC/NOVE is effective and very well tolerated. RhGM-CSF administration is safe after response to induction therapy. To define the therapeutic impact of rhGM-CSF a higher number of patients and a longer follow-up are needed. Chromosome analyses of bone marrow and/or peripheral blood sRecimens were performed in 179 patients with myelodysplastic syndromes. According to the FAB-classi/ication 4z~ patients had RA, 16 had RAP.S, 34 suffered from RAEB, 21 from CMML and in 26 patients RAEB-T was diagnosed. 9 additional patients displayed a MDS secondary to an exposition to cytostatic or other mutagenic agents. In 29 patients no FAB-dassification was available. C]onal chromosome anomalies werde observed in 92 (51.5 %) patients. An AN-status (mosaik of normal and abnormal metaphases) was present in 5g patients~ while 34 patients showed an AA-status (only abnormal metaphases). An as yet unpublished phenomenon of increased sporadic ch[omosome breakage was uncovered in 19 (]0.6 %) patients. Three of them developed clonal anomalies during the course of their disease. The most frequent chromosome anomalies were as follows: 5q-(27.2 % of 92 abnormal cases), -7/7q-(26.[ %), trisomy of lq (14. 1%), +g ([3 %), -20/20q-(g.7 %), -X/Y (6.5 %), + 2l (4.3%). Thirteen patients (14.l %) displayed complex karyotype anomalies and in 17 patients (IS.5 %) a karyotype evolution could be uncovered. In 53 patients sequential chromosome analyses were performed, ranging from two to six examination dates. The observation period varied between l an 62.5 months with a mean of 9.9 months. Thirty-one of these patients showed no karyotypical change, while lg of them displayed a cytogenetic progression. In 4 patients a cytogenetJc regression was documented. One occurred spontaneously, three were due to therapeutical intervention. One hundred and three patients suffering from recurrent venous thrombosis (DVT), recurrent arterial thromboembolism (ATE) and/or recurrent myocardial infarction (MI) and 50 healthy subjects were tested for Hageman factor (F XII) activity and antigen. Among the 103 patients we identified 15 subjects with F XII deficiency (15 %), 3 with protein C deficiency (3%) and 3 with protein S deficiency (3%). The 103 patients were divided into subgroups according to the kind of thrombotic complication. Of the DVT-group 8 % (p < 0.153) of the patients were deficient in F XII. Among patients suffering from recurrent ATE and/or MI, the incidence of F XII deficiency was significantly higher (20 %, p < 0.003). In 67 % of the patients with F XII deficiency a positive family history of thrombosis could be established. In contrast, only 32 % of all DVT and 28 % of all ATE/MI patients had a positive family history. We believe that reduced levels of F XII should be considered as a risk factor in the development of thromboembolism. Consequently, more attention should be payed to the measurement of F XII when evaluating thromboembolic risk factors especially in cases of recurrent ATE and/or myocardial infarction. Steel factor (SF) supports the growth and differentiation of human progenitor cells in synergy with a variety of hemopoietins including GM-CSF. In an effort to characterize the mechanism of interaction of these factors, we have investigated their effects on the human factor-dependent cell line MO7. Proliferation of this cell line is induced by both GM-CSF and SF alone, but the maximum rate of proliferation is enhanced synergistically (3-6 fold) with combinations of SF and GM-CSF as compared with optimum concentrations of either factor alone. This synergy was not due to an SF-induced increase in GM-CSF receptor number or affinity. The effects of SF and GM-CSF on the activation of several intracellular signal transduction pathways were therefore assessed. Both cytokines induced a rapid, transient and concentration-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of a number of substrates. GM-CSF stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of several phosphoproteins with mol. weights of 150, 125, 93, 63, 55, 44, 42 kDa; proteins phosphorylated in response to SF had mol. weights of 140-150, 116, 94, 63, 44 and 42 kDa. A potential overlap between GM-CSF and SF was observed for 42, 44, and 63-kDa proteins. Some of the substrates phosphorylated in response to these growth factors were identified by immunoblotting with monospecific antibodies (Table 1) . Additionally, the induction of the transcription factors c-myc and c-fos, and of two G1 cyclins, cyclin D2 and D3, by either factor was assessed by northern blotting ( + + + Co-stimulation with SF and GM-CSF resulted in at least additive effects on c-fos mRNA levels. In conclusion, the synergy between SF and GM-CSF may result from the activation of common signal transduction intermediates like MAPK, Raf-1, c-los, and cyclin D3, as well as of unique pathways such as c-kit, PLC-7, c-myc, and cyclin D2. Lobaplatin is a new platinum compound with apparently no nephro-and neurotoxicity, currently undergoing clinical phase I-and II-studies. We evaluated the activity of this new compound in a variety of HCCL in comparison to cisplatin and carboplatin, using 96 h continuous drug exposure in a SRB-assay. In 3 cisplatin sensitive testicular carcinomas and 1 ovarian carcinoma LOB and DDP had comparable antitumor activity (IC 50 DDP: 0,1 -0,4 gM; IC 50 LOB: 0,25 -0,5 gM), whereas carboplatin was significantly less active (IC 50:8 -20 gM). In order to assess the cross resistance between LOB and DDP, both drugs were evaluated in 5 HCCL with acquired DDP resistance. Complete cross resistance was seen in 2 gastric carcinomas (3,3 and 9 fold DDP resistant, 3,1 and 6,5 fold LOB resistant) and 1 ovarian carcinoma (15 fold The combination of fluorouracil and interferon a has shown considerable antitumor activity in metastatic colon carcinoma: Little is known about the activity of interferon in combination with other drugs in GI tract cancer. We therefore evaluated the interaction of interferon with different antineoplastic drugs in 2 human colon carcinoma (HTB 138, CCL 29) and 1 human gastric carcinoma (M2) cell lines. Interferon was given at a fixed dose of 100 U/ml continuously. The drugs were added for 96 hours. Cytotoxicity was evaluated in the SRB-assay. The fractionated survival product method was used to characterize the nature of drug interactions. FU and interferon were synergistic in HTB 138 and additive in CCL 29 and M2 cells. The interaction of interferon and ifosfamide was additive in M2 and CCL and less than additive in HTB 138. Doxorubicin and interferon were nergistic in HTB 138 and additive in M2 and CCL 29. oposide and interferon were less than additive in all 3 cell lines. From these data the combinations of 5-FU and interferon and doxorubicin and interferon appear promising in GI malignancies, since synergism was observed in at least one test system. On the other hand the combination of etoposide and interferon showed less than additive interactions in all 3 cell lines and therefore seems to have no therapeutic benefit. Mutations of the p53 gene appear to be a major determinant in many forms of human cancer. The mutant protein adopts a characteristic conformation, which lacks the growth suppressor function of wild-type p53 and accumulates in the nuclei of transformed cells due to a prolonged half-life of the protein. In order to investigate the role of p53 in tumor progression and metastasis we analyzed 28 metastases of colorectal carcinomas (24 liver, one lymph node, one lung, one omentum, one skin metastasis) with respect to mutational changes and expression of the p53 tumor suppressor gene. Total RNA was extracted from fresh frozen material, reverse transcribed into cDNA, and cDNA sequences corresponding to the four mutational "hot spots" of the gene were PCRamplified and directly sequenced. 18 of 28 metastases (64%) showed point mutations in the p53 gene. Interestingly the frequency of mutations at amino acid positions commonly mutated in primary colon cancer differs significantly in the metastases compared to the data published for primary tumours. For instance, whereas mutations at amino acid position 175 in "hot spot B" are a relatively frequent event in primary colon cancer (18%), we found no liver metastasis with a mutation at this position. Taken together the data indicate a preferential occurance of mutations in metastases in the "hot spots" C and D compared to the distribution of mutations along the four "hot spots" in primary colon cancer, Thus we suggest that cells carrying mutations in the "hot spots" C and 0 may have a selective advantage to metastasize. Alpha-l-antichymotrypsin is a 68,000 mw glycoprotein, belonging to the SERPIN family (serine proteinase inhibitors) of plasma proteinase inhibitors. Being a major acute phase reactant, its plasma concentration can drastically increase within hours after injury. Although the interrelationship of Alpha-1antichymotrypsin and the leukocyte proteinase cathepsin G is well established, the physiological role of this system is not known. With immunological methods, heterozygous deficiency states have been described without severe clinical sequelae. However, no deficiencies with less than 50% of normal have been seen so far. With our novel assay for functional activity (Clin Chem 36:1990 , 2077 , we now found six patients with malignant lymphoma in whom the activity of Alpha-1antichymotrypsin was decreased beyond the 50% margin (21-45% of normal). This opens the question whether impaired activity of Alpha-1antichymotrypsin is a permissive pathogenetic factor for the acquisition of malignant lymphoma. (colony growth ~50% x control in 5/12 specimens), less active than mitoxantrone (10/12) or epirubicin (10/12), but slightly more active than DOX (3/12) alone. Head-to-head comparisons of DOX-OXD and DOX using equimolar DOX concentrations showed similar activity of DOX-OXD (2/12 specimens) as compared to DOX (3/12 specimens). In one gastric cancer specimen D0X-OXD was the only active drug out of the 5 agents studied. We conclude from these preliminary data that DOX-OXD may be at least as active as DOX against clonogenic cells from freshly explanted human tumor specimens in vitro. Techn. Univ. M~nchen, Klinikum r. d. Isar, D-8000 Munich 80; Alpha Therapeutic GmbH, 6070 Langen. In a prospective trial of the "SLiddeutsche Hw 146 patients aged 15 to 50 years (mean =36 years) with de-novo AML (FAB M1-M6) received two cycles of a three drug combination (DAV I/ll) including cytarabine (100 mg/m 2, continuous infusion, 8 days) daunorubicin (60 mg/m 2 daily for 3 days) and VP 16-213 (100 mg/m 2 daily, 5 days) for remission induction. Patients in complete remission received one additional course of the DAV combination therapy (DAV III) as early consolidation after recovery of the neutrophil count to over 1000/pl and thrombocytes to over lO0.000/pl. In 104 out of 149 patients (70%) a complete remission (CR) was achieved. Partial remission was achieved in 7 patients (5%) and 14 patients (9%) died within the first 6 weeks during remission induction. 24 patients (15%) were treatment failures and in 2 patients (1%) the result of induction therapy could not be evaluated. Sixty-one patients of the 104 complete responders underwent planed late consolidation therapy with high-dose cytarabine (3 g/m 2, every 12 hours for 12 doses) followed by daunorubicin (30 mg/m 2 daily for 3 doses). High-dose cytarabine/daunorubicin therapy was started 4 weeks after recovery from early consolidation. 43 patients did not receive late consolidation therapy owing to excessive toxicity of induction therapy, early relapse, selection for bone marrow transplantation or refusal.At a median follow up of 3.4 years the five year actuarial leukemia-free survival was 34% for all patients achieving CR and 38% for the patients who received late consolidation therapy. Despite the fact that this form of consolidation therapy may represent an improvement over conventional therapy, relapses were common even after planed therapy indicating that post-remission therapy remains further to be improved. This multicenter trial initiated in 5/90 addressed the question whether the addition of rhu GM-CSF to a standard cytotoxic regimen prolonges event free survival of AML patients. Furthermore we wished to reduce the incidence of infections by shorting the duration of critical neutropenia. Induction and early consolidation therapy included cytarabine (Ara-C, 100 mg/m 2, day 1 -8 civi), daunorubicin (60 mg/m 2, IV, day 3 -5,) and etoposide (100 mg/m 2, day 4 -8, 2 h IV infusion) with reduced dosages in the second induction and early consolidation course. Late consolidation included one cycle with high-dose Ara-C (3g/m 2, 12 doses) and daunorubiein (30 mg/m 2, day 7 -9) for patients aged 50 years and younger, whereas patients over 50 years received a reduced dose of Ara-C (0.6g/m 2, 12 doses). Patients were randomized after the first induction course to receive either rhu GM-CSF (E. coil, 250/Jg/m2/ day, s.c,) or placebo. GM-CSF/placebo therapy was started 48 hours prior to the second induction and the subsequent courses and was stopped after chemotherapy induced aplasia at absolute neutrophil count > 500//A. 80 out of 84 patients (median age = 50 years) included into the study could be randomized. The remaining four patients could not be randomized due to death during the first induction course prior to randomization (n = 2), alternate therapy (n = 1) or refusal (n = 1). In 51 out of 65 patients (79%) evaluable so far a complete remission (CR) could be induced. 12 patients (18%) were treatment failures and another 2 patients (3%) died during the first induction course. 14 patients suffered a relapse after a median remission duration of 2.8 months (range 1.2 to 9.5 months). 20 out 84 study patients died including the two patients who died during induction therapy. Seven patients died as treatment failures and another 11 patients died in relapse. These preliminary data with a rather high CR rate together with the low induction death rate compare favorably with those obtained after intensive chemotherapy regimen, while the influence of GM-CSF on the treatment outcome remains open till unblinding of the study. This reduces feed-back inhibition on dCyd kinase and so augments the activity of this rate-limiting enzyme for dFdC phosphorylation. Depletion of dCTP also diminishes competition of dFdCTP with dCTP at DNA polymerases which increases incorporation of dFdC into DNA. dFdCTP-mediated inhibition of dCMPD decreases the katabolism of intracellular dFdCTP to deaminated, nontoxic metabolites. Consequently, intracellular dFdCTP retention and with it cytotoxicity may increase with rising dFdCTP concentrations. The activity of dCMPD is further diminished as dCTP, the allosteric activator of the enzyme, is depleted. Cellular activity of CTP-S is inhibited at high cellular dFdCTP concentrations. Depletion of CTP is inhibitory to RNA synthesis and, by mass action, results in dCTP depletion. We conclude that the increased cytotoxicity of dFdC may be explained by its self-potentiative mechanism of action. Serum concentrations of AmB were analyzed before (trough) and one hour after end (peak) of a l-h infusion of Ambisome R. AmB concentrations, as determined by HPLC, showed a great interpatient variability. Median initial trough and peak concentrations of AmB were 0.8 ~g/ml (range 0.2-3.5 ~g/ml) and 5.9 ~g/ml (range 1.8-21.8 ~g/ml). The median overall half-life (T 89 of AmB in serum was 10.4 h (range 6.9-16.5 h). A longitudinal analysis of serum AmB concentrations was performed in 15 patients for a median duration of i0 d. Two groups of patients could be identified with regard to serum T 89 and maximal trough -and peak concentrations of AmB. Median T 89 in group A (n=7) was significantly lower with 8.7 h (range 6.9-10.3 h) than in group B (n=8) with 12.4 h (range 10.4-16.0 h). Accordingly, serum peak and trough concentrations of AmB remained steady in group A, and increased cumulatively in group B. Group A achieved maximal trough and peak concentrations of 1.7 ~g/ml and 9.5 ~g/ml respectively, while significantly greater concentrations were reached in group B with maximal trough and peak concentrations of 5.4 ~g/ml and 19.3 ~g/ml respectively. We conclude that a patient entity defined by prolonged elimination of liposomal AmB from serum might rather profit from a modified schedule of Ambisome R administration.  Overexpression of the MDR1 gene product pgp, a transmembrane protein, has been found to be responsible for resistance to a variety of antineoplastic agents, so called classical multidrug resistance (MDR). In vitro as well as in vivo pgp may be overexpressed following exposure drugs (induced overexpression). Likewise, overexpression may be present in tumors not previously exposed to drugs (de novo overexpression).The mechanism of this type of resistance is likely to be increased outward transport of the drug. Several substances have shown to competitively inhibit the function of pgp. These include calcium chanel blockers, antiarrhythmic agents, trifluoperazine, detergents, antiestrogens, cyclosporin A and monoclonal antibodies to pgp. For these agents high blood levels are required which in most instances cause unacceptable side effects, Polycythemia vera is a monoclonal disorder of hematopoietic stem cells, characterised by extensive proliferation of granulocytic, erythroid and megakaryocytic cells in the bone marrow and frequent deletions of chromosome 20q. We here analyse the expression of growth regulatory genes e.g. oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes of peripheral blood samples from 25 PV patients, who were diagnosed according to the PCV study group. The oncogenes trk, fyn, myc and p53 were differentially expressed in the patients. Furthermore, overexpression of the RB gene was detected when compared to normal peripheral blood cells. Polymerasc chain reaction (PCR) revealed in 1 out of 25 cases either a loss of exon 5 or 8 of the p53 gene and in 3 out of 25 cases a loss of ras tumor suppressor gene NTS-1. Furthermore, single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) showed a mutation of the GNAS-1 gene, which is like NTS-1 located on chromosome 20q. In addition, we are characterising the erythropoietin (EPO) system in PCV patients. In some patients low epression of Epo was detected using reverse PCR. Interestingly the patients produce differential amounts of Epo. Detailed analysis of structural alterations of the Epo system, oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes is in progress. after T-cell depleted (n=3) or conventional BMT (n=3). In 5/6 patients treatment respose could be demonstrated by cytogenetic analysis, RFLP ~ testing or blood group typing. One patient showed no response. GvHD occured in the 5 responders resembling typical grade II aGvHD of the skin in two patients and showing features of acute and chronic GvHD in 3 patients. Bone marrow hypoplasia, being severe in 4 cases was observed in all responding patients and was cause of death in 3 cases (infection n =2, bleeding n = 1). Prior institution of treatment lymphocyte subsets (double IF-labeling using anti CD3, CD4, CD8, CD19, HLA-DR, CD56 and CD16 antibodies) were normal in 5 patients, in one patient inversion of the CD4/CD8 ratio was present. Following buffy coat treatment increase in the proportion of CD8 cells was seen in 5 cases, most markedly in the patients developing 'typical aGvHD. No changes were observe within the NK subset. This data indicate that treatment with buffy coat transfusions results in clinical response in the majority of patients but has substantial toxicity due to BM-aplasia. Phenotypical analysis may indicate that T-cells and not NK cell play a major role in the mechanism of this treatment. The onset of hypercalcemia in Chronic Lymphatic Leukemia (CLL) is infrequent. It is usually due to lytic bone lesions based on B-cell mediated local or wide spread osteoclastic activation. We observed a severe hypercalcemic crisis in a 56 years-old patient with a 10 years history of B-CLL, who did not develop demonstrable bone lesions. The patient was admitted to our clinic with recurrent pneumonia. At admission serum creatinine, calcium and phosphorus levels were normal. Antibiotics were started, and he recovered slowly. Within 8 days, however, serum calcium continuously rose to 4.19 retool/I, and phosphorus values declined to 0.70 mmol/l. The patient became symptomatic presenting restlessness, confusion and polyuria. Moreover, we found an increase of serum creatinine (3.0 mg/dl), high urine calcium levels (6.2 retoOl/I), and reduced calcitriol values (< 15 pg/ml). Primary hyperparathyreoidism was not present (Parathormone 11 ng/ml). Other common causes of hypercalcemia (e. g. lytic bone lesions, 2nd malignancies ) were excluded later by autopsy. Hypercalcemia was successfully treated by calcitonin and clodronat infusions. However, renal function declined, and the patient died. We believe that a humoral factor with PTH like activities was responsible for the hypercalcemia in our case. This is indicated by the laboratory data pattern and by exclusion of other causes. Such a factor is rare in CLL and is usually associated to a large tumor burden and a bad prognosis. , 1991 ). E-Cadherin, an epithelium dependent cellcell adhesion molecule, has expressed in noninvasive and is lost in invasive metastatic tumors (J Cell Biol 113:173, 1991) . We used northern blotting to analyse mRNA of E-cadherin and of TSH receptor transcripts in patients operated for follicular (FTC,n=5), papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC,n=7) or anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC), in patients with benign nodular goitre (NG,n=2) and in normal controls (C,n=7). E-cadherin protein levels were measured by immunostaining. TSH-R and Ecadherin mRNA were strongly expressed in C and in NG, but greatly reduced in ATC. In PTC and FTC the TSH-R and E-Cadherin transcripts varied from normal to reduced levels. C and NG showed positive immunostaining for E-cadherin, variable staining was detected in PTC and FTC and no staining was found in ATC. These data demonstrated a parallel change of TSH-R and E-cadherin mRNA levels in differentiated and a reduction in undifferentiated tumors. The Synergism of specific antigen and cytokines for elonal expansion and differentiation of CTL-p has generally been accepted. However, the primary effect of eytokines on CTL-p without challenge by specific antigen remains tmelesr. We investigated, wether systemic treatment with cytokines affects the clone size of circulating alloreactive CTL-p in man. We used limiting dilution analysis to determine CTL-p frequencies in patients with non-hematologic diseases before and after three days of subcutaneous application of either IL-3 (2.5, 5.0 or 10.0 #g/kg/d), GM-CSF (5 #g/kg/d), IFN-gamma (400 #g/d), IFN-alpha (5x106 IU/d) or IL-2 (4.8x106 IU/m 2 bd). Simultaneously clone sizes of circulating autoreactive CTL-p were determined by split well analysis. Our data suggest only minor influences of low and intermediate dose IL-3 on CTL-p frequencies. Further escalation of dose interestingly led to significant expansion of these cells. Significant expansion was also observed under systemic treatment with IL-2. In contrast IFN-gamma markedly diminished the clone size of circulating alloreative CTL-p. GM-CSF and IFN-alpha did not exhibit measurable effects. Furthermore we could not find autoreactive CTL-p at any time tested. In conclusion systemic application of IL-2, IFN-gamma or IL-3 differently affects circulating precursors of CTL in man. This may have impact on the responder status to specific antigens in vivo. Division of Hematology, III. Department of Medicine, Johannes-Gutenberg-University Mainz, Langenbeckstr. 1, 6500 Mainz, FRG A.Hochhaus, R.Hehlmann, H.Ansari, J.Hasford, S.Mende and the German CML-Study Group 201 consecutive hydroxyurea (HU)-treated patients (100 male, 101 female, age between 8.1 and 86.9 years) with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) were followed prospectively from 1983 to 1992. The mean time of observation under therapy was 772 days. The occurence of adverse events (AE) was routinely checked and documentated at standardized intervals. 38 (19%) of the HU-treated patients showed AE; in only two cases the therapy had to be changed to busulfan. This was due to the occurence of septic temperatures 4 to 6 hours after the intake of HU. After the exclusion of other causes of fever and positive reexposition4rials the fever was designated as a "drug-fever". The most frequent AE of HU were 19 gastrointestinal AE (gastritis, gastric and duodenal ulcers, nausea, vomiting), 8 neurological disturbances (paraesthesias, headache, tremor, dizziness) and 7 dermatological AE (hyperpigmentation, atrophy of dermis, alopecia). In comparison, 64 (32%) of 197 busulfan-treated patients of the same trial showed AE, 28 patients suffered from gastrointestinal AE, 24 patients showed neurological AE, 15 patients dermatological AE and 25 patients had an increased activity of liver enzymes. The size of the cohort, the total observation time of 9 years, the uniformity of the disease and the uniform treatment as a monotherapy renders the present study a sound basis to evaluate the frequency of AE of HU versus busulfan. Comparable studies are not known in the literature. III. Medizinische Klinik, Klinikum Mannheim der Universit&t Heidelberg, Wiesbadener Stra6e 7-11, D-6800 Mannheim 31, FRG A.Hochhaus, E.Lengfelder, M.Simon, Ch.Fonatsch, and R.Hehlmann We report on a 68-year-old man who developed Philadelphia (Ph)positive chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) two years after the onset of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). When CML was diagnosed, both malignant cell populations were detected in the bone marrow and in the blood. Peripheral leukocytes were fractionated by Ficoll density gradient, and cytogenetic and molecular genetic studies were performed on mononuclear cells and granulocyte-enriched populations. The bone marrow metaphases of the myeloid line were 100% Ph-positive, the metaphases of the lymphoid line after the stimulation of mononuclear cells with phytohemagglutinine and Epstein-Barr-Virus were Ph-negative. Immunocytological investigations showed the B-ceil type of the lymphocytes in the peripheral blood. A bcrrearrangement was observed in DNA from the granulocyte-enriched fraction. The results indicate that the two neoplastic populations originated independently. The CLL had been treated with chlorambucil for two years. After the diagnosis of CML treatment was changed to busulfan. After acceleration of CML the therapy was changed to hydroxyurea. The following myeloid blast crisis had been treated with low dose cytosine arabinoside s.c. The patient died in blast crisis four years after the diagnosis of CLL and two years after the diagnosis of CML. Possible causes for the development of a myeloproliferative disorder in a patient with a pre-existing lymphoproliferative disorder will be discussed. From July 1983 to May 1992 72 (41 male, 31 female) patients with Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome-negative chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) were recruited for studies designed to compare the effects of hydroxyurea and interferon alpha in mono-and combination therapy, and busulfan on the duration of the chronic phase and on survival. 64 patients are evaluable for treatment response and survival. 24 patients were treated with hydroxyurea, 18 with busulfan, 18 with interferon alpha and 4 with a combination of hydroxyurea and interferon alpha. Ph chromosome-negativity was observed in 11% of a total of 650 evaluable CML-patients. The median survival of Ph-negative CML-patients by now is 1.2 years compared to 4.1 years for Phpositive patients. Ph-negative CML is characterized by lower blood cell counts (WBC 103,000 vs. 168,000/1~1, platelets 370,000 vs. 495,000/~1, hemoglobin 11.3 vs. 12.1 g/dl). Ph-negative patients as a group are older (63.5 vs. 47 years) and more ill (Kamofsky index 80% vs. 90%, initial fatigue and general ill-feeling 78% vs. 65%) than Ph-positive patients. In 13 (18%) out of the 72 Ph-negative patients a cytogenetic aberration other than the Ph-chromosome was observed, in 7 of these a trisomy 8. 6 of the patients with other cytogenetic aberrations died, 3 of them (all with trisomy 8) died in the first year of observation. 3 out of 14 other (except one) examined patients showed the bcr/abl rearrangement. The Ph-negative, bcr-positive cases have a disease that is probably identical to Ph-positive disease and respond well to treatment. All 3 bcrpositive patients of our series are alive 13 to 33 months after diagnosis. Phnegativity, bcr-negativity and trisomy 8 may be considered to be a typical constellation for myelodysplastic syndrome. We confirm that Ph-negative CML may be a separate disease entity on the basis of survival, age maximum, clinical and hematological characteristics. In addition, it appears to be a heterogeneous group, in so far as it includes some patients with an obscured Ph-chromosome, cases which obviously belong to the myelodysplasias and a further group of not yet sufficiently characterized CML-like disease. (JCO 9, 1991, 625-630) recently reported on high-remission rates in patientswith metastatic colorectal carcinoma using a weekly 24 hou~ continuous infusion of high,dose 5-fluorouracil (2,6 g/m ) and folinic acid (500 mg/m ). Stimulated by these results we have treated several patients with the same regimen in our department. In two patients 5-FU accidentally was administered as a 1 hour infusion instead of a 24 hour continuous infusion. Patient i: a 71 year old patient with metastatic colon carcinoma had tolerated the first two treatments without any side effects. The third infusion was given accidentally within 1 hour instead of 24 hours. 6 days later mucositis and diarrhea grade 2 developed. Within 3 days severity of mucositis and diarrhea increased to grade 4 and the patient was hospitalized. At admission leukopenia grade 4, thrombocytopenia grade 3 and fever grade 2 were also diagnosed. The patient's condition was critical. These clinical conditions necessitated total parenteral nutrition and antibiotic therapy. The patient recovered within 7 days. After recovery 3 further chemotherapy courses as 24 hour infusions were given without any complication. CT-scans performed after the 6th course showed a partiell remission. Patient 2: A 30 year old patient was diagnosed to have peritoneal carcinosis of a adenocarcinoma of unknown orign. 3 high-dose 5-FU cntinuous infusions over 24 hours were well tolerated. The 4th infusion was accidentally given within i hour instead of 24 hours. Severity and duration of the side effects were roughly identical to patient I. After recovery he received 4 additional courses as a 24 hour infusion without any side effect. Both of these accidental applications of high-dose 5-FU/FA demonstrate the critical importanc~ of time-schedule in high-dose chemotherapy. 5-FU, 2,6g/m , given as a 24 hours infusion is well tolerated while the same dose given as an 1 hour infusion may result in life-threatining toxic side effects. Recent studies suggest that by using blood stem cells hematological recovery following high-dose conditioning therapy can be achieved more rapidly than with bone marrow-derived progenitor cells. We treated a group of 7 patients (p) with malignant lymphoma (5 Hodgkin's disease, 2 non-Hodgkin's lymphoma) with following second-line regimens: Dexa-BEAM (5 p), HAM (1 p), and a modified COP-BLAM protog,ol (1 p). The patients received rhG-CSF (5 t~g/kg/d s.c., Neupogen ~) to shorten the phase of neutropenia and to enhance the chemotherapyinduced rebound of hemopoiefic progenitqg cells. Leukaphereses (LP) were started as soon as a WBC > 1.0 x 10Y/nl was achieved. A median of 6 LP (range 6-11) was performed over 8 days (median, range 9-15). The individual peak of CFU-GM and CD34+ cells in the peripheral blood (PB) varied substantially from patient to patient. Compared to baseline a median 194-fold increase of CFU-GM/ml of PB was observed. The expansion of CFU-GM was paralleled by a rise of circulating CD34+ cells. During steady-state hemopoiesis, virtually no CD34+ cells could be detected, whereas at ~e time of pevak increase circulating CD34+ cells ranged from 2 x 10" to 47 x 10"/ml of PB. Although a comparable quantity of TNC/kg bw was harvested, we observed a striking patient-to-patient variation with respect to the yield of CFU-GM and CD34+ cells/kg bw. Based on the analysis of 53 leukapheresis products, a strong correlation could be found between the number of hemopoietic progenitors (CFU-GM/BFU-E) and CD34+ cells collected (R = 0.8, p < 0.01). In contrast, the absolute number of mononuclear cells in PB correlated only weakly with the quantity of harvested progenitor cells. The CD34+ cells coexpressed HLA-DR (> 99%) and CD33 with a varying percentage (22-98%). The pattern of coexpression did not change significantly during the collection period for a given patient. Two types of G-CSF-induced mobilization kinetics emerged: patients characterized by an early and relatively brisk hemopoietic progenitor overshoot and patients with a gradual and rather late increase during leukocyte recovery. Therefore, to avoid unneccessary leukaphereses, sequential CD34 assessment in PB is essential to ensure optimal blood stem cell collection. with human blood lymphocytes (PBL-hu-scid), which has raised the question whether GVHD in scid mice injected with human PBL takes a mild course or does not occur at all. We followed the development of chimerism in PBL-huscid by immunohistochemistry as well as by an immunocytochemical slide method for minute cell numbers which allow us to follow the chimeric status of individual mice by multimarker phenotyping of weekly mouse tail bleeds. About half of the mice showed less than 0.5% chimerism and were free of human cells when studied by immunohistochemistry. The other mice developed a remarkable chimerism and high mortality. During 1988 aM 1992, 56 patients (~ ~len, 50 f~als) with a aMian age of 66 years (range 18-89 years) ~e tmatsd with a ~mbinaf/0n of etslx~i~ {I00 ~ total ~age), ifsfali~ (Ig total ilsage) and ,;tox~tzene (~/m 2) given on thren ccene~tive days. ~ was given an urn. ?hough great achievement in the treatment of 1~ has been nade, salvage therapy is still n~essary for patianta having a refractor/or rd~ed course of disease. 10st ~Lblished schedules have considerable toxeity ard I~r 10T tert 0r So we devlcod a r~l~n of mCar~le 10w toxicity, consisting of blnomyeine [15 ~) and eldesine (5 rag] e~mbined with irradiation (16 pts.) or cytostaties non eross resistant to firstllne therapy (anparaginaan and methotr~t, 56 pto.). 10st patients were pretreatad with r~imean includi~ an~aeyelines. Ble0myeian and eldesine were given as a 2 -24 llan~ col~inan~ illfanian. Inflannoe of the different infanian durations hill M dis~sed. Pr0phylaetie antipyrnti~ were givan in all patients, ~e medical records of 100 patients, 55 male and 45 regale with a median age of 59 years (r~e 21-88) treated at our department between 1.i.1985 and 1.5.1992 were analysed r~anlmtively. Ann ArMr stage ~as I/5, II/L III/17 and IV/70 patients. 6 patients suffered from low gade, 4n from intarmaliata grade and 46 fr~ blgh ~ede nan lled~dn lymph~z~. Overall response was 38% (13| ~, 25% ~). ~%ern was no differe~n in the response bet~n the histoloqicol anb~. t~tlelty measured ~rding to the SO-recmmandatian was as follows: Leuko;enia grade [/5 ~tiants, g' ade ll/B pa~anto aM grade II/fl patianto. Yar~bnoytopeni a grade I/2 Imtlants, grade II/4 patients and grade lll/l patient. An~ia grade I w~ seen in one l~tient, ~da II/3 patients, grade III/l patient and ~rede I~/I patient. In contrast to publiCaed data short ~ infanico of bleanydian/eldesine was ~l~ior aed therefore this t~ant~t can be easily applied in atbulatory lztienta. Recent data indicate that the use of Interferon (IFN) in the therapy of patients with multiple myeloma is of benefit. The precise mechanism of action of IFN's is still unknown. Possible interactions with interleukins, in multiple myeloma especially with interleukin 6 (IL 6), are discussed. We examined 4 human myeloma lines 3, 4, 5) , which are heterogeneous with respect to their requirement and production of IL 6. Cell line: OCI-Myl My3 My4 My5 IL 6 dependent growth --+ -mRNA for IL 6 + + --IL 6 production -+ --Cells from each line were incubated with different concentrations of IFNllse r in liquid suspension cultures. Supernatants were collected, RNA was extracted, and Northern blot analyses were performed with probes for IL 6, interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-I) and IFNB. IL 6 concentrations were determined in supernatants by ELISA. Only OCI-My3 showed an upregulation of IL 6 mRNA levels after incubation with i04 IU/ml IFN/ise r. This upregulation of IL 6 mRNA corresponded to a dose-dependent elevation of IL 6 protein production with an almost 4-fold increase above the negative control after incubation with 104 IU/ml IFNlise r. Supernatants from the other examined cell lines did not contain detectable amounts of IL 6 protein. Untreated cells of all 4 lines displayed IRF-I mRNA. Incubation with IFNBse r led to a dose-dependent increase of IRF-1 mRNA in each line. Basal expression levels of IFNB mRNA, examined in OCI-Myl and My3, remained unchanged during IFNllse r incubation. We conclude that IFNflse r incubation increased IL 6 production only in the line that is already able to produce IL 6 constitutively. However, IRF-1 mRNA was upregulated in all 4 lines whereas IFN5 mRNA levels remained constant in 2 examined lines. The latter finding makes an autocrine loop in IFN regulation rather unlikely. Plain radiographs are currently used to screen for osteolytic changes in patients with multiple myeloma, as bone scintigraphy has limited sensitivity. To determine a possible role of MR imaging, 34 patients with multiple myeloma were studied prospectively. Opposed-phase gradient-echo imaging (GE, TR 400 msec, TE 22 msec, 5 mm slice thickness, 4 NEX, coronal or saggital orientation) were acquired before and after 0.1 mmol Gadolinium-DTPA / kg b.w. using a body or spine coil. Plain films and CT scans of selected cases were available in all patients. Evaluation was done by two blinded observers. The pathogenesis of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobulinemia (PNH} can be explained by the deficiency in expression of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchored proteins on the cell surface. The lack of the GPl-linked complement regulatory proteins lead to the typical symptoms of hemolysis and thrombosis. But functional consequences of the defect in GPl-linked immune control proteins, important for cell function and activation, are not clear. Therefore, we investigated the deficiency of Fcy receptors (FcyR) on PNH neutrophils. Normal neutrophils express constitutively two low-affinity FcyR, FcTRII (CDw32) with moderate and FcTRIIIb (CD16) with high density. FcyRII is a transmembranous protein, FcTRIIIb is attached to the lipid bilayer through a GPl-anchor. Both can induce the release of calcium from intracellular stores and the production of hydrogen peroxide after specific crosslinking with monoclonal antibodies. Using an IgG~x cryoglobulin complex it previously could be demonstrated that the GPl-linked FcyRIIlb is the predominant receptor for physiologic ligands. On PNH neutrophils the density of FcTRIIIb is much lower than of FcyRII. Therefore, stimulation via specific crosslinking of FcyRIIlb induced only minimal increase of cytoplasmic calcium and production of hydrogen peroxide. But cryoglobulin complex stimulation was diminished by 25 % only, and this activation could be demonstrated to be FcyRll dependent for H,~O~ production and calcium release. Therefore, a shift of FcRllIb functions to FcyRll in PNH neutrophils has to be postulated. Whether the defect in production of GPl-molecules leads to different intracellular signal transduction needs to be further investigated. Dogs given 920 cGy of total body irradiation (TBI) and autologous marrow infusion uniformly show hemopoietic reconstitution. However, if treated with an anti-MHC-class II monoclonal antibody (MAB) postgrafting, they develop marrow aplasia. Experimental data are consistent with a growth factor deficiency. For example, hemopoietic reconstitution can be partially restored by a short course of recombinant canine stem cell factor (SCF=c-kit ligand). Serum levels also indicate reduced production of G-CSF. Preliminary data suggest, furthermore, an altered interaction of hemopoietic precursors and stromal cells. Therefore, we established stromal cell lines from long term bone marrow cultures as an in vitro system to determine the effects of irradiation and MAB administration on the expression of mRNA of various growth factors and MHC molecules. Cytoplasmic RNA was isolated from canine stromal cells and from various cell lines at different time intervals following treatment with anti-MHC-class II MAB or irradiation. The RNA was hybridized with canine cDNA probes where available or with cross-reactive human cDNA probes, using slot-blot technique and Northern blot analysis. Within hours of anti-MHC-class II treatment or irradiation there was a decline of TGF-8 mRNA. There was also a slight decrease in mRNA expression for G-CSF and SCF after MAB application in parallel with an increase in message for MHC-class II. GM-CSF mRNA declined initially but showed a prominent rise after 48 hours. In conclusion, anti-MHC-class II MAB treatment and irradiation affect mRNA transcription in stromal cells in a complex way. The emerging pattern suggests that growth factor expression after TBI may indeed be altered by MAB administration and may contribute to the development of aplasia in our model. From July 86 to August 91, 88 patients with deep-seated, advanced sarcomas were treated at the University of Munich in two consecutive protocols consisting of regional hyperthermia (RHT) combined with systemic chemotherapy. Sixtyfive patients (43 soft tissue-sa., 12 Ewing's-sa., 7 chondro-sa, and 3 osteo-sa.) received ifosfamide (1,5 g/m2, day 1-5) and etoposide (100mg/m2, day 1,3,5) with RHT given at day 1 and 5 in repeated cycles every four weeks. RHT was produced by an electromagnetic deep regional heating device (BSD-System). Detailed thermal mapping by invasive thermometry was performed. In 61 patients evaluable for tumor control (62 % pretreated with ifosfamide containing drug regimens) the objective response rate indudiug 9 CR, 4 PR and eight patients with favourable histologie response (8 FHR) was 34 % and confirmed the results of an previous interlm-report on 40 patients (Issels et al. J. Clin. Oncol Vol 8, 1990). The time-averaged temperatures of all RHT treatments calulated for 20 % (T20), 50 % (T50) or 90 % (Tg0) of measured tumor sites differed significantly between responders (CR+PR+FHR, 21 patients) and nonresponders (PD, 18 patients), respectively. To test further the potential for RHT combined with chemotherapy we have started in Nov. 90 a pilot study (RHT-91) for patients wlth-high risk nonmetastatic sarcomas (tumor diameter >_ 8 cm and/or non-resectabel without mutilation or local recurrence after initial treatment). The patients (20 soft tissue-sa., 3 chondro-sa.) were scheduled to receive ifosfamide (1,25 g/m2, day 1-4), adriamycin (50 mg/m2, day i), and etoposide (125 rag/m2, day 1 + 4) with RHT given at day 1 and 4 in repeated cycles every three weeks. After preoperative thermochemotherapy (2-5 cycles) conservative surgical resection of the tumor could be performed in 10 patients (cut off-date: August 30 th). Six of these patients showed an objective response and before (2 PR) or at the time of surgery (4 FHR). In the other four patients no tumor regression has been observed by CT/MRI or pathohistologlcal evaluation. All 23 patients on study are alive but three show tumor progression during the short observation time. Supported by the Deutsche Krebshilfe. The case of a 18-years old patient with severe aplastic anaemia is reported. There was no response to high dose corticosteroid /methylprednisolone/ and to oxymetholone. Bone marrow transplantation could not be performed since he had no histocompatible donor. Antithymocyte globulin treatment had been, wich resulted in a complete clinical and nearly complete haematological remission.  In the light of these observations we conclude that PL under "physiological conditions" (37~ 3raM Ca 2+) does not modify the platelet responsiveness to thrombin. However, PL acts synergistically with PGI 2 to inhibit platelet activation. Thus, PL may efficiently operate together with EDRF and PGI2 to localize platelet activation in vivo. Jaschonek K., M. Scheurlen, M. Kirchner, M.R. Clemens Changes in the receptor micr0environment and membrane microviscosity regulate the accessability of ligands for its corresponding binding sites. In previous experiments (Jaschonek et al., Thromb Res 1989 /1991 we demonstrated that platelet-PGI2 receptors behave as syndromic proteins: an increase in membrane microviscosity induced by cholesterol decreased whereas fluidizing fatty acids increased platelet surface PGI2-receptor expression. There is some evidence from in-vitro studies that TXA2/PGH2receptors are regulated in a opposite fashion. In this study, we investigated the effects of supplementation with either 4.5 g eicosapentaenoic (EPA) and 3.35 g docosahexaenoic (DHA) acid (group I, n=6; EPA/DHA = 1.33) or 3.5 g EPA and 6.4 g DHA (group II, n =6; EPA/DHA=0.544) on platelet thromboxane (TXA2) synthesis and platelet responsiveness to the stable endoperoxide-analogue U 46619. Dose-response-curves (DRC) of U 46619induced aggregation were analyzed by computerized nonlinear curve-fitting. The synthesis of TX~, TXB 3 and PGE 2 by platelets was measured after incubation with thrombin (5 U/ml) by HPLC. In group I, the dose of U 46619 required for half-maximal platelet aggregation (K) remained unchanged, whereas the Hill-coefficient decreased from 6.2 to 3.3 (p < 0.02). In group II, characterized by a high intake of DHA, a considerable increase of K from 0.3 to 1.4 ~tM was found (p<0.02). These results suggest different effects of EPA and DHA on the platelet thromboxane/endoperoxide-amplifying system. After the EPA-rich preparation, the reduced cooperative effect found presumably is simply the result of the reduced endogenous thromboxane synthesis. However, the considerable shift of the DRC in group II suggests an effect of DHA on the presentation of endoperoxide receptor and/or postreceptoral events. Retinoic acids have an effective chemopreventive potential in a subgroup of lung cancers. They act via nuclear receptors which belong to the family of steroid hormone receptors. To select lung cancer subtypes that may be responsive to the treatment with retinoic acid human lung cancer cell lines were studied immuncytologicaily with specific polylconal antipeptide antibodies directed against the retinoic acid receptors alpha, beta and gamma for presence of retinoic acid receptors. Specificity was demonstrated by inhibition of immunoreaction after presaturation with the corresponding peptide as well as by immunoblottin~. Immunoreaction was restricted to cell nuclei. Small ceil lung cancer cell lines (SCLC)(4/4) and nonsmall cell lung cancer cell lines (NSCLC)(7/8) reacted with the anti -alpha receptor antibody. However in 2 of 4 SCLC lines and 5 of 8 NSCLC lines the beta receptor could not or only faintly in less than 50% of cells be demonstrated. Among the NSCLC lines those derived from adenocarcinoma(2) exhibited a strong reactivity, squamous cell carcinoma lines (3) displayed no or faint reactivity. Reaction pattern with the antigamma receptor antibody was faint in SCLC (2/3) and NSCLC(4/8). Our data suggest that in some lung tumors predominantly in squamous cell carcinomas the beta receptor is not expressed. Studies are in progress to determine receptor expression after preincubaiton of cells with retinoic acid. Elevations of three groups of serum factors were observed: 1st, elevations of the hematopoietic cytokines GM-CSF (detected in 39%), IL-6 (57%) and IL-3 (13%), which occurred simultaneously in the majority of the cases; 2nd, simultaneous elevations of the inflammatory cytokines TNF-~ and 1L-11~ (detected in 7%); and 3rd, elevations of membrane-derived activation antigens sCD8, sCD25, and sCD30. While the eytokine levels were not correlated with other obvious parameters, the membrane-derived activation antigens sCD8, sCD25 and sCD30 were associated with a poor prognosis. Only sCD30 correlated with disease activity and holds promise for the follow-up of patients in remission. Further investigations of these parameters at the cellular level might help to elucidate the enigmatic biology of HI). only CMV-negative platelet concentrates were administered; red blood cells were filtered; CMV hyperimmunoglobuline (Cytotect, iml/kg from day -i to 100 in 2 week intervals) was given; and the dose rate used in single dose TBI was <5 rad/min. Twenty two of the 96 pts died before day 100 from other cause than IP and were excluded from further analysis. Of the 74 remaining pts, 53 (72%) are currently alive at a median of 35 months (5-105). Relapse occured in 14/74 pts (19%). CMV-IP was seen in 1/74 (1%), occuring on day 274 while the pt received immunosuppressive treatment for extensive chronic GVHD; 1 pt died from idiopathic IP on day 61. CMV-disease was see in 20/74 pts. (27%).Acute GVHD grade II-IV was seen in 27/74 pts (36%). These data show that our combined modality approach was effective in prevention of CMV-IP without increasing the risk of relapse. The scarcity of tumor cells has hampered the genotypic and karyotypic characterization of Hodgkin' s lymphoma. Xenotransplant tumor models allow to study the nature of malignant cells and to identify conditions necessary for their malignant proliferation. We reasoned that the SCID mouse might provide an appropriate microenvironment for the growth of primary Hodgkin (HD)-and Reed-Sternberg (RS)-cells. Fifteen biopsy specimen of Hodgkin's lymphoma from 13 patients were transplanted into the subrenal capsule or into the liver of untreated SCID mice, In two cases human tumors developed in the mice within a latency period of 3-5 months. Tumor growth was observed at the primary transplantation site as well as in liver, lymph nodes, thymus and spleen. Three histological types of EBV positive human lymphomas were found in the mice: 1. immunoblastic lymphoma, 2. anaplastic large cell (ALC) lymphoma, 3. Hodgkin-like lesions. Minor cytogenetic aberrations were found both in the grown tumor specimen and in their EBV-positive B cell lines recultured in vitro. The Reed-Sternberg cells were free of EBV in one of the two original biopsy specimen leading to EBV positive tumor growth in the mice. Therefore, cytogenetically abnormal EBV positive cells in the surrounding of the Hodgkin cells may be those that proliferate into ALC lymphoma lesions in SCID mice. Such cells might possibly be precursors of the malignant cell clone in Hodgkin's disease. *Present address: Medizinische Klinik I, Universit~t zu K61n, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9, 5000 K6ln 41, FRG. Interdisciplinary treatment of metastatic melanoma: Surgical resection of residual disease following IL-2 based immunotherapy -a curative approach? U Keilholz, E Stoelben, C Scheibenbogen, M Manasterski, W Tilgen, W Hunstein Surgery of advanced metastatic melanoma is of limited value and usually not recommended. Immunotherapy using high dose IL-2 is effective in a substantial proportion of patients, however, the duration of responses is limited, and benefits in survival are not yet proven. Maintainance therapy with iL-2 has not been established and would hardly be tolerable because of toxicity. This evaluation was done to determine the value of resection of residual tumor lesions following succsessful immunotherapy. 54 patients with progressive metastatic melanoma have been enrolled in immunotherapy trials including IFN-c~ and high dose IL-2 in our hospital since 1987. 21 patients showed antitumor response (3 CR, 11 PR, 8 SD >3 months). In patients responding to immunotherapy, residual lesions were resected, whenever technically possible and patients agreed to surgery (8 patients). 12 of the 13 patients without surgery relapsed, the median time to progression was 5 months (range 2-14), most relapses occured locally, 7 patients died so far. 8 patients underwent surgery, and histology revealed vital tumor cells in all resected specimens. Two of these 8 patients relapsed (one locally, 5 months after surgery, one CNS, 9 months after surgery), six are still free of recurrence (6+,7+,9+,10+,20+,23+ months after surgery). All 8 patients are still alive. Surgical reevaluation and resection of residual lesions should be considered in patients with partial response or clinical complete remission after immunotherapy, and in selected cases also with stable disease. This approach offers the chance for extended disease free survival, and may be curative in certain patients. The neu-oncogene (HER-2, c-erb-B2) codes for a transmembrane tyrosine kinase, commonly referred to as p185, sharing extensive homology to the epidermal growth factor receptor. The extracellular domain of p185 is released from the surface of the human breast carcinoma cell line SK-BR-3 (J Biol Chemistry: 266, 1716, 1991). Using a double monoclonal antibody capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for p185 (DIANOVA, Hamburg), we measured the extraceilular domain of p185 secreted by SK-BR-3 cells into conditioned medium after three and five days of incubation with interfcron-alpha-2b (ESSEX, Miincheu). Comparing 10 and 100 Units intcrferon-alpha-2b/ml medium (RPMI with 10oh FCS; cell density 1.25x104/cm2; replenishment of interferonaipha-2b after 48 hours; collecting conditioned medium every 48 hours for p185 ELISA) we observed a mean growth inhibition of 16% after three and five days, respectively. However, a mean increase of 12% after three and 19% after five days in secretion of the extracellular domain of p185 occurred. Thus, the relative increase per cell in secretion of the extracellular domain of p185 was 31% after five days. We conclude, that similar to the upregulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor by interferon-alpha (Cancer Research: 51, 1294 , 1991 an increase in secretion of the extracellular domain of p185 occurred. The mechanisms altering the growth factor receptor expression need yet to be elucidated. Department of Internal Medicine, *Institute of Molecular Biology (Cancer Research), West German Cancer Center Essen, Universit} of Essen Medical School, Hufelandstr. 55, 4300 Essen 1, FRG A regional approach of adoptive immunotherapy with interleukin-2 and lymphokine activated killer cells for the treatment of liver metastases is reported. The treatment consists of continuous infusion of interleukin-2 i.v. or into the splenic artery, and transfer of ex vivo generated lymphokine activated killer cells into the portal vein or the hepatic artery.15 patients with malignant melanoma, 2 with renal cell carcinoma, and 1 with thyroid carcinoma have been treated. All had progressive liver metastases. In 9 patients with liver metastases of cutaneous melanoma, 2 CR (24 and 13+ months), 2 SD (10 and 9+ months), and 2 PD were observed, three are too early to evaluate. No responses were observed in 6 patients with liver metastases of ocular melanoma, suggesting an immunologic difference between these two melanoma subtypes. 1 PR (6 months) and 1 SD (10 months) were achieved in 2 patients with renal cell carcinoma, and 1 SD (6+ months) in the patient with thyroid carcinoma. Trafficking studies using indiumoxine labelled cells revealed that >80% of the LAK cells remained in the liver after regional adoptive transfer. Evidence for the crucial role of regional cell transfer is provided by the observation in a patient with an anatomic variation of hepatic blood supply in whom we achieved complete and durable tumor regression. In this case anti-tumor responses were only observed in anatomic areas of the liver which were perfused with LAK cells. Depts. of Internal Medicine, Surgical Oncology, Diagnostic Radiology, and Dermatology, University of Heidelberg, F.R.G. More than a century ago Trousseau recognized the association of thromboembolic disorders and cancer. Today the mechanisms leading to thromboembolic complications in cancer patients are known to be multifactorial, but are not yet completely understood. 5 -15 % of cancer patients suffer from thromboembolic events and in more than 90 % of cancer patients altered coagulation parameters were measured: predominantly elevated levels of fibrinogen, fibrinopeptide A and TAT-complexes. None of these parameters however is predictive by itself or pathognomonic for thromboembolic events. The individual thrombotic risk for cancer patients depends upon: I. The tumor type: lung and pancreatic carcinoma and myeloproliferative-disorders are known to have a high thrombotic risk. 2. Local complications induced by the tumor itself such as compression of vessel walls or penetration and destruction of vessel walls. 3. An imbalance of the coagulation system due to increasing procoagulatory or decreasing anticoagulatory active coagulation factors and/or an impairment of the fibrinolytic system can induce a hypercoagulable state leading to thromboembolic complications. 4, Local venous irritation may occur induced by indwelling catheters or chemotherapy: a variety of chemotherapeutic drugs are known to cause thrombotic complications. Furthermore, antioestrogens, estrogens and corticosteroids enhance the risk to suffer from thromboembolic complications. 5. Surgery, immobilization and hyperviscosity further enhance the risk to suffer from thromboembolic complications. Zentrum f~r Innere Medizin der Universit~t GieSen, KlinikstraSe 36, D-6300 GieBen, Germany. Interleukin 6 (IL-6) is a cytokine playing a major role in the regulation of the haemopoietic and immune system. Moreover, the production of IL-6 in response to viruses and bacteria indicates a central role in host defense mechanisms. Manoukian et al (1984) found that serum acute phase protein concentrations increased in murine schistosomiasis. These proteins are known to have important functions, namely conf'mlng the inflammation, limiting the autolytie processes and repairing damaged tissues. Therefore we expected IL-6 to play a role during the course of schistosomiasis, particularly in regulating the hepatic part of acute phase responses. BALB/c mice were subcutaneously infected with a dose of 50 S.mansoni coreariae per mouse to study the kinetics of IL-6 production. At different time points from 1 to 28 weeks following infection 5 to 10 mice per group were examined for IL-6 levels in sera and pokeweed mitogen-stimutated spleen coil-conditioned media (SCM) using an IL-6 specific indicator ceil line (7TD1) in a colorimetrie bioassay (MTT test). IL-6 was specified using the neutralizing monoclonal anti-meuse IL-6 antibody 6B4. In addition the livers of these animals were analyzed histopathologically. We found that IL-6 levels in SCM samples were significantly increased starting at week 6, reaching a peak at week 10 and remaining significantly elevated till week 20 after infection. In infected mice serum IL-6 levels followed similar kinetics with the difference that increased concentrations were first observed at week 8, reached a peak at week ]2 and were still significantly higher than those of uninfected controls till the 24th week after infection. IL-6 peak values of both SCM and serum samples were increased by a factor of 8 as compared to tminfected controls. The expression of IL-6 mRNA in spleens and rivers correlated with the serum IL-6 levels, whereas the number of river granulomas formed in the early stage of the disease correlated with the IL-6 levels in the corresponding SCM samples. These results strongly suggest a biological role of IL-6 in S. mansoni infection, which should be elucidated in future experiments using in vivo neutralizing anti-IL-6 antibodies and/or antibodies blocking IL-6 receptors. The term "thrombophilia" applies to familial or acquired disorders of the haemostatic system which are likely to predispose to thrombosis. In the narrow sense of the definition, there are only few thrombophilic disorders that are particularly associated with an increased risk of arterial thrombosis. These include rare congenital abnormalities such as homocysteinaemia and possibly dysfibrinogenaemia or acquired disorders such as antiphospholipid antibody syndromes or thrombocythaemia. In classical thrombophilic states, e.g. congenital deficiencies of natural anticoagulants, arterial events account for less than 5 % of thromboembolic episodes. However, numerous epidemiological studies have prospectively demonstrated that variations of haemostatic factor levels even within currently recommended "normal" ranges are positively linked to the incidence of coronary or cerebrovascular ischaemic events. Most convincingly, fibrinogen levels have been shown to be positively associated with the risk of myocardial infarction or stroke. In addition evidence has been presented for a role of factor VIIc levels, reduced fibrinolytic activity and platelet hyperreactivity in predicting the individual coronary risk. These findings gave rise to the hypothesis that an increased activity of coagulation proteins or platelets might serve as a marker of, or even directly contribute to the thrombotic component of ischaemic arterial disease. Using activation peptide assays such as prothrombin fragment 1+2 measurements, ongoing studies address the relationship between coagulation system activity and ischaemic heart disease. Department of Internal Medicine, University of M~nster, Albert-Schweitzer-Str. 33, 4400 M~nster The significance of the breakpoint location in the bcr/abl translocation for the prognosis of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is still being discussed despite numerous publications in the field. The question of whether or not the location of the breakpoint in bcr has any impact on the survival of patients suffering from CML has not yet found a conclusive answer. We are attempting to investigate this question in a controlled fashion by analysing patients who are (for other reasons) included in the German multicenter study on the treatment of CML. The advantages of this approach are: i) all patient data are immediately accessible, ii) a continual follow-up is ensured, iii) no preselection of patients will occur. We are also interested in refining the established method with respect to the preparation of the DNA. Using double-digested samples and smaller probes will probably give more detailed data on the location of the breakpoint and possibly also the putative splice site of the bcr/abl mRNA. The results of these experiments will be included in the evaluation of the data collected in the CML study. The composition of the extracellular matrix in the human bone marrow microenvironment is still poorly defined, although the matrix has been shown to be of critical importance for support of hematopoiesis in vitro. We have studied the expression of the extracellular basement membrane components laminin, nidogen, BM-40 (SPARC), type IV collagen and low density heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) in human long term bone marrow cultures (LTMC) by immunofluorescence and immunoblotting/immunoprecipitation analysis. A laminin isoform consisting of only BI and B2 chains is synthesized by the stromal cells and secreted into the medium. Neither the laminin A chain nor the homologues merosin and s-laminin could be detected. When LTMC were incubated with the cytokine G-CSF, an extracellular deposition of laminin was found, untreated cultures did not deposit laminin extracellularly. It is still an open question whether the cytokine treatment can alter the expression of the different laminin chains. The strongest expression and extraeellular deposition was seen for HSPG, which can be detected very early during the establishment of the adherent stromal layer. Type IV collagen, BM-40 and nidogen were also found in an extracellular meshwork suggesting the the stromal cells in vitro, which are largely composed of fibroblasts, produce significant amounts of basement membrane components. To address the question whether these components are involved in establihing the intimate cell contact required for hematopoiesis in vitro we performed cell attachment assays to plastic immobilized proteins. Several hematopoietic cell lines were tested for their ability to bind to the laminin/nidogen complex, to type IV.collagen and to matrigel, a solubilized tissue basement membrane. None of the cell lines tested adhered to the laminin/nidogen complex, and only K562 attached to type IV collagen. In contrast, all cell lines strongly adhered to matrigel consisting of a mixture of native basement membrane components. Further studies are aimed to characterize the individual components responsible for hematopoietic cell attachment. University Medical Clinic, Section Transplantation Immunology and Immunohematology, 7400 Tfibingen; "Max-Planck-lnstitut for Biochemistry, 8033 Martinstied Tenascin, a large glycoprotein of the extracellular matrix, has a restricted tissue distribution in normal adult tissue, but seems to be prominently expressed in regenerative organs and regenerating tissues. The expression of tenascin was analysed in the human hematopoietic system. Long term bone marrow cultures ((LTMC) and cryostat sections were analysed by indirect immunofluorescence with different tenascin specific antibodies. Tenascin was always found to be strongly expressed by the adherent stromal cells of the LTMC and deposited in an extracellular network. Northerrn blot anlysis revealed the expression of two mRNA splice variants of 6 and 8 kb. In an immunoblot analysis a prominent band of 275 kD could be detected together with a smaller band of 220 kD which was more weakly expressed. By immunofluorescence staining of cryostat sections of bone marrow a strong expression of tenascin could be detected in the microenvironment surrounding the maturing hematopoietic cells. An adhesive function of tenascin in the bone marrow could be demonstrated by an adhesion assay between bone marrow stromal cells and hematopoietic progenitor cells. The anti-tenasein antibody showed an inhibitory effect on cell binding of myelomonocytic progenitor ceils to the stroma. These data suggest an involvement of tenascin in binding of hematopoietic progenitor cells to the stroma. University Medical Clinic, Section Transplantation Immunology and Immunohematology, 7400 Tfibingen  Patients suffering from acute leukemia often acquire severe infections in the phase of therapy-induced bone marrow aplasia. Among these infectious episodes pulmonary affections are most threatening. Recently, granulocyte-stimulating-factors have become available for clinical use thereby opening the chance of shortening neutropenic phases. We report our experience with 21 patients receiving G-CSF (Neupogen | in therapeutical manner after developping infectious complications in posttherapeutic bone marrow aplasia. In our group there were 12 female and 9 male patients, 18 suffering from acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), 5 of them with secondary leukemia emerging from myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), 1 advanded MDS and 2 patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). 7 patients were treated for relapse, 2 had been non-responsive to induction chemotherapy. All of them had been leukocytopenic posttherapeutically for 8 until 30 days when G-CSF was started. In 15 cases the site of infection was in the lung, 4 patients suffered from ARDS, 1 patient had hepatolienal candidiasis and 1 candida septicaemia. G-CSF was predominantly given subcutaneously at a dosage of 300-600 ~tg/day. Antimicrobial and further supportive therapy was employed as usual. Under these conditions 14 patients have survived, 7 have died. 11 complete hematological remissions were achieved, 2 patients had partial remissions, 1 patient was non-responsive. G-CSF treatment was well tolerated, discontinuation of therapy was not necessary. More detailed analysis reveals some noteworthy treatment results, i.e., 2 of 4 patients with ARDS survived and another 2 patients, who were nonresponsive to initial therapy, achieved complete remission. On the other hand the limitations of G-CSF-treatment became apparent, when patients had to be treated early in aplasia and needed up to 23 days for regeneration despite continued stimulation. In summary we conclude that G-CSF represents an useful novel element in supportive therapy for leukemic patients experiencing severe infections, especially at the end of bone marrow aplasia. University of Dfisseldorf Moorensla'. 5, D~t000 Dfisseldorf Immunomagnetic separation techniques are useful to deplete cytokine producing cells from samples /br clonogenic assays or other functional assays depending on proliferation. The depletion is not as effective as sorting with a flow cytometer, but faster by several times. One method is the "Magnetic Cell Separator" (MACS) utilizing a biotin-avidin-system bound to a polysaccharide coated superparamagnetic nucleus (size 50-150 nm). A alternative method lbr high efficient T-cell depletion using the "Magnetic Cell Separator" is described. T-lymphocytes were depleted from peripheral blood samples of 37 patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). The flow speed in the MACS column was adjusted by a syringe-driver allowing a constant flow speed of about 100/~l/minute. The mean content of T-cells after depletion was 0.17 % (SD _+ 0.27 %). The effectiveness of depletion was calculated to a mean 93.7 %. There was no correlation between the proportion of CD3-positive cells befure and after depletion. Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome encompasses a heterogenous group of disorders. Besides persistent eosinophilia greater than or equal 1500/gl and lacking underlying cause for eosinophilia signs of organ involvement are postulated for diagnosis. Especially neurologic manifestations often lead to a fatal course of the disease. However the role of eosinophilic granulocytes in the development of tissue damage remains to be clarified. Furthermore from a hematologist's point of view often the distinction between a reactive versus autonomous character of the disease is difficult to be made. We report the clinical course of a 34-year old female, who was admitted to our hospital after a four weeks period of continued malaise and complex neurologic symptomatology. She was found to have an excessive leukocyte count of 550.000/ktl, 95 % of which were eosinophils. Bone marrow examination revealed a nearly complete infiltration by mature eosinophils with a partial suppression of normal hematopoiesis and a normal blast relative count. Immediately leukapheresis was started and within 48 hours leukocyte counts could be lowered until 20-30.000/~tl. Unfortunately the patient required mechanical ventilation because of an acute respiratory failure, additionally multiple biventricular cardiac thrombi and at least two intracerebral lesions had been diagnosed meanwhile. Finally the patient died in central dysregulation after massive intracerebral hemorrhage. Autoptically typical features of L6ffler's endoearditis were found, further eosinophilic infiltrates could be demonstrated in lung, spleen and kidney. Neuropathological examination showed expanded intracerebral hemorrhage thrombotically occluded vessels and hitherto undescribed perivascular as well as intraparenchymatous infiltrates of eosinophils. The latter finding could support the hypothesis of eosinophils contributing to cerebral tissue damage, e.g. by their granule substances. Furthermore the present case illustrates once again the difficulties in diagnosis and therapy of hypereosinophilic states. Cytokines represent important mediators of the acute-phase-response. Detailed analysis of the function and mutual interaction of these factors is essential to the understanding of the complex cytokine network. However these investigations are hampered by the short half-life of cytokines in the circulation, the presence of soluble inhibitors and the ill-defined beginning of acute-phase-reactions. Therefore we have chosen the acute toxicity after intravenous amphotericin B (Am B) application, characterized by fever, severe chills and hypotension as a model for an acute-phase reaction. Amphotericin B is believed to induce its adverse reactions via liberation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, e.g. Tumor-Necrosis-Factor ct (TNF ct) and Interleukin 1, from cells of the monocyte/macrophage system. We have determined plasma levels of TNF ct, Interleukin-6, soluble-TNFreceptor (s-TNF-r) and Interleukin-1-receptor-antagonist (IL-1-RA) from 6 patients with acute leukemia and systemic fungal infections. Seri',d samples of EDTA blood were obtained before and up to 6 hours after start of Am B infusion. Samples were immediately centrifuged and the supematant was stored at -40 ~ C until analysis by ELISA (Medgenix and R&D Systems). In patients with adverse reactions TNF ct reached peak plasma levels 90-180 minutes after starting Am B. Peak s-TNF-r levels were observed about 30 minutes after TNF c~, whereas IL-1-RA reached its maximum thereafter. Most patients tolerating Am B well did not show increased TNF t~ levels. We conclude that adverse Am B reactions in humans provide a suitable model for studying time dependent interactions between inflammatory cytokines and their natural inhibitors. Fludarabine, a nucleoside analogue, is reported to be highly effective in tow grade Non-Hodgldn's tymphoma. Patients (pts) with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) were therefore consecutively enrolled in a phase II/III trial and received 2-6 courses (median 5) with fludarabine 25mg/m 2, day 1-5, monthly. In these pts, we tested the in vitro antiproliferative activity of fludarabine, mitoxantrone, and chlorambucil. Peripheral blood was obtained from nine pretreated pts with advanced stage B-CLL before initiation of systemic therapy. Mononuclear cells were isolated by Ficoll-Hypopaque gradient. Triplicates of 5x104 cells were seeded in 96-well microplates. Cells were cultured in 10% FCS containing medium and exposed to fludarabine, mitoxantrone, or chlorambucil at concentrations of 0.05-50.0/zg/ml. In addition, combinations of fludarabine and mitoxantrone were examined. Incubation time with drags was 48 h at 37~ Cytotoxicity was assessed using a modified colorimetric tetrazolium salt assay (MTT assay). In order to quantify additive or even synergistic drug interactions the median effect equation and combination index was applied (Chou and Rideout, 1991). B-CLL cells from all the nine pts were found to be sensitive to fiudarabine in vitro with IC50 values ranging from 0.5-10.0 Fg/ml. Five of these pts responded also in vivo. One patient achieved a complete remission and four pts a partial remission, whereas two pts had stable disease and another two pts had progressive disease. The mean IC50 value of responding pts was 4.75 #g/ml and of non-responders 8.5 /zg/ml. Furthermore, all pts demonstrated in vitro responsiveness to mitoxantrone with IC50 values ranging from 0.125-1.0 /zg/ml, and to chlorambucil with IC50 values varying from 1.5-10.0 /~g/ml. In five pts tested so far, the combination of fludarabine and mitoxantrone showed additive interactions and enhanced cell kill rate by 1-2 logs. In summary, our results indicate the in vitro and in vivo activity of fludarabine in pretreated pts with B-CLL. The combination of fludarabine and mitoxantrone revealed additive cytotoxicity in vitro. Therefore, clinical trials are warranted to assess the clinical efficacy of this combination. After evaluating 15 patients in 1989 21 new patients received this regimen. All patients suffered from lecoregional or metastatic transitional cell cancer and were pretreated locally. 13 patients had impaired renal function due to obstructive uropathy. Of 15 patients evaluable for response, 4 patients achieved partial remission, 8 patients stable disease and 2 patients had progressive disease. Mean duration of response was 8.33 month (range from 3 + to 29+). Subjective tolerance was excellent though considerable bone marrow toxicity but no deterioration of renal function was noticed. In all responding and all patients experiencing no change there was remarkable improvement of life quality measured by an increase of the Karnofsky index. In conclusion, the regimen appears to be a welltolerated palliative treatment for patients with unfavorable prognosis. Soluble forms of CD25 and CD8 (sCD25/sCD8) are detected at low levels in the serum of healthy subjects. Elevated levels are found in patients (pts) with active autoimmune disorders as well as with malignant lymphomas. Therefore, we examined sCD25 and sCD8 in pts with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) in order to assess their role as indicators of disease activity. 47 pts with B-CLL were studied so far. Staging was performed according to the classification systems of Rai and Binet, respectively. Serum samples were freshly stored in liquid nitrogen until further processing. Levels of sCD25 and sCD8 were measured by a sandwich ELISA technique using commercially available assays (Biermann, Germany). Advancing Rai stages were associated with a progressive increase (p<0.01) of sCD25 from 1412+680 U/ml in stages 0/I, to 5730+2117 U/ml in stage II, and to 7125-t-2873 U/ml in stages III/IV. This progression of sCD25 was also evident when the Binet classification was applied (p<0.01). Levels of sCD8 were found to increase from 471+287 U/ml in Rai stages 0/I to 1028+570 U/ml in stage II (p<0.05), but without further progression in stages Ill/IV with 1183+778 U/ml. Applying the Binet classification, sCD8 was shown to be 589+484 U/ml in stage A, but 1114+481 U/ml in stage B (p<0.05). Again, no further increase was found in Binet stage C. High levels of both sCD25 and sCD8 were associated with the occurrence of B-symptoms (p < 0.05). Moreover, sCD25 and sCD8 were preferentially elevated in pts with a lymphocyte doubling time of < 12 months, but this tendency was not statistically significant. In summary, (1) progressive serum levels of sCD25 and sCD8 correlate with advancing stages of disease in B-CLL. (2) B-symptoms were associated with high levels of sCD25 and sCD8. (3) We found sCD25 to be the more sensitive marker of disease activity than sCD8. Thus, sCD25 may be useful in monitoring pts with B-CLL. infiltrations by malignant lymphomas with high sensitivity. Therefore, we used MRI to examine BM infiltration in CLL and to assess the responsiveness to treatment with fludarabine. Seven conventionally pretreated pts with Binet stage C and one patient with Binet stage B disease were studied so far. They received at maximum six courses of fludarabine 25 mg/m 2 x 5 d monthly. Before initiation of treatment, and after the third and the sixth course of therapy, BM of the lumbar spine and the pelvic region was examined by MRI using a 1.5 tesla imager, "Magnetom" system (Siemens, Germany). Areas of abnormal signal intensities were determined both by visual criteria and quantitavely. As internal standard we chose subcutaneous fatty tissue. While three pts remained refractory to fludarabine treatment, four other pts turned to Binet stage A with normal blood counts but slight lymphocytosis in the BM. One patient had a mixed response with normal leucocyte counts but persisting anemia and thr0mbocytopenia. Before therapy, signal reduction in tl weighted images and prolonged tl relaxation times indicated lymphocytic infiltration in large BM areas in all pts. We analyzed paraffin-embedded specimens of 21 lymphomas (13 cb/cc, 2 centroblastic, 4 immunoblastic, 2 MALT lymphomas) by PCR using single pairs of primers for the major breakpoint (mbr) and the minor cluster (mcr) region. Seven cb/cc NHL showed trad3slocations and 2 centroblastic lymphomas had gene rearrangements. In one cb/cc lymphoma a translocation within the mcr was observed. Specificity of amplification products was shown by Southern blot analysis with an internal bcl-2 oligonucleotide probe for all PCR products and by direct DNA sequence analysis of junctional regions in two cases. The data show that even in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded material PCR analysis provide an additional molecular tool for the diagnosis of cb/cc NHL in small histologic specimens with degraded DNA. Acute promyeloeytic leukemia (APL) is associated with disseminated intravaseuar coagulation (DIC), which can be accelerated by induction of cytostatic chemotherapy and causes a markedly risk for (intracerebral) hemorrhage. Complete remissions of APL can be achieved by differentiation-induclng therapy with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). We studied activation markers of the eoagulation system (thrombin-AT III complex (TAT), D-Dimer) in 3 patient with APL treated with ATRA. All patients had signs of DIC before induction of therapy (low plasma fibrinogen, low platelet-count) and moderate to severe bleeding tendency, activation markers were elevated (TAT >15 ~g/L, D-Dimer )1500 pg/L). DIC was treated with fresh frozen plasma (3-9 U/d), no heparin was administered. APL was treated with ATRA (45 mg/m2/d). D-Dimer levels decreased rapidly to values <300 pg/L, TAT <8 Mg/L within I week of ATRA therapy, after 2 weeks activation markers were in the normal range (D-Dimer <I00, TAT <3 /~g/L). No platelet substitution was necessary during ATRA therapy, FFP substitution could be stopped after at least 4 days. Our data show, that treatment with ATRA can reduce the coagulation disorder and the risk for severe bleeding in patients with APL. Resting T and B blood lymphocytes were stimulated toward blast activation and mitogenesis using phytohaemagglutinin short term culture. The transition to S phase of cell cycle was reversibly blacked for 48 hours by Methotrexate and relBased by cold thymidine together with crude supernate of control cultures. The detection of bcl-2 RNA was performed by Oct blots with the bcl-2 probe. This was a 4,0 kb Hind III-Hind III insert from probe "b" obtained from Y. Tsujimoto, labeled with digo Obtained findings indicate that the bcl-2 gene is operative in a cell-cycle linked manner being induced as early as after I-3 hours after mitogen addition. The peak expression was observed after one day followed diminishing signals detectable up to 6 days in cultured lymphocytes. Most important time course points of bcl-2 Bene expression were i. the growth induction period followed by blastic development and 2. the accumulation of lymphoblasts. HTX block reversal with subsequent proliferative period initiated by DNA synthesis was not accompagoied by further sisnificant changes in bcl-2 gene expression. From simultaneously performed clinical trials it is evident that the bcl-2 gene expression is slighly elevated in CLL-blood lymphocytes, in umbilical blood mononuclears and also in neoplastic human myeloid cells. Above data are in accord with present suggestions that the proto-oncogene bcl-2 is related to genes impli cared in cell cycle control in haemopoietic cell lineage. Department of Medical Genetics and Hematologic Clinic, Medical Academy of Lublin, Radziwillowska ll Str.P1 20-950 Lublin, Poland V. K~nig, N. Schwella, W. Siegert and U. Hopf .................................................  Case report A 24-year-old man received combined eadiochemotherapy for hodgkin's disease, achieving a complete remission. Two years later, a thoracic relapse of preexistent hodgkin's disease was diagnosed. High dose chemotherapy with subsequent antologons BMT was performed. Lavestigatious revealed anti-HBs and anti-HBc lgG antibodies indicative of prior exposure to HBV. The transaminases were within normal limits pre-trausplont. After autologous BMT, substitution therapy for erythrocytes and tilrombocytes was necessitated throughout the whole treatment procedure ( 28 units of platelet concentrates, 13 units of filtered packed red blood cells). One week after autologoes BMT, a slow but progredient increase of trausaminases was nol~l. Six months later, conventional HBV serology showed both HBsAg and ItBeAg in the serum. Additional serology demonstrated anti-HBc (lgM), anti-llBc (lgG+IgM) and a maximum alanilmminotransferase (ALl') of 545 IU/I confirming the diagnosis of subacute hepatitis B. In the further course, chronic hepatitis B developed. Discussion ~ee report a case of HBV infection following autologous BMT. Since the patient was immune to HBV prior to transplant it is almost certain that he reactivated ItBV as a result of immunosuppression associated with hodghin's disease and its therapy. Disappearance of anti-HBc and anti-IlBs antibodies and reactivation or" HBV with transient HBs antigenemia after immunosuppression has been observed repeatedly. Acquired blood-borne HBV infection is unlikely since all blood products tranfused demonstrated an HBV serology completely negative at repeated testing. All blood and platelet donors were followed carefully, none showed a positive HBV serology at subsequent donations. Maximum liver damage in this patient correlated with immunological recoustitution post-transplant. This is consistent with the finding that the target for cytotoxic T cells in chronic hepatitis has been identified as HBcAg expressed on the hepatocyte membrane. Patients at risk of HBV reactivation should be identified by conventional serological screening before transplant. Patients so identified could then be introduced into controlled trials of HBV immunization pre-transplant or therapy with interferon elfa posttransplant. Anti-HBs hyperimmune globulin may be effective in limiting liver damage by preventing HBV replication. In the years from 1987 to 1991 45821 patients were examined in routine screenings concerning applications for rehabilitation and the premature drawing of pension. The screenings were conducted by doctors working yon behaff of the national pension insurance institution (Landesversicherungsanstalt Berlin, LVA). The purpose of this study was to look at the percentage of monoclonal gammopathy (MG) detected and its clinical relevance to the patients. Of all 45821 patients examined by the national pension insurance institution proteineelectrophoretic analyses were made. If there was any suspicion of an existing MG (even with extremely low M-components}, an immuno-fixatienelectrophoresis was conducted to confirm or reject the presence of MG.During the period 1987 -91 a total of 304 patients with MG were detected. The mean age of these patients was 55 years, with a relation of 2/3 : 1/3 in favour of males. tn the last 5 years 42 patients out of the 304 with MG were admitted to our hospital in order to conduct a complete staging. The mean age and the immunologic classification of all gammopathies, including the biclonal gammopathies, of this sample was in direct proportion to the consistency of the whole group of 304 patients. The staging examinations led to the following results: in 33 patients a MGUS was diagnosed, and regular testing by their GPs recommended. In 3 patients early infiltration of the bone marrow by a multiple myeloma could not be ruled out; they were classified as smouldering multiple myeloma (SMM}. In these cases rigid supervision by a haematologist was recommended. In 2 patients a MM with confirmed infiltration of the bone marrow was found. In 1 of these patients we diagnosed a stage la according to SALMON, in the other a stage 2a. The latter was referred to chemotherapy treatment as advanced osteolytic destruction was present. In 4 patients with IgM-gammopathy a lymphoplasmocytic immunocytoma was found. At the time of diagnosis no treatment was required. A rate of 21% malignant MGs out of all the detected MGs in routine screenings is a very high proportion compared to other findings in literature. It has to be assumed that there is a relation between the malignant illness and the desire for rehabilitation or premature retirement. Adhesion of tumor cells to extracellular matrix (ECM) components is considered to be an important step for the development of metastases. Several limitations of current in vitro adhesion assays such as the use of radioactivity, low reproducibility, and time consuming read-out steps have led us to develop a new assay and to compare it to an established technique using radioactively labeled cells. Methods: In both assays, 25x103 cells of the colon cancer cell line HT 29 are incubated serum-free for 90 rain at 37oc in microtiter wells precoated with individual ECM proteins or BSA. Non-adherent cells are removed by repeated washing. After subtracting nonspecific binding to BSA, specific adhesion is calculated as % of totally added cells. For the fluorescence method, adherent cells are incubated with methylumbelliferyl heptanoate (MUH). Fluorescence intensity as a function of cell numbers is quantitated using a microtiter plate reader (Titertec Fluoroscan II), For the radioactive method, cells are labeled with 51-Chromium (51-Cr) before adhesion. Adherent cells are lysed and the radioactivity is measured in a gamma counter. Results: Specific adhesion (data from 8 experiments, given in % _+ SD) Collagen LipasomaL amphothericin B, a preparation lacking the nephrotoxic and pyrogenic side effects of standard amphothericin Be was chosen because both patients had an impairment of renal function with CKrea < 30 mt/min, due to prior aminoglycoside treatment in one patient and preexisting impaircent in the other patient. Both patients were treated with 4 mg/kg/d intravenously and become afebrile within 72h. The pulmonary infiltrates showed a regression and then changed to the classical aspect of aspergitLoma with a ball of hyphae within a cavity. At that time IgG antibodies to aspargillus antigens were detected in both patients sera. Systemic treatment was continued for a total of 16 weeks in one and 12 weeks in the other patient. During this time the cavities with fungus balls showed a continuous regression and disappeared in both patients. One patient showed a complete clearance of infiltrates on chest x-ray. A small dense consolidation remained in the area of the fungus ball in the second patient. This patient is still alive and without evidence of relapse of the aspargiIius infection 12 months after stopping intravenous lipesomal amphothericin g. The other patient received a second course aggressive chemotherapy as consolidation for his AML without relapse of the pulmonary aspergiLtus and is off therapy for 6 months. We conclude that [~posomal amphothericin B is active and well tolerated in neutropenic patients with pulmonary aspergillus/asperg~itom and concomittant renal insufficiency. In the last two decades we treated more than 500 patients with germ cell tumors (GCT), 13 of whom presented with bilateral testicular tumors, accounting for about 2.5 %. In 3 patients (pts) the tumor was diagnosed simultaneously and in 10 pts metachronously. In the pts with metachronously diagnosed GCT age at diagnosis of the first tumor ranged from 16 to 36 years (ys) (median 24 ys), at diagnosis of the second tumor it ranged from 24 to 54 ys (median 34 ys). The interval between diagnosis of first and second GCT ranged from 20 to 206 months (mts) (median 85 mts). Histology of the first tumor was nonseminomatous (NS) in 6 pts, and in 4 pts it was a seminoma (S) Histology of the second tumor was NS in 4 pts and S in 6 pts. Treatment of the first tumor consisted of radiation in 6 pts (4 S, 2 NS), chemotherapy in 2 pts (both NS) and only surgery in one pt (NS).Treatment of the second tumor consisted of radiation in 4 pts (3 S, INS) and chemotherapy in 3 pts (I S, 2 NS). "Wait and see'strategy was performed in one pt (NS) in the first, and in 3 pts (2 S, ! NS) in the second tumor. At diagnosis of the second tumor 7/10 pts underwent follow-up examinations. Therapy of first and second tumor resulted in a complete remission in all pts. 3 to 209 mts after diagnosis of the second tumor (mean 55 mts) 7/10 pts currently are alive without disease. 3 pts are lost for follow-up. In the 3 simultaneously diagnosed pts age at diagnosis was 24, 27 and 31 ys. ~of one of both tumors was MTU in all pts and that of the second tumor was seminoma, MTI and MTD, respectively. 2 pts presented with advanced metastatic disease and died within few mts after onset of chemotherapy. One pt (stage IIA) received 4 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy and remains disease-free 84 mts after diagnosis. We conclude, that bilateral testicular GCT is an extremely rare disease. Due to combined modality treatment and careful follow-up examinations pts suffering from bilateral testicular GCT have a definite chance of cure. 173 patients were evaluable for response and survival. A complete response (GR) was seen in 148/173 patients (85%) with 86% CR in arm Avs 84% CR in arm B, With a median follow-up of 35 months (range 17-61) the overall projected survival at 48 months is 61% vs 65% for arm A and B, respectively. Event-free survival is projected to be 57Z in arm A and 47Z in arm B at 48 months. So far, the differences in CR, survival and disease-free survival are statistically not significant. Factors associated with poor survival were advanced stage (III, IV) and an LDH > 250 U/I. Toxicity of all regimens was acceptable. Main side effects were mild nausea/vomiting, leukopenia and fever/infection associated with leukopenia. Two patients died of infectious events and one from hemorrhage giving a toxic death rate of 2%. In conclusion, both treatment modalities produced high complete remission rates and survival data indicate that the majority of patients will be longterm survivors. Internal Medicine, Baldingerstr., D-3550 Marburg, Germany The mobilisation of circulating hemopoietic progenitor cells (HPC) by preceding chemotherapy with or without hemopoietic growth factors is a well established method. Recently it has been demonstrated in a monkey model that the sequential administration of I1.-3 and GM-CSF caused a marked increase in HPC without prior cytostatic treatment. Based on these data we initiated a prospective, non randomised phase I/II trial in patients with breast cancer, testicular cancer, and high grade NHL in complete remission and high risk of relapse.Primary aim was to evaluate the optimal dose and time schedule of IL-3 in combination with GM-CSF for maximal stem cell yield thus providing superior conditions for stem cell transplantation in chemotherapy sensitive relapse. 16 patients have been treated with various doses of IL-3 (2,5 ug, 5 ug, tO ug/kg) for 3 days or IL-3 5 ug/kg for various days (3, 7, 14) followed by administration of GM-CSF for 5 days. As a control GM-CSF (5 ug/kg) alone was given for 5 days. The combination of IL-3 (2,5 ug -10 ug/kg) for 3 days did not show any further increase of HPC compared to GM-CSF alone. A marked additive effect was observed when the treatment time with IL-3 (5 ug/kg) was raised to 7-14 days. In all cases HPC disappeared from peripheral blood immediately after IL-3 therapy thus indicating an effect on the expression of special adhesion molecules. Concerning cytokine induction there are preliminary data that GM-CSF seems to upregulate IL-8 expression whereas IL-3 was without any influence. In this part of the study the sequential administration of IL-3 and GM-CSF was safe and well tolerated. On this basis we plan to further escalate the dose and treatment duration of IL-3. Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), a distinct subtype of AML, is frequently associated with disseminated coagulopathy (DIC) causing a high incidence of fatal bleeding complications. APL is cytogeneticallv characterized by the translocation t(l 5;17) involving the region of the retinoic receptor ct gene. In vitro all trails retinoic acid (ATRAI exhibits a differentiation-inducing and antiproliferative capacity on APL-celllines. Similar effects were observed when ATRA was administered to APL-patients, who achieved complete remission without any cytostatic therapy. We have treated 10 patients with APL ( 5 males and5 females, median age: 36 years, range 22 -60 years). The cytogenetic translocation t (15:17) was observed in all patients, 3 patients had additional karyotyp~, abnormalities. ATRA was administered as capsules (45mg/m divided in two daily doses) for 90 -106 days. 4 primarily untreated patients, 1 patient in 1 ~t relapse after autologous transplantation and one patient with a chemotherapy-resistant relapse received ATRA without any cytostatic treatment. Two patients we, re treated with a combination of~TRA and "3+7" inducti~m (60 mg/m ~ Daunorubicin dl-3, 100 mg/m Ara-C~dl-7) and two patients received additional chemotherapy (4 x 3g/m z Ara-C) due to excessive liyperleukocytosis developing durmg ATRA-treatment. Clinical and laboratory signs of DIC (fibrinogen level, fibrinogen degradation products) improved rapidly in all patients. Complete hematological, immunological and remission was obtained in all patients within 4 to 12 weeks rapy, Hyperleuk~cytosis developed in 3 patients and was treated in 2/3 with 4 x 3g/m Ara-C. Other ATRA side effects (dryness of skin, alopecia, bone pain) were mild but improved during continuing ATRA-treatment. 7/10 patients are still in remission for 1 + to 8+ months after starting treatment. 3 patients receiving ATRA as salvage therapy after treatment failure relapsed after 2 -7 months in complete remlssmn. Our results indicate that ATRA therapy for APL is safe and highly effective. The authors present the case of a 76-year-old man in whom bladder tumor was detected the reason for haematuria. The histological investigation of trans urethral resected pattern showed lymphocytic lymphoma. In pocession of the histological finding detailed haematological examination has been carried out, the patient was without evidence of lymphoma dissemination. He received multiehemotherapy /6 cources/ and Iocoregional cytostatic therapy and complete clinical remission was detected. The authors report our experience with extranodal bladder lymphoma includedod~pgnosis and therapeutical notes as well as review ol ~ne reievan~ literazura. with infections in 3 (i case of cryptococcal meningitisD and in 9 (among them in 2 being in CCRD -secondary neoplasms. qqne authors conclude that the main cause of death in over ten years survivors remains the underlying disease and long term survival.not in all pts is equivalent with the cure of HD. Dept of Hematology, Med. Univ., Pasteura 4, 50-367 Wroclaw, Poland. Interferon-T induced aggregation of human monoeytes has been shown to be inhibited by monoclonal antibodies against the integrin LFA-1 (CD11 a/18). To further investigate the role of this antigen and its physiological ligand ICAM-1 (CD54) in mediation of cell-cell-contacts between human monocytes we investigated antigen expression and surface distribution of LFA-1 and ICAM-1 on monocytes stimulated with interferon-T by immuno-electron microscopy. Human monocytes were obtained by plastic adherence of Ficoll Hypaque isolated human peripheral blood mononuelear cells of healthy donors. The adherent ceils were detached from the plastic and after washing in PBS resuspended in RPMI + 10% FCS. After that, the cells were seeded for 30min onto glass eoverslips covered with melamine resin foils. After adherence to the foils, the monocytes were incubated in RPMI + 10% FCS with interferon-T in a concentration of 200U/ml. Immuno-electron microscopical analysis was performed after lh and after 18h of incubation: The cells were rinsed with PBS, prefixed with 0.2% glutaraldehyde, incubated with the mouse monoclonal antibodies against LFA-1 (IOT16) or ICAM-1 (WEHICAM1) for lh, washed again and incubated for lh with a goat-anti-mouse antibody coupled to 30ore gold colloids (GAM gold 30, Janssen). After that, the cells were fixed in 2,5% glutaraldehyde and air dried. The melamine foils with the adherent cells were detached from the glass and mounted on coppergrids. These preparations of the whole cells were viewed at with an electron microscope at lO0kV. After lh of adherence, the cells expressed only low levels of LFA-1 and ICAM-1. However, they had started to spread over the substrate surface and formed membrane structures such as filopodia, which sometimes reached the neighbour cell and formed cell-cell-contacts. Neither LFA-! nor ICAM-1 was accumulated on these membrane structures. After 18h of incubation, most of the cells had formed cell-cell-contacts with their neighbour cells. Moreover, the cells were intensively stained for ICAM-1 and LFA-1 indicating antigen upregulation during incubation. In several cell-aggregates the antigens were found to be accumulated in the cell-cell-contact areas. These morphological data suggest that aggregation of interferon-T stimulated monocytes is a process consisting of several steps including development of membrane projections, antigen upregulation and redistribution and that LFA-1 and ICAM-1 are probably not involved in the early steps of cell-cell-interaction of monocytes. Integrin receptors play a critical role in mediating adhesion to extracellular matrix proteins and invasion of tumor ceils thus influencing their metastatic potential. In order to elucidate the impact of rlFN-u and rTNF-a on the regulation of integrin receptors, we studied constitutive and inducible 1~1-, 82-, and B3-integdn expression on breast cancer (MCF 7), colon cancer (HT 29), and glioblastoma (U 87) cell lines by flow cytometry using monoclonal antibodies specific for a-subunits (~l-Ot6, av) and 8-subunits (1] High-dose chemotherapy and subsequent autologous bone marrow transplantation (ABMT) or peripheral 61ood stem cell transplantation (PBSCT) have become a salvage therapy for patients with mali~gnant lymphoma. The value of ABMT and PBSCT ~or women with high-risk breast-cancer (BC) is under investigation. Marrow involvement in NHL and BC is associated with a poor prognosis. The meaning of minimal malignant contaminations in autografts is not yet clear, but there is some evidence that it may influence the outcome of patients with NHL and BC. We used a long-term liquid culture system for detection of occuh rumor cells in BM and PBSC [1] . Samples were cultured in supplemented media for seven weeks. Each week half of the culture was removed, cytospin slides were made and stained with Wright-Giemsa stain. The remaining culture was supplemented with fresh media. In cases of BC, addkionnally slides were made for immunostalning with antiepithelial antibodies. The system showed a sensitivity of about one in a tmqlion in dilution experiments of NI-IL or BC cell lines in marrow samples of vounteer donors. Samples from healthy donors were always negative. Malignant cells were cultured from BM with known involvement, we were ame to culture suspected cells from cytologically and histologically normal BM and PBSC of patients with NHL and BC prior to ABMT or PBSCT without prior marrow involvement. Due to the short followup and the small number of patients, the clinical signifi~nce of these results is not eva/uable at this time, but we hope that me system will be helpful to predict relaps in BC and NHL patients after autologous transplantation. The t(15;17) which juxtaposes the PML gene with the gene encoding the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARalpha) is the chromosomal hallmark of acute promyelocytic leukemia (M3). The translocation creates PML-RARalpha fusion RNAs which can be specifically detected by a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using 5'primers from PML and 3'primers from BAR (deThe et al., Cell 66: 675-684, 1991) . We have used this technique to analyze samples of three patients with M3 and t(15;17) before, during and after treatment with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and conventional chemotherapy. PCR was positive at diagnosis in two of the three patients. One of the two PCR-positive patients had a short clinical remission, but relapsed early and died of a cerebral hemorrhage due to DIC after 6 months. Residual t(15;17) cells could be detected in blood and bone marrow samples of this patient at any time. The other patient is still in remission after 6 months. Interestingly, t(15;17) cells disappeared from the peripheral blood of this patient after chemotherapy, at least at a detection level of approximately 1/104 cells. Our data indicate that (1) t(15;17) PCR can be used for the diagnosis of M3 in many, but not all patients, probably due to a certain heterogeneity of breakpoint location; (2) it is useful for the detection of minimal residual disease, especially since there may be a group of patients whose blood samples become negative after treatment. Mutation in the p53 gene has been reported to be involved in malignant transformation. Point mutations in the p53 gene are the most frequently identified genetic change in human cancer. The overexpression of p53 in tumor ceils appears to reflect the accumulation of mutationally qnactivated forms of the protein. In normal cells however, wild-type p53 has a short half-life and is generally not detectable. In order to study the sensitivity and specificity of different p53 specific monoclonal antibodies (PAb 1801, PAb 240, PAb 1620, PAb 421) we analyzed p53 expression by flow cytometry using Triton X-100, immunoblotting and immunofluorescence in colon cancer cell lines HT 29, NMG, LS 180, LoVo. Furthermore, direct non-isotopic solid-phase sequencing of p53 cDNA was applied to detect point mutations in the highly conserved domains spanning from exon 4 to 9 of the p53 gene. All of the cell lines tested expressed high levels of p53 using PAb 1801 and PAb 240 in flow cytometry studies. In contrast, p53 expression could not be detected by the monoclonal antibody 1620. To exclude unspecific fluorescence induced by Triton X-100 additionly immunofluorescence and immunoblots were done demonstrating overexpression of p53 in all cell lines. By direct non-isotopic solid-phase sequencing of p53 cDNA using the polymerase chain reaction HT 29 and LoVo showed G to A transitions resulting in missense mutations in aminoacids highly conserved in evolution. In conclusion, overexpression of p53 can be demonstrated by flow cytometric analysis using Triton X-100 in tumor cell lines and mutation of the p53 gene is associated with excess of p53 reflecting stabilization of the protein within the tumor cells. I, about 95% of patients chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML) is characterized by the presence of the Philadelphia chromosome which is caused by a reciprocal translocation of chromosomes 9 and 22. The result of this event is a novel BCR/ABL fusion gene which codes for the K-28 and the L-6 type mRNA, both of which are translated into a protein of 210 kD; unique is that transcription and translation products can only be found in malignant and not in non-malignant cells. We therefore designed synthetic ribozymes which are capable of exclusively cleaving the BCR/ABL K-28 type mRNA without altering any normal cellular transcript. First cDNA segments carrying the BCR/ABL junction of the two target mRNAs and as controls cDNA of the ALL-type RNA as well as the normal ABL RNA were cloned into Bluescript. Transcripts were then incubated with different ribozymes that were directly transcribed from short ribozyme genes. K-28 type RNA could only be cleaved by the correct ribozyme and not by any of the controls. The K-28 type directed ribozyme on the other hand did not cleave any of the convrol RNAs. We then introduced the different ribozymes by lipofection into K562 cells which express only the K-28 type mRNA. A marked inhibition of proliferation was observed only with K-28 directed dbozymes; controls showed the same proliferation rate as lipofection agent alone or Hepes buffered saline. The effective delivery of ribozymes into living cells and their intracellular localization were shown by direct fluorescent microscopy; slot blot analysis revealed an intracellular stability of the ribozyme core sequence of at least 12 hours. The effective in vivo cleavage of K-28 mRNA was proved by primer extension assay. We conclude that ribozymes are able to inhibit the proliferation of malignant cells and that they might be possible therapeutic agents in CML patients. Abt. Hi~u~tologie u. Onkologie, Hugstetter Str. 55, Deutschland. One hundred and sixty patients with a median age of 38 years (range, 2 months to 84 years) having silicone rubber central venous access catheters for long-term parenteral nutrition or chemotherapy were studied prospectively. Two different types of catheters were used, the Broviactype 'life-cath ' T~ (Vygon, Aachen) and the Groshong~-catheter (Boehringer, Ingelheim). Intraoperative complications were not noticed. Parenteral therapy was performed in 124 patients (81%) without any complications. After a mean postoperative intervall of 36 weeks there were 34 catheters removed because of end of therapy. Seventy-eight patients died with the catheter in place. Fourty catheters had to be removed before end of therapy due to catheter-related complications. Occlusion of the lumen occurred in 9 patients after an intervall from 3 to 20 weeks. Explantation of catheters due to a suspected catheter-related sepsis was performed in 17 patients. Both types of catheter showed a high cumulative patency rate of 90% after a twelve months period. However, there were catheters that had to be removed before planned end of therapy. Thus, the cumulative rate of functioning catheters is lower (44% of all catheters). In conclusion, Hickman type catheters are important devices for parenteral nutrition, chemotherapy and even bone marrow transplantation in patients with malignant tumors. lymphocytes from peripheral blood samples from patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) and acute lymphoblastic leukemia at presentation (B-ALL) and amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in an automated thermal cycler. Using six different VH-family-specific t primers based on conserved 5 -leader sequences and a consensus JH primer allowed amplification of almost the entire rearranged VDJ gene. By in vitro amplification of DNA prepared from 20 B-CLL and 7 B-ALL patients a DNA fragment of about 500 bp was obtained, which could not be seen with DNA from 6 healthy donors. Employing modified primers with restriction enzyme recognition sites incorporated we cloned several of the PCR fragments. Sequence analysis revealed homologies to VH and D H sequences known to be frequently involved in rearrangements of leukemic cells at least. There are several applications of this PCR and sequencing strategy. Incidence of the various V~genes and VH-gene-families in rearranged VDJ can be determined. PCR results have been compared to genomic southern blot analysis with a J.-probe. In a number of B-CLL cases these studies revealed differences between the number of complete rearrangements as detected by the PCR described and higher numbers of non-germline-bands on southern hybridizations, indicating that a proportion of the latter might represent incomplete DJ rearrangements, translocations or deletions. Currently we are investigating the feasibility of this sequencing strategy to detect minimal residual disease in ALL. The Aminopepetidase N (APN, CD13, EC 3.4.1 1.2) is a well established marker in the diagnosis of the myelomonocytic lineage leukemias. By means of both Southern analysis and PCR analysis of DNA isolated from mononuclear cells of peripheral blood or bone marrow aspirate structural aberrations in the APN-gene were observed in AML and NHL. These alterations were not found in mononuclear cells derived from normal probands. These findings could be of interest for understanding the molecular events provoking both diseases and might proof suitable as an additional diagnostic tool. We suppose a possible involvement of an APN-disregu!ation in the multistep tumorogenesis process in certain immuno-proliferative disorders. Information on the clinical course and the prognosis of monocytoid Bcell lymphoma is limited. We observed an 58-year-old male patient with a very unfavourable course of this rare type of Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. 20 years earlier a Hodgkin's disease had been successfully treated with splenectomy and combined radio-chemotherapy. The monocytoid B-cell lymphoma was diagnosed in 10/1991. The manifestations in cervical lymph nodes, stomach, ascites and pleural effusion were histologically and cytologically confirmed. Bone marrow and CNS were not involved. After chemotherapy with 3 courses of CHOP complete remission was achieved. After 2 additional courses the patient relapsed with an involvement of bone marrow, CNS and liver. Cytologically there was no evidence of a progression to a high grade lymphoma. The patient was then treated with a regimen including high dose methotrexate and died 8 days later in postcytostatic neutropenia (3/92) . This case confirms the already described tendency of the monocytoid B-cell lymphoma to manifest simoultaneously in peripheral lymph nodes and stomach. It further demonstrates that despite of its low malignant histology the monocytoid B-cell lymphoma can show the clinical feature and course of a high grade lymphoma. The data of 69 patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) diagnosed from 1985 to 1991 were retrospectively analysed. 24 patients had RA, 8 patients RAS, 15 patients CMML, 10 patients RAEB and 12 patients RAEBt. Patients with RA or RAS and most patients with CMML only received transfusions. 14 of 22 patients with RAEB or RAEBt were treated with low dose cytosine arabinoside and 3 with aggressive combination therapy. According to Kaplan-Meier the median survival time of the combined RA/RAS group (36t17,5 months) differed significantly (p<0,05) from the combined RAEB/RAEBt group (9t7,5 months) and was not yet reached in the CMML group (medium observation time 20.4 months). The prognostic importance of 6 parameters at the time of diagnosis was evaluated for the RNRAS group and for the RAEB/RAEBt group: Hb <10 g%, leucocytes <3000/1~1, platelets <100000/HI, LDH >240 U/I, BKS >50ram first hour, splenomegaly. In the RAEB/RAEBt group none of these parameters was of prognostic importance. In the RNRAS group Hb (p=0,006), platelet count (p=0,01) and splenomegaly (p=0,004) showed a significant influence on survival (Cox model, confidence interval 95%). The median survival time even of the unfavourable RNRAS patients was still better than of the RAEB/RAEBt patients. Previous experiments raised evidence for the involvement of T-Iymphocytes in control mechanisms of myeloma tumor cells. We could demonstrate in vitro that the growth of human myeloma tumor cells was downregulated by purified autologous CD3+ lymphocytes. This suppression could be enhanced by the addition of rlL-2 to the cultures. Using a cytotoxicity assay we demonstrated that peripheral blood mononuclear cells showed cytotoxic activity against autologous multiple myeloma (MM) tumor target cells. Based on these data we have initiated a phase II study in melphalan resistant progressive multiple myeloma patients with low dose alL-2 on an outpatient basis, rlL-2 was administered at an initial dose of 9x10 s IU/m 2 s.c. twice a day for 2 days followed by weekly administration of 0.9x106 IU/m 2 s.c. twice a day during 5 subsequent days until day 56 (q day 85). So far 18 patients have been treated for 1 -30 months. In all patients the number of CD25+, CD3+, CD4+ lymphocytes increased (mean: 11% up to 24%) during therapy. NK-cell activity, determined by standard cytotoxicity assays, was augmented, and serum concentrations of slL-2R rose as measured by an ELISA (mean: 2.5 up to 11.2 ng/ml). The observation time of 5/18 patients is too short for response evaluation. In 2/18 patients rlL-2 treatment induced tumor mass reduction, 5/18 patients achieved stable disease, and 6/18 continued with serologic progress during treatment. Side effects included local infiltrations at the inoculation sites, fever at the beginning of each treatment cycle, eosinophilia, temporary enlargement of the spleen, and slight liver enzyme elevations. These results show, that low dose rlL-2 application can augment suppressive immune functions, and that long term rlL-2 application may be a useful new therapeutic approach in multiple myeloma. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) has been shown to synergistically potentiate the cytetoxicity of several anti-neoplastic agents. To examine whether multidrug-resistant cells are also targets of TNF, and whether TNF modulates chemoresistance, a pleural mesothelioma cell line, PXF1118L, and two chemoresistant sublines selected by vindesine (VDS) were used. As compared to the parental line, resistance was enhanced 4g-fold resp. 170fold. P-glycoprotein expression was increased in resistant cells as demonstrated by immunocytochemical peroxidase-anti-peroxidase staining with monoclonal antibody MRK16. Chemoresistance in these cells was confirmed to result from P-glycoprotein expression by decreased [3H]-vinblastine accumulation that was reversed by a chemosensitizer, verapamil (VER), and enhanced VDS toxicity in the presence of VER. Parental and VDS-se]ected cells showed little, but comparable sensitivity to TNF alone. The combination of TNF with VDS or, to a lesser extent with doxorubicin, but not with cisplatin was more cytotoxic in multidrug-resistant cells than each compound alone. A synergistic interplay of TNF and VDS is thus suggested. In the sensitive parental cells, however, TNF had no synergistic or additive effect. Binding of [~='I]-TNF to sensitive and resistant cells was similar, thus the observed differences cannot be attributed to alterations of TNF binding sites. Since [~H]-vinblastine accumulation was not altered by TNF, the mechanism by which TNF augmented the cytotoxicity of VDS is apparently different from that of VER. In addition, the chemosensitizing effect of the combination of TNF and VER was stronger than that of either TNF of VER alone. In conclusion, our study shows that TNF increased the antineoplastic activity of VDS in multidrug-resistant, but not in chemosensitive pleural mesothelioma cells by a mechanism that is different from chemosensitization by calcium antagonists. Further studies will be needed to prove whether the effects observed are restricted to certain tumor entities or not. In this prospective randomized trial different treatment strategies for patients with granulocytopenia < 1000/#1 and fever >38.5~ aRer chemotherapy were compared. 1573 of 1770 patients were evaluable with a median age of 48 years, 90.2% of whom had acute leukemia or high grade malignant lymphoma. The initial treatment consisted of acylaminopenicillin (Pen) plus aminoglycoside (AG) or third generation cephalosporin (Ceph) plus AG or Pen plus Ceph. In 848 patients with fever of unknown origin (FUO) the response rates were: 70.8%, 69.8%, 65.1% total 68.4%. Patients (n=155) not responding received Pen/-Ceph/Vancomycin or Pen/Ceph/AG: response rates 50.7% and 50.0%, total 50.3 %. If fever did not resolve the patients (n= 99) received either Pen/Ceph or Imipenem/Cilastatin in combination with Amphotericin-B/5-Flucytosin-/Rifampitin, resulting in response rates of 62.5% and 79.7%, total 72.7%. No significant differences between the treatment modalities compared were found. Analyzing all phases together 91.3% of patients with FUO were cured. The response rate in patients with gram positive bacteremia (n= 183) was 82.5%, with gram negative organisms (n=145) 78.6%, in fungemia (n=51) 43.1% (p<0.001), with lung infiltrates (n=269) 61.3% (p<0.O01), in clinically documented infections (11=198) 84.4%, in clinically and microbiologically documented infections (n=84) 82.1%. If infections were diagnosed after at least 5 febrile days, more lung infiltrates and f~ngal infections occurred (p<0.001). Leukocytes rising above 500//zl predicted better response rates (p<O.001): in FUO 97.8% vs 86.5% and death rates 1.5% vs 8.5%. In documented infections the response rates were 89.9% vs 62.3% and the death rates 7.0% vs 20.5%: Therapy of neutropenic fever and infections must be risk factor adapted and include early empiric antifungal therapy. The therapeutic and prophylactic use of hematopoietic growth factors to overcome neutropenia should be evaluated. EA is a very effective and well-tolerated treatment modality for RBC depletion in patients with PV [*]. Its long lasting effect (about 6 months) may, at least in part, be due to the massive loss of iron. Hematopoietic progenitor cells, as do all proliferating ceils, need iron for their growth. Characteristically, in PV the erythropoietin (EPO)independent, spontaneous growth of erythroid progenitor cells (BFU-E) is enhanced. In this study we investigated the effect of EA in 6 cases of PV. Hematological parameters and the growth of hematopoietic progenitor ceils (BFU-E, GM-CFU) were monitored. EA resulted in a profound reduction of the RBC count, hematocrit (Hct), and hemoglobin (Hb) in all cases. RBC parameters were before/after EA (mean 6 values): RBC 7.74 / 5.97 xl0/ml, Hct 54 / 41%; Hb 16.3 / 12.5 g/dl and remained at these levels for several weeks. In all patients a significant inhibition of the growth of BFU-E was detectable after EA while granulocyte-macrophage progenitor cells (GM-CFU) remained nearly unchanged. Within 3 to 6 weeks, the inhibition of endogenous BFU-E amounted to between 53% and 100% and of EPO-dependent BFU-E to between 31% and 74%. The inhibition of BFU-E after EA was completely abolished by in vitro addition of FeCI 3. On the other hand, in vitro exposure of progenitor cells to an equivalent concentration of the iron chelator DFO (Deferoxamine Mesylate) resulted in a total disappearance of progenitor cell growth. The iron deficiency after EA was expressed less markedly in the reduction of the serum iron level (approx. 31% less than before EA) than in the reduction of the iron storage protein ferritin (approx. 41% less). These findings were accompanied by an about 2-fold enhancement of the expression of transferrin receptors on peripheral mononuclear cells, measured by flow cytometry. Our data suggest that the beneficial effect of EA is not only due to the high volume removal of RBCs but also to the inhibition of the growth of EPO-independent and -dependent BFUs-E. The reduced proliferative capacity of erythroid progenitor cells is apparently maintained by the considerable loss of iron during the EA. [*] Kaboth U., et al (1990) If the neutrophil count does not rise at the onset of neutropenic fever, despite adequate antibiotic therapy, the risk of death is 8% in unexplained fever, 20.4% in documented infections and 26.8% in patients with pneumonia, as found in 1573 neutropenic episodes. The aim of this 1/11 phase trial was to determine the optimal dose of G-CSF in order to accelerate the regeneration of granulopoiesis to a maximum, when used therapeutically in fever with neutrophils less than 500//11. All patients were treated with standard combination of antibiotic therapy. 6 patients were treated with G-CSF, each at a dosage of 2, 5 and 10,ug/kg, and 7 patients with 20 pg/kg until a neutrophil count of 500//11 was reached. Glycosylated G-CSF was genetically engineered and derived from CHO-cells given as 30 min i.v. infusion. Only patients without leukemic cells in the bone marrow smear were entered into the trial (average age -47 years; 16 male and 12 female). 21 patients had AML, 3 ALL, I high grade lymphoma, 1 hairy cell leukemia and 1 multiple myeloma. When treating with 2 pg/kg G-CSF the maximal neutrophil count was 6,500//A and with 5, 10, or 20 pg/kg 19,700 -28,500//11. There was an inverse relationship between the duration of aplasia before the use of G-CSF and the duration of G-CSFtherapy. One patient died from cerebral hemorrhage, one from congestive heart failure and one from interstitial pneumonia. At 2-10 pg/kg no side effects were observed, at 20 pg/kg one patient sufferred from fluid retention possibly due to G-CSF. No progression of leukemia was documented. We conclude, that G-CSF can safely be used at 2-10/~g/kg. The optimal dose for stimulation of neutrophil regeneration was found at 5 pg G-CSF/kg. G-CSF might be helpful for the treatment of febrile neutropenic patients with AML and lymphoid neoplasias, by enhancing neutrophil regeneration and thus improving the outcome of severe infections. Cytomegalovirus infection after bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is a major cause of lethal complications. Early and rapid diagnosis may enable early specific therapy before progression of the disease. We analyzed the number of leukocytes expressing the CMV pp65 antigen with specific monoclonal antibodies (Clonab, BiotestR), visualized by the APAAP technique. Cytospins with 20,000 leukocytes per glass slide were prepared regularly up to day 100 after BMT from 56 patients after allogeneic and 18 patients after autologous BMT. Standard methods for CMV diagnosis were performed weekly until discharge, then every other week. A CMV-infection was considered as symptomatic in the presence of clinical symptoms and a positive conventional test. Results: 18 symptomatic infections were observed. (allo:14/56=25%, auto: 4/18=22%). Conventional methods had a sensitivity of 100% and a specifity of 23%. CMV pp65 expression had a sensitivity of 67 % and a specifity of 57 %. After allogeneic BMT a high number of pp65 positive cells was associated with the severity of CMV-disease. In CMVasymptomatic patients, the maximal number (>0.1%) of pp65-positive cells correlated with the severity of aGvHD: aGvHD 0~ 22% of patients; I~ 31%; 11~ III~176 autologous BMT: 21%. In ten fu/-ther patients the immunological subtype of immunomagnetically separated mononuclear blood cells expressing CMV-immediate early antigen (CMV-IEA, Clone El3, Biosoft R) was determined additionally. CMV-IEA was expressed earlier than CMV-pp65 in total leukocytes. In general CD4+, CD8 + and CD 14 + cells were CMV-IEA-positive. CD56+ cells were rarely infected. CDI9+ were not detctable within the first 10 weeks after BMT. The CD14+ cells had the highest percentage of CMV-IEA positive cells, ranging from 14-95%. Conclusions: This rapid method correlated well with the severity of CMV-infection and aGvHD in allogeneic BMT. CMV-IEA-expressing leukocytes could be detected earlier than pp65 positive cells. Monocytes were the predominantly infected mononuclear cells, arising early during the course of the CMV disease. Certain subtypes of ALL with a t(l;19) (q23;p13) or a t(9;22)(q34;qll) have been associated with poor ~rognosls. To test whether the employment of PCR improves the detection rate of these clinically relevant genetic anomalies we have developed a multiprimer-PCR protocol which facilitates the detection of each of the four chimeric E2A/PBXl and BCR/ABL mRNAs in a single reaction. This protocol was used for the evaluation of bonemarrow or blood samples from 251 children with ALL in whom cytogenetic analyses had been performed. From March 1988 to September 1991 41 patients with relapsed or refractory non seminomatous germ cell tumors (NSGCT) were treated with carboplatin 2000 mg/sqm, etoposide 1500 mg/sqm and cyclophosphamide 120 mg/kg followed by retransfusion of bone marrow and/or peripheral blood stem cells (ABMT). All patients were deemed incurable with conventional therapy after second line cisplatin-based treatment. At time of ABMT 63 % of the pts. presented with advanced disease (Indiana staging > 6). Regarding response to prior chemotherapy pts. were either absolute refractory, progressive (unstable disease, increase of markers < 4 weeks) or refractory (stable disease, marker plateau, never CR or PR marker neg.) or had relapsed (CR or PR marker neg. > 4 weeks). 10/15 (67 %) pts. with refractory disease were responders (3 PR, 7 CR lasting 37+, 36+, 7, 8, 18+, 17+, 16+ months) . 11/17 (64 %) pts. transplanted in relapse responsed (5 PR, 6 CR lasting 43+,28+,ii,!i+,10+,8+ months). 6 pts. with absolute refractory disease did not achieve CR with a survival not longer than 5 months. 10/13 pts. having achieved CR (median observation time 22 months) are still in continuous complete remission up to 43+ months without any further treatment. 2/3 pts. having relapsed 2 and 5 months after CCR hat primary extragonadal disease. This longterm follow up demonstrates that this regimen of ultrahighdose carboplatin, VP 16 and cyclophosphamide represents a curative option in heavily pretreated pts. with NSGCT. In the period from 1/89 to 6/91 25 patients with advanced recurrent pelvic tumors have been treated in about 100 regional hyperthermia (RHT)-sessions in the SIGMA-ring of the BSD-2000 system. Most of the patients had recurrent rectal or cervical cancer. In 16/25 patients RHT has been combined with radiotherapy. In 9/25 patients a bimodal or trimodal approach with chemotherapy or chemotherapy/radiotherapy has been performed. Temperature measurements were taken in a closed-end catheter which has been implanted under CT-scan guidance or fluorscopy from the vagina. As a predominant side effect of RHT, some local discomfort or pain occured during or immediately after RHT in 70% of patients. These complaints are specific and will be discussed. The planned RHT courses were not accomplished in 6/25 patients: 2 cases of claustrophobia or psychic disorders; 2/25 tumor related necrosis; 2/25 thermal blisters in the rima ani. The average SAR (specific absorption rate) in the target point of the tumor was in the range of 20-30 mW/g, the intratumoral temperature > 42 centigrade degree was achieved in 67% of patients. Overall objective response for these in most cases preirradiated patients was about 30%. However, a subjective palliative effect (e.g. pain decrease) was achieved in 70% of patients. Conclusions for further studies are extracted from the clinical results and will be discussed. 17) is a muramidase that is stored and secreted by mature myeloid cells and thought to be primarily involved in host defense. We have previously shown that LZM is differentially expressed and methylated in acute myeloid leukemias of different FAB subtypes (L~bbert et al., Onkologie 14 [suppl.l:100-101, 1991 ). In the present study, we examined patterns of LZM mRNA expression and its regulation during normal and leukemic myelopoiesis. The LZM gene was actively transcribed in cells of both promyelocytic (HL-60) and myelomonocytic (U-937) phenotype. In both cells, in vitro induction of macrophage differentiation using 12-0tetradecanoyl-phorbol acetate (TPA, lO'~) resulted in rapid and drastic downregulation of expression. In contrast, treatment of HL-60 with interferon-gamma, Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha, dimethyl sulfoxide or cycloheximide did not result in significant alterations of transcript levels. Analysis of mRNA stability using actinomycin D did not reveal posttranscriptional means of TPA-induced downregulation of LZM in HL-60. This suggests a predominantly transcriptional mode of regulation which is being investigated using nuclear runoff. Colony-Stimulating Factor (25 ng/ml) for 3 days resulted in an at least five-fold upregulation of LZM expression. In contrast, no transcription of LZM was detectable in early myeloblastic KG-I cells using nuclear run-off, and no mRNA accumulation was detectable in either untreated cells or after treatment with TPA for various times. Also, LZM expression was undetectable in normal peripheral blood lymphocytes and lymphoid cell lines. In these different systems, expression of LZM strictly correlated with at least partial demethylation of a SmaI restriction site located 450 bp 5" of exon 1 of the LZM gene; however, the cellspecific methylation status of this gene locus was stable during induction of terminal differentiation end concomitant regulation of expression. In conclusion, in the cell systems chosen, expression of lysozyme is differentially regulated during different stages of myelopoiesis. LZM gene expression and maturational arrest are associated with a variable degree of gene hypomethylation that is stable during in vitro differentiation. Promyelocytic HL-60 cells have complete loss of one p53 allele and gross alterations of the remaining allele. We examined p53 expression and gene structure in cells from 25 patients with AML and 30 patients with ALL. Using RT-PCR, p53 transcript segments of 445 bp (spanning codons 78-227 of exons 4-7) and 289 bp (spanning codons 214-310 of exons 6-9) could be amplified from total RNA from all ALL samples and from 18/25 AML samples. Structural analysis of the p53 gene locus by Southern blot using EcoRI, HindIII, BglII and BamHI revealed presence of a known BglII polymorphism in 4/36 patients and heterozygous loss of an EcoRI site 2.3 kb upstream of the promoter region in one case of ALL. This alteration might be due to a point mutation or small deletion. Control hybridization with a probe for M-CSF (located on the long arm of chromosome i) did not indicate loss of a p53 allele in all cases studied. Direct DNA sequencing of PeR products was performed on 41 patients; however, no mutations were detected in any of the samples. Fine-mapping of the p53 gene rearrangement in HL-60 cells revealed at least three breakpoints, one in the central region of intron i, the others 5' of exon 4 and 3' of exon 9, respectively. Transcript fragments encoded by the remaining exons could be detected by RT-PCR. Conclusions: active transcription of p53 can consistently be detected in primary cells from patients with ALL and frequently but not always in AML. Mechanisms that have been implicated in the pathogenesis of solid tumors, i.e. p53 point mutations in the highly conserved regions between codons 78 and 227, loss of alleles or gene rearrangements occur infrequently in the hematological malignancies examined. However, alterations may be complex, as exemplified by several rearrangements and deletions within the single allele of p53 in HL-60 cells. Apoptesis is a distinct form of cell death characterized by chromatin condensation, membrane blebbing, the appearance ofapoptotic bodies and nuclear fragmentation. Apoptosis leads to the activation of an endogenous endonuclease, which results in oligonucleosomal DNA cleavage. We studied the induction ofapoptosis in chronic B cell malignancies by triggering the APO-1 antigen. In BCLL cells in vitro activation with Staphylococcus aureus cowan I (SAC) or Interleukin 2 (IL 2) resulted in APO-lantigen upregulation. Co-stimulation with SAC plus IL 2 resulted in a dramatic synergistic increase in APO-lantigen expression. BCLL cells stimulated with SAC plus IL 2 became sensitive for the apoptosis inducing effect of monoclonal anti-APO-1, whereas SAC or IL 2 stimulated cells were not susceptible to anti-APO-1 dependent apoptosis. In contrast apoptosis could be induced without prior in vitro stimulation in hairy cell leukemias revealing a constitutive expression of APO-1 antigen. Thus APO-1 antigen expression alone is not sufficient for the induction ofapoptosis. We believe that SAC plus IL 2 stimulation prepared BCLL cells for the apoptosis inducing effect of anti-APO-1.This might be due to the processing of intracelhilar signals. Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 220 6900 Heidelberg Hansj6rg MASCHEK, Vassiliki KALOUTSI, AxeI GEORGII. Histopathological criteria for predicting survival in MDS patients are not well established. To identify those histological features which are most important for predicting life expectancy in MDS patients, bone marrow biopsies of 384 patients with MDS were evaluated in a retrospective study, and histopathologic parameters were correlated with clinical data and outcome of the disease. A scoring system with 13 histological parameters was established, which allowed a discrimination of 3 patient groups with a mean survival of 34.6, 13.8, and 6.1 months, respectively (p-value = 0.00001}. Applying this scoring system to patients classified as RA and RARS according ta FAB only, it was possible to distinguish 3 groups with different survival (A with 34.8 months, B with 20.3, and C with 7.0 months; p = o.ogol). Meticulous evaluation of the histopathology of MDS in plastic-embedded bane morrow biopsies therefore seems to be of great value for classifying different risk groups of MDS patients, which provides a reasonable basis far clinical decisions regarding an individual risk-adapted therapy and helps to select those patients who would benefit of a more aggressive and special protocol. Patients with severe neutropenia after aggressive chemotherapy for high grade malignant hematologic disease who develop fever and lung infiltrates have a considerably poor outcome under conventional antibiotic treatment. Response rates of 30% are reported for this subgroup of patients from multicenter trials. As part of the first Intarventionsl Antimicrobial Strategy Study of the PEG, patients with pulmonary infiltrates were initially randomized for a I]-iactam-aminoglyceside or a double 6-iactam combination plus rifampin and in case of non-response for amphotericin B plus 5-flucytcsine either in combination with the former antibiotics or with imipenern/cilastatin already on day 4 to 6 of the study. 269 patients were evaluable for response, 71% of which had only clinically and 29% also microbiologically documented infiltrates. There was no difference in response rates between these two subgroups. As etiologic pathogens, fungi dominated with 43%, followed by gram-negative (31%), gram:pesitive (22%) pathogens and Pneumocystis carinii (4~ The overall response rate was 61,3% which was significantly lower than for other documented infections (82.9%) or for unexplained fever (91.3%)(p<.001). Mortality was 21.6% compared to 6.1% in FUO and 9.5% in other documented infections (p=.001). 44 patients had confirmed pulmonary mycosis. Their proportion on documented infections increased from 31% in the first week to 56% in 2nd and 3rd week with a mortality of 22% within the first 5 days. Only 27% of lung infiltrates could be cured by antibiotics alone, Initially randomized combinations of antibiotics did not show significant differences in response rates. The empirical addition of rifampin had no beneficial impact on treatment outcome. Prophylactic oral antimicrobial b-eatment had no influence on response rates. The application of systemic corticosteroids did not improve treatment results. The trend in neutrophil counts and age were the only significant prognostic factors. Teatment results for neutropenic patients with lung infiltrates might be improved by early initiation of systemic antifungal therapy. Microbiologic diagnostics in neutropenic patients with lung infiltrates require further improvement. Hansj6r 9 MASCHEK, Rolf GORMITZ, Vassiliki KALOUTSI, Axe1GEORGII. Among 384 patients with MDS, 30 patients with therapy-induced MDS (th-MDS) could be ascertained (15 women and 15 men). Median age was 63 years (minimum 44.4, maximum 79.0 years) in th-MDS. The most frequent basic diseases were carcinomas of the thyroid (6 cases), Hodgkin's lymphomas (5 cases), and mammary carcinemas (5 cases). 4 cases of thyroid carcinoma were treated with radio-iodium therapy atone, 10 of the 30 patients received chemotherapy only, 8 radiotherapy anly, and 7 a combined chemo-radiotherapy. The minimum latency period between diagnosis of the primary disease and manifestation of MDS was 12 months, the maximum latency period amounted to 24 years; the medium latency period is thus 7.2 years. 37 % of the secondary myelodysplasios developed overt acute non-lymphatic leukemia (ANLL) in the course of their disease. -Classification of these 30 cases according to the FAB system revealed ]O patients with RA, 10 patients with RAEB, 4 patients not otherwise classified, 3 patients with CMMoL, 2 patients with RAEB-T, and l patient with RARS. Evaluation of the histopothology showed that sclerosis and fibrosis of the bone morrow occurred more frequently (33 % versus 17 %) in secondary than in primary MDS. Atypias of erythropoiesis can likewise be found twice as frequently as in primary MDS patients, whereas dysplastic changes of megakaryopoiesis and granulopoiesis did not show conspicuous differences in frequency and grade among patients with primary and with secondary MDS. Cases with increased siderin deposits in the reticulum of the bone marrow are observed significantly more rarely in secondary MDS than in primary MDS. -In contrast to other authors, we did not observe hypoplasia of hematopoiesis more often in th-MDS than in primary myelodysplasias. About 20% of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) develop hematological relapse after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (aBMT). A new conception of relapse treatment studied by Kolb et al. (Munich) is based on the "graft-versus-leukemia" (GvL) reaction of immunocompetent bone marrow donor cells directed against the leukemic cell clone of the recipient. For this purpose, peripheral blood leukocytes of the donor are transfused to the patient not requiring immunosuppression because of persisiting immunotolerance due to mixed chimerism after aBMT. Additionally, oNnterferon (cNFN) is given to enhance the antileukemic effect. We describe a patient with hematological relapse of Philadelphia chromosome positive (Ph+) CML one year after aBMT who was treated with o~-IFN (5-8 x 106 U/day) and 10 single leukocyte transfusions (% = 1.8 x 1010 leukocytes) of his female donor. Four weeks later, he developed severe hepatic, intestinal and cutanous graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) requiring immunosuppressive treatment to avoid liver failure. Finally, not only hematological, but complete eytogenetic and molecular remission was achieved. A relapse constellation (46, XY, Ph+) was changed into cytogenetic remission with complete chimerism (46, XX, Ph-), and bcr-abl translocation could not be detected even by the potymerase chain reaction (PCR) method. Successful treatment of leukemia relapse after aBMT with (x-IFN and donor leukocyte transfusions reflects the antileukemic potency of this therapy, and fudher patients will be treated equally to determine its curative potency. In clinical studies, during cytostatic therapy of SCLC-patients, hematopoietic growth factors are used to prevent the induced bone marrow toxicity. A detailed analysis of the hematological and infectious complications without growth factors is not available. In a prospective study we evaluated the complications in the course of 107 patients who had been treated according to the EORTC-TriaI: Alternating vs sequential chemo-radio-therapy and to the Havemann-Protocol: Etoposid/Vincristin vs AIO and Carboplatin/Vepesid. We documented hematological toxicity WHO-grade 3 and 4: Leukopenia 77%, thrombozytopenia 13%, anemia 8%. If during the treatment granulocytes decreased below 1000 x 105/I we used ciprofloxacin (2 x 500 mg p.o.) for infection prevention (65% of the patients). Fever episodes were seen in 78 patients (73%). In 65 cases (61%) infections were diagnosed clinically (62%) and microbiologically (34%). In 4% of the patients infections were suspected. Manifestation of infections were pulmonal (purulent bronchitis 19%, bronchopneumonia 12%, pleural empyema 2%), sepsis 10% (bacteriemia 6%), oropharyngeal (25%) in the urinary tract (17%) and on the skin (15%). The prevailing germs were: Staph. aureus (21%), Strept. pneum. (11%), enterococci (11%), gram-negative cocci (18%). The antibiotic response rate was 79%. 9 patients died during infectious episodes, 4 patients with an advanced tumor stage died as a result of the chemotherapy, 5 patients due to their underlying disease. This analysis shows the necessity to improve the infection control during the intensive cytostatic treatment of SCLCpatients. Long-term in vitro hemopoiesis strictly depends on the interaction of a heterogeneous population of adherent cells with very primitive bemopoietic stem cells (PSTC) from which elouogenic ceils, e.g. granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming cells (GM-CFC), can be derived for many weeks. The stem ceils inducing long-term in vitro hemopoiesis differ from clonogenie cells by their resistance to 4-bydroperoxycyclophosphamide and by differences in their antigen expression. In order to analyze the frequency of PSTC normal human bone marrow ceils (BMC) were seeded onto subeultured and irradiated allogeueie adherent marrow layers in a wide concentration range. Thereafter, the cultures were incubated with weekly changes of half of the medium. After 5 weeks the cells were harvested and GM-CFC were determined individually from each microculture. The frequency of PSTC in the initial BMC sample was determined by employing Poisson statistics and regression analysis of the fraction of GM-CFC-non-producing cultures. In 6 different samples appx. 1 PSTC was found per 69~0 unseparated normal BMC resulting in a frequency of 14.5 _+ 8.1 PSTC per 10 BMC. Our results demonstrate that the frequency of human PSTC can be analyzed in vitro which offers an interesting new tool for quantitative analyses at the PSTC level in the clinical bone marrow transplantation setting as well as in pathopbysiological studies of stem cell diseases. The Wilms tumor suppressor gene (WT1) has been isolated and characterized recently. It is located at the human chromosome 11 band p13. The WT1 mRNA is expressed in a limited range of normal cell types, predominantly in kidney and spleen during early development. It was also found expressed in several sporadic Wilms tumors and some human tumor cell lines including the hematopoetic cell lines K562 and CEM. The WT1 gene product includes a zinc finger region, potentially conferring DNA binding. It is suggested that the WT1 gene product functions as a transcription factor, being involved in differentiation. Here we show WT1 transcription in a variety of immunologically well characterized human actue lymphoblastic leukemias (c-ALL, pre-pre B-ALL, pre T-ALL, T-ALL) utilizing RNA-PCR (polymerase chain reaction). Of 51 acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALL), WT1 transcripts were detected in 30 cases (56 %). No correlation between WT1 expression and immunophenotype of the blast cells was found so far. In two cases one allele of the zinc finger region is altered. The precise genetic alteration was determined by automated solid-phase sequencing. Our data show a different expression pattern of the WT1 gene in ALL. As most of the ALLpatients are treated according to the AUL/ALL-study protocol, the expression of WT1 will be correlated to clinical risc factors, remission duration and overall survival. Department of Hematology and Oncology, Klinikum Steglitz, Free University of Berlin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 1000 Berlin 45, Germany. In chronic ivmnhocvtic leukemia of T-cell tvDe most cases exhibit T-cell receptor B gene demonstrating predominantly large granular lymphocytes with granulocytopenia, associated with autoimmune disease and unlike the "knobby' and pleomorphic subtypes a low frequency of skin infiltration and benign clinical course. Patients with the Drolvmnhocvtic leukemia of T-cell tYPe unlike the B-cell equivalent, frequently have lymphadenopathy and skin infiltrations. L vmDhoeDithelioid IVmDhoma (Lennert ivmDhema) with its histology suggess of Hodgkinis disease and clinical presentation of a generalized non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) is of moderate aggressiveness. -zo e 1 homa exhibits a generalized lymphadenopathy, infiltration of lung and pleura and rarely of bone marrow. Anaioimmunoblastic IvmDhadenoDathv (Arr.n. LurX| --tYPe T-cell 1 homa is a distinctive disease complex including constitutional symptoms, generalized lymphadenopathy, rash, hepatosplenomegaly and autoimmL[ne anemia. According data of a prospective study AILD behaves like a NHL of high-grade malignancy. The same is true for the T-cell counterparts of immunoblastic and the larqe cell ananlastic ivmDhQma (Ki-I Ivmphoma). Data of retrospective and a few prospective studies seem to demonstrate that peripheral T-cell lymphomas of high-grade malignancy are associated with a poorer prognosis than their B-cell equivalents. Patients with adult T-cell leukemia/lymDhoma (A~T.T:) % HTLV 1 demonstrate skin involvement in more than 60-70% of cases, bone lesions often accompanied by hypercalcemia and exhibit a median survival probability of less than 6 months. Abt. fur H~matologie der Med. Universit~tsklinik Essen, HufelandstraBe 55, D-4300 Essen i, Germany MITOXANTRONE METABOLISM USING PRIMARY CULTURES OF RAT HEPATOCYTES K. Mewes*, J. Blanz, G. Ehninger and K.-P. Zeller* The metabolism of mitoxantrone has been studied using hepatocytes in primary cultures freshly prepared from rat liver. Cells have been incubated for 24h with concentrations ranging from 10-100~aM mitoxantrone. The metabolic pattern has been evaluated by high performance liquid chromatography using a method specifically developed for mitoxantrone and its thioether metabolites. By this technique three of the five metabolites occuring in intra-and extracellular compartment have been identified as a mono-L-cysteine conjugate, a monoglutathione conjugate, and a naphthoquinoxaline derivative of mitoxantrone. These metabolites have been independently prepared by chemical synthesis and their structures have been established by NMR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry. The formation of these metabolites can be explained by cytochrome P-450 mediated oxidation of the phenylenediamine substructure to an intermediate quinonediimine. Our results emphasizes the importance of an oxidative biotransformation of mitoxantrone in ceils to a quinonediimine intermediate characterized by a high alkylating potential. Insutut fiir Orgamsche Chemie, Auf der Morgenstelle 18, W-7400 Tiibingen Medizinische Klinik Tiibingen, Otfried-Miiller-Str. 10, W-7400 Tfihingen P.S Mitrou #, T. Klippstein, G. Lautenschl&ger, K.L. Burkhardt ABVD seems to be at least as effective as MOPP in the treatment of HD with minimal risks of male sterilization and secondary ANLL when compared to MOPP. In an attempt to reduce toxicity the ABVD regimen was modified by replacing DTIC with etoposide, vinblastine with vincristine to avoid serious myelotoxicity and adriamycin with epirubicin to reduce the risk of cardiotoxicity. The regimen consisted of Epirubicin (E) 30 mg/m 2, Bleomycin 8 mg/m 2, Vincristin (O) 1.4 mg/m 2 i.v. d 1 +8, Etoposide 100 mg/m 2 i.v. d 1-4 and Prednisone 40 mg/m 2 p.o. d 1-8 (EBOEP). Treatment was repeated every 3 weeks for 4 cycles followed by IF or EF RT with 30 Gy. Fifty previously untreated patients (pts) with stages I-IIA,B with unfavourable prognostic factors, mainly mediastinal bulky disease or IIIA, B and 6 pts in first relapse following RT are so far evaluable. Twenty-four pts had B-symptoms. Nodular sclerosis (37/56) and mixed cellularity (14/56) were the predominating histologies. All pts entered complete remission with a median duration of 35+ months. The three year failure free survival is 90% for the previously untreated pts and 50% for the pts treated at first relapse at 3 yrs. Acute toxicity was minimal. Grade 3/4 toxicity was noted in 22% for leukocytes and in 3.5% for plateles of the chemotherapy cycles. The myelotoxic agents epirubicin and etoposide have been administered at the calculated doses in >90% of all courses. Severe nausea and vomiting (2%) were infrequent. Spermatogenesis was preserved in male pts, Cardiac and lung function testing did not reveal serious complications. Thus, EBOEP seems to be an effective regimen with the minimal acute toxicity, which should be introduced in the treatment of more advanced stages of HD. Both, interferon-a (IFN-a) and interleukin-2 (IL-2) have some efficacy in advanced renal cell cancer (RCC) as single agents and act synergistically on activation of cytotoxic cells in vitro. In order to improve clinical results without more toxicity, we treated patient,s with,advanced RCC in a daily alternating schedule o,~ 10x1~ U/m" rlFN-a s.c. (Essex-Pharma, Munich) and 18x10 ~ IU/m rlL-2 (EuroCetus, Frankfurt) as lh infusion for 14 days. This cycle was repeated after a rest of 3-4 weeks up to a maximum of 4 cycles. In a f~llowiog phase II study we reduced the dosages of IFN-a to 3x10 ~ U/m~and rlL-2 to 9x10 ~ IU/m . In the first study, totally 36 patients were entered, 30 were evaluable for response. 2/30 achieved CR and 7/30 PR (CR+PR=30%) with a remission duration of 3-25+. One CR is still ongoing. In the second study 15 patients are entered so far, 12 are evaluable for response. Up to now the response rate in this low dose study is only 8% with 1 PR. In both schedules no grade IV toxicities were observed, the side effects were tolerable. No major difference between the higher and lower dosages were noted. In contrast to CIVI application of IL-2 no or only a mild capillary leak syndrome was observed. High amounts of endogenous cytokine induction as IFN-y, TNF-cr and 11-6, sRIL-2 and an upregulation of endogenous IL-2 mRNA were detected. In the hiher dose study the lymphopenia was less pronounced than in the low dose study. Between responders and non-responders the only significant difference was a longer persisting lyphocytosis in responders. The preliminary data suggest a dose dependent reponse in RCC. Combination chemotherapy of AML usually contain anthracyclines, which may interfere with bone marrow transplantation because of their cardiotoxicity. In a pilot study (unpublished results) the combination of etoposide (E) and intermediate high-dose Ara-C (I-HIDAC) demonstrated substantial activity in AML and has been introduced in the treatment of relapsing AML patients. Patients: 29 pts with first AML relapse treated in 5 clinics are evaluable for response to treatment. The median age was 53 yrs. FAB-Classification: M1, M2 11, M3, M4,5 14, M7 2 pts. The median duration of the preceding first remission was 14 months. Chemotheraov consisted of Ara-C 600 mg/m 2 every 12 hrsx8 and etoposide 100 mg/m 2 daily days 1-7. Pts received 2 courses of induction followed by an additional consolidation course. The study design of postremission treatment with Interleukin-2 and autologous bone marrow transplantation will be presented elsewhere. Results and side effects: Twenty out of 29 pts (69%) achieved complete remission (CR), 2 PR, 2 were early deaths and 5 have been resistant to chemotherapy. The median duration of the second CR is 8+ months. In 5 pts (25%) the second CR was longer than the first CR. Four additional pts. are alive in CR 1-20 months after treatment. Infectious (FUO, pneumonia, septicemia) were the most frequent side effect. Chemotherapy was well tolerated. Conclusion: Although preliminary, the results are encouraging indicating that aggressive chemotherapy followed by immunotherapy may substantially prolong second remission in pts. with relapsing de novo AML. *Division of Haematology, Department of Internal Medicine, J.W. Goethe University, Frankfurt, FRG APO-1/Fas, a new activation antigen and member of the NGF/TNF receptor family, in normal and neoplastic B cells. Co-regulation with ICAM-1 (CD54) in peripheral B cells and co-ordinate expression in a subset of follicular B blasts. Peter Mrller, Christof Henne, Frank Leithauser, Anette Eichelmann, Silke Brtiderlein, Jens Dhein, and Peter H. Krammer APO-1/Fas is a 50kDa transmenbrane glycoprotein belonging to the NGF/TNF receptor family of surface molecules. Cross-linking of APO-1/Fas molecules via antibodies against this structure induces apoptotic cell death in sensitive cells. Here we show that APO-1/Fas is an activation molecule on B cells. It could be induced/enhanced on dense and buoyant tonsillar B cells, respectively, through surface immunoglobulin cross-linking in combination with interleukin-2 or by interferon-~, together with tumor necrosis factor-a. These conditions also increased the amount of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (CD54) on these ceils. Epstein-Ban" virus transformants of peripheral B cells co-expressed APO-1/Fas and CD54 at very high levels. Immunohistologically, Ape-1/Fas was detectable at low levels in a subpopulation of follicular center B blasts and, at higher levels, in sinusoidal B cells while follicular mantle B cells and plasma ceils were negative. Acute B lymphoblastic and chronic B lymphocytic leukemias and Burkitt's lymphomas were immunohistochemically devoid of both APO-1/Fas and CD54. At the individual level expression strictly corresponded in mediastinanal B cell lymphomas and statistically correlated in follicular center cell lymphomas (p<0.0019) but was less stringently associated in hairy cell leukemia. No association was found in plasmacytomas.This was in line with the differential expression of these molecules found i n reactive plasma ceils. The co-ordinate expression of APO-l/Fas and CD54 might suggest that the receptor function of APO-1/Fas might be influenced by accesory molecules. Present address: Prof. Dr. med. Peter Mrller, Pathologisches Insfitut der Universit~it Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 220, D-6900 Heidelberg J. Mulling, A. Franke, A. Borstel, A. Daeud, Ch. Willgeroth In this paper an account of results obtained by treatment of NHL-patients with primary manifestation into the GIT. Sequentiell diagnostic programs and appropriate therapy were applied from January 1978 to December 1991 to 60 patients with primary GIT-NHL out of a large group of 952 NHL-patients. All patients were examined and treated at the Department of Hematology, Clinic of Internal Medicine, Medical Academy Magdeburg. The histological sub-types were diagnosed using KIEL-classification. Clinical staging was performed by the aid of modified ANN-ARDOR-classification. Survival courves have been calculated in accordance with product limit methods of KAPLAN-MEYER. 33 men end 27 womwn fell ill, most of them at an age beetwen 41 to 70 years. A high-grade malignant sub-type was detected in 37 cases and 23 patients showed a low-grade malignant sub-type. Long-term survival rates and diagnostic and therapeutic possibilities for the general improvement of therapeutic results will be discussed too. We investigated patients with hematologic malignancies for evidence of HTLVI in the serum. We included patients with the following diagnoses: Acute myeioid leukemia, acute lymphatic leukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia, myelodysplastic syndrome. Additionally obtained sexa from healthy platelet donors during the same period were also tested. None of the patients tested had a known risk for acquiring retroviral infection. The results showed a high incidence of reactivity by both indirect immunfluorescence and Western Blot in the group of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes. Reaction was found in the group of patients wtth AML but to a lesser degree in the group of patients with chronic lymphatic leukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia and in the group of healthy platelet donors no reactivity was found. The screening for HTLV1 which we carried out two years ago showed silnilar results. Therefore we have to discuss: Whether the high occurrence is a results of the intensive supportive care required by the group of patients with MDS or whether the virus plays a role in the etiology of the disease. RESULTS: At the time of BMT significant amounts of VP-16 were detectable ranging from 60 -1630 ng/ml. The terminal half-lives were significant longer than described in the literature ranging from 6 -100 hours. The plasma samples from the day when BMT was carried out showed a significant inhibition of the CFU-GM in those samples with high VP-16 plasma levels. CONCLUSION: The BMT procedure should be delayed if high plasma levels of VP-16 are detected. A drug monitoring procedure of the cytostatic agents being used in the conditioning regimen is recommended or if not possible, there should be at least an interval 72 hrs between VP-16 administration and BM infusion. INTRODUCTION: Anthracyclines are the most active anticancer agents in breast cancer patients. Drug resistance is the most important problem in metastatic breast cancer. Drug resistance modulation with high-dose verapamil (VPL) and intensive dose epirubicin (EPI) was applied to breast cancer patient with metastasis. PATIENTS and METHODS: 51 patients entered the study, 26 were treated with EPI 40 mg/m 2 d3 iv bolus injection and 25 patients were treated with EPI (same dose and schedule) plus 4 x 120 mg VPL po d4. Response evaluation was carried out after three cycles. Study endpoints were the determination of the objective response rate and the overall survival time. RESULTS: In the group of patients with EPI + VPL the objective response rate was 33 %, 38 % had an NC and 29 % a PD. The results in the EPI group were 33 %, 28 % and 40 % respectively. The median survival time was 8.9 month in the EPI + VPL group and 7.4 month in the EPI group. There was no statistical significant difference in clinical outcome and overall survival time. CONCLUSION: The objective response rate was lower than expected. A resistance modifying action was not observed. VPL is not a good candidate for such trials and EPI at higher dose is as effective as at lower dose. Since similar dermal lesions have been described to characterize human cytomegalovirus infection (HCMV) and GvHD related skin manifestations, a precise analysis of the relationship between HCMV infection and the development of cutaneous GvHR was performed on 118 skin biopsies obtained from 44 patients with and without GvHD after BMT, who were transplanted from HLA-identical sibling donors. Sensitive virus detection by PCR-DNA amplification was used and correlated to immunohistological and clinical alterations of skin GvHR to evaluate local HCMV involvment. 9 (29%) of 31 patients revealed presence of HCMV-DNA already before BMT in comparison to 3 of 20 (15%) controls of untransplanted patients with renal diseases. During the first 30 days after BMT a rise of skin HCMV infection was observed to 60% of the analysed patients in correlation with the development of cutaneous grade II-IV aGvI-ID. Sequential immunhistologicai staining in correlation to PCR analysis of skin biopsies in five patients with clinical signs of aGvHD after BMT revealed presence of HCMV before the development of abnormal expression of HLA-class II antigens on keratinocytes and of T-cell infiltrates representing established immunhistological criteria of dermal GvHD. Thus CMV may participate in tissue lesions not only by augmenting, but also by inducing aGvHD of the skin in humans. Medical Univ. Clinic, Dept. II and Section of Transplantation Immunology and Immunohematology, W 7400 T/ibingen, Germany KMross, K.Hamm, D.K.Hossfeld INTRODUCTION: Experimental data suggests that multi-drug resistance in cancer may be overcome by increasing the dose of anticancer agents in combination with a drug resistance modifying agent. We studied the pharmacokinetics and metabolism of epirubicin (EPI) as well as of verapamil (VPL) during a randomized clinical phase II study in breast cancer patients. PATIENTS, MATERIAL, AND METHODS: Totally 11 patients with advanced breast cancer were treated either with EPI 40 mg/m 2 d3 or EPI (same dose) combined with VPL 4 x 120 mg po d4. EPI and metabolites and VPL and nor-VPL were determined by use of a HPLC assay procedure. RESULTS: The c(t)-curves of EPI were identical in both treatment groups but the AUC of EPI was larger. Vdss, Ctp and MRT were similar. The AUC's of E-GLU, EOL-GLU, EOL, AOLON, 7d-AOLON and 7d-AON were larger in the EPI+VPL group. The VPL + nor-VPL plasma levels varied between 100 and 1000 ng/ml (0.2 -2 /~mol) DISCUSSION: The pharmacokinetics of EPI was altered by coadministration of VPL. The AUC's of the metabolites were higher in case of VPL administration. Enzyme induction or inhibition of excretion may offer an explanation. The VPL plasma levels varied in a wide range. Resistance modulation with VPL seems to be difficult under such circumstances. Ehninger, H. Schmidt Long lasting remissions can be achieved in leukemia as well as in severe aplastic anemia by allogenic bone marrow transplantation (BMT). One of the main problems after BMT still remains severe acute graft versus host disease (GvHD) (> grade II) occurring in 30 % of the patients after BMT with marrow from HLA identical siblings and in up to 50 % after BMT with marrow from unrelated donors or not completely HLA-identicai family donors. Besides intensification of the immunosuppressive therapy during BMT improving HLA matching of donor and recipient might diminish the incidence of GvHD. In a retrospective study we examined HLA-DP matching of donor and recipient in allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. The HLA-DPA and HLA-DPB genotype of 74 patients (30 with CML, 6 with SAA, 35 with acute leukemia, 1 with myelodysplasia and 2 with lymphoma) and their bone marrow donors were determined by oligotyping. 62 times donor and recipient were HLA identical siblings, in 7 transplants the donor was a not completely HLA-A,-B,-DR matched relative and in 5 transplants a HLA identical unrelated person. In 10 of the 62 (16 %) HLA-A,-B,-C,-DR identical siblings differences in HLA-DP genotype could be detected (once only HLA-DPA, 3 x HLA-DPB and 6 x in both chains). In the other pairs HLA-DP differences were detected in 6 out of 12 (50 %). Mixed lymphocyte cultures had been performed in all patients. The number of patients with GvHD index < 0.1% was significantly higher in HLA-A,-B,-DR and -DP matched siblings compared to the pairs with a HLA-DPB mismatch. Preliminary results indicate even that patients with completely matched donors might suffer from less severe GvHD. Therefore it seems advisable to do HLA-DP typing especially since this difference could not be detected by mixed lymphocyte culture. Medical Univ. Clinic, Dept. II and Section of Transplantation Immunology and Immunohematology, W 7400 T/ibingen, Germany Hereditary causes of thromboembolism are becoming more evident since assays for antithrombin III (AT III), protein C, protein S and plasminogen are more widely available. From 1982 to 1990 hereditary thrombophilia was diagnosed in 23 persons (mean age 28.6 years, 8 female, 15 male) of 14 families in our hospital. 15 patients presented with AT III deficiency, 2 patients had an abnormal low protein C level and 2 a decreased protein S level. Two patients presented with hypoplasminogenaemia and 2 with hypo-/dysfibrinogenaemia. Diagnosis of thrombophilia was evident in 21 cases after thromboembolism; thrombosis was determined in 19 patients under 40 years. Apart from 14 patients (60.8 %) with deep vein thrombosis'(60.8 %) and 7 patients (30.3 %) with pulmonary embolism, some rare thromboembolic complications were observed: 1 case of mesenteric vein thrombosis and 4 cases of arterial thrombosis. In 3 cases the precipitating factor for thrombosis was simple trauma and in 4 cases surgical procedures, pregnancy in 3 cases and infection diseases in 4 cases. In 10 patients no such factor could be elicited. Two patients were asymptomatic. In 6 patients several thromboembolic complications occurred simultaneously. Coumarin treatment was started or continued in 16 cases. In one woman intraabdomina[ bleeding complications occurred during coumarin therapy. 7 patients were not started on oral anticoagulants for various reasons. A recurrent thrombotic event was seen in 3 patients, in whom the INn was not in the therapeutic range, and in 4 patients after cessation bf anticoagulant therapy. One patient died from mesenteric vein thrombosis shortly after discontinuation of coumarins. One woman was successfully treated with AT III substitution during pregnancy without complications. In conclusion, our data indicate that continuous oral anticoagulation may be beneficial in patients with hereditary thrombophilia. Dept. of Internal Medicine III, University of UIm, FRG A97 271 Musch, E., M. Malek, J. Peter-Katalinic, E. H0gl, M. Westerhausen Mit der Konjugation des Chlorambucils (CLB) an Steroidhormone wurde das Ziel einer gr66eren Tumorselektivit~-it des CLB verfolgt. Prednimustin, ein oral wirksamer Prednisolonester des Chlorambucils zeigte beim metastasierten Mamma-Carcinom sowie beim niedrig malignen NHL in verschiedenen Studien eine verbesserte Responserate und Vertr~iglichkeit im Vergleich zur Therapie mit den Einzelkomponenten Chlorambuci1 + Predniso-Ion (Loeber et al. 1983; M611er 1985) . PM zeigte darQber hinaus Wirksamkeit auch bei vorbehandelten Patienten, welche auf vorausgegangene Therapie mit Alkylantien + Corticosteroiden nicht angesprochen hatten (Pedersen-Bjeregaard et al. 1980) . Der Vergleich der Pharmakokinetik des PM versus CLB + P in aequih~imatotoxischer Desis (PM 300 mg-CLB 30 mg, P 50 mg) ergab jedoch auf eine aequimolare ChlorambuciI-Dosis berechnet eine so viel kleineres Konz.-Zeit-Integral (AUC) des CL8 fl3r PM (15%) als nach Gabe yon CLB, mit welcher die hShere cytostatische Aktivit~it des PM nicht zu vereinbaren ist. Entspreehend der Grundidee, da6 PM dutch den Steroidanteil eine bevorzugte zelluffire Aufnahme in rezeptorpositiven Tumorzellen erf&hrt, haben wir in vitro wie auch in rive Studien zur intrazellul~ren Pharmakokinetik des PM durch-gefLihrt. Die in vitro Experimente an verschiedenen Tumorzellinien ergaben intrazellul~r hohe Konzentrationen an nicht gespaltenem PM, welches mittels FAB-Massenspektroskopie identifiziert wurde. Dar~3ber hinaus unterschieden sich die mit PM inkubierten Tumorzellinien durch einen wesentlich verz6gerten intrazellulw Konz.-Zeit-Verlauf yon dessen Spaltprodukten van entsprechenden Tumorzellen, die mit den Einzelkomponenten CLB + P inkubiert wurden. Auch die zellul~re Pharmakokinetik in viva zeigte ~ihnliche zellul~ire chromatographische Ergebnisse, wobei hier an der Strukturaufkl~rung noch gearbeitet wird. We describe the course ef a 37-year-old wc !an with severe aplastic anemia (SAA), who relapsed six years after anti-lymphocyte glob. ~n (ALG) therapy. Treatment with intravenous recombinant human IL-3 (rhlL-3, Sandoz, B~ ;el, Switzerland) at a dosage of 4 ~g/kg/d for 21 days resulted in a moderate, but only trarsient hematological response. Subsequently, long-term therapy with subcutaneous rhlL--at the highest dose level tested so far (16 p.g/kg/d) was initiated in order to maintain ~rowth factor response. Therapy had to be discontinued ON day 73 for progressive thro-oecytopenia and increased bleeding. Intravenous rhlL-3 given as a 24-hour continJous infusion led to an increase in leukocytes from 1.5 to 2.3 G/I, due to an increase in rc "nocytes, eosinophils and lymphocytes. After discontinuation of treatment, blood coun returned to pretreatment values. During subcutaneous treatment, leukocytes increas~u from 1.9 to 3.2, due to a 9.5-fold increase in monocytes, a twofold increase in neutrophik~ and a dramatic, but asymptomatic increase in eosinophils (18-fc, ld~ c,~-. day 88. rhIL-3 had ,',,. ~ffect on hamog'.c,~in, ~atieulecyte ccunts, basophils, bone marrow cellularity or vi ~cliferative capacity of hematcpoietic progenitors. Side effects of both traatmei . scl ,as were mild and did not exceed WHO grade II. During intravenous treatment, serum IL 3 i creased from undetectable levels before treatment to > t ng/ml, rhlL-3 treatment slign[ly induced serum interferon 7 (IFN-y) and tumor necrosis factor ~ (TNF-oO, although pathological values were not reached. No other secondary cytckines (interleukin 1, ]L-l, interleukin 6, IL-6) were induced at this dosage. Subcutaneous high-dose rhlL-3 resulted in IL-3 serum levels > 2 ng/m[. However, steadystate serum concentrations were achieved for the first time on day fourteen. They declined after day 35, probably due to the inductio~ of neutralizing antibodies. Subcutaneous rhlL-3 induced IL-6, soluble IL-2 receptor (slL-2F) ant to a lesser extent, neopterin. In contrast, secretion of TNF-c~, as observed during iow-des intravenous application, was not induced by subcutaneous rhlL-3. IFN-y, IL-1 or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) were unmeasurable in the patient's serum. Results indicate that (1) in vitro-effective serum concentrations of IL-3 are achievable by intravenous (4 #g/kg/d) as well as subcutaneous (16 #g/kg/d) administration, (2) despite subcutaneous administration, high-dose treatment resulted in markedly higher serum levels of IL-3, (3) only minimal side effects were observed during high-dose treatment, (4) cytokine pattern induced by rhlL-3 was dose-and ro,.te-dependent, leading to induction of TNF-c~ and IFN-~' at low concentration and of IL-6, slL-2R and neopterin at high concentration, (5) despite treatment, IL-3 serum levels disapp~, ea after three weeks, suggesting an induction of neutralizing antibodies. Determinauon of IL-3 serum levels and IL-3-induced cytokines during treatment may be useful ii. establishing optimal treatment protocols. Passive immunotherapy with intravenous immunogtobulin (IVIG) has been successfully employed in primary and secondary antibody deficiency syndromes. In more recent years IVIG has been shown to also be of benefit in the treatment of various autoimmune diseases including immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and Kawasaki syndrome. In order to better elucidate the mechanisms involved in the immunornodulatory activity of WIG, we investigated the influence of Gamimune (7S-IgG; Cutter), Gamma-Venin (SS-F(ab')2; Behring) and heat-stabilized Fc fragments (Behring) on in vitro proliferative and cytotoxic immune cell response, focusing primarily on the action of IVlG on cytokine release. Intact immunoglobulins (Gamimune, 1-10 mg/ml) reduced alloantigen-induced proliferation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) by more than 60% in a dose-dependent manner, whereas F(ab')2 fragments and Fc fragments suppressed mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) only at the highest dose level tested (10 mg/ml). In a similar fashion, WIG suppressed lectin-induced proliferation of PBMC, interferon-induced MHC antigen expression on a colon carcinoma cell line and interferon-induced macrophage activation. WIG preparations containing the Fn fragment of the immunoglobulin molecule also inhibited the cytoloytic activity of NK cells. Immunosuppressive activity of IVIG was mediated by selective cytokine modulation. Secretion of T cell-derived cytokines such as interleukin 2 (IL-2) and granulocyt-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) was significantly inhibited in the presence of IVIG, whereas monocyte/maorophagederived tumor necrosis factor a was induced. Release of IL-1, IL-6 and interferon-g during MLR was not significantly affected by WIG. We conclude that immunoglobulins have potent immunomodulatory properties mediated in part by selective inhibition/stimulation of endogenous cytokine production. Dlv. Clin. Immunobiology, Dept. Internal Medicine, 6020 Innsbruok, Austria, *Dept. Hematology, Klinikum der Johannes Gutenberg Universit&t, Mainz, FRG. Routine immunophenotyping of acute leukemias has been established as a standard procedure in many laboratories. Although monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) of defined clusters and standard technical procedures are widely used, little is known about the concordance rate for the diagnosis of acute leukemia between different laboratories. In a consecutive series of 37 patients with acute leukemia (ALL, N: 30; AML, N= 7) immunophenotypic profiles, using a battery of up to 20 MAbs, were established at 2 different places (Munich = M; Berlin = B). Unseparated leukemic cells (bone marrow or peripheral blood) were shipped as heparinized samples from M to B usually arriving within 24-48 hrs later. An average panel consisting of 8 MAbs (identical in respect to the cluster designation) was used in all 37 patients in both labs.Only 2/8 MAbs (CDI3, CD33) were purchased in both labs from the same manufacturer. Using flow cytometry (FACScan) 293 pairs of markers were invest]gated in the 37 patients. In the AML patients only one discordant result was obtained out of 64 marker pairs tested. In the ALL patients of 229 markers tested for in both labs 17 differing results were found. 10/17 were based on MAbs coming from different sources (CD20 = 5, CDIO = 3, CDIg = 2). On the contrary,7/17 different results Were obtained using identical antibodies ICD33= 5, CD13= 2). Since the expression of these myeloid antlgens was not detected in the second laboratory in 6/7 cases this effect might have been due to shedding along the way. On the contrary, testing for various I-cell antigens did not reveal any major discrepancies.lnspite of the discordant marker results described (18/293 = 6%) the final diagnosis made in the two laboratories was identical in 35/37 (95%) cases investigated. In the remaining 2/37 cases a different stage of differentiation of the same lineage was seen.We concluae that immunophenotyping, using a well selected panel of monoclonal antibodies, standard techniques and flow cytometry for analysis is a reliable method for the diagnosis of acute leukemias and can be performed with cells transported at room temperature even after an interval of more than 24 hours. The synthesis and deposition of extracellular matrix proteins is highly regulated and plays a pivotal in vivo role during tissue development, homeostasis, wound healing, and inflammation. Overexpression of ECM proteins may lead to tissue fibrosis with severe impairment of organ function. Therefore, the accumulation of the ECM proteins collagen type I and fibronectin is a pathological hallmark of several fibrotic diseases including osteomyelofibrosis. Collagen type I is a triple helical molecule composed of two protein chains of the cd(I) and one of the ct2(I) collagen gene. Progress has recently been made in the identification of important regulatory elements of the human cgl(I) gene. Several binding sites for the GC-box binding transcription factor Spl were located in the first intron of this, to which enhancerlike activities were ascribed. We have functionally characterized four highly conserved GC-rieh elements located in the al(I) promoter. The two most proximately to the TATA-box (Footprint I and I], FPI,II) contain mutually exclusive binding sites for the transcription factors Spl and NF-I, thereby forming two direct repeats of NF-I/Spl switch elements. These two elements control most of the activity of 3.5 kb of 5' regulatory region of the routine ctl(I) gene. We could demonstrate that the affinity of Spl to the two switch elements co-increases with cd(I) mRNA levels in a model of experimental fibrosis. Using the GC-binding antibiotic mithramycin we show that the GC-rich elements play a crucial role in determining the high basal transcriptional activity of the human ~l(I) gene in primary fibroblasts. Low concentrations of the DNA binding drug completely block collagen cd(1) gene transcription by directly interfering with transcription factor binding to GC-rich regulatory elements as shown by DNAse I protection and mobility shift assays. The activity of other genes including the collagenase gene are unchanged in nuclear run on assays. These results clearly indicate that M(I) gene activity in human primary fibroblasts is strongly depending on GC-rich regulatory elements, while the activity of e.g. the collagenase gene is not. Thus it seems feasible to differentially change the balance of ECM synthesis/degradation in human fibroblasts by a DNA binding drug. We previously described the isolation and molecular characterization of a novel receptor tyrosine kinase, axl, from two patients with chronic myelogeneous leukemia (Mol Cell Biol 11:5016). We now report on the expression pattern in hematopoietic tissues and in hematological malignancies. We used a sensitive reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) based approach to detect axl expression. A 304 base pair (bp) fragment of the tyrosine kinase domain was amplified and its intensity compared with a 204 bp fragment of the same cDNA reaction using primers specific for e-actin. Expression was found in 6/7 myelodysplastic syndromes, 14/26 acute myeloid leukemias, 6/16 chronic myelogeneous leukemias (CML), 5/7 hairy cell leukemias, and 3/39 chronic lymphocytic leukemias. Furthermore, expression was found in normal human bone marrow  of CG residues plays a major role in the regulation of gene expression in the mammalian genome. It has previously been reported that hyper-m@thylation of the calcitonin gene on chromosome llp, as determined with Southern blotting, can be observed in acute lymphocytic leukemias and Non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, but also in the progression of chronic myelogeneous leukemia CML) from chronic phase to blast crisis (Blood 77:2431 and 2435). In order to work with minimal cell numbers, eg from flow sorted cells, it would be helpful to develop a PCR-based approach to detect hypermethylation of the calcitonin gene. Genomic DNA was completely digested in the presence of an unmethylated PCR modified competitor. PCR was then performed using primers flanking four restriction sites in the 5'-re gion of the calcitonin gene. To exclude false negative results, primers specific for the b-interferon gene without restriction sites for HpaII were included in the PCR reaction. Several human cell lines (Jurkat,Molt-4,CEM,HL60,SCC) showed evidence for hypermethylation, whereas, interestingly, the CML blastic phase line, K562, was completely unmethylated. These data show that PCR can be used to detect methylation in the human calcitonin gene and will probably help to better understand the basis of hymermethylation in the progression of human leukemias. Mutations in the ras protooncogenes are the most frequent genetic alteration observed in AML occu ring in approx. 20-25% of the cases. The signifi cance of such mutations was studied prospectively in a well characterized CALGB cohort (median follow-up time: 3 years). Using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and mutational specific radioactively labeled oligonucleotides, mutations were found in 18/99 AML patients: N-ras in i0 cases, Kras in 5, and concurrent N-and K-ras in three cases. The presence of mutant ras genes was found to be associated with a low percentage of blasts in the bone marrow (p-0.007). No other association between the presence of a ras mutation and clinical parameters (e.g. FAB) was detected. When the outcome of the ras-positive was compared to the ras-negative patients, a trend towards a better survival in the ras-positive group was seen (median survival ras-positive 1.55 years vs. 1.07 in the ras-negative group (p=0.088)). Age adjusted multivariate analysis revealed cytogenetics and the presence of a ras mutation as the two most important predictors for improved survival after age (p=0.01 for cytogenetics; p-0.02 for ras). This improved survival was associated with a trend towards higher CR rate in the ras positive group (83% vs 62%, p-0.1), indicating that ras positive AML may be more likely to respond to chemotherapy. Taken together the data show that ras mutations may define a subgroup of AML patients with a better prognosis. We asked if p53 gene mutations can be detected in the myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), a heterogeneous group of myeloid disorders, which can be used as a model system for leukemic transformation. Single-strandconformation polymorphism (SSCP) and direct polymerase-chain-reaction based sequencing were performed to detect point mutations in 16 patients with MDS in exons 4 8 in p53. None of these 16 patients harbored a p53 gene mutation. In order to examine the role of p53 gene mutations in late steps of leukemic transformation, we asked if p53 mutations can be observed in the blastic phase of chronic myelogeneous leukemia (CML). However, none of 19 patients carried a p53 gene mutation. These results are in contrast to those published by others (JCI 87:2042), who investigated a group of CML patients mainly from India and found mutations in about 30%. These differences may point to the etiologic role of certain carcinogens and do not support the view that p53 gene mutations play an important role in the initiation and the progression of myeloid leukemias. The prevalence of protein S deficiency (which has an autosomal dominant inheritance) in adolescent patients is about 8%. The first manifestation rarely occurs before the 10th year of life, and mostly takes place between the 20th and 35th year of life. An isolated protein S deficiency was first diagnosed in ii elderly patients from nine families from January 1990 to February 1992. The age of these patients was between 60 and 75 years. The median protein S activity was 37% and the median protein S concentration was 44%. Additionally, a grading of centroblastic-centrocytic lymphomas (n = 20), based on the size of centrocytes, demonstrated a better survival rate (p < 0,05) in cases of the small cell variant (n = 12) than in those of the large cell variant (n = 8). Sorting these same cases, based on the presence (n = 9) or absence (n = ii) of a nk~ntle zone surrounding the neoplastic follicles, showed no significant difference in terms of patient survival. It is concluded that supplementary histo-or cytological grading of lymphoma entities can be prognostically useful within the framework of existing classification schemes. StrempelstraBe 14, 0-2500 Restock i, Germany A study of innmnological markers was performed in 16 patients with newly diagnosed refractory anaentia with excess of blasts (RAEB) and RAEB in transformation (RAEB-T) and in 12 other patients with acute myeloid leukaemia evolving from myelodysplasia. In~h~Aical investigation of bone n~3rrow blasts was done using a modified indirect iranunoperoxidase method. This technique permitted accurate morphological identification of blasts and other cells of bone n~3rrow. The monoclonal antibodies used were anti-CD 34, -c-kit,-HLA-DR, -CD 13 and-@33. The range of CD34 expression of blasts in RAEB sanioles was I -14% (mean 7%) and in RAEB-T samples 30 -48% (mean 37%). CD 34 positivity was detected in 7 -94% (mean 46%) of the bone marr~g blasts in acute myeloid leukaemia evolving fr~ RAFt. T. Expression of c-kit was demonstrated only in a low percentage of blasts in RAEB, RAEB-T and acute myeloid leukaemia foll(;wing nEzelodysplasia. A high percentage of blasts (2 30%) in RAEB, RAEB-T and acute myeloid leukaemia following myelodysplasia was HLA~DR, CDI 3 and CD 33 positive. We observed the tr~formation from RAEB to acute myeleid leukaemia in three patients. The proportion of CD 34 positive blasts increased from 2 -5% (mean 3.2%) to 15 -72% (mean 48%). These findings indicate that the positivity of blasts increases with the progression of myelodysplasia to RAEB-T and acute myeloid leukae~ia demonstrating expression of st~ cell inmunophenotype of blasts in these disorders. The quantification of the DNA-content from cell suspensions is possible by means of the flowcytometric cell cycle analysis. Non-Hodgkin-Lymphoma (NHL) show clear differancea within the proliferative activity. If we look at Lymphoma with low malignancy the part of cells in S-phase is most very small. We can often detect greater proliferation rates regarding high malignant NHL's. If we carry out the cell cycle analysis with unfraetionated cell suspensions there are difficulties by measureing the S-phase. Normal cells influence the size of the value in these analyses. This fact is very important if ~'~e inveotigate bone Elarro~ infiltrations by NHL, We point out a method of cell cycle analysis with irm~unophenotyp~d Lympho:,la cells. Co,l~)aring our results with the simple cell cycle analysis we can detect a higher exactness by measureing the proliferative activity of additional lmmunophenotyped cells. Patients with germ cell tumors relapsing after chemotherapy induced complete remission or with incompletely responding tumors under primary treatment have a very bad prognosis with a probability of cure below 20%.To improve their prognosis we started to evaluate the efficacy of high-dose treatment (HDT) followed by autologous stem cell rescue (ASCR). Between 8/89 and 2/92 we treated 55 patients with 56 cycles of escalating doses of carboplatin (1500 -2000 mg/mZ)~ etoposide (12OO -2400 mg/m z) and ifosfamide (0 -10 g/mZ). All patients had heavily pretreated tumors between 3 -15 (median 6) cycles of cis-platin containing regimens and were considered incurable with standard therapy. Prior to HDT two cycles of conventionally dosed PEI were applied to test the sensitivity of the tumor and to bridge the time to HDT. The major toxicities were hematologic and renal or concerned the skin and the mucosae. Two patients (4%) died from treatment related toxicities (pneumonia n=l, renal failure + coma + pneumonia n=l). Response rates were CR/NED 12 (21%), PR-marker negative 16 (28%). At the evaluation 21 of 55 patients were alive in continuous CR/NED or marker-negative PR between 3+ and 26+ months. The probability of overall event-free survival is 34% including 8 patients with an event-free survival between one and two years. These results are very promising in the light of the otherwise extremely bad prognosis. Infections with Cytomegalovirus (CMV) are the most frequent viral complication after liver and bone marrow transplantation and are cause of severe morbidity and mortality. Early diagnosis of symptomatic CMV-infection allows early treatment and can therefore significantly reduce frequency and severity of CMV-associated complications. New sensitive diagnostic techniques for detection of CMV-antigen have been described recently. We analyzed clinical samples (peripheral blood leucocytes) from 60 patients after liver trans-plantation for presence of CMV-DNA using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). CMV-DNA was detected in 33 cases, 27 patients remained negative. None of these 27 CMV-PCR negative patients developed a symtomatic CMV-infection. Further, none of the 60 patients included in this study died due to CMV associated complications. 13 of the 33 CMV-PCR positive patients developed a symptomatic CMV-infection. Interestingly, 9 of these 13 patients were pretransplant seronegative for CMV (IgG ELISA). All 13 patients became CMV-PCR negative during antiviral therapy. Monitoring of CMV-DNA in peripheral blood leucocytes with CMV-PCR does not allow discrimination between viremia and symptomatic infection. Yet, this technique allows -in combination with other parameters (i.e. pretransplant serostatus)identification of patients "at risk" for development of symptomatic CMV-infection. 593 patients (pts) with hNHL treated with CBUIMV polychemotherapy in a prospective multicenter trial (BMFT) were retrospectively evaluated for incidence and localization of clinically manifest TEC. To clarify the pathogenesis of TEC in hNHL pts the following parameters were analyzed in the TEC and non-TEC group : Age, sex, Ann Arbor stage, sites of hNHL involvement, evidence of bulky disease, histological subtype of hNHL, Karnofsky index, platelet count, hemoglobin and fibrinogen levels, TPZ, aPrT, LDH, response to chemotherapy, overall (OS) and relapse free survival (RFS). In the TEC group [35 pts (5,9 %)] age (p--0,035), Ann Arbor stage and LDH level at presentation were found to be higher and response to chemotherapy (p=0,042), RFS (p---0,008) and OS lower than in the non-TEC group. Local compression of blood vessels by hNHL (18 pts) or a central venous catheter (2 pts) at the site of thrombosis were documented in 20 pts (60 %) of the TEC group. Conclusions: 1) TEC in pts with hNHL under CBU IMV is rare. 2) Age,a high tumor mass and an insufficient response to polychemotherapy are risk factors for TEC. 3) In contrast to other malignancies a paraneoplastic pathogenesis of TEC in hNHL pts may play only a secondary role, since thrombosis preferably develops at sites of blood vessel compression by hNHL and in elderly pts, but not during rapid destruction of bulky tumor masses and irrespective of the histologic subtype of hNHL. Mutations at the factor VIII gene locus causing Hemophilia A have now been identified in many patients from many different ethnic groups. Earlier studies used biased methods which detected repetitive mutations at several CG dinucleotides. More recently rapid gene scanning methods have uncovered an extreme diversity of mutations. The detection of mutations has been especially difficult for a genetic disease, such as Hemophilia A, in which the involved gene is very large and almost all affected individuals have different mutations, most of which being point mutations. So far, over 140 different small mutations-point mutations, insertions, small deletions-and 60 large deletions have been characterized. Using computer analysis the melting properties of factor VIII gene sequences to design primer sets for PCR amplification and subsequent denaturing gradient electrophoresis (DGGE) have been determined. With this method more than 80 different muations have been identified. Another promising method to find small mutations in an efficient way is the analysis of factor VIII gene transcripts, which can be recovered in very low amounts from lymphocyte preparations. Recently, on non-CD 4 cells factor VIII protein could be identified by the aid of immunofluorescence microscopy (appr. 1 out of 2000 cells). Institut for Molekularbiologische Diagnostik Kleinstr.14 5303 Bornheim 2 Coexpression of lymphoid and myeloid surface markers is a characteristic finding in lymphoblasts of ALL with a t(4;ll). An analysis of their response to lymphoid and myeloid growth factors and stromal cells was the aim of this study. CD34+ blast cells from 3 patients with a t(4;ll) ALL were cultured in SF liquid cultures in the presence of ILl, IL3, IL7, G-CSF, GM-CSF and KL, alone and in combinations, and in the presence or absence of bone marrow fibroblasts (Fb). Thymidine incorporation, immunophenotype, cell counts and morphology were done before and after 1-5 weeks of culture. Assays for leukemic colony forming cells and normal hematopoietic progenitors were performed using clonal cultures. In the absence of Fb, cell numbers decreased rapidly irrespective of the cytokine combination, a modest stimulation of thymidine uptake was seen primarily with IL3 and IL7. In contrast, an up to 12-fold increase of leukemic (CDI9+/CD20-) cells was stimulated by IL3+IL7 in 3 week cocultures with Fb. While KL had no significant stimulatory effect on growth of leukemic cells, KL acted synergistically with IL3 and GM-CSF on the expansion of normal progenitors, with an up to several hundred-fold increase of CFU-GM after three and five weeks. In conclusion, this culture system facilitates an expansion of both lymphoblasts and normal progenitor cells in t(4;ll) ALL, and allows the analysis of differential growth requirements of normal and leukemic populations. A striking thrombotic tendency can be observed in certain individuals and families. It was in 1965, that Egeberg demonstrated a correlation between biochemical abnormality (antithrombin III-deficiency) and a thrombotic tendency. Further abnormalitites known to cause thrombophilia are protein C (PC)-and protein S (PS)-def. and dysfibrinogenemia. Other abnormalities (heparin cofactor II-def., factor XIIdef. and abnormalities of fibrinolysis) are not truely established as risk factors. The presence of a lupus anticoagulant or malignant disease are acquired risk factors for development of venous thromboembolism. The prevalence of antithrombin Ill (AT Ill)-, PC-, PS-def. and dysfibrinogenemia in patients with a history of thrombosis was found to be around 7%. The prevalence is increased about 2-fold in individuals with a positive family history. In 1% of patients with thrombosis a lupus anticoagulant can be detected. There is a marked inter-and intrafamilial heterogeneity in the expression of clinical manifestations in individuals with a natural inhibitor def. Previous reports have shown that probably the majority of patients with hereditary PCdef. do not have an increased thrombotic tendency, on the other hand in a minority of families the thrombotic risk is very high. Patients with AT Ill-def. type II with abnormal heparin binding are not at an increased risk of thrombosis. Considering long term oral anticoagulant treatment information on the individual and familial history and on biochemical abnormalities should be available. Long-term treatment should be introduced in patients with recurrent thrombotic events and in patients with biochemical abnormalities known to increase the risk. Several lines of evidence support the view that inactivation of tumor suppressor genes and/or activation and deregulation of oncogenes play an important role in the development of neoplasia. We have studied blood and bone marrow samples of 20 AML patients and examined the expression of a number of oncogenes involved in growth regulation. In addition, we analysed the transcript and structure of the p53 gene using Northern and Southern blot analysis as well as single stranded conformation polymorphism (SSCP) and polymerase chain reaction.The myc, raf-1, fyn and vav oncogene was differentially expressed in all patient samples and the respective mRNA levels were high when compared to normal peripheral blood ceils. Furthermore the p53 gene was strongly overexpressed in the leukemic cells. Using PCR and SSCP analysis, we searched for loss and mutations of the exons 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 of the p53 gene in all 20 patients. The analysis revealed in 40% of the patients either a loss or mutation of the p53 gene. The most dramatic alteration was found in the exon 7 of the p53 gene, where the exon 7 was lost in 6 out of 20 patients. These results suggest that there may exist several mechanisms for the maintenance and progression of AML in vivo: (1) overexpression of oncogenes and (2) 13 patients (12 men, 1 female; median age 59 years [range 45 -85]) with histologically verified sqamouscell carcinoma and tumor associated anemia were treated with recombinant human EPO. Other forms of anemia (iron or vitamin deficiency, renal failure, hemolysis or chronic bloodless) had been ruled out. i0 patients had previously received chemotherapy (in 8 cases cisplatin containing regimens). 6 patients had underwent irradiation prior to the enrollement in the trial. Epo was administered in a dose of 150 U/kg body weight thrice weekly, Unless the hemoglobin levels did not increase more than 1 g/dl within 6 weeks, an escalation of the EPO dose to 300 U/kg body weight was performed, without changing application intervals. 1 patient acquired pneumonia and died in the third week of EPO treatment. 12 patients are evaluable for the course of hemoglobin levels: in 2 cases, anemia could not be influenced. In the remaining i0 patients (83.3%) an increase of hemoglobin of > 2 g/dl was found. The median time to fullfill this response criterion was 5.5 weeks [range 1.0 -10.7]. The median hemoglobin concentration increased from 9.9 g/dl [range 7.6 -10.7] prior to EPO treatment to 13.85 g/dl [range 13.6 to 14.1] at week 12 of EPO therapy. Moreover, a statistically significant decrease of serum ferritin concentrations was observed, indicating mobilisation of iron stores. In immunocompetent individuals pneumoccocal vaccines are protective against infections with S.pn. In the present series the antibody response in 11 splenectomized patients with non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL) vaccinated with a 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide prior to chemo-and/or radiotherapy was studied. With the bacterial vaccine a 2-5 fold rise of the prevaccination titer against S.pn. (as evaluated by ELISA against an antigen from the 23-valent polysaccharide vaccine) was elicited in 4/11 patients with NHL. Prevaccination antibody concentration in patients with NHL was lower (p = 0,001) as compared to controls who had undergone splenectomy for other reasons. After vaccination no significant difference in antibody levels against S.pn. was evaluated between both groups (p = 0,082). NHL patients in remission after having completed chemotherapy received a booster dose of the polysaccharide. Revaccination did not increase the pneumoccocal antibody titer significantly (p = 0,7). We conclude that vaccination with pneumoccocal polysaccharides in splenectomized patients with NHL elicits an antibody response in 36% of cases and should therefore be administered. However, a second injection of the bacterial vaccine does not contribute to the protection against invasive pnenmococcal infections. Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, University of Essen, 43 Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, Germany 1 and Department of Microbiology, University of Aachen, Germany 2 Tumor cells in multiple myeloma exert a multiplicity of interactions with other cellular components, such as monocytes and macrophages, T-lymphocytes, polyclonal B-cells, hematopoietic progenitors, and cells involved in bone metabolism. A lot of experimental data and several clinical findings raise strong evidence that cytokines and other soluble factors have a predominant pathophysiological impact in this disease; e.g. paracrine produced interleukin-6 turned out to be the major growth factor for multiple myeloma tumor cells. Findings that cytokines can promote or inhibit tumor growth and may influence tumor complications by direct action on the plasma cells or indirect effects via stimulation of regulator cells suggest the use interleukins, hematopoietic growth factors, and other regulating factors for therapeutical approaches. At present several of these factors have been tested in vitro or are under clinical investigation. Among others, substances such as interferon-u, interleukin-2, interleukin-4, erythropoietin, GM-CSF, G-CSF, and monoclonal antibodies (anti-interleukin-6; anti-CD3) are of special interest. Previous and recent results clearly demonstrate potential impact of these factors. However, just as in other tumors, lots of effort is needed to elaborate the appropriate indications, optimal doses, and schedules for a judicious application of growth factors and interleukins. Multiple myeloma can serve as a suitable model for such an approach. Immunologie In addition to the known 94 kDa metalloproteinase HL-60 cells release a hitherto undescribed 55 kDa metalloproteinase into the culture medium, which preferentially cleaves a peptide bond between alanine and glycine in a synthetic substrate. This proteinase, which is inhibited by chemical inhibitors (phenanthroline, EDTA) of metalloproteinases, deer~des extr~ce!!u!ar m~trix constituerts st:oh as denatured collagen type I (gelatine), fibronectin, proteoglycans and collagen type IV. In contrast to all other matrix-metalloproteinases known at present the proteolytic activity of the 55 kDa enzyme is not abolished upon incubation with recombinant TIMP i or 2. Moreover, after incubation with recombinant TIMP i a 13 kDa cleavage product is generated indicating the proteolytic breakdown of the inhibitor. Thus, the 55 kDa enzyme may influence extraceliular matrix turnover not only by proteolytic degradation of matrix constituents, but also by disturbing the balance between other metalloproteinases and their inhibitors through enzymatic inactivation of these proteinase inhibitors. Such a mechanism may contribute to the premature egress of leukemic cells from the bone marrow in acute myeloid leukemia. In this study we evaluated clinical and cytogenetie data of patients with MDS (RA,RAEB or CMML) or AML secondary to MDS and compared them to the results of the molecular biological analysis. 20 tip long fragments of the c-fins oneogene containing codon 301 were .specifically amplified from DNA isolated from patients with MDS using th~,polymerase chain reaction. Dot blots were hybridiz~ with ~P endlabelled wild type and mutant oligonucleotides. DNA from patients with a 5q deletion hybridized only with 9e wild type oligo, indicating~,e ab~nce of mutations m this tlns region. ~eim-quantitative t,~tt using me eo-ampma, canon of part of the beta globine gone as reference comnanea observati~ons of fms he~gosity in 5q.. 2-chloro-2'<leoxyadenosine (CdA) is a new promising substance in the treatment of lymphoid malignancies. Neutropenia and bone marrow suppression is a common side effect in patients treated with CdA. It was the aim of this study to investigate the myelosuppressive effect of CdA in Dexter-type human LTBMCs. LTBMCs were analyzed weekly for up to 8 weeks. In order to mimic the in vivo situation, where patients are treated with a continous infusion of CdA over a period of 7 days, LTBMCs were incubated with varying doses of CdA (5 -20nM) during the first week. After week 1, LTBMCs were washed free from CdA and with weekly 1/2 medium change (MC) non-adherent cells were counted and analyzed for clonogenity. At a CdA-dose of 5nM, no additional cell loss compared to untreated controls was found. However, the numbers of CFU-GM and BFU-E were reduced to 50% at week 1 compared to that of normals, but recovered after 4 to 5 weeks of culture (Inhibition 0 -20%). In contrast, at higher doses of CdA (10, 20 riM), the reduction in the number of myeloid progenitor ceils was 60% and 85%, respectively during the whole obse~ation pedod (8 weeks). Concerning the composition of the adherent stromal layer, no difference between CdAtreated and normal LTBMCs was found. In order to exclude, that in CdA-treated cultures a functionally defective stromal layer was the reason for the reduced progenitor cell growth, we performed LTBMCs + CdA on preformed irradiated stromal feeder layers. Similar results were obtained whether LTBMCs -+ CdA were done on already formed stromal feeder layers or not. It is known that low doses of CdA reduce the release of IL6 from monecytes and that intetleukins (IL6, GM-CSF) secreted by the stromal layer stimulate primitive hematopietic progenitor cells in normal LTBMCs. In order to exclude that the strongly reduced progenitor cell growth found in CdA-treated LTBMCs is the result of a reduced cytokine concentration in the supernal,ant, IL6 and GM-CSF were measured 3, 6, 12, 24.48 .72 and 96 hours after 1/2 MC. The results show, that the levels of cytokines investigated were similar in normal and CdA-treated cultures. Therefore it can be suggested, that the dose dependent myelosuppressive effect of CdA is mediated by a direct action on progenitor cells and not by a functionally defective stromal layer. The in~oact of hematopmatic growth factors on proliferation aed pathogenesis of rm/etogenous teukeeda is currently the main focus of research. Neariy ate leukemic celt lines are influenced b,/ these cytokines in terms of growth stinwJlation or differentiation. On the other har~d there is evidence that other nonhematop<Hetic growth factors eventually have comparable influences. In our tab human iwetogenous Leukemic celt Lines have been adapted to growth in serLln-free media without SUl~otemtntation of any protein. Serum-free conditional media (CM) of these ceil tines induce growth stimulation of other Leukemic celt tines. A trensferrin (Tf)-iike iron binding kD 50 protein was four<l to be the main growth factor of these CMs. This protein is produced by the leukemic cells and crossreacts with antibodies raised against human serbln Tf. Purification and further characterization of this protein was I>erformc,~] by chr~atographic methc~s, SDS-PAGE, l:w~ptide mapping and amino acid analysis. The kD 50 growth factor differs clearly fr~ hlmlan serL~ Tf in terms of motecular weight, isoelectric point, and chromatographic behaviour. Digestion with V B protease, elastase, trypsin~ BrCN OCt. resulted in different digestion peptides as compared to Tf. Additionally with regard to human serufn Tf main differences in amino acid composition exist for the content of following amino acids: Asp, Thr, GEU, Vat, Ire, His, and Lys. Comparison with metanotransferrin p07 revealed a closer relationship with only the amino acids Thr, Ite, and His varying significantly. Nothernblot analysis of m-RNA of leukemic cell lines using antisense oIigonucteotide probes specific for human serum tf and meLanotransferrin p97 show no idendity. These results suggest, that kD 50 growth factor may be an ackJitional tumor associated rnerdoer of the transferrin superfamily. Work is in progress to reveal amino acid sequence of this novel growth factor. Zentrum der Inneren Medizin, Abteilung HQmato[ogie/Onkologie der PhiIipps-Universit~t Marburg, Baldingerstrasse, 3550 Marburg FRG Present adress: Universit~tsklinik fiir lnnere Medizin, Anichstr. 35, A-6020 Innsbruck A. Pies, B. WSrmann, H. D~hner, M. Kneba, G. Edol, W. Hiddemann, and F. Griesinger. The tal-1 gene is localized on 1p33 and has been found to be involved in chromosomal translocations in 5% of T-ALL and to carry an interstitial deletion in 25% of T-ALL (Jonson st al., 1989) . It encodes a helix-loop-helix protein which is transcribed in hematopoistic precursor cells and may be involved in gene regulation during early hematopoietic differentiation. Tal-1 interstitial rearrangements represent recombination of two 5" intronic regions separated by 80 kb in the germline configuration. TaM rearrangements were found to be a marker for malignant transformation in T-ALL (leukemia specific marker). Additionally, lymphoid recombinase most likely mediates recombination and the junctional regions are highly diversified by N-nucleotides and exonucleolytic trimming (clone specific marker) of rearranging regions. Thus, tal-1 interstitial rearrangements potentially represent an ideal leukemia-and clone-specific marker for the detection of occult and minimal residual disease in ALL and lymphoma at diagnosis and after therapy, respectively. Therefore, the incidence of tal -1 interstitial rearrangements was studied in diagnostic tissues (>50% lymphoma/ leukemia involvement) of 41 T-lineage malignancies at different stages of differentiation: 10 T-ALL, 7 T-lymphoblastic lymphomas, 7 T-PLL, 2 T-CLL and 15 T-lineage non-HODGKIN's lymphomas. DNA was extracted out of single cell suspensions or out of paraffin embedded tissue. Amplification of tal-1 interstitial rearrangement in CEM and of intronic sequences of the vWF gene in all samples studied served as positive controls. Tal-1 interstitial rearrangements were amplified by the polymerase chain reaction using intronic tal-1 oligonucleotide primers as described by Borkhardt et al., 1992 ., VNTR's of the vWF gene using primers as described by Geigsr st al, 1992. Amplification products were size fractionated on 1% agarose gels and visualized by ethidium bromide staining resulting in a sensitivity of detection of 10 -2. No tal-1 interstitial deletions were found in the 41 T-lineage malignancies while amplification products for vWF were readily obtained in all tissues. In conclusion, tal-1 interstitial rearrangements respresent an ideal leukemia and clone specific genetic marker, however our preliminary data indicate that the incidence of tal-1 interstitial rearrangements may be lower than previously reported in T-ALL and T-lymphoblastic lymphomas (n=17) and may be similar in T-lineage lymphomas at more mature stages of differentiation (n=24). patients. An audiogram and an orientating otolaryngoscopical examination was performed before each cycle of chemotherapy and at least one audiogram after treatment as control in follow up. 69 patients (36%) revealed abnormalities in audiogram, in most cases a hearing impairment in the high frequency range from 4.000 to 12.000 Hz. Hearing loss in speech frequency range or symptoms lik~ tinnitus were rare side effects. The primary treatment protocol seems to be of influence: whereas 38/135 2VB/~EB patients (28%) revealed abnormalities, this was the case in 20/30 ECBC patients (67%) and in 11/26 VIP/EiE patients (42%). Total CDDP doses below 400 mg already showed significant side effects, so that every patient receiving CDD2-containing treatment need a careful audiologic control. The follow up audiegram in some of these 69 patients showed reversibility of the high frequency hearing impairment in about 50%. Conclusion: We were able to confirm the ototoxic side effects of CDDP-containing chemotherapy. Repeated audiogram controls are necessary during treatment and follow up from the beginning of administration. In contrast to other reports, we found that in some cases the audisgram abnormalities tended to be totally reversible and the hearing impairment must not necessarily be symmetrical. Trisomy 12 is one of the most common chromosome abnormalities in Bcell chronic lymphoid leukemias, such as B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia or immunocytoma. It has been associated with early need for treatment and short overall survival. Cytogenctic analysis of chronic lymphoid leukemias has been hampered by the low in vitro mitotic activity of the leukemic cells. With the development of fluorescence in situ hybridization (ISH) techniques stddies of chromosome abnormalities are possible not only in mitotic cells but also in interphase nuclei (interphase cytogenetics). We have analyzed 51 patients (,pts.) with chronic lymphoid leukemias using fluorescence ISH. Mononuclear cells from blood, lymph node or splenic tissue were cuhered in the presence of B-cell growth factor, anti-g and PMA or calcium-ionophore and harvested according to standard protocols. Part of the chromosome preparations were G-banded with Wright's stain for karyotype analysis. Fluorescence ISH experiments were performed on slides stored at -70~ using the following probes: D12Z3 (Oncor Sciences), biotin-labeled, a chromosome 12 specific centromere probe and pBS12 (kindly provided by Dr. J Gray), digoxigenin-labeled, a chromosome 12 specific DNA library. Hybridizations were performed as previously described (Lichter et al. Hum Genet 80:224-234, 1988) . By using fluorescence ISH trisomy 12 was detected in 7 of 51 (13.7%) pts. In these cases the number of trisomic cells ranged from 27.7 to 77%. On G-banding analysis 18 of 42 (43%) pts. so far studied had clonal chromosome abnormalities but only 3 pts. had trisomy 12 and 1 pt. had partial trisomy 12. We conclude that fluorescence ISH is a more sensitive method than conventional G-banding analysis for the detection of trisomy 12. Fluorescence ISH will be of great value in more accurately assessing the prognostic impact of trisomy 12 in chronic lymphoid leukemias. Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik V, Universit~it Heidelberg, and *Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg. Lymphogeinc metastases of rat and human tumors carry one or several specific lsoform(s) of the ubiquitously expressed surface glycoprotein CD44. These lsoforms represent splice variants. They carry additional exon-encoded sequences in the extracellular portion of the molecule which are recognized by monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies. Two of the Isoforms were individually expressed in several nonmetastasizing rat tumor cell lines. Beyond a threshold level these transfectants became fully metastatic in that they spread lymphogenically. The smallest isoform tested carries an 85 amino acid nonglycosylated extra domain in CD44. The critical role of these isoforms is further documented by the effective inhibition of metastasis formation by i.v. injection of antibody. The genomic locus spans some 50 kb including at least 10 '~variant" ex0ns. DilTef~u[ splice variants are expressed in certain nonllat tissues, especially in the embryo and In selected epithelial cells of the adult. Interestingly, a small variant is transiently expressed on antigenstimulated T and B lymphocytes and in macrophages. Antibody or F(ab')2 fragments directed against the CD44 variant domain, block B and T dependent immune responses in vivo. We hypothesize that immune cells need the surface protein after meeting antigen in the periphery and for an interaction within the draining lymphatic tissues that permit activation and expansion of antigen-specific cells. It is assumed that tumor responses induced by palliative therapy are associated with a benefit to the patients, in this study we test the correlation of change in tumor load and change in intensity of somatic and psychological complaints. The study includes 153 assessments of tumor responses, somatic and psychological complaints in 83 patients with metastatic breast cancer. The patients were treated with one to three cycles of the Triple-M regimen. Complaints (patient's self assessment) and toxicity were recorded before treatment and simultaneously with the assessment of tumor responses after each of the Triple-M cycles in 6-weekly intervals; the intensities of complaints were classified from 1 (very mild) through 5 (very severe). The correlations of changes in tumor load and complaints were tested by using the Fisher's exact test. The sensitivity in detecting changes of the tumor load or of complaints was tested by using Bowker's symmetry ~est. Results: The tumor load was decreased in 25%, unchanged in 60%, and increased in 15% of assessments. The corresponding results for intensities of somatic complaints were (24%, 50%, 26%) and were (43%, 32%, 25%) for intensities of psychological complaints. No significant correlations were seen in the changes of tumor load and intensities of somatic or psychological corn-plaints (all 20 > 0.05). The intensities of psychological complaints but not of somatic complaints were more frequently (p < 0.05) reduced than the tumor load when excluding those cycles where no psychological complaints were recorded before the cycle. Conclusions: Both, tumor load and complaints were reduced by treatment but tumor load and complaints were reduced in different patients (none of the correlations were significant). Psychological complaints (if not absent) were reduced more frequently than the tumor load. The first result raises the question on whether the reduction of the tumor load or the reduction of complaints or both reflect a benefit from palliation. The second result raises the question on whether the reduction of existing psychological complaints is reduced m()re frequently than the tumor load or patients reported the less psychological complaints the more the disease progressed. Both of these questions will be addressed by introducing an additional questionnaire for assessment of quality of life. Tumor Center UIm, Univ. of UIm, Robert Koch Strasse 8, 7900 UIm, Germany. Immunofixation electrophoresis has become the standard technique for the detection of monoclonal components (M-proteins) in the sera of patients with suspected monoclonal gammopathies. Commercial kits are available for the rapid and convenient recognition of the principle immmunoglobulin fig) heavy and light chain types. Subclass characterization of IgG and IgA type M-proteins, however, is not routinely performed and may be difficult and expensive if carried out according to standard immunofixation protocols. We have developed a simple procedure for the subclass determination of IgG type Mproteins. Sera are separated by agarose gel electrophoresis as for immunofixation (Beckman Paragon | system). Separated proteins are transferred to nitrocellulose (NC) membranes by capillary blot within 20 minutes. Free protein binding sites are blocked with nonfat dry milk in PBS (Blotto) and single NC strips are incubated with highly diluted, IgG subclass-specific monoclonal mouse antibodies (MoAb). Moab are detected with peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse Ig antibodies, and the reaction product is visualized with diaminobenzidine-H202 substrate solution. The procedure is highly sensitive. Detection limits for M-protein bands were 0.2 mg/I for IgG~, 6.1 mg/I for IgG=, 0.6 mg/I for IgG3, and 0.2 mg/I for IgG4. Sera from 189 pts with IgG type Mproteins were examined. One-hundred and fifty-one M-proteins (80 %) were IgG1, 17 (9 %) were IgG2, 9 (5 %) were IgG3, and 6 (3 %) were IgG4. In 6 cases (3 %), the IgG subclass remained uncertain owing to recognition of the M-component by more than one MoAb. Among 65 pts with plasmacytoma/multiple myeloma, the M-protein was IgG1 in 50 (77 %), IgG2 in 9 (14 %), IgG3 in 5 (7.5 %), and IgG4 in 1 (1.5 %) . At the time of diagnosis, there were no IgG subclass-related deviations of laboratory parameters such as ESR, blood cell counts, coagulation parameters, serum Ig levels, presence of cryoglobulins, serum viscosity, retention parameters, and calcium levels in these pts. Likewise, frequency and severity of bone lesions and bone pain as well as the incidence of infectious episodes were independent of the IgG subclass of the M-protein. The same was true for the response to treatment and the survival time. Thus, subclass analyses of IgG type M-proteins may be carried out easily with the assay procedure described. The clinical relevance of these distinctions, however, remains to be established. Interferon (IFN) treatment may stimulate the formation of autoantibodies. We analyzed the occurrence of several types of autoantibodies in renal cell carcinoma patients (pts) treated with recombinant IFN-o2a (rlFN-a2a) in a controlled, adjuvant trial. Patients with resectable tumors (PT3~4N+j.M o) were randomized after curative surgery to rlFN-o2a (9 MU s.c., three times per week for a maximum of 12 months) versus no treatment (control group). Patient sera were analyzed for the presence of antibodies to rlFN-a2a, extractable nuclear antigens (ENA), double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), pancreatic islet cells, edrenocortical cells, parietal cells of gastric mucosa (PCA), thyroid microsomes (MAB), and thyroglobulin (TAB). Prior to treatment, rlFN-a2a-binding antibodies were present in 5 of 203 pts (2.5 %) analyzed. Of 86 pts treated with rlFN-a2a for more than 2 months, 40 (4-7 %) developed IFN-a-binding antibodies. Among 62 IFN-treated pts analyzed 5 to 1 5 months after initiation of therapy, 1 7 (27 %) were positive for MAB, 1 8 (29 %) for TAB, and 3 (5 %) for PCA. In the untreated control group, the respective antibody frequencies were 3/62 (5 %) for MAB, 4/62 (6 %) for TAB, and 4/62 (6 %) for PCA. In 14 pts, MAB and TAB occurred simultaneously; 6 pts were positive for MAB only, and 8 pts were positive for TAB only. The presence of IFN-a antibodies, which appeared after e median treatment duration of three months, was not correlated to the induction of MAB or TAB. Thus, apart from the elicitation of IFN-a antibodies, prolonged treatment with rlFN-a2a preferentially stimulated the formation of thyroid-specific autoantibodies but had no impact on the frequency of several different autoantibodies in renal cell carcinoma pts. The presence of IFN-mbinding antibodies failed to inhibit the development of antibodies to thyroid antigens. In this study 14 patients with hemoglobins < 10 g/dl and/or transfusion dependent anemia received subcutaneously human recombinant EPO (Citag). Four patients had myelofibrosis (MF), three had multiple myeloma (MM), three had refractory anemia iRA), two had refractory anemia with excess of blasts (RAEB). one had chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) and one had chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), respectively. None of the patients had iron deficiency, renal insufficiency or hemolysis. The patients were treated with doses of EPO ranging from 150 -300 U/kg s.c. three times per week. Ten patients (2 MM, 3 RA. 1 RAEB, 3 MF, 1 CMML) responded to EPO treatment. Responders had EPO levels < 500 U/I at baseline, normal levels for TNF-(z and only two of them were transfusion dependent with a short history of transfusions. Responses were achieved alter 3 -18 weeks EPO treatment. Three MDS patients had a rise in hemoglobin level but failed to retain this after further 18 weeks-, 20 weeks-and 28 weeks-EPO application. EPO treatment was well tolerated. Bone marrow BFU-E numbers were low in all patients prior to treatment. Four patients did not respond at the end of 18 weeks treatment. This study suggests that a subset of patients who have EPO levels less than 500 U/I. normal TNF-(z levels and low requirement for transfusion therapy may benefit from EPO application when given at pharmacological doses. Our findings further suggest that even initially responding MDS patients may become refractory to EPO treatment, in view of the trend of MDS marrow BFU-E to decline with increasing erythropoietin levels. Mutations in the nuclear phosphoprotein p53 ere the most frequent genetic alterations in human solid tumors detected so far. These mutations are clustered in highly conserved domains spanning from exon four to nine of the gene. Starting trom DNA two to three overlapping PCR-amplifications were needed to span the whole mutation-prone region. Furthermore p53 sequencing data are badly needed to determine the specifity of monoclonal antibodies against mutant p53. Thus we have established a very rapid non-radioactive solid-phase DNAsequencing method starting from RNA to sequence through the p53 exons 4 to 9 in both directions with only one primer pair. The sequencing procedure outlined above yields sequencing data the same day. Because of the excellent purity ol the sequencing template, reading of more than four hundred base pairs in one direction is possible as a routine. Sequencing with T7-DNA-Polymerase also allows detection of the helerozygous state, in which one allele shows the wild-type sequence, the other the mulated one, respectively. Our sequencing data are a prerequisite for the design of mutantspecitic p53 oligonucleotides for the PCR-detection of minimal residual disease. The molecular events which regulate human hematopoiesis remain largely unknown. However, a number of candiate protooncogenes encoding nuclear transcription factors, elements of the signal transduction apparatus, growth factors, or their receptors, have been postulated to play an important role in governing this process. To directly validate the importance of these genes, and to gain an enhanced appreciation of their function, we have engaged in a series of "knockout" experiments using antisense oligodeoxynucleoddes (oligos). Such oligos have been synthesized as native DNA (18 bp) or with phosphorothioate modified backbones (24 bp). The oligos are targeted against the mRNA of the protooncogene of interest around the translation start site. Using this strategy we have been able to disrupt expression of a variety of targets including the c-myb, and c-kit protooncogenes in both normal and malignant human hematopoietic cells. We have found for example, that disruption of c-kit gene in normal bone marrow mononuclear cells (MNC) profoundly impairs erythropoiesis, c-kit AS oligomers inhibit [IL-3 + erythropoietin] driven erythroid colony formation N70%, and [kit ligand+ erythropoietin] driven colony formation 100%. In contrast, no effect on myeloid colony formation was observed indicating that c-kit function was of uncertain importance for development of myeolid progenitor ceils. Using a similar model system we have also shown that the c-myb protooncogene is critical for the growth of all normal hematopoietic lineages and for malignant hematopoietic cell growth in vitro, as well. Recently, we treated human myeloid leukemia-SCID mouse chimeras with phosphorothioate modified AS oligodeoxynucleotides to cmyb. Animals receiving the AS oligomers lived three to eight fold longer than untreated controls, or those which received three different control phosphorothioate sequences. These results suggest that antisense DNA can be a powerful research tool with potential therapeutic applications as well. The role of CSA in the treatment of AA has still to be defined. We report the results of a retrospective study conducted in 15 countries in Europe and abroad. A total of 334 patients resp. 353 treatment cycles has been analysed. Patient characteristics: initial manifestation 25%, relapsed 10%, refractory 65%. Severity: severe AA in 62% and very severe (VSAA) in 25%. CSA monotherapy (n=118) was compared with CSA+ALG (n=88), CSA + androgens (n=80) and CSA +ALG+androgens (n=39). Results: The overall response rate at 3 me. (CR+PR) was 41%. Responses further increased at 6 me.: 53% overall, 46% CSA-mono, 55% CSA+ALG, 52% CSA+androgens, and 70% CSA+ALG+ androgens. Obviously there is no major difference between CSA monotherapy and combined treatment modalities. However there was an advantage in survival for patients treated with CSA only. Response rates stratified by severity for CSA-mono were 53% in non-svere AA, 34% in SAA and 25% in VSAA. Increasing the dose of CSA did not result in improved response rates. Mean CSA dosage was higher in nonresponders. There was no influence of serum creatinine increase on response. This study is a retrospective one with ascertainment bias. Beyond question, CSA is effective in AA and these data are an encouragement for further controlled trials. Department of Medicine III, University of Ulm, Robert-Koch-Str. 8, W-7900 Ulm,FRG. (4x2.5g/d i.v.) . Seven days after the initiation of this regimen, cerehrospinal fluid white cell count increased to 712 cclls/#l and cryptococcus neofozmans could still be cultured. The clinical status of the patient deteriorated accordingly and he went into coma (Karnofsky index: 10). Amphotericin B trough levels of 0.068 rag/1 in eerebrospina] fluid and of 2.05 mg/l in serum were detected 12 h after intravenous application of 60 mg (lmg/kg/d) ampho~eeic B. Ampho~ericin B was discontinued having no therapeutic efficacy after ? days of treatment. AmBisome R (2mg/kg/d i.v.) was applied instead for the next 28 days and Flucytosize was continued at a dosage of 4x2.5g/d i.v.. On day 3 of treatment with AmBisome R the patient improved dramatically, regaining normal consciousness and vigilance (Karnofsky: 50). Amphotericiu B trough levels of 0.11 mg/l in cerebrospinal fluid and of 3.12 rag/1 in serum were detected 12 h after intravenous application of 120 mg (2mg/kg/d) AmBisome R. Drug level measurements indicate that AmBisome R is able to yield higher CSF drug levels than free amphotericin B under comparable conditions and could thus be more effective than free amphotericin B in the treatment of ctypto-coccM meningitis. The dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DP IV) and aminopeptidase N (AP N), ectopeptidases of the plasmamembrane of lymphocytes, have been found to be involved in regulation of lymphocyte activation and proliferation in vitro. The aim of the present paper was to study the influence of peptidase inhibitors and antibodies on proliferation of PWM stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and of DP IV or AP N positive monocytic and lymphocytic cell lines. We could show that specific DP IV and AP N inhibitors, monoclonal and polyclonal anti-DP IV and anti-AP N antibodies inhibited the DNA synthesis as well as the IL-2 and IL-6 production of PWM stimulated PBMC and arrested the cells in the Go/G1 phase of the cell cycle. The DNA synthesis of the DP IV positive U937, EL4.6.1 and 7TD1 cells was also found to be decreased in presence of DP IV effectors. Using AP N effectors, the proliferation of the strongly AP N expressing U937 cells was found to be suppressed, too. In future experiments the effect of these peptidase inhibitors will be studied with respect of there influence on the proliferation of neoplastic cells of the immune system. In trial ALL/NHL-BFM 86. 206 pts (9 me -18 y of age) with B-NHL (165 pts) and B-ALL (41 pts) were treated in 54 clinics in West Germany and Austria. The therapy strategy consisted of a cytoreductive prephase followed by two kinds of therapy courses: dexamethason 10 mg/m = days (d) 1-5, itosfamide 800 mg/m = d 1-5, methotrexate 500 mg/m = (MD-MTX) 24-h-infusion, and MTX/Ara-C/prednisolon (triple drug) i.th. at d 1, Ara-C 150 mg/m=/12 h at d 4 and 5, teniposide 100 mg/m = at d 4 and 5. In every second course itosfamide was replaced by cyclophosphamide 200 mg/m = d 1-5, and Ara-C/teniposide were replaced by adriamycin 25 mg/m 2 at d 4 and 5. Treatment intensity was stratified according to the St. Jude staging system (Murphy, SB.: Semin Oncol 7:332-339, 1980) . Pts with stages I and II-R (completely resected) received 3 courses, pts with stages II-NR (incomplete resected), III, IV and B-ALL received 6 courses of therapy. For stage IV and B-ALL pts MD-MTX was replaced by high-dose-MTX 5 g/m =, triple drug i.th. therapy was splitted (d 1 and 5), and vincristin t.5 mg/m = was added at d 1. For CNS pos pts cranial irradiation (24 Gy) was optional. Local treatment was restricted to individual cases with incomplete regression after 2 therapy courses. G.W.Bornkamm , A.Ullrich , P.Dormer . Human cord blood or bone marrow cells expressing the CD34 surface antigen include a population of pluripotent progenitors. We idantitied and isolated a subpopulation of cells coexpressing CD34 and e-kit, a transmembrane receptor with tyrosine kinase activity. Novel monoclonal antibodies (16A6, 14A3, 3D6) directed against the extraceUular domain of human c-kit were used for immtmofluorescenco labeling and sorting of low-density monuelear cells (MNCs) from umbilical cord blood and bone marrow. The frequency of e-kit labeled MNCs from cord blood (mean, 5.0% -2.1%, n = 16) was similar to that from adult bone marrow (mean, 3.7% +--1.3%, n = 4). On the average, 1.4% of CD34 positive cells were recorded ix* cord blood and 2.1% in bone marrow MNCs. Roughly 60% of CD34 positive cells coexpressed e-kit. The ability of CD34 +/ckit  calls to form multilineage colonies (CFU-GEMM) was assayed after sorting with an antibody that did not show any sij~lifi~ effect on e-kit ligand or GM-CSF induced colony formation. For CD34"r/c-kit coils we fotmd a 20-to 50-fold enrichment as against total MNCs, and a twofold enrichment if compared to the CD34 "/c-kit-population. Furthermore frequencies of BFU-e if compared to GM-CFC were enriched preferentially within the c-kit +/CD34" population. To study expression of c-kit in lymphocytic precursors, monoclonal anti-CDT, anti-CD10, anti-CD19 or anti-CD38 antibodies were used simultaneously. In contrast to CD34 expressing cells, no consistent doublelabeled subpopulation of lymphocytic ceils expressing CD7 or CD10 was detected. The CD38 antigen, which has been used to discriminate the more mature progenitors within the CD34 positive population, was coexpressed on 73% -+ 14% (n=3) of c-kit positive cells. Whereas the myeloic differentiation antigen CD33 was found on 30% -'-12% (n =5) of c-klt cells. The different cell subpopulations (CSP) in the bone marrow obtained by needle aspiration from 30 myeloma patients were determined by flow cytometry. In double flourescence technique the expression of CD38, CD56, CD9. CD10, CD19, CD20, CD24, and CD34 was measured. For the determination of multidrug resistance we examined the inhibition of the rhodamine 123 efflux 0-R123-E) of the different CSP's. Rhodamine123 is a vital dye which is effectively pumped out from the cytoplasm by the gp -170 protein.The I-R123-E was determined by flow cytometry in the lympoid, the myeloid and the myeloma area. Further we tried to detect the gp170 expression applying the turk16 antibody. We found that the I-R123-E is low in myeloma and myeloid cells and does not change during therapy. In the lymphoid cells the I-R123-E increased significantly during the cytostatic therapy. After several weeks without therapy the I-R123-E decreased spontaneously. Within the lymphoid region we found a CD38 strong positive cell population . We sorted these cells and confirmed that only lymphoid but not plasma ceils showed I-R123-E. In order to proof the hypothesis that the CD38 strong positive cells with I-R123-E are myeloma -associated cells we sorted the lymphoid cells with the highest R123 efflux for gene rearrangement analyses. Neutrophils from patients receiving rhG-CSF in doses of 5 lxg/kg/day strongly express the high affinity receptor for lgG (FcyRI). In contrast, FcyRI is absent on neutrophils from the blood of healthy donors and cannot be induced in vitro with G-CSF. In order to test whether the action of G-CSF in vivo is directly on precursor cells, myeloid cells were isolated from the bone marrow and seperated into various fractions by density centrifugation. During G-CSF therapy, polymorphonuclear neutrophils isolated from bone marrow samples expressed FcyRI comparable to blood neutrophils. Nevertheless FcyRI was also found marrow neutrophfls of a control group of untreated patients, not bearing F~RI on blood neutrophils. Granulocytic precursors at different maturation stages ranging from promyelocytes to juvenile neutrophils only weakly expressed FcyRI, but this expression could be increased after 24 h incubation with G-CSF. G-CSF aiso enhanced the cytotoxicity mediated by neutrophils as could be demonstrated both with Daudi lymphoma cells opsonized with polyclonal rabbit antisera as well as with cell lines from glioblastoma (A1207) or epidermoid carcinoma (A431) coated with monoclonal anti-EGF-receptor antibody 425. Direct involvement of F~RI could be demonstrated by the use of blocking antibodies to FcyRl and FcyRIl. The antibody to FcyRI inhibited only neutrophils from patients during G-CSF therapy but not those of healthy donors, whose neutrophils were completely blocked by anti-Fc~,RII antibodies. Thus G-CSF therapy may lead to FcyRI expression on blood neutrophils by mobilization of mature cells from the bone marrow expressing The anthrapyrazole DuP 937 has shown exceptional in vivo anticancer activity and reduced cardiotoxic potential in preclinical models and phase 1 and phase 2 studies. The antitumour effect of DuP 937 seems to be associated to intercalative binding to DNA and interaction with DNA-Topoisomerase. In analogy to mitoxantrone we found that the phenylenediamine-analogous moiety of DuP 937 can be oxidized by activated horseradish peroxidase. The oxidation produces an quiuonediimine-analogous intermediate with electrophilic properties. In the presence of glutathione two monoglutathione conjugates and one diglutathione conjugate have been identified. After chromatographic separation the chemical structures of these conjugates were elucidated by means of on-line coupling of high performance liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. Collisional induced dissociation mass spectra and nuclear magnetic resonauce spectroscopy provided unequivocal evidence that conjugation took place at the amino-substituted aromatic ring of the anthrapyrazole. Our results suggest that alkylation of cellular targets may be a further mode A. MOiler Expression of selected adhesion molecules of the integrin and immunoglobulin family was investigated on CD34+ precursor cells in normal bone marrow and leukemia to evaluate possible defective homing qualities of malignant hematopoietic precursor cells. Of the B2-integrin family CDlla was expressed on most CD34+ cells in normal bone marrow and almost all leukemias, whereas CDllb and CDllc were not expressed on CD34+ cells in normal bone marrow, but were found on CD34+ blasts in some leukemias. Of the Bl-family CDw49d (VLA-4) was strongly expressed on normal CD34+ bone marrow cells and on the blasts of all 30 cases of CD34+ leukemic samples, whereas CDw49b (VLA-2) was absent on CD34+ cells in normal bone marrow, but detected on CD34+ cells in a few leukemias which did not constitute a clinical or phenotypic entity according to the FAB classification. The lymphocyte-homing-associated adhesion molecule CD44 (HCAM) and CD58 (LFA-3) were expressed on CD34+ cells in all investigated cases of normal and leukemic bone marrow. ICAM-1 (CD54), the inducible receptor ligand for CD1 la/CD18 was not present on CD34 + cells in normal bone marrow, but expressed in some leukemias. So far distinct patterns of expression for some B2-as well as for l~l-integrins and for ICAM-1 were observed in various subtypes of leukemia. This may point to specific adhesion defects in some leukemias or be related to rare precursor phenotypes of normal bone marrow exaggerated in leukemia. Medical Univ. Clinic, Dept. II and Section of Transplantation Immunology and Immunohematology, W 7400 Tiibingen, Germany c. neuter 1, U. Auf der Landwahr 12, U. Auf der Landwehr II 2, E. $chleyer 1, C. Rolf 2, 8. W6rmann 1 , T. BOchner 2 & W. Hiddemann 1 . Cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C) is one of the most active single agents in the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Its cytotoxicity is believed to result from an inhibition of DNA synthesis and from incorporation of Ara-C into the DNA. Recent in vitro studies of our group and others indicate that pretreatment of AML blasts by hematopoietic growth factors like GM-CSF or IL-3 enhances the Ara-C mediated cytotoxicity against clonogenic ceils. Furthermore, GM-CSF and 1[.-3 have been reported to possibly increase the cytotoxicity against leukemic blasts, preferentially. In order to elucidate this phenomenon we investigated the effect of GM-CSF pretreatment on 3H-TdR and 3H-Ara-C incorporation into the DNA of AML blasts (n=31) and normal bone marrow (NBM) cells (n=8) in vitro. Additionally, we determined overall DNA polymerase, DNA polymerase =, TK and dCK activity as well as intracellular Ara-CTP levels. AML blasts and normal bone marrow cells were incubated fur 48 hrs with GM-CSF (100 U/ml) followed by 12 hrs incubation in the presence of increasing Ara-C concentrations (0.1-100/~M). In contrast to AML blasts, NBM cells always responded to GM-CSF with increases of TdR and Ara-C incorporation into the DNA and with increases in overall DNA polymerase as well as DNA polymerase =. Rate and amount of the enhancements of TK and dCK activity affer GM-CSF were similar for both NBM cells and AML blasts. Compared to the increase of TdR incorporation after GM-CSF (1.5-4.0, median 2.7 vs 1.5-8.5, median 2.3) NBM cells showed a significantly lower increase in the ArB-C incorporation into the DNA than AML blasts (1.5-2.4 fold, median 1.7 vs 1.5-8.4 fold, median 2.3; Wilcoxon test p<O.05). Furthermore, the Ara-C mediated inhibition of TdR incorporation into the DNA was significantly lower in NBM cells compared to AML blasts (55% vs 76% at 0.05/~M Ara-C; Wilcoxon test p<O.O5). In addition, Ara-C induced inhibition of TdR incorporation into the DNA was enhanced by GM-CSF in NBM cells (56% to 64 %, Wilcoxon test p<O.O5) while GM-CSF had no effect on the inhibition of TdR incorporation in leukemic blasts (76% to 78%). Furthermore, intracellular Ara-CTP levels were 2-40 fold lower in NBM cells compared to AML blasts. In summary, our data suggest differences in the intracellular metabolism of Ara-C between NBM cells and leukemic blasts which might translate into a selective cytotoxicity. This effect can possibly be increased by GM-CSF pretreatment. Present address: Division of Haematology and Oncology, Dept. Internal Medicine, 1 University of GOttingen, Robert-Koch-Stra6e 40,D-3400 G6ttingen, 2University of MOnster, Domagkstrasse 3, D-4400 M~)nster, Germany. Mitogenic signaJs leading to ceil proliferation may engage Raf-1 as it has been shown for a variety of other polypeptide factors including GM-CSF, M-CSF, IL-3, insulin, bFGF, EGF and PDGF. In addition, the viral homolng v-raf, cooperates with c-myc in abrogating factor dependence of murine FDC-P1 cells and also in inducing leekemias and lymphomes. Elimination of Raf.1 may thus favor growth arrest, at least when the growth promoting event ist generated upstream of c-raf-l. In this regard previous studies are of note demonstrating that phorbo112-myristate13-acetate-mediatad proliferation of NIH/3T3 cells is abrogated upon transfection of an antisense c-raf expression vector. Work showing activation of Raf-1 by specific growth factors does not settle the question whether Raf is necessary for transduction of a growth factor signal. However, Raf ;r.P,;tJt~'~ does di~e~ address that issue, tn these sudies therefore an octadecamer oligodeoxyribonucleotide corresponding to ondons 1-6 of human c-raf-1 has been employed to analyze growth promotion of T lymphncytes directed by recombinant human IL-2. In these experiments the proliferative response of IL-2-receptive T-cells (3H-thymidine incorporation) to exogenous IL-2 was substantially reduced when c-raf antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotides which specifically decreased intracellular Raf-1 levels were added to cultures, while in the presence of sense or nonsense oligo-deoxyribonucleotides the proliferative response to IL-2 remained unaffected. Moreover, intracellular Raf translecation induced by IL-2 was prevented when c-raf-1 antisense oligomers were present in the cultures. Taken together, our results demonstrate that RAF-1 is a necessary component of 11.-2 signaling in l"lymphncytes. 13 patients were in Wanebo stage I, 38 patients in stage If, and 6 patients in stage III. The cytotoxic agents were given using a totally implantable catheter system. The following treatment protocol was administered; 5-flucrouracil 900 mg/m2/3 hrs/day x 5 every 21 days. Treatment extended over a mean duration of i0 month. Cytotoxic side-effects such as chemical hepatitis, sclsrosing cholangitis were observed. The high plasma clearance of epirubicin might be also useful after intrahepatic administration in the attempt to obtain an effective locoregional therapy with a reduced systemic toxicity. The resuits of intraindividual pharmacokinetic stadies on epirubicin after intrahepatic arterial administration (30 mg/m 2 over 1,5 to 150 min) are reported. A tumor reduction of 50 % ore more was determined by computer tomography in 21 cases (33,9 %) . Objective response rate observed in patients with colon primaries was 37,5 %. Mean time to progression was 12,3 month. Elevated urinary excretion of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and/or transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-alpha) in patients suffering from cervical cancer and other malignancies has been reported (UcchiP, asi et a1.1982 . Stromberg et aL t987). As TGF-atphaand EGF bind to the same receptor, they are subsumed under "EGF-like activity". The aim of this study was to reexamine the findings of an elevated of EGF-like activity in urine in cervical carcinoma patients and to evaluate the clinical relevance concerning early diagnosis, prognosis, therapy control and early diagnosis of relapse. A human placenta binding assay was used to measure EGF-like activity in 1 24 urine specimens of 83 patients with histologically proven gynecologic malignancies.67 of them were cervical carcinomas. 23 urine specimens from 18 healthy women were used as controls. High-molecular weight (HMW) and low-molecular weight (LMW) EGF-like activity were measured separately. -Patients under 50 years showed elevated excretion of LMW and HMW-EGF-llke activity in comparison to patients over 50 years (p < 0,05), In the younger patients excretion of HMW-EGF-like activity was statistically significantly higher than in the control group (p < 0,05). Urine of patients with cervical carcinoma under 50 years preoperatively showed higher EGF-like activity than postoperatively. This.was not found in the control group with hysterectomy for other reasons than malignancy. HMW-EGF-Iike activity correlated with known prognostic factors in cervical carcinoma. Excretion of EGF-like activity in patients under 50 years after curative operation was lower than in patients of the same age suffering from relapse. These results indicate a possible suitability of EGF-like activity in urine for screening cervical carcinoma in women under 50 years, therapy control. early diagnoses of relapse and as prognostic factor in patients suffering from cervical carcinoma under 50 years. Further and larger studies are necessary, however, to confirm the evidence. A 51-year-old woman complained of the sudden onset of lower backache 3 1/2 years ago. By sonography and computer tomography, a large paravertebral mass encasing the aorta and vena cava as well as obstructing the left ureter leading to renal enlargment, was diagnosed. Histology showed granulomatous tissue with steatosis and fibrosis mass, likely a xanthofibrogranuloma constituting an early stage of retroperitoneal fibrosis. However a lipogranuloma could not be excluded. Antiphlogistic treatment was slated, and for the following 3 1/2 years, no enlargment of the retroperitoneal tumor was noticable. One month before admission to our hospital, the patient presented with severe abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and dyspnoe. On the day of entry, bilateral pleural effusions as well as lympbomas along the aorta and diaphragm were diagnosed. The left psoas muscle was infiltrated by tumor. Centroblasts and immunoblasts discovered by cytologic examination in the pleural effusion led to the diagnosis of a high-grade centroblastic-immunoblastic lymphoma. Fiberoptic examination of the upper gastrointestinal tract sho%;ed 6 deep ulcera. Mucosal biopsy revealed lymphoma infiltration in between gastric glands. The proliferating blasts contained either one large nucleolus or multiple, medium-sized nucleoli located chiefly at the nuclear membrane. This indicated a high-grade NHL, most likely a centroblastic-immunoblastic lymphoma. By positron-emission tomography with fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose ([18F] FDG) activity was accumulated along the pleura, stomach and mesenterium. In the retroperitoneal tumor histologically diagnosed as or~ond 3 1/2 years ago, no significant accumulation of activity was diagnosed. A laparatomy showed extensive involvement of the stomach, duodenum, omentum majus, colon and retroperitoneal space. In the meantime a successful chemotherapy has been slated with our patient. Concerning the differential diagnosis of this patient, we have to consider a primary retroperitoneal fibrosis (Ormond disease) with secondary infiltration by a high-grade lymphoma or as described by M.H. Bennet (1975) "Sclerosis in non-Hodgkin's lymphomata", since retroperitoneal fibrosis is rare disorder, multiple generous biopsies are necessary to ensure a lymphoma is not being overlooked and therapeutic intervention delayed. For local control surgery and ionizing irradiation are inevitable. In case that such three modality treatment fails or is likely to fail, additional local treatment is desirable. Regional enhancement of drug cytotoxicity by heat is a promising approach to increase therapy intensity but not systemic toxicity. In contrast to the biological efficacy there are some clinical problems, especially the invasiveness of thermometry and the risk of thermal damage of normal tissue. In the pilot phase of a cooperative GPOH-study regional hyperthermia treatment was restricted to high risk patients in the majority suffering from either locally relapsed soft tissue and Ewing's sarcoma or osteosarcoma and soft tissue sarcoma which were not resectable even with mutilation.  Detection of wild and mutant type p53 in human germ cell tumors by histochemistry staining U. R0ther, C. Nunnensiek, H.A.G. MLiller, H. Bader, W. Rupp, M. L0thgens, F. Eisenberger, P. Jipp P53, first detected in a complex with SV 40 large T-antigen, was subsequently found to complex to the E1B 58 kd product of adenovirus 5 and 12, and to mammalian heat shock protein HSP 70. The gene is located on the short arm of chromosome 17. It is made up of 11 exons covering 16-20 kb of DNA and encodes a 2.2-2.5 kb mRNA producing a 53 kd nuclear protein. This protein is found in most cells of the body. A consistent deletion of the short arm of chromosome 17 has been seen in many tumors. A study of brain, breast, lung and colon tumors showed, that in the majority of the cases, where p53 was deleted, there was a detectable mutation in the remaining p53 allele, which causes tumor progression by loss of growth control by functional inactivation of p53 gene. Frozen testloular specimens from 20 patients with testicular cancer were analyzed. The following monoclonal antibodies were used: 1. Clone PAb 1801, derived by fusion of BALB/c splenocytes with NS-1 mouse myeloma cells. 2. Clone PAb 240 was derived by immunization of BALB/c mice with p53-~galactosidase fusion protein and fusion of splenocytes with SP2 mouse myeloma cells. 3. Clone 1620 derived by immunizing BALB/c mice with VLM tumor cells and fusion of splenocytes with SP2/0-Ag 14 mouse myeloma cells. The p53 protein in the mutant conformation was localized in the cell cytoplasm, whereas the wild type in the cell nucleus was found in numerous but not in all tumor cells. The wild and the mutant type could be found in the same tumors (e.g. in 3 embryonal carcinomas, 8 seminomas, in the benign Leydig cell tumor, in one immature teratoma, in 3 embryonal carcinomas with seminomas, in one teratoma with choriocarcinoma, in one immature teratoma with seminoma, in one embryonal carcinoma with teratoma). Neither the wild nor the mutant type could be detected in the mature teratoma. In the same of these tumors we also found EBV-DNA. In some of these tumors we could detect the oncogenes: c-myc, Nmyc, c-Ha-ras 1, c-fos, and c-jun. The discovery of wild and mutant p53 in human testicular cancer is consistent with the view, that alterations of tumor-suppressor genes play a role in the pathogenesis of this tumor type in cooperation with the Epstein-Barr virus and other oncogenes. The posilive effect of prophylactic TPN on the long-term outcome of bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is well documented, even in well-nourished individuals. Intravenous fat emulsions are an integral part of a TPN system in which 30-60% of the nonprotein calories are supplied as fat. As particularly stressed and infected patients can not utilize long chain triglycerides (LCT) sufficiently, MCT/LCT emulsions have been introduced into TPN programs. We have investigated the use of a lipid emulsion containing both LCT and MCT in a randomized prospective trial. Thirty patients are evaluable. The regimen was designed to deliver 150 % of the basal energy expenditure (BEE) for the first two weeks of the study, 130 % for the next two weeks and 100 % BEE for the last study week. Two thirds of the the nonprotein calories were supplied as glucose, one third as fat emulsion. Group I received MCT/LCT (Lipofundin) and group II received LCT (Intralipid). Additionally, amino acid solutions were provided in a dosage of 1.5 g/kg/day. Daily body weight, weekly triceps skinfold, plasma triglycerides, cholesterol, free fatty acids, prealbumine as Well as routine hematology, biochemistry and liver function tests were measured from BMT day -8 to 70. Metabolic parameters, antropometric measures and patient outcome showed no significant differences between the two groups of patients. In conclusion, MCT/LCT emulsions were found to be as safe and as effective a source of calories as LCT, but there were no significant differences in the metabolic parameters in the two groups. Retinoic acid has a well known differentiating activity on leukemic cells in vitro. In acute promyelocytic leukemia, in vivo treatment with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) induces complete remission in most of the patients. The current study was performed to evaluate the efficacy of ATRA in the myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). From July 1991 to April 1992, 15 MDS patients were treated with increasing doses of ATRA. FAB-subtypes were: RA n=4, RARS n=2, RAEB n=6, RAEB-T n=3. All patients were transfusion dependent. Median (range) pretreatment WBC and platelet counts were 2.1 (0.7-10.3) x 109/1 and 43 (6-319) x 109/1, respectively. During the first month ATRA was given at a dosage of 30 mg/m 2. If the treatment was well tolerateted, the dosage was increased to 60 mg/m 2 during the second and to 90 mg/m 2 during the iast month of treatment. 10 patients were treated over the complete study period of 3 months. Neither changes in transfusion requirements nor improvements in peripheral leukocyte and platelet counts were observed. Apart from dryness of the skin and mucosa and hypertriglyceridemia in nearly all patients, treatment was well tolerated. In contrast to patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia no thromboembolic events were seen. We conclude that ATRA has no beneficial effect in patients with MDS. A 20-year old female with c-ALL in complete remission undergoing maintenance treatment with low-dose cytosine arabineside, thioguanin and prednisone developed cerbral symptoms with headache, nausea, followed by desorientation the following day. Peripheral blood leukocytes were 1800/ram 3, platelets 48 000. There was no menint6~a~ CCT showed no abnormal f'mdings, but cerebrospinal fluid examination revealed 160/3 cells (95% neutrophils). Empiric antibiotic therapy with high-dose penicillin, cephalosporln and aminoglycaside was started. On the third day the patient developed nm~ive intracerebcal hemorrhage despite of normal blood pressure and minimal platelet counts of 39 000/mm 3, followed by fever > 39eC. Bacillus was grown in repeated blood cultures and the antibiotic regimen was changed according to the resistance prof'de to clindamycin, vancomycin and chloramphenicol, together with anti-edematous therapy. Nevertheless, the patient became comatous und control CCTs on days 4 and 5 showed multiple brain abscesses with diameters up to 15 mm for the f'n~t time. The patient expired on day 5 due to central respiratory failure. Autopsy conf'wmed multiple brain abscesses at the cortex/white matter border with no other septic metastases in other organs. The CNS-tropy of bacillus has been repeatedly demonstrated and exotoxins of bacillus typically cause a necrotizing inflammation. The latter was the most likely reason for the cerebral hemorrhage in our patient. We conclude that bacillus bacteremia should be considered in the differential diagnosis of cerebral hemorrhage in the presence of sufficient platelet counts in immllnosuppressed patients. Hiller Endothelial cell damage is supposed to be a central pathogenetic mechanism in the development of graft versus host disease (GVHD), a major complication after bone marrow transplantation (BMT). Laboratory methQds for the detection of endothelial cell lesions are missing. A correlation between the degree of microangiopathy and elevation of vWF was described earlier. On the other hand TM is expressed on the endothelial cell surface, can be cleaved and measured as soluble TM tn in plasma. Trying to find a marker of endothelial cell damage we studied vWF and TM levels in patients after bone marrow transplantation (n=15). Materials and methods: Citrated blood samples were collected on day -8, -5, -I, O, 7, 14, 21, 28, and 35 respectively. VWF levels were determined by a commercially available assay (ELISA vWF, Boehringer Mannheim, FRG) . TM was also measured by an immunoassay based on monoclonal antibodies (Asserachrom Thrombomodulln, kind gift of J. Amiral, Serbio, Gennevtlie, France). Results: TM levels before BMT (57,9 +/-21,7 ng/ml) reached a first peak after conditioning (73,2 +/-27,2 ng/ml) on day 0 and a second peak on day 21 (76,9 +/-46,5 ng/ml). The highest levels were found in a patient with severe complications reaching a summit of 223,7 ng one day before he died. VWF was slightly elevated before BMT (141,6 +/-41,3%) and rose continously until day 28 (313,3 +/-133,7%) . We conclude that the observed elevation TM and vWF in patients after BMT could be contributed to endothelial cell alterations in these patients. Dept. of Hematology, University of_Frankfurt, Dept. of Hematology, University of Marburg, :~ DSM, Braunschweig, FRG To analyse the importance of cell-cell interactions for the proliferation of acute lymphoblastic leukemic cells we have determined the baseline expression of ICAM-1 and its modulation by TPA and different cytokines (TNFG and IFNgamma) in a number of human pre-B cell lines (Nalm-6, BV-173, MN-60, REH) by FACS analyses and immunoblots. All pre-B cell lines displayed ICAM-1 in variable degrees with different MG's, ranging from 85 KD to 92 KD. After 12 hrs. of incubation with TPA, IFNgamma or TNFa upregulation of ICAM-1 could be detected by FACS and immunoblot analyses. IFNgamma was generally the most effective cytokine in modulating ICAM-1 expression on pre-B cell lines, since the extent of ICAM-1 upregulation was much higher and the temporal kinetics were different from that found with TNFG stimulation. To determine the function of ICAM-1 mediated cell adhesion we used HUEV in an adhesion assay. Neither the MoAbs to LFA-1 nor MoAbs to ICAM-1 affected adherence of the pre-B cell lines to endothelial cells. MoAb 4B9 (anti-VCAM-1) and MoAb HP2/1 (anti-CD49d) inhibited the adherence of pre-B cell lines to endothelial cells in variable degrees suggesting a role for the interaction with stroma cells. The results of the present study indicate that variable expression of ICAM-1 is a property of pre-B cell lines and can differentially be upregulated by IFNgamma and TNFa but is not involved in the adhesion to HUEV. We conclude that VLA-A but not ICAM-1 mediated adhesion may be important in the interaction of pre-B ALL end bone marrow stroma cells. We have previously shown that platelet aggregation defects in MPD or MDS can be associated with dysfunction or reduced expression of the platelet membrane GP IIb-IIIa complex. To analyze molecular mechanisms of abnormal GP lib-Ilia receptor function, we have studied 13 patients (8 with MPD, 5 with MDS) using conformation-specific monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) and platelet flow cytometry. Ten patients showed defective platelet aggregation in response to epinephrine and/or adenosine diphosphate and 8 concomitantly had a prolonged bleeding time (mean+SEM: 16__+4 min; normal 4+2.5 min). Upon platelet stimulation with epinephrine or adenosine diphosphate, binding of PAC1, an MoAb directed to the activated GP IIb-llIa complex (supplied by Dr. Shattil, Univ. of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia), was intact, as compared to heathy volunteers (n=12), in the 3 patients with normal bleeding time and normal aggregation responses, whereas 8 of the 10 patients with defective platelet aggregation failed to bind PAC1. However, binding of PAC1 increased in response to phorbol myristate acetate, which circumvents receptor-mediated pathways by directly activating platelet protein kinase C. Furthermore, binding of anti-LIBS1, an MoAb that recognizes a ligand-induced binding site on GP Ilia (supplied by Dr. Ginsberg, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla), was concomitantly reduced or absent following platelet stimulation with epinephrine or adenosine diphosphate, or incubation with the fibrinogen-mimetic peptide GRGDSP (which binds to normal GP Ilb-Ilia without prior platelet activation). These results indicate that platelet dysfunction in MPD or MDS is related, at least in part, to an agonist-specific defect either in activation of the GP lib-Ilia receptor, or its ligand binding function, or a combination of both. 14 Consecutive patients with ALL (12 de nero, 2 relapsed)median age 42 years (18 to 69), 10 o-ALL (2 ber-abl posLtive), 2 pre-B ALL (I bcr-abl positive}, 1 early aprecursor ALL and one T-ALL w~Ee treated accordlng to the chemotherapy protocol deserlbed by noelzer et el. In addition r-metHuG-csF (Neupogan R) was given at a dose of 200 uS/m2 iv. in phase 1 from day 2 ~o day 21, and thereafter until neutrophil counts were >1000/ul on two consecutive days. In phase 2, G-CSF 200 uS/m2 so. was s~a~ted on day .2 (after CP) and continued until neutrophils recovered to more than 1000/ul on two consecutive days, These patlenta were oompared to a historical control group treated with the same ohemotherapy protocol but without G-CSF. it included only patients, who achieved CR within 4 weeks (median age 27 years, 22 e-ALL, 3 pre-B ALL, 3 early B-precusor ALL and I0 T-ALL). -13/14 petients achieved complete hematologio =emission (I0 within 4 weeks and three at the end cf induction treatment), One patient died because of funsal septicemia. G-CSP treated patients had a shorter duration o% granulqcytopeni& ( 14.5 days vs 21.~ days) in phase I. In phase 2~the median granulceyte count during weeks 3 and 4 was sign~icantly higher compared to the historical control group. The number of days wlth fever in phase 2 was lower in the O-CSF group (1,5 days vS 0,S days). The full dose of uh~herapy (anthracyclins, oyolophosphamidss ARA-C and purlnethol) could be given in 11/13 G-CSF treated patients, while in the control group only 23 % of the patients received the protocol without dose reduction or delay, These data indicate, that, (I) G-~SF can be given along with chemotherapy in induction treatment without compromising efficacy, (2) the ti~ cf ~ranuloeytopenia in phase I is shortened by 7 days and the degree of granulocytopenie is amelloreated in phase 2 and (3)  TNFo~ plays an important role in immunotherapy with IL.2 by increasing susceptibility of melanoma cells. C. Scheibanbogen, 1". Roll, 1". Mbhler, W. Hunstein, and U. Keilholz The role of TNF~ in immunotherapy with IL-2 is controversial. TNF,~ is induced by IL-2 and thought to be responsible for most of the side effects. It is unclear, whether it is of any importance for response to treatment. The data we present here, however, suggest that TNF,z indeed is crucial for immunologically mediated regression of melanoma. Two new melanoma cell lines were established from metastases of patients prior to immunotherapy. Both patients received immunotherapy with IL-2 and showed good response. Using the standard chromium release assay, the cytotoxic activity of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (MNC) against autologous melanoma targets was assessed prior to immunotherapy and after IL-2 treatment, and for comparison also after in vitro activation of MNC with various concentrations of IL2. To increase expression of MHC molecules and the adhesion antigens LFA3 and ICAM1, melanoma ceils were preincubated with IFNa or TNFa. These two cytokines are of special interest, since IFN~ is frequently used in combination with IL-2 for immunotherapy, and TNF~ is induced by high dose IL-2 in rive. The modulation of cell surface molecules was determined by FACS analysis. Unstimulated MNC had almost no detectable lytic activity. After immunotherapy with IL-2, MNC exhibited cytotoxic activity against autologous melanoma cells, that could be increased by preincubation of the target cells with TNFa, which effectively augments the expression of ICAM1, and to a lesser extent by IFNm which mainly upregulates MHC Class I molecules. Autologous LAK cells (cultered in the presence of 1000U/ml of IL-2) had high lytic activity against pretreated as well as unmodified melanoma cells. The results demonstrate that TNFc~ increases the susceptibility of melanoma cells to lysis by autologous effector cells activated by IL-2 in vivo. Besides cytosine arabinoside the anthracyclines (AC), such as dannorubicin (DNR) and idarubicin (IDA), belong to the most active drugs in the treatment of patients with AML. Multidrug resistance (MDR) may be one of the major obstacles to an effective chemotherapy of AML. It is associated with the overexpression of a membrane glycoprotein (Gp-170) acting as an energydependent efflux pump for AC and other xenobiotics. MDR1 gene expression has been shown to be an independent prognostic factor in AML. Several drugs including calcium antagonists have been proven to inhibit Gp-170 in vitro. R-Verapamil, the dihydropyridine derivative dexniguldipine (B8509-035) and cyclosporine A are investigated in clinical trials to overcome MDR in AML in relapse: The determination of the cellular pharmacokinetics (CP) of AC in myeloid blasts (MB) from peripheral blood or bone marrow ex vivo either directly by FACS-analysis or by extraction of AC and determination by HPLC with fluorescence detection is a functional test for the effiux capacity. Furthermore, subpopulations (SP) of MB can be characterized in vitro by the effiux of rhodamine 123 (R123), a MDR-dependent dye which does not interact with DNA. The correlation with MDR1 gene expression or the determination of Gp-170 by MRK 16 immunefluorescence may help to understand the different sensitivity of MB to AC on a molecular level. The comparison of the CP of DNR and IDA after simultaneous administration in equimolar amounts led to a significantly longer half life for effiux and a higher area under the curve for IDA. These differences can be explained by a lower MDR-dependent effiux of IDA or by its higher affinity to cellular macromolecules such as DNA. Interestingly, there is a strong correlation between high R123-effiux capacity and the expression of CD34. Thus, MDR may be a physiological detoxification mechanism in bone marrow stem cells. Accordingly, further clinical investigations of MDR-modifiers must be performed with great caution. Due to the application of more intensive chemotherapeutic regimens with support either by colony stimulating factors (CSF) or bone marrow transplantation (BMT) in the treatment of malignant diseases, an increasing number of patients is temporary leukopenic. Conventional morphological examination (CME) of May-GriJnwald-Giemsa-stained peripheral blood smears of these patients in the daily clinical routine is time consuming or unreliable for statistical reasons. Thus, we have investigated the automated differentiation of peripheral blood counts in leukopenic patients after high dose treatment with BMT by the Coulter VCS-technology (VCS), which utilizes the :~imultaneous determination of volume, conductometry and light scatter of at least 1.500 cells in EDTA-collected blood samples in a continuous flow mode, in comparison to CME. Altogether, 150 blood samples with leukocyte counts between 300 and 2.900//.tl have been analysed by VCS within 4 hours after withdrawal ot blood. In addinon, a con~p~i~z:n between CME and VCS was performed in 69 blood samples with normal distribution of cells. There was a good correlation for neutrophils (y = 0.95x + 26, r = 0.93), lymphocytes (y = 0.86x + 146, r = 0.95) and eosinophils (y = 0.82x + 15, r = 0.93), respectively. The number of monocytes was generally smaller with VCS although correlation was good (y = 0.68x + 74, r = 0.91). There was only a weak correlation for basophils (y = 0.22x + 14, r = 0.35), due to the small number of cells. During follow-up of patients undergoing high dose treatment with BMT altogether there was a good agreement between the numbers of neutrophils and lymphocytes as determined by VCS in comparison to CME. Thus, VCS allows an earlier diagnosis of bone marrow take. In conclusion, the automated differentiation by VCS is an essential tool in the assessment of blood counts of leukopenic patients. Thus, blood samples with leukocyte counts of down to 300/gl can be evaluated in the daily clinical routine. Inhere Klinik und Poliklinik (Tumorforschung), *Klinik und Poliklinik flJr Knochenmarktransplantation, Westdeutsches Tumorzentrum, Universit~itsklinikum, D-4300 Essen, B.R.D. Schleyer E., Reinhardt L, Grimm M., Unterhalt M; and Hiddemann W., Dept, of Internal Medicine, Division Hematology/Oncology, Univ. of G6ttingcn. Leucovorin is a racemic mixture of S-R-formyltetrahydrofolicacid (S-fI'HF, R-fI'HF). Its main clinical application is in methotrexat rescue therapy and for modulation of 5-fluoruracil, predominantly in the treatment of metastatic colo-rectal cancer. In spite of its broad clinical use little is known about the differential pharmacokinetics of the diastercomers and the main metabolitc, S-methyltetrahydrofolicaeid (S-mTHF). For the appropriate design of new therapies with the recently available pure S-ITHF a detailed knowledge of its pbarmacokinetics and protein binding of both diastereomers seems deeply warranted. We recently developed a highly sensitive HPLC assay with detection limits of 2ng/ml for S-and R-f'fHF, and 5ng/ml for S-mTHF. On this basis the plasma kinetics and protein binding of S-ffFHF, R-fI'HF and S-mTHF were measured in 7 patients during a 24 hour period following the administration of lcucovorin 3II0mg/m: i.v. over 15 minutes, Results were: S-ffltF: t ~e~ = 0,76 h with a coefficient of variation (CV) of 13%, AUC = 15,2 ugxh,"ml CV 35%, peak ct~nccntration (PC) 26,i ug/ml CV 62%. R-rrHF: t i~ = 6,65 h CV 24%, AUC = 251 ugxh/ml CV 46%, PC = 50,8 ug/ml CV 47%. S-mTHF: t ~/za = 3,29 h CV 32%, AUC = 30,6 ugxh/ml CV 4.8%, peak concentration were reached between 2 -4 hour = 2,45 ug/ml CV 19%. Protein binding was analysed in spiked plasma samples and patient plasma after leucovorin application. In the presence of the two diastereomers and the metabolite the average S-tTHF binding is 32% (CV 8%). For R-tTHF and S-mTHF the results were 88% (CV 6%) and 59% (CV 11%), respectively. In the absence of R-Eli-IF, protein binding of S-fTHF and S-mTHF increased significantly to 54% (CV 3%) and 74% (CV 4%). These data indicate that the free plasma concentrations of St'q'I-IF and S-mTHF, the active metabolite, arc only roughly half as high after application of the pure S-fTHF as compared to the administration of the racemic mixture at comparable doses. These findings therefore explain the described lower distribution volume of S-fI'HF and the decreased metabolic rate to S-mTHF after application of the pure S-form in comparable dosage to the racemic mixture. Hence, these data question the currently proposed dosing of S-fTHF at equimolar concentrations with the racemic mixture. Recombinant human granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) has been reported to increase circulating neutrophil numbers in congenital idiopathic, familial cyclic, and acquired chronic neutropenia. Here we report on repeated G-CSF treatment of a 26-year old woman with clonal Ty-lymphocytosis (constant expansion (5-7x10g/I) of atypical CD3+CD8 247 + lymphocytes with clonal rearrangement of the T-cell receptor I~-chain detected by Southern Blot analysis of genomic DNA) associated with severe chronic neutropenia (neutrophils < 0.3x109/I) and recurrent skin and mucosal infections. Bone marrow biopsy showed a 40% lymphoid infiltration and a maturation arrest of granulopoiesis. In August 1991 treatment with G-CSF at a dose of 480 pg Filgrastim/d subcutaneously was commenced because of a perforated sigmadiverticulitis complicated by diffuse peritonitis and rapid deterioration despite immediate surgical resection with colostoma and therapy with broadspectrum antibiotics. Together with rapid clinical improvement the peripheral neutrophil count rose to values of more than 20x109/I within 7 days and rapidly declined to less than 0.5x109/I after cessation of G-CSF. The rapid neutrophil recovery induced by G-CSF was reproducible with reduced G-CSF doses of 300 pg Filgrastim/d (for treatment of a panaritium with incipient hand phlegmona) and 150 pg Filgrastim/d (for prevention of postsurgical insufficiency of descendorectostomy anastomosis). However, on both occasions the elevation of peripheral neutrophil-counts to 11.1 x 10 ~/I and 5.8xl 09/I respectively within 6 days coincided with the development of a painful purpuric vasculitic rash on both legs complicated by renal involvement with hematuria, proteinuria and a serum creatinine rise. After G-CSF was discontinued on day 6, the rash disappeared within 7 days in parallel with neutrophil counts falling to pretreatment levels, the acute renal failure was completely reversible within 3 weeks. The findings in this case suggest that G-CSF can induce a rapid neutrophil recovery at least in selected cases of chronic Ty-lymphoproiferative disease despite persistence of clonal lymphocytosis. However, because of the risk of severe vasculitic reactions of the skin and, more importantly, of the kindey G-CSF application in Ty-lymphocytosis should be carefully monitored and primarily restricted to life threatening infections. The transcription factor NF-kB plays a major role in the regulation of cytokines, MHC I and II antigens and viruses. We recently reported the cloning of a new member of the NF-kB multigene family, NF-kB p49/p100 (Nature 352: 733-736, 1991) . To under-stand the role of the distinct NF-kB subunits, p49/p100, p50/i05, p65 and c-rel, in vitro and in vivo studies were performed. Homodimeric p49 binds weakly to the HIV kB site (identical to the k-light chain kB site) but strongly to the MHC class I kB element. In association with p65 the complex binds with greater affinity to the HIV kB element but still binds the MHC class I motif stronger. In transfection experiments in a T-cell line we have characterized the transcriptional activation of the HIV, MHC class I, interleukin-2 receptor, and two related kB motifs with only single base pair changes. The combination of p4g/p65 is most effective in stimulating transcription dependent on the HIV kB site and slightly stimulates reporter plasmids with one base pair changes in the kB sites. These data indicate that: i. Binding activity to the kB sites does not correlate with transcriptional activation. 2. kB dependent gene expression is regulated through distinct combinatorial associations of NF-kB subunits. 3. Transcriptional activation is affected by single base pair changes in the kB motif. This complexity of regulation might have been evolved to enable the differential expression of diverse genes containing kB sites. Differences in the regulation of HLA class I antigen expression by interferon (IFN) was demonstrated after transfection of the corresponding genes into mouse L cells. Modification of the 5' ends of the HLA-B7 and HLA-B27 genes before transfection revealed the presence of enhancer sequences responding to interferon treatment in the 5' untranslated region of the HLA-B7, but not of the HLA-B27 gene and suggested further independently acting enhancer elements downstream of the transcription initiation site. For further analysis of the structural basis causing differential induction of HLA-class I genes by IFN 560 bp fragments containing the ICS, enhancer A and B region of the 5'ends of HLA genes were subcloned into pBL CAT2 plasmids and analysed for IFN sensitivity after transfection in mouse L cells. In these cells we could show that low inducibility of the B27 or B38 gene by IFN could be due to an high constitutive promotor acitvity of their 5'ends with reduced IFN sensitivity in mouse fibroblasts. In contrast, Y-flanking regions of the B7 and B64 genes appear to operate at constitutively low level expression, but are strongly regulated by IFN type I to potentiate gene transcripition. In comparison in vivo modulation of HLAantigens on peripheral blood lymphocytes, monocytes and hematopoietic precursors during IFNa therapy was investigated in patients with myeloproliferative syndrome. A strong induction of HLA-class I antigens was found on all eamined ce1Is within the first 36 hours. HLA-class I antigen expression was consistently augmented by IFNa in all patients irrespective of their haematologic response. Differential in vivo regulation of HLA-elass I antigens was demonstrated by comparison of HLA-A2 with HLA-B antigen expression. These findings may indicate specific regulatory mechanisms for different HLA class I antigen expression possibly influencing T-cell recognition in immune responses. Medical Univ. Clinic, Dept. II and Section of Transplantation Immunology and Immunohematology, W 7400 Tfibingen, Germany We conclude that c-raf-i overexpression can be found in a subset of AML in adults. The biological significance of the observed findings remains to be determined. Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a clonal neoplastic disease that arises in a pluripotent hematopoietic stem cell. However, functionally competent non-neoplastic Ph' negative stem cells are known to persist in many patients. Differentiation between neoplastic and non-neoplastic cells is routinely done via cytogenetic determination of Ph' positive cells. However, no assessment on clonogenicity of the cells can be made with that method. In order to quantitate the number of normal and bcr/abl positive clonogenic progenitor cells, we have examined individual 14-day CFU-GM colonies from CML patients via polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Clusters and colonies with 20-50 cells were isolated, total RNA was isolated and complementary DNA (cDNA) was obtained by reverse transcription. PCR was performed on cDNA from each single cluster or colony using primers specific for bcr/abl chromosomal translocation. Alpha-actin primers were used as control for the amount and integrity of the cDNA. PCR products were reamplified in a second PCR using internal primers ("nested PCR"). Using this method bcr/abl transcript could be detected reliably in cDNA derived from 20-50 cells and the percentage of bcr/abl positive colonies was determined. This simple method should facilitate the assessment of efficacy of therapeutic studies performed either in vitro or in vivo in patients with CML. Exposure of human and animal cells to inhibitors of topoisomerase I or II has recently been shown to alter gene expression and induce differentiation in a number of experimental systems. Since DNA hypomethylation is frequently associated with transcriptional activation, we wished to explore the relationship between inhibition of DNA topoisomerases and enzymatic DNA methylation. When HT-29 human colonic adenocarcinoma cells were exposed to the specific topoisomerase II inhibitor teniposide (VM-26), a dose-dependent hypomethylation of DNA was observed during the window of drug treatment. Exposure to the topoisomerase I inhibitor camptothecin (CPT) produced a small but not statistically significant trend toward DNA hypomethylation. CPT-treated cells were found to have up to 19 fold increased levels of topoisomerase II protein, which may have compensated for decreased levels of non-drug-bound topoisomerase I. Both VM-26 and CPT were found to increase [3H]thymidine incorporation into DNA when administered in low dose. Combination of VM-26 and CPT produced DNA hypomethyltion, a synergistic increase in DNA synthesis, and an increasing number of cells entering a higher DNA ploidy cycle. Topoisomerase inhibitor-induced DNA hypomethylation may offer a possible explanation for the induction of differentiation observed upon exposure to this family of drugs. Altered topoisomerase activity occurring during the process of tumor progression may also provide a link between the induction of polyploidy, DNA hypomethylation and aberrant gene expression, three markers of genetic instablility in tumor cells.  AUTOMATED LEUKOCYTE DIFFERENTIAL: GOALS AND PERSPECTIVES G. SCHMITZ, G. ROTHE The goal of the automated leukocyte differentiation is both the objective, reliable and statistically valid recognition of all normal leukocyte populations of the peripheral blood and the sensitive detection and further analysis of pathological samples. Following recent apparative and methodological progress the multiparametric flow cytometry is interesting for the automated leukocyte differentiation not only for research, but also for routine laboratories. An objective cellular characterisation is reached by the automated measurement and analysis of five independent parameters (cellular forward and side scatter, three fluorescence emissions) under standardised, machine-independent measurement conditions. The analysis of 10,000 to 50,000 cells per blood sample results in statistically valid information even about small cellular subpopulations. The analysis of the cellular light scatter characteristics and of cytochemical staining reactions allows a white blood cell differentiation similar to the use of cytochemistry in morphological cell differentiation techniques. An objective recognition of the cellular lineage and the precise characterisation of the cellular differentiation level even of morphologically indistinguishable lymphocyte subpopulations are obtained through the simultaneous analysis of up to three molecularly defined surface or cytoplasmic antigens with directly labelled moneclonal antibodies. The analysis of the lineage specific expression of enzymes such as the cysteine proteinases of mononuclear phagocytes is an additional parameter for the differentiation of myeloic cells. Pathophysiologically important information in malignant hematopoietic diseases can be obtained from the analysis of the cellular DNA content and proliferative activity. Functional parameters such as the the intracellular free calcium and pH, the cellular production of reactive oxidants, the cellular glutathione levels, or the cellular production of cytokines upon stimulation in addition reveal information about reactive alterations of leukocytes, e.g. in inflammatory processes and should lead to additional diagnostic applications of the white blood cell differentiation. The ability of MR imaging to detect bone marrow involvement is currently evaluated for different hematological disorders. Unlike plain radiography and computed tomography which may detect destruction of trabecular or cortical bone secondary to cellular infiltrates MR imaging depicts malignant bone marrow infiltrates with signal intensities different from those of normal fatty or hematopoietic marrow. Plain TI-W images were usually employed in the past, but more sophisticated approaches promising higher sensitivity and specificity are currenntly developed. Newer techniques include different methods of suppressing signal from fat. These approaches may be used alone or in combination with the paramagnetic contrast agent Gadolinium-DTPA. The paper reviews the different techniques and discusses the role of MR imaging in detecting marrow involvement in patients with multiple myeloma, Hodgkins disease and the Non-Hodgkin lymphomas. 202 T-ALL patients were enrolled in two consecutive trials, 79 in ALL-BFM 83 (n=677)and 123 in ALL-BFM 86 (n=998), the median follow-up being 83 and 40 months, respectively. The patient groups were not different with respect to age, sex, white blood count, platelets, hemoglobin, mediastinal mass, hepato-and splenomegaly In both studies, the therapy strategy was composed of induction, methotrexate (MTX) based extracompartment therapy, reinduction, maintenance and brain irradiation. In trial ALL-BFM 86, high-dose (HD) MTX, 5 g/m 2 instead of 0.5 g/m ~ as in trial ALL-BFM 83, was applied four times as 24 h infusion. Pts with initial poor response to prednisone (Pred-PR: _> 1000/pl blasts in the peripheral blood at day 8) received protocol E instead of protocol M, composed of HD-MTX (4x), HD-cytarabine (2 g/m ~ x 8), ifosfamide, mitoxanthrone and prednisone. Event free survival (pEFS) in trial ALL-BFM 83 at 5 years for T-ALL pts is 0.56 and 0.73 in trial ALL-BFM 86 (p=0.013). For pts with Pred-PR pEFS at 5 years was 0.41 in trial ALL-BFM 83 (n=26) and 0.44 in trial 86 (n=34). For pts with preclnisone good response (Pred-GR: < 1000/pl blasts in the PB at day 8), pEFS at 5 years was 0.62 in trial ALL-BFM 83 (n=53) but 0.84 in trial 86 (n =89). The difference of pEFS for Pred-GR pts in trial ALL-BFM 86 compared to trial 83 is significant (p= 0.006) indicating a beneficial effect of HD-MTX for T-ALL pts with Pred-GR. Vinoelbine, Pierre Fabre Oncologie, is a new Vincaalkaloid with high single agent activity especially in lung cancer (NSCLC and SCLC) and breast cancer. In a clinical study we treated 16 heavily pretreated females median 58 years with breast cancer and 13 pts with lung cancer (11 m, 2 f, 0/4 pretreated SCLC, 4/9 pretreated NSCLC median age 59 years) and 3 pts all pretreated with esophageal tumors and 1 female with ovarian cancer. At the begining of treatment all pts showed sign of tumor progression. The attention was to apply NVB weekly in a dose of 30 mg/m 2 palliatively. Pretreatment for breast cancer for all pts consisted of CMF, VAMe, VTM. Pts with lung and esophageal and ovarian cancer were pretreated with Cisplatin containing schedules and radiotherapy. EDTAand heparin-anticoagulated blood, counts increased again reaching a stable plateau at about 90 minutes after blood sampling. In the T540 model, PTP was accompanied by a pseudoleucocytosis only when EDTA was used (significant increase in leucocyte count from 7.1 to 10.6 G/L). In contrast, with the STKS model a concomitant pseudoleucocytosis was present also in oxalate-, heparm-and citrate-antieoagulated samples. In EDTA-anticoagulated blood, an abnormal platelet histogram was detected only in 28% of measurements in the T540 model and in 38% of measurements in the STKS counter. Conclusions: It is important to recognize the laboratory artifact of PTP and pseudoleucocytosis to avoid inappropriate treatment. PTP is most pronounced when EDTA-blood is used. However, there is no anticoagulant that reliably prevents falsely low platelet counts in patients with PTP. The least decline in platelet counts was observed when ACD-anticoagulated samples were used. The efficacy in the detection of platelet clumping by automatic cell counters is low. In platelet counts of patients with PTP the correlation between the two counters used and between the STKS counter and the hemocytometer counts is poor. -MRS noninvasively provides information on relative concentrations of high energy phosphates and phospholipids in vivo. Aim of the study was to investigate, whether 31P-MRS canbe used as an early indicator of tumor response to chemotherapy and whether it is possible to distinguish between responders and non-responders using the pretherapeutie metabolic profile as assessed b 31P-MRS. 31P-MRS was performed in 9 patients (5 females, 4 males) (mean aqe: 24.8 _+ 4.3 yrs.) for different soft tissue and bone sarcomas. 7 pt]ents were investigated prior to during and after chemotherapy. Changes in the spectra were correlated to clinical course and histological tumor regression assessed after surgery according to Salzer-Kuntschik. 2 patients were finally classified responders(R) and 5 non-responders (FIR). P31 -NMR spectra were obtained at 25.85 MHz using a 1.5 Tesla imaging-spectroscopy system and a 16 cm double tuned surf, ace coil. Mean size of the volume of interest(VOI) was 86.3_+33.5 cm3). The VOI was strictly located within the tumor. Magnetic field homogeneity was optimised to 40_+ 12 Hz. 512-1024 free induction decays were averaged. Prior to treatment all spectra showed elevated PDE (phosphodiester), PME(phosphomonoester) and Pa(anorganic phosphate) and reduced PCr(phosphocreatine) peaks compared to a normal muscle spectrum. In R and NR the pretreatment PDE/PME ratio was 1.33 -+ 0.72 and 1.45 _+ 0.54 respectively. Pretherapeutic PCr/Pa and PCr/~-ATP ratios were significantly different in R 1.48 + 0.35 and 1.03 + 0.3 compared to NR 0.43 + 0.36 and 0 .39 _+ 0.38. In NR tumor volume remained unchanged or increased during therapy and no change of spectral profiles could be noted during therapy, In respontiers metabolic changes turned out to be more heterogeneous. Two of the R showed tumor volume reduction of >50%. In one of these PDE/ PME increased under therapy. In the other PDE/PME decreased. In the latter patient posttherapeutic pathology found 70% viable tumor cells, indicating that a resisting subclone had developped under therapy. The R without tumor volume reduction showed a dramatic change of the spectral profile towards a normal muscle spectrum, as confirmed by TI-201 scintigraphy.Conclusions:P31-MRS may be a useful early indicator to tumor response during chemotherapy together with other clinical parameters. The pretherapeutic PDE/PME ratio does not seem to differ significantly b-tween R and NR. Pretherapeutic PCr/Pa and PCr/ATP ratios seem to predict tumor response to chemotherapy while pretherapeutic PDE/PME ratio does not. (2) (20) (2) (2) 6 9 n.s. (2) (3) (3) (2) prophylaxis is as efficent as P in preventing mycoses in neutropenic )atieets, there were significantly less mucosal mycoses in the F group. The stem cell factor (SCF) has been identified as the ligand of a 145-to 160-Kd transmembrane receptor with tyrosine kinase activity encoded by the c-kit proto-oncogene. Recent studies have reported c-kit mRNA and/or protein expression in 30-87% of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) specimens and indicated that evidence of the c-kit product in AML was associated with a poor response to treatment. At the beginning of 1991 we have started to prospectively analyze c-kit expression in hematopoietic malignancies and have yet investigated a large series of patients with malignant myeloid and lymphoid proliferations (N = 171) of distinct differentiation stages. Two monoclonal antibodies (MoABS: YB5.B8, 17Fll) recognizing an extracellular domain of the c-kit receptor were used to detect c-kit expression and their reactivity was evaluated by flow cytometry. C-kit expression (>_ 10% positive cells) was found in most patients with AML (66/103, 64%), irrespective of their FAB-subtype, myelodysplastic syndrome (2/6), and blast crisis of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML, 3/4) but not in cells from patients with chronic phase of CML (0/5) or acute lymphoblastic leukemia (0/53) disclosing a B-cell precursor or T-cell-lineage immunophenotype. Although the percentage of c-kitpositive blasts varied considerably within the AML patients, we did not observe any significant differences in the reactivity pattern of both MoAbs tested. A strong c-kit expression (> 50% positive blasts) was found more often in AML cells with an immature CD34-positive, CD 13/CD33 weakly positive or negative immunophenotype thus underscoring the value of c-kit as a marker for undifferentiated AML The antigenic profile of c-kit-positive myeloid leukemic cells will be correlated with the expression of other progenitor cell markers, myeloid-lineage-associated differentiation antigens as well as cytoadhesion molecules and the prognostic implications of c-kit-positive AML will be presented. A 46-year-old woman with severe dyspnea was admitted to our hospital. The diagnosis of a chronic myeloid leukemia had been made one year previously and confirmed by detecting a Mbcr/abl mRNA using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The patient had been treated with busulfan for one year. At the time of admission, the chest x-ray and a CT-scan showed mediastinal enlargement and pleural effusions bilaterally. Lymphoblastic cells found in pleural-effusion specimens disclosed immunophenotypic features of thymic cells (CD la+, CD 2+, CD 3+, CD 4+, CD 5+, CD 7+, CD 8+). The cells were found to be negative for B-cell surface markers such as CD 19 and CD 20. The PCR demonstrated a M-bcr/abl mRNA in these cells, thus confirming their origin from the malignant clone. Morphologically, the bone marrow showed a chronic phase of the disease without immunological evidence of an immature T-cell population. The patient was treated according to the ALL-BMFT protocol with a good response and a reduction of the mediastinal mass. Pancytopenia delayed the continuation of chemotherapy, but dyspnea and regrowth of the mediastinal mass after twelve days of delay required the continuation of the chemotherapy which again resulted in an improvement of symptoms. Concomitant mediastinal and cranial irradiation was performed. Seizures and impairment of consciousness occurred and the cell count in the cerebrospinal fluid was much higher than at the previous examination. The cells showed morphological features of lymphoblastic cells. The patient died three months after the occurrence of the first symptoms. Extramedullary blast crisis with T-cell features is reported only in six cases yet and has a poor outcome as in our case. (15 women, 16 men) with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in complete remission (n=8) and chronic myeloganous leukemia (CML) in chronic phase (n=23) received unmanipulated bone marrow from their HLAidentical, MLC-negative siblings. The conditioning regimen consisted either of busulfan (BU 4 mg/kg/day, day -9,-8,-7,-6) and cyclophosphamide (CY -50mg/kg/day, day -5,-4,-3,-2) = group A (gr.A) or of total body irradiation (TBI 4 Gy/day, delivered by a linear accelerator on days -8,-7,-6, with lung shielding at 9 Gy) and CY as in group A = group B (gr.B). All pts. received a short course of methotrexate and cyclosporin A until day 150 as prophylaxis for graft versus host disease (GvHD). 18 pts. (13 CML, 5 AML; 9 w, 9 m, median age 34 years, range 10 -50) were randomized intogr.A and 13 pts. (10 CML, 3 AML; 6 w 7 m, median age 36 years range 15-50) into gr.B. Median follow up is 16,5 months (range 0,2 -51) in gr.A and 28 months (range 0,3 -70) m gr.B. The actuarial survival is 72% (13/18) in gr.A (median duration 37 months, range 3 -50) and 69 % (9/13) ingr.B (median duration 40 months, range 3 -70). Early death (before day + 100) occurred in 3 pts. in each group and was not related to the conditioning regimen. Late death occurred m two pts. in gr.A and one in gr.B. Median time to take (polymorph-nuclear cells -500/ul) was 23 days (range 17 -34) in gr.A (n=16) and 24 (range 18 -40) ingr.B (n = 12). Twopts. in gr.A and one in gr.B died before engraftment could be documented (day + 6, + 21 and + 9 respectively). One pt. with CML who had received BU/CY relapsed at 27 months. Grade II (Glucksberg) acute GvHD was seen in one pt. in gr,A and in 4 pts. in gr.B, grade Ill in 2 pts. in ~r.A and none in gor.B. No grade IV (WHO) toxicity except for mucositis -11 ~ in gr.A and 62~ in gr.B -was observed in either group. Besides the more severe mucositis, transient bilirubin (grade Fill elevation was seen more often in gr.B than gr.A: 61% vs. 44%, whereas grade II-III ALT elevation occurred more often in the BU/CY group: 61% vs. 46%. 17% of pts. in gr.A and 38% in gr.B suffered from diarrhea grade II-Ill. There was no difference as to renal toxicity, hematuria, nausea and vomiting between the two groups. One pt.(with AML) developed veno-occlusive disease (VOD) and in one patient a brief generalized seizure occurred after conditionin~l with BU/CY. We conclude from the interim analysis of our ongoing prospective study that the BU/CY regimen is considerably less toxic to the mucosa of the entire gastro intestinal tract but may be more toxic to the liver than the TBI/CY regimen. In contrast to TBI/CY treatment it also may affect the central nervous sytem causing generalized seizures. The question if both regimens are equivalent in terms of their antileukemic efficacy awaits further observation. Therapy related ANLL (t-ANLL) has become a major long-term complication of cancer chemotherapy (CT). The risk of t-ANLL has been predominantly related to treatment with alkylating agents, more recently also to other eytotoxic drugs. We describe the ease of a 53-year-old woman with ovarian carcinoma, who received CT for several years and subsequently developed ANLL. Case report: In 1/84 ovarian carcinoma (FIGO stage Ill) was diagnosed by laparotomy. From 1/84 to 10/84 she received CT including cisplatinum (DDP), adriamycin (ADM) and cyclophosphamide (CPM) resulting in complete remission (pCR), followed by maintenance CT with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and CPM from 12/84 to 6/86. From 9/87 to 4/88 DDP, CPM and epidoxorubicin (EDR), then until 3/89 melphalan (MPH) were administered because of intraabdomlnal relapse, resulting in stable disease (SD). However, systemic CT had to be discontinued on account of thrombocytopenia (<20000 platelets/pl). In 5/89 progressive disease (PD) had to be stated and from 6/89 to 8/90 fourteen cycles of intraperitoneal earboplatin were administered resulting in SD again. In 9/90 ANLL occured and the patient expired in 11/90. It is likely that in this patient the ANLL is related to one or more of the administered cytotoxic drugs. This fact stresses the conflicting issues of inducing longstanding remissions in ovarian cancer by intensive CT and the induction of t-ANLL by anticancer therapy, reported to occur in up to 15% of patients treated by CT for ovarian cancer. We are currently investigating the expression of human endogenous retroviruses (HERV) in cell cultures of the human breast cancer cell line T47D which can be induced by steroid hormons to produce retroviruslike particles. The particles show B-type morphology similiar to that of the mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV). One member of the HERV family has been characterized by Ono and coworkers as a proviral endogenous element of 9.2 kb. HERV-K is expressed as a 8.8 kb mRNA in T47D cells. The possibility that HERV-K or parts of its genome are contained in the retroviral particles is still in discussion. In this presentation we demonstrate by PCR experiments the expression of gag and pol specific DNA fragments of HERV-K in T47D cells after hormon induction. By a reverse transcription assay we show that the particles contain reverse transcriptase activity and a mRNA, which can be endogenously reverse transcribed to give a cDNA first strand of about 4.5 kb. Using this cDNA as a template in a PCR assay. however, no amplification of HERV-K specific gag and pol fragments was observed. From the existing data it may be concluded that the T47D particles either contain a truncated form of the HERV-K genome missing the gag and pol regions tested or a novel HERV. In order to establish the nature of the sequences harboured in the T47D particles, screening of a cDNA library from the cloned particle genome with a number of retroviral DNA probes is in progress. Using the same probes we carry cut Northern blot experiments on purified particle mRNA. In the last years we treated 3 patients with severe coumarin necrosis in our hospital. In order to answer the open questions concerning incidence, risk factors, pathophysiology, clinical course and therapeutic strategies of this disease, we reviewed the literature data since 1943 . Between 1943 and 1990 , 188 cases of coumarin-induced necrosis of the skin and underlying subcutaneous tissues were described in 111 publications. The incidence of coumarin necrosis is reported to range from 0.01 to 0.1% of all patients treated with oral anticoagulation. The exact pathomechanism of coumarin necrosis is still unknown. There is good evidence, however, that primary endothelial vascular damage induced by coumarins and transitory thrombophilic diathesis due to an acquired protein C deficiency is a main cause. Half life of protein C is shorter than that of the vitamin K.-dependent clotting factors II, VII, IX and X. The maximum of the imbalance between pro-and anticoagulant activity is reached between the 3rd and 5th day after starting oral coumarin therapy. The clinical picture of coumarin-induced skin necrosis passes four stages: 1. initial flush 2. petechiae 3. ecchymosis 4. hemorrhagic infarction (gangrenous necrosis). Risk factors for developing coumarin necrosis are: 1. female patients, mainly after delivery or > 50 years. Relative estrogen deficiency is supposed to be an important factor. 2. obesity 3. infection and antibiotic treatment 4. pre-existing hereditary protein C deficiency. Predisposing areas for the lesion are characterized by marked subcutaneous tissue, e.g. female breasts, buttocks and thighs. Possib]e therapeutic strategies are: 1. fibrinolytic therapy 2. continuation of coumarin therapy 3. anticoagulation with heparin 4. application of protein C concentrate or prothrombin complex preparation containing high levels of protein C. Mortality of coumarin-induced skin necrosis is 15 %. The risk of re-necrosis after repeating oral anticoagulation is 19 %. Therefore we suggest that necessary secondary prophylaxis of thromboembolic complications should be best continued with subcutaneous application of fractionated or unfractionated heparin. Between 1986 and 1990, a Hickman-line (n = 41 5) or a Port-A-Cath (n = 57) was implanted into 472 patients aged from 17 to 68 years in our hospital. All patients had underlying malignant haematological or oncological diseases, and the central vein catheters were used to facilitate polychemotherapy and supportive therapy including blood transfusions. To elucidate the thrombogenic risk of the inserted catheters, we studied the incidence of thrombotic events of the upper central veins or of the catheters retrospectively. 58 of 472 patients developed thrombi, 48 of which were Iocalised in the upper veins and 10 occluded the catheters themselves. This indicated an overall incidence of catheter-related thrombosis of 1 2.3 %. No laboratory risk factor could be defined. In 22 patients the thrombotic event was associated with cytostatic therapy and in 16 patients signs of infection were present. 11 of 42 patients with a dislocated catheter developed thrombosis indicating a thrombogenic risk of 26 %. Thrombosis also occurred in patients with decreased platelet counts below 50 giga/I (n = 11). Incidence of thrombosis was lower in patients receiving antithrombotic prophylaxis with lowdose heparin as compared with patients without prophylaxis (8,5 % vs. 12,9 %}. Time of diagnosis of thrombosis ranged between 5 to 11 38 days after implantation (median 102 days). Therapy of catheterrelated thrombosis included administration of heparin either as lowdose or thrombin-time-adapted dose. In cases of intraluminal thrombosis fibrinolytic agents were applied. 22 catheters had to be removed and 2 patients had recurrent thrombosis after removal. In conclusion implantation of long-term intravenous catheters is associated with a high risk of thrombosis in the upper veins. Antithrombotic prophylaxis with heparin should be instituted unless the haemostatic balance is severely deranged.  Polychemotherapy in patients with acute leucemia requires supportive therapy including platelet transfusions. In alloimmunized patients refractory against unselected and HLA-matched platelet tranfusions we used cryoconserved autologes platelets taken in regeneration of bone marrow after chemotherapy by thrombapheresis as described by us earlier. Platelet membrane glycoproteins and platelet functions were measured before, 1 and 24 hours after 31 transfusions to 7 patients with acute leucemia and in 31 freshly thawed cryoconserved platelet concentrates. Platelet numbers before 1 and 24 h after transfusion were 20571, 67430 and 41735//11 (min), respectively. There is a growing body of evidence that coagulation is activated in lung cancer patients. This may be due to an inflammatory response to the tumor with stimulation of macrophages and neutrophils. Coagulation and fibrinolysis may also be triggered by activators released from the tumor cells. It is thought that the activation of haemostasis may be important for tumor growth and metastasis, but little is known so far about the clinical impact. In 47 lung cancer patients (15 small cell, 20 squamous cell, 6 adeno, 6 large cell) the course of following parameters was assessed prospectively before and during treatment: Fibrinogen~ factor XIII, TAT, prothrombin fragment FI+2, Ddimer, plasmin-antiplasmin complex (PAP), and neutrophil elastase. Standard parameters of coagulation (prothrombin times, aPTT) were also monitored and remained essentially unchanged during the study. The initial levels of TAT and D-dimer were higher in the patients with distant metastases ( The mutated forms of the p53 cellular tumor antigen cause neoplastic transformation in vitro. Recent evidence suggest that the loss or inactivation of the normal p53 is a frequent event in several types of tumors. Furthermore alterations of the p53 gene in human leukemias provide evidence for the involvement of p53 gene aberration in a recessive manner in these diseases. One major goal of studying the status of p53 in leukemias is the suppression of the tumorigenic phenotype by restoration of the expression of the wildtype p53. To examine the feasibility of suppressing the tumorigeneic phenotype two human leukemic cell lines, K562 and HL60, which have lost the normal function of p53 as determined by PCR and Northern blot analysis were used for gene transfer experiments with the wild type p53. Expression of the wild-type p53 reduced the growth rate of the respective cell lines and induces differentiation as determined by FACScan analysis. These results suggest that suppression of the leukemic phenotype of the HL60 and K562 cells occured after introduction of wild-type p53 and support the hypothesis that the inactivation of p53 may play a crucial role in tumorigenesis of leukemias. Human lymphopoeitic cells and their malignant counterparts require a complex regulative interaction with stromal factors and cytokines for their growth. Due to this there are no reproducible in vitro assay systems available which would allow to perform long term studies on the biological properties of lymphoproliferative diseases. The generation of new types of immunodeficient mice (SCID, bg/nu/xid) has allowed to engraft various hematological malignancies. Our objective is to establish a long term animal model of Multiple Myeloma and Lymphomas in the SCID mouse model to study proliferative and regulative properties in vivo. Four Human Myeloma cell lines that had been generated in our laboratory and tested for their response to IL-6 were transplanted into SCID mice. Cells (107) were injected either i.v. or. i.p. after irradiation of the animals with 400 Rad. After six weeks line OCI-My 5 grew locoregionally (peritoneum) when injected i.p. or generalized (liver, bone marrow) when injected i.v. Later (10 to 18 weeks) infiltration by tumor cells of liver, spleen, and bone marrow could be detected after either route of injection. Material recovered from the tissues involved matched the patterns of the maternal line by immuno-phenotype and genotype (J, -rearrangement). Addtionally we were able to generate secondary cell lines from these tumors. The Myeloma cell line OCI-My 1, which is slowly proliferating in vitro, generated tumors at 26 weeks after injection. No in vivo growth was detectable for the lines OCI-My 3 (IL-6 producing) and OCI-My 4 (IL-6 dependan0 at 10 to 26 weeks. Currently we are investigating whether we are able to modify proliferation of Myeloma cells in SCID mice by IL-6 and accessory cells. The SCID mouse system might serve as an exeUent model to evaluate novel therapeutic approaches e.g. cytokines or immunotherapy. Ontario Cancer Institute, 500 Sherbourne Street, Toronto, M4X 1K9, Canada Blood CD34-ce1is have been monitored in 25 patients receiving conventional chemotherapy, and subsequently either GM-CSF, II-3, or G-CSF for mobilization of blood CD34-cells. Leukaphereses were started, when a number of > 1500 CD34-cells/ml blood were reached. CD34-cells were also determined in the cytapheresis-products, and also CFU-GM cultures were performed. There was no correlation of numbers of CD34-cells and of leukocytes, per ml blood, respectively. A weak correlation was calculated for lymphocytes and CD34-cells in blood. Evaluating the cytapheresis-products, a correlation of 0.94 was calculated for numbers of CFU-GM/ml and for numbers of Cg34cells/ml. Mean clonogenity of CD34-cells was 2 %, with a range from 0.9 % to 13 %. The volume of cytapheresis-product necessary to provide 70x(SxlOE4) CFU-GM was calculated for each patient. This volume ranged from 10. ml to 1300. ml. Our data indicate the usefulness of flow-cytometrical determinations of blood CD34-cells. Given the fact, that in some diseases currently treated by autologous blood stem cell transplantation, there is risk for reinfusion of circulating malignant cells, the assay described should allow for determination of the minimum number of cells to be reinfused. Universit~teklinikum R.Virchow-Charlottenburg, Abteilung Innere Medizin und Poliklinik mit Schwerpunkt H~matologie-Onkologie, H~matol. Labor, Blutbank, Spandauer Damm 130, 1000 Berlin 18 Both numbers and stages of maturation of reticulecytes present in blood are valuable parameters in evaluation of the activity of the erythropoietic system. Classical determinations of reticulocytes, by means of microscopy on blood smears following staining of whole blood, are subject to major uncertainties. Immature erythrocytes, i.e. reticulocytes, can also be determined by multiparameter flow-cytOmetry. These immature erythrocytes can be discriminated from the mature ones as they show a higher BNA-content, and also a higher expression of the transferrin-reeeptor (CD71-antigen). With both parameters, distinct subsets, correlating to distinct stages of maturation, can be visualized. Consistently, however, only about 70% of reticulocytes as determined by RNA-analysis, will be detected based on C071-expression. Principles of both flow-cytometrical methods, as well as limitations of both methods, will be dis- Up to now, according to several reports the prognosis for patients with primary plasma cell leukemia as a de novo-disease has been considered extremely poor (median survival time approx. 5 to 7 months). The 50 year old patient to be presented here was admited to our hospital in may 1991 after having suffered from a feeling of general weakness and fatigue as well as temperatures up to 38.8 ~ C. Besides elevated levels of LDH laboratory findings showed a hypercalcemia (3.39 mmol/l) as well as anemia and a thrombozytopenia. Furthermore we found a leukozytosis of 32/nl revealing more than 50 % of dedifferentiated blasts. Bone marrow cytology demonstrated a dense, lawn-like infiltration of atypical plasmoblasts (strongly positive reaction of acid phosphatase). Cytogenetic studies elucidated a reduction of the genome to 40 chromosomes with numerous aberrations. Urine immunoelectrophoresis revealed free light chains of the kappa type. The blood concentration of these light chains was below detection limit. Radiography merely revealed suspicious small spotted osteolyses in the pelvic regions. Whole skeleton scintiscanning was without pathological findings. After treatment of the hypercalcemia with a biphosphonate (BM 21.0955, still in clinical trial) the first 3 courses of chemotherapy according to the VAD protocol (Vincristine, Adriamycin, Dexamethason) were carried out in a more intensive scheme. Already 4 days after initiation of therapy a complete blast remission was achieved in the peripheral blood. A marrow control puncture 6 weeks later (after 3 courses) revealed a complete remission. Pathological light chains in the urine were no longer detectable, the peripheral blood count was completely normalized. After 3 additional VAD-courses in intervalls of 6 weeks the patient is currently still in complete remission. Considering the so far documented extremely poor prognosis, an autologous bone marrow transplantation during continous primary remission is planned. Serum procollagen III peptide(P-III-P), serum type IV collagen(C-IV) and serum prolylhydroxylase(PH) were measured in patients with myeloproliferative disorders to elucidate the relationship between these variables and the presence of myelofibrosis in myeloproliferative disorders. Studied were 10 patients with chronic myelocytic leukemia in chronic phase(CML-CP), 3 with CML in blastic crisis (CML-BC), 7 with idiopathic myelofibrosis(IMF), 2 with myelodysplastic syndrome with myelofibrosis (MDS-MF), 11 with essential thrombocythemia(ET), 13 with polycythemia vera(PV) and 10 with acute non-lymphocytic leukemia(ANNL). Serum P-III-P, C-IV and PH in normal controls were 0.43 u/ml, 3.95 ng/ml and 46.5 ng/ml(mean respectively. Serum P--III P and C IV were significantly increased in IMF(0.79 u/ml and 6.72 2.07 ng/ml, respectively). While serum P-III-P was higher in all types of MPD we studied than that in normal controls, serum C-IV was increased in IMF t MDS-MF,CML-BC and ANLL, and it was not significantly higher in CML-CP,ET and PV. Serum PH was normal in all types of MPD except for ANLL. Immunological staining of biopsied bone marrow collagen revealed that both type III and IV vollagen were increased in myelofibrosis, but type IV collagen was stained more intensely than type III. These reslts suggest that C-IV was more specific for myelofibrosis than P-III-P. First Department of Internal Medicine, Toho University School of Medicine. 6-11-1,0hmori-nishi, Ota-Ku,Tokyo,143,Japan. in pts with severe neutropenia. Amphotericin B (Amp B) is the drug of choice, but administration is limited because of nephrotoxicity and side effects as fever, chills and hypotonia. In order to reduce toxicity and improve efficacy Amp B was incorporated in liposomes. We used the Amp B preparation AmBisome (Vestar Inc) (AmBi) in 14 pts with neutrophils less than 1000/cmm in 15 episodes. Underlying diseases were hematological malignancies (ii AML, 2 NHL, 1 relapsed HD). All pts were resistant to initial antibiotic therapy and received additional antifungal therapy with conventional Amp B. Change to AmBi was due to toxicity in 8 and/or progression of pulmonary infiltrates in 8 and/or persistent fever in 7 pts. AmBi was given in a dose of 3 mg/kg/day. The median duration was 26,8 days (4-42). Response to AmBi was achieved in 11/15 episodes and 9/12 with pulmonary infiltrates and 6/7 of those with radiological signs of pulmonary aspergillosis improved. Only 2 pts improved with recovery of neutrophils, all other pts were still neutropenic. 4/14 pts died due to infections. Although higher doses of AmBi were given it was well tolerated without any prophylactic administration of drugs to reduce side effects. Nephrotoxicity did not occur with regard to creatinine, loss of potassium was not significantly reduced when Amp B was replaced by AmBi. We conclude that AmBisome provides a well tolerated drug and suggests to be highly effective in this high risk group even in pulmonary aspergillosis. Objective: To estimate the prevalence of HCV carriers in a population of blood donors in Southern Germany, using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and recombinant protein immunoblot assay (RIBA). Methods: Sera from 261 blood donors were screened by the second anti-HCV assay (EIA) from Ortho Diagnostic Systems. Serum alanine-aminotransferase level was determined for each sample/donor. All samples were submitted to the PCR and RIBA (Ortho) assays. For the PCR approach, samples were tested with two different sets of primers, both coding for sequences in the 5' non-coding region of the HCV genome. Samples were considered "reactive" if they showed one positive result out of two amplifications. Positive samples were the ones that resulted positive after amplification with the two primer-sets. Negative samples showed two negative results out of two reactions. Results: Among EIA anti-HCV negative blood donors, we could find 4.3 and 3.0% reactivity in the PCR assay, related to ALT <35 U/I and ALT >35 U/I, respectively. Investigation by RIBA resulted in 0 and 1.5% for the same two subgroups. Among anti-HCV positive blood donors we were able to detect 21,2% and 59.4% in the ALT <35 U/I and ALT >35 U/I subgroup, respectively. RIBA detected 15.2% and 71.4% positivity for those subgroups. The results suggest that the combined screening of donors for ALT and anti-HCV antibodies is able to exclude the great majority of donors carrying HCV sequences. Simon ~ , E.Lengfelder L , J.Hastka ~ , C. Fonatsch 2 , R.Hehlmann ~ From 1/84 to 4/92, 111 patients were treated for AML at our institution: AML was "de novo" in 83 pts, secondary to myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) in 19 pts, and secondary to another neoplasm in 9 pts. Of these, 3 presented with AML following high grade tymphoma. This observation supports recent reports of an excess of secondary AML in etoposide-treated ALL patients (20/580) (Pui, NEJM, 1991 , 325:1682 , as opposed to the very low frequency of AML (2/9720) in protocols without etoposide (Neglia, NEJM,1991 , 325:1330 . Possible pathogenetic modes, including treatment-induced second neoplasm, phenotypic shift of gene expression (clonal evolution) and ctonal selection in a bilineal neoplasm, will be discussed. However, to our knowledge no report is presently available regarding the development of a second lymphoproliferative malignancy under alpha-interferon (IFN)-therapy. Since 1989 we have observed 3 such cases. The first patient responded adequately to alpha-IFN obtaining a complete response after 12 months of treatment. During alpha-IFN maintenance-therapy he developed a lymphocytic non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) with lymph node and bone marrow involvement 7 months later. Patient 2 presented generalized lymph node enlargement due to centreblastic lymphoma 2 months after start of alpha-IFN therapy because of HCL progress. Patient 3 has been under IFN-treatment since January 1989. Repeated bone marrow biopsies revealed an increasing dense infiltration by lymphocytes in addition to HCL. Actual immunochemistry did not show a clonal population. Detailed histology and clinical data will be presented. It seems striking that despite alpha-IFN treatment second lymphoproliferative neoplasias developed. Autologous bone marrow transplantation is performed in poor prognosis T-All patients when no HLA-compatible donor is available. However, the likely presence of contaminating leukemic cells in the autologous bone marrow is a major concern. To establish a bone marrow purging protocol, we used an experimental model in which peripheral blood MNC from CML-pafients or normal bone marrow cells were ficoll-separated and then contaminated with 1% and 10% cells of the human T-Cell-Line Jurkat. The T-Cells were previously marked using the Hoechst 33258 dye method. T-Cell-removal was achieved using monoclonal antibodies (MoAb) and immunomagnetic beads ( Dynabeads M-450 coated with Sheep-anti-Mans-IgG ). In comparison with the indirect method the direct method (MoAb coupled to the IgG-eoated beads before use ) led to an increased elimination efficiency of 19,8% (direct: mean 1,36 log, range 0,91-1,631og; indirect: mean 1,09log, range 0,84-1,321og ) with increased MNC-recovery ( direct: mean 45,1%, range 19-62,3%; indirect: mean 42,6%, range 30,8-45,8% ). For the direct method we varied the total beads concentration from 0,9 mg to 7,2 mg beads per 1"107 MNC and analysed the effect of two successive treatments of the sample. Four MoAbs were tested alone in comparison to different MoAB-cocktalls. Using the direct tectmique in a two step procedure with an MoAb-cocktail against the CD2-, CD3-and CD5-antigen we obtained a MNC-recovery of 51,35% ( range 28,6-74% ) and a depletion efficiency of 3 log ( range 2,82-3,16 log ) which corresponded to a removal ofmore than 99,9% of the T-Cells. This corresponds to the antigen-positive fraction of the Jurkat-cellline. In an attempt to increase dose intensity of chemotherapy, patients with HG-NHL stage II-IV were treated with 8 alternating cycles of VIM (VP16, ifosfamide, methotrexate) and CHOP (cyclophosphamide, adriamycin, vincristine, prednisolone) with a stepwise reduction of the time interval between treatment cycles. To overcome hematotoxicity, which is mainly neutropenia with this protocol, rG-CSF (Amgen-Roche) 5 pg/kg sc was given for 9-10 days between the treatment cycles. In a first phase of the study, intended cycle duration was 17 days during the initial 4 treatment cycles. In a second phase the treatment interval was reduced to 14 days for 4 cycles. In the third step patients were treated at 14 day intervals throughout all 8 cycles of chemotherapy. 14 patients entered the first phase, 10 the second and 19 the third phase. During rG-CSF treatment there was a rapid increase in neutrophils beginning at about day 10. Chemotherapy could therefore be continued in the planned interval in >80% of all cycles at both 17 and 14 day intervals. With rG-CSF support, dose intensity could be increased in patients with HG-NHL without increased toxicity. Whether this will lead to better tumor treatment outcome is currently being studied in a randomized phase Ill trial comparing a regular 3 weekly treatment schedule with a two weekly regimen combined with G-CSF support. We analysed 43 cases of nodal and extranodal B-cell lymphomas for presence of a BCL-2 gene rearrangement by conventional Southern blotting and for expression of the BCL-2 gene by immunohistochemistry. Among nodal lymphomas, a BCL-2 gene rearrangement was found in 10 of 15 cases with cb/ec, in 0 of 3 cases with cb and in 1 of 4 cases with cc. BCL-2 expressiou was seen in 17 of these 22 cases, being found consistently in cases where a BCL-2 gene rearrangemeut could be detected. This is in accordance with the concept of BCL-2 gene rearrangements resulting in BCL-2 deregulation. On the other side, the finding of 5 lymphomas, which did not carry a detectable BCL-2 gene rearrangement and also did not express BCL-2, is consistent with their follicular center-cell derivation because follicular center-cells are the only peripheral B-cells which physiologically do not express BCL-2. BCL-2 expression was also frequent among primary gastrointestinal B-cell lymphomas (11 low-grade malignancies, 10 high-grade malignancies) and was seen in 15 of 21 cases. In contrast to nodal lymphomas, however, only 2 BCL-2 gene rearrangements were detected. When looking closer at 7 nodular growing lymphomas, it turned out that two could be defined as true follicular lymphomas because of presence of BCL-2 gene rearrangements, BCL-2 expression, expression of CD10 and lack of vimentin. Another 3 nodular growing, BCL-2 protein positive lymphomas had no detectable BCL-2 gene rearrangements, and had a reverse immunophenotype in respect to CD10 and vimentin expression. They might represent lymphomas of extrafollicular origin, which invaded pre-existiog follicles of MALT. A routine discrimination between these two typos of nodular growing, BCL-2 protein positive, gastrointestinal lymphomas -which might be of clinical importanceshould be achieved by PCR. (Bianco et al., Blood 1991 , 78, 1205 have suggested that pentoxifylline (PTX) reduces morbidity and mortality in patients (pts) undergoing bone marrow transplantation (BMT). Based on these encouraging results, we prophylactically administered PTX to 30 consecutive allogeneic BMT recipients (AML i0, CML i0, ALL 6, NHL 2, MM 2; 15 standard-risk, 15 high-risk; donor: HLA-id.-rel. 24, mism.-rel. 5, matched unrel, i). PTX (12-30 mg/kg/day by continuous infusion) was started one day prior to conditioning, switched to oral PTX when tolerated and discontinued on day i00. Clinical data were compared to a historical control group of 63 pts (AML 21, CML 25, ALL 8, NHL 2, MDS 3, SAA 4; 47 stand, i-d-rip-k, 16 hi~1-~s~. ~TX ~s well tolerated at all dose levels administered and no pt experienced significant adverse side effects. Twenty-six of thirty PTX pts engrafted. One pt experienced graft failure and three pts died too early to be evaluable. Currently, 15/30 (50 %) pts survive with a median follow-up of 160 (70-399) days. 63 % of the PTX recipients developed severe hyperbilirubinemia (>3mg%), i0 % renal insufficiency (serum-creatinine >l. Smg%) and 57% acute GvHD Grade II-IV. The respective values for the control group were 28%, 32%, and 51%. Mucositis requiring narcotics occured in 90% of pts receiving PTX. No difference was observed regarding the days of fever, TPN requirements, and the duration of hospitalization. Based on these results, we can not confirm the previously published beneficial effects of PTX on transplant-related complications. *BMT-Unit, University Hospital Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, and BMT-Unit, Department of Medicine I, University of Vienna, Austria. Hematopoietic growth factors like GM-CSF and IL-3 act on early multipotential progenitors as well as on granulocyte/monocytic progenitor cells. However, GM-CSF and IL-3 are not strictly lineage specific for cells of the myelopoiesis. It has been reported that they can stimulate lymphoid cells, indicating that these cells may express GM-CSF-and IL-3-receptors. We therefore investigated the effects of IL-3 and GM-CSF on 15 human lymphoid precursor B-cell lines derived from a variety of different B-cell neoplasms. Monoclonal lymphoid B-cell lines were used to exclude secondary effects by accompanying non-tumor cells. Thymidine uptake, surface membrane and nuclear antigen expression, immunoglobulin secretion, receptor expression and secretion of cytokines were monitored before and after stimulation with IL-3 and GM-CSF. GM-CSF and IL-3 were used at 10, 100, and 1000 U/ml over a time period of 24 to 72 h. In 14 out of 15 B-cell lines we observed an effect upon IL-3 or GM-CSF treatment. We found a growth inhibition in one cell line and a proliferation in two other cell lines. The majority of cell lines exhibited alterations in their expression of proliferation and activation antigen expression. The surface membrane expression of the IL-3 and GM-CSF receptors as well as secretion of cytokines were correlated with the reaction of the ceils to IL-3 and GM-CSF stimulation. We conclude that some B-cell tumors react upon treatment with GM-CSF and IL-3. The effects could be regulated through direct effector-ligand interactions. These in vitro findings will prompt further investigations of lymphoma cells from patients treated with these growth factors. Abtl. ffir H~matologie, Zentrum ffir Innere Medizin, Univer-sit~it-Gesamthochschule Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 4300 Essen.  Torsten Strohmeyer 1~, Wendy Levin ~, Mike Press 3, Peter Effe~, Dennis Slamon ~" A class of cellular oncogenes known as immediate early transcription factors function as transcriptional regulators in that they are known to both positively and negatively control cellular growth properties. This class of genes includes c-fos, c-jun and EGR-I. To determine whether these genes are altered in renal cell carcinomas, 47 pairs of renal tumors and adjacent normal tissues were analyzed for these 3 genes at the DNA-, RNA-, and protein levels using Northern-and Southern blots, and immunohistochemistry respectively. The expression of these 3 genes was found to be coordinately regulated at the transcript level in the vast majority of normal and malignant kidney tissue samples. Overall, approx. 50% of the tumors showed high expression, as opposed to 50% of tumors with little or no expression of these genes. Moreover, markedly higher mRNA levels of c-fos, c-jun and EGR-1 could be demonstrated by Northern analysis in almost 40% of the tumors when compared to their adjacent normal tissues. However, there were some differences of expression within the adjacent normal kidney samples, thus suggesting that these genes are differentially regulated even within different anatomical regions of the normal kidney. These expression patterns were confirmed by immunohistochemical analysis using polyclonal antisera to the c-fos, c-jun, and EGR-1 gene protein products: Tumors with high mRNA levels showed high expression of the transcript factor proteins on the cellular level, whereas in the tumors with decreased mRNA levels little or no nuclear staining was detected in the tumor cells. Although no correlations of these molecular findings with tumor stage, grade or patients outcome were found so far, the striking differences of the expression of immediate early transcription factors may be of importance in the oathoeenesis and clinical course in renal cell tumors. Aggressive chemotherapy of akute leukemia results in neutropenia with prolonged hospital stay and is often associated with pulmonary infections. Intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1, CD 54), a member of the immunogLobulin superfamily, has been shown to be involved in the binding of leukocytes to target cells and endothelium. After induction by cytokines, ICAM-1 is expressed on a variety of hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic cells. We performed serial determinations of circulating ICAM-1 levels (ELISA, Bender MedSystems, Wien) in 5 patients during treatment of acute leukemia. During this period, 3 episodes of pneumonia occurred and etiologic agents could be confirmed as E.coli, Candida, and Aspergillus, respectively. TNF-m which is known to produce a strong upregulation of ICAM-1 expression, could not be detected in plasma during pulmonary infections. Ln additon, we observed 2 cases of acute respiratory distress syndrome of unknown etiology. In all events circulating ICAM-1 increased at least 2 fold and maximal levels were found in acute respiratory distress syndrome. Elevated ICAM-1 levels associated with pulmonary complications occured not only during overt leukemia but also in bone marrow aplasia. Thus, we suggested the ICAM-1 molecule to be of endothelial origine. The turnover and the role of these circulating molecules in the pathophysiology of infections in immuno-compromised patients remains to be established. From these first observations, pulmonary complications in leukemia appear to result in increased circulating ICAM-1 levels. In 1989, a 60 year old female patient was admitted to our hospital with rapidly progressive chronic lymphocytic leukemia, classified as Rai IV. A total of 17 treatment cycles of anthracycline based chemotherapy was applied during 20 months. On disease progression, Fludarabine Phosphate at a dose of 25mg/qm for 5 days was administered. After 4 courses complete clinical remission was achieved with normalization of leukocyte count and resolution of lymphadenopathy and bone marrow infiltration. Immunoglobulin levels increased continuously from 540 to 820 mg/dl into the lower normal range and the patient developed a severe hemolytic anemia of autoimmune origin. Direct Coombs test became positive and IgG and C3d molecules could be demonstrated on red blood cell membranes. Hemolysis could be controlled by immunosuppressive therapy with prednisone and azathioprine. Unfortunately, the patient died of unrelated ischemic cerebrovascular complications. Autoimmunity is a well known complication in CLL, but is usually correlated with disease activity. In this rare case of Fludarabineinduced complete clinical remission of CLL with recovery of immunoglobulin levels, autoimmune hemolytic anemia is difficult to explain. Because malignant B-cells generally produce IgMantibodies of monoclonal origin, the autoimmune phenomenon could be attributed to therapy-induced disturbance of the immunoregulatory network. Even though the T/B-cell ratio was balanced, Fludarabine may have ted to a loss of a certain subset of T-lymphocytes (CD45RA), which has recently been implicated in the control of autoimmune mechanisms. Increased succeptibility of T-lymphocytes to Fludarabine has been demonstrated by in vitro studies. Stem cell factor is a pluripotent cytokine which is believed to play an important role in proliferation and differentiation in various types of cells. We have studied the in vitro growth-modulating effects of rhSCF (0.i -i0 ng/ml) in 7 tumor cell lines using continous exposure experiments in a capillary human tumor cloning system, a tritiated thymidine uptake assay and by counting cell numbers. Tumor types included: 4 renal cell (A-498, Caki-l, Caki-2, ACHN) and 3 colorectal carcinoma cell lines LS 180, WiDr) . No significant stimulation or inhibition of soft agar colony formation was observed in most cell lines. These results were confirmed in the tritiated thymidine uptake assay and by counting cell numbers. However, a borderline increase of tritiated thymidine uptake to 159%  18% compared to control was observed in Caki-2 cells after 3 days of incubation with 1 ng/ml rhSCF. Similarly, an increase in cell number after 3 days of incubation with 1 ng/ml rhSCF to 166%  36.6% and with i0 ng/ml rhSCF to 155% + 33% was noted in A-498 cells. No time-or dose-relationship was noted. We conclude that under our experimental conditions rhSCF had no profound growth modulating effect on established human tumor cell lines. In an ongoing study 41 pts presenting with lymphoma or lymphatic leukemia (CB: n=9; CB-CC: n=17; ALL: n=6; CC: n=4; T-NHL: n=l; NHL unclass: n=2; T-CLL: n= 1; immunoeytoma: n= 1) were screened for immunoglobulin light and hea W chain or T-cell receptor gene rearrangement by Southern blotting. In 9 pts (CB-CC: n=3; ALL: n=3; CB: n=f; NHL unclass: n=l; immunocytoma: n=l) only BM samples were available and rearrangement was detected in all but two pts with CB and c-ArL In 18 pts (CB-CC: n=7; CB: n=5; CC: n=2; ALL: n=l; T-CLL: n= 1) PB samples only were analyzed and rearrangement could be detected in all but two pts with CB or CB-CC, respectively. In the remaining 16 pts samples from BM and PB could be studied simultaneously. While rearrangement was found in all BM samples a rearrangement was present in the PB of 8 pts only. Nine pts (CB II EA: n=l; CB III A: n=l; CB IVA: n=2; CC IVA: n=l; CC IV B: n=l; CB-CC III A n=l; CB-CC IV B: n=2) exhibiting a rearrangement in the PB at diagnosis were followed regularly by analysis of PB samples while treatment with CHOEP progressed. After three cycles of CHOEP 3 pts had returned to germline configuration of the respective genes involved in rearrangement at diagnosis and these pts remain alive and well 20, 20, and 21 months after diagnosis. Five pts showed a persisting or reappearing rearrangement at the end of chemotherapy and 3 of these pts have died 6, 9, and 9 months after diagnosis. Two pts are alive and well 22 and 23 months after diagnosis although the last evaluation of P8 cells showed a reappearing rearrangement of immunoglobulin genes. One further pt awaits testing after the last cycle of chemotherapy. We conclude that up to 50 % of lymphoma/lymphatic leukemia pts exhibit detectable rearrangements of immunoglobulin and/or T-cell receptor genes in the peripheral blood which then offers the opportunity to easily follow the kinetics of the diagnosed rearrangements under chemotherapy. Our results do not allow firm conclusions as to the clinical value of such studies. However, further investigation seems warranted as those pts achieving a molecular remission by the end of chemotherapy remain in clinical remission for extended periods of time while on the contrary, 3/6 pts with persisting or reappearing rearrangements have relapsed and died already whereas 2 pts with rearranged immunglobulin genes at the end of therapy remain alive and well closed two years after diagnosis. The characteristic histology of Hodgkin's Disease (HD), in which low numbers of Hodgkin and Sternberg-Reed cells a, re surrounded by a large number of reactive cells, suggests a functional relationship between these cells, possibly mediated by cytokines. To study the role of cytokines in the biology of HD, we first analysed the expression of a panel of growth factors in HD derived cell lines in primary biopsy specimen and in serum of patients with HD. Our data indicate that the cells produce a variety of cytokines such as IL-1, IL-5, IL-6, M-CSF, G-CSF, GM-CSF, TNFct, lymphotoxin and TGFfs In addition, the receptors for IL-2 (ct and 1% chains), IL-6 and M-CSF could be detected in some of the cell lines. In primary tissues we have found the expression of IL-6 and IL-6 receptors and of IL-2 Ra and IL-2 RK in Hodgkin and Sternberg-Reed cells by in-situ hybridization and immunohisto-logical experiments. ELISA analyses revealed expression of IL-3, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, GCSF and soluble IL-2 R molecules in the serum of patients with HD. Thus, we conclude from our data that IL-6 and perhaps additional cytokines are involved in Hodgkin's Disease. Regulation of surface antigens by hemopoietic growth factors was studied by flow cytometry on lymphocytes and monocytes ot patients treated with rG-CSF, rGM-CSF and rlL-3. The effects of these cytokines were observed under three conditions : rG-CSF in patients with advanced bladder cancer treated with M-VAC. They received a single dose of rG-CSF (5 p.g/kg/s.c.) before chemotherapy. Cell surface marker analysis was done before and after cytokine application. rGM-CSF in patients with small lung cancer treated with different doses of this cytokine (5 #g or 10 p.g/kg/s.c.) followed by the ACO-II scheme. Antigens were analysed as described above. rGM-CSF and rlL-3 treatment of patients with different solid tumors in complete remission for peripherial stem cell harvest. An application of rGM-CSF (5 #g/kg/d on 5 consecutive days) was combined with several doses of rlL-3 (2.5 #g, 5 #g or 10 pg/kg/d) and different application periods (3, 7 or 14 consecutive days). Methods : Ficoll-separated mononuclear cells were studied by two color FACS-analysis using a broad panel of FITC and PE conjungated monoclonal antibodies. Cells were characterised by lineage specific antibodies (CD 2, CD 14, CD 19 among others); coexpression of activation markers (CD 25, CD 38, CD 71 and MHC II) and adhesion molecules (CD 11b, CD 44 and CD 49wd) was studied. Results : After rGM-CSF and rG-CSF treatment activation of T-lymphocytes was observed by coexpression of CD 25, CD 71 and MHC II, while rlL-3 had no influence on T-cell activation, rG-CSF downregulated adhesion molecules (CD 11b, CD 44 and CD 49wd) on lymphocytes. On monocytes rGM-CSF upregufated CD 54, CD 71 and MHC II. In contrast MHC II was downregulated during rG-CSF application. Furtheron, rG-CSF reduced the antigen density of CD11b and CD 44 on monocyles. The studies showed differential regulation of activation and adhesion molecules in vivo during treatment with different hemopoietic growth factors. Hepatic venoocclusive disease (VO0) is a complication of allogeneic bone marrrow transplantation (BMT) occurring in 10-30 % of patients. The mortality of these patienf_s is 30-40 %. We report a 38 year-old patient with an acute myeloid leucemia (M5, FAB) in first remission after conditioning with busulfan 4 mg/kg/day orally for 4 daws and cyclophosphamide 60 mg/1<g/day for 2 daws. On day +8 after BMT (HLA idmtical sibling donor, AB0-and sex-mismatched, immunosuppr~sion with cyclc~porine A and "short-MIX") the patient developed fever and increasing C-reactive protein. Antibiotic therapy ms ineffective. 5 days later a progr~sive hepatomexjaly, rise of bilirubin (maximum 200 umol/l), rise of liver transaminases (maximum of GOT/GPT/GLDH > 1000 U/I), ascites and refractoriness to platelet transfusions occurred. A clinical diagnosis of VOO was made. Hepatorenal syndrome developed and daily dialysis w~ initiated. Because the liver function progressive ] y deteriorated, orthotopic liver transplantation (LTX) was planed and carried out at day +23 after BMI_ The transplanted liver was AB0-eompatible with the bone marrOw graft. Postoperatively the patient received steroides, cyclo~porine A and monoclonal murine iL-2-receptor antibody for immunosuppr~sion. Liver function parameters improved quickly, but hemodialy~is was necessary for further 4 weeks. No GVHD was observed neither after BMT nor after LIX. 7 month after BMI bone marrow function was slightly impaired due to c~tomegalovirus-infection and subsequent gangciclovir-therapy (in complete remission). 6 month after LTX liver function was still completely normal. No signs of rejection or GVHD were seen.. The Karnofsky index of the patient was 70-80 %. We conclude that orthotopic liver traosplantation is a leasable approach for rescue in rapidly ~[~r_~s_!v_e_v~s aft~_B~.. Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a clonal hematopoietic disease of the pluripotent stem cell. Cure can only be achieved by bone marrow transplantation. Allogenic bone marrow is available only for a minority of patients. Autologous bone marrow may be used, if in vitro treatment is successful for elimination of Ph 1 positive cells. 15 bone marrow samples of patients with newly diagnosed untreated CML in chronic phase were treated with the alkyllysophospholipid ET-18-OCH3 (ALP) followed by long term bone marrow culture (LTBMC). Colony growth assays and cytogenetic analysis were done at day 0,21,28 and 35 of LTBMC. In 14 of 15 cases without ALP treatment the philadelphia chromosome was still detectable after several periods of LTBMC. In one case there was no analysable metaphase. In three out of the 15 cases treated with ALP we found Ph I negative metaphases in cytogenetic analysis after three and four weeks of LTBMC. These preliminary results indicate that treatment with ALP might enhance the rate of conversion of Ph 1 positive CML bone marrow precursor cells during LTBMC. Samelson, Cell, 1986) . In order to analyse the role of tyrosine kinases in murine cytolytic T-ceils we used the specific tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein. Concentration dependently, genistein inhibits IL-2-dependent cellular proliferation and TCR-mediated cytolytic T-cell effector functions. These functions include a) cytolytic activity, b) exocytosis of preformed granules, and c) de novo protein synthesis. Biochemical characterisation of intracellular signalling events reveals two steps in TCR-induced signal transduction sensitive to genistein. First, phosphatidylinositol turnover is blocked suggesting a tyrosine kinase activity proximal to phospholipase C activation. Second, genistein is able to inhibit phorbolester/calcium ionophore-induced exocytosis of granules and de novo protein synthesis. Implications of findings on the regulation of lymphocytic functions are discussed. Div. of Hematology, Dept. of Medicine, University of Essen. Hufelandstr. 55, 4300 Essen i. Immune control of tumours is thought to be mediated through specific, antigen dependent mechanisms that are T cell dependent and through mainly unspecific, K(?) and NK mediated processes. The existence of antigen specific rejection mechanisms has been shown in early experiments involving immunization with irradiated tumour cells and subsequent challenge with vital tumour cells (Foley 1953 , Main and Prehn 1957 , Klein 1960 . To further dissect the cellular subsets responsible for the observed postimmunization tumour rejection, we have utilized a novel mouse strain that is completely CD 8 deficient and was generated by homologous recombination (Fung-Leung et al, Cell, 1991 ) . These mice lack CD 8 killer T function in CTL assays. CD 8 deficient mice were backcrossed into a B6 background (F5) and immunized with 1 Mio. irradiated ALC cells weekly x 5. ALC is a radiatiori virus induced murine thymic leukemia (B6 background). CD 8 +/-and wild type mice as well as non-immunized mice of the three phenotypes served as controls. One week after the last immunization, mice were challenged with 1000 live tumour cells after a 400 rad irradiation of the mice. Results (tumour incidence for immunized and non immunized mice) are shown in the Although it was the first malignant lymphoma to be recognized as an individual disease entity, Hodgkin's disease [HD] , its origin and cause, remains an enigma to clinicians and researchers alike. Heterogeneity in clinical presentation and biologic behaviour suggests that HD might not represent a single disease. Due to the scarcity of Reed Sternberg [RS] tumour cells in affected tissues, we have examined single RS cells from 11 patients with HD with a global PCR method (potyA-cDNA PCR) and from 4 patients with combined RT cDNA+DNA PCR for p53. PolyA cDNA PCR generates 500bp 3'mRNA cDNA "libraries" with preservation of relative abundance from small samples. To examine specificity, cell line controls were examined with 3' cDNA probes. Jurkat 3' cDNA was cloned into a vector, and the library screened for TCRB sequence. 420 bp of non-mutated TCR sequence were found. Probing of libraries from 6 patients with at toast 7 successfully amplified single RS cells showed lack of c-fins expression, very frequent c-myc, cfes/fps and fyn expression in single cells. Lck (T-cell tyrosine kinase) and lyn were expressed to varying degrees in different cases. Hck (monocytoid/B cell kinase) was found in one NS case and no other case. CD 4 was expressed in most RS cells from LP and NS cases. TNF8 was expressed to high levels. GATA-& a T cell specific transcription factor, was expressed in T lines but not in single RS cells. This molecular footprint shows that RS cells are activated hemopoietic cells and shows consistent differences for kinase proto-oncogene expression, p53was expressed in 3/4 cases examined by RT PCR, genomic sequence was found in 414cases. Ontario Cancer Institute, 500 Sherbourne Street, Toronto, Canada, Georgetown U., Washington, D.C., BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver The study comprised I3 patients aged 19-66 years ( median 54 years ) with high grade malignancy non-Hodgkin lymphomas in the remission phase of disease ( remission duration 26-103 me, median 45 me )o Following parameters of unspecific immunity: absoiute numbers of peripheral blood lymphocytes, their subpopulationa, neutrophils and monocytes, serum levels of IgG, A, M and skin tests with recall antigens were evaluated prior to and after immunomodulationo All patients were g&vem Thymus Factor X ( Polfa ) in dosage of $Omg SoCo every 2nd day for the 1st month, followed by the same dose every 3rd day for 5 months~ Disturbances in parameters studied were observed prior to imm~nomndHlntion. Moreover, ~ll of patients suffered from frequent viral or Candtda albicans infections of the oral and pharyngeal mucosa 9 None of these infections ocurred since the 2nd month of immunomodulationo After 6 months of immunomodulatton disturbances in parameters of unspecific immunity persistend, but the CD4/CDB ratio tended to improve~ Multidrug resistance (mdr) is a major problem in anthracycline tratment of gastric cancer. The cytotoxicity of the new anthracycline idarubicin seems to be independent of P-glycoprotein (Pgp) related mdr. Cytotoxicity of DOX, EPI and IDA was studied in two human gastric cancer cell lines (HM2 and HM51) with different expression of Pgp. M ethod_s~ Expression of Pgp was determined by immunocytochemistry using the specific monoclonal antibodies C-219 and JSB-1. Chemosensitivity was estimated with the MTT colorimetric assay. Exponential cell growth was shown for both cell lines within 96 h. Continuous drug exposure was performed with concentrations of IDA. EPI and DOX between 0.0625 and 5.0 #M for 24 and 72 h Cytotoxicity was measured after 96 h. R e._s._ults; Pgp expression was high in HM2, and low in HM51 cell line. In HM2 IC~0 of DOX was 5 (24 h) and 11 fold (72 h) higher than in HM51. In contrast to DOX the tCr,, of IDA was only moderately elevated in HM2. In comparison to DOX the ICr,. of IDA was 3 (HM51) and 10 fold (HM2) CE combines tumor ischemia with locoregional chemotherapy. It may have particular utility in patients with HCC, whose tumors tend to be vascular and refmctory to standard treatment. At UC San Francisco, we have treated 115 patients on sequential trials of CE since February, 1986, using gelfoam as the embolizing material, combined with various chemothempies. Entry criteria include a KPS > 60%, liver-predominant tumor, patent portal vein, no gross ascites and bilimbin < 5 mg/dl. Our pilot experience with gelfoam alone (N = 14) revealed no evident activity, so patients were then treated with a combination of gelfoam, doxorubicin, mitomycin-c and cisplatin. The mixture was injected under fluoroscopic guidance via a percutaneous catheter into the hepatic artery until stagnation of blood flow was achieved. 84 patients (median liver replacement = 50%) were treated palliatively with this combination. 60% of patients had selective arterial embolization due to underlying cirrhosis and/or hepatitis. By CT scan criteria, there were 21 PR's (25%) and 21 MR's (25%). Liquefaction necrosis occured in 77% of patients, and alpha-fetoprotein declined by > 50% in 43/56 patients. The median survival for all patients was nine months; 25% ofpatienls were alive > two years. Patients are now being treated palliatively on a protocol using Lipiodol in the same CE mixture. Seven patients have been treated, responses are similar. Eight patients have been treated with the original CE mixture as preoperative therapy for orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). To be eligible, patients have tumors < 5 cm, are HBsAg -and have no metastases. Six patients had OLT; all are alive and free of disease (months 10,10,16,21,24,42) ; one patient had carcinomatosis at surgery and one awaits OLT. The toxicity of CE includes transient fever, nausea, vomitting and abnormal liver enzymes. Complications have included hepatic abscess (2) , bacteremia (2) , and tumor lysis syndrome (1) . There have been three treatment-related deaths (liver failure, 2; hemorrhage, 1). In summary, CE is reasonably well tolerated and is active against HCC. The best particle/drag combination and the role of CE in treating HCC are uncertain. Development of clonal disorders such as PNH, myelodysplastic syndromes or acute myeloid leukemia is observed in a considerable proportion of patients with AA following after IS.These results imply that long term follow-up investigations in AA after IS are necessary. In a recently completed study we have investigate 29 patients (15 males, 14 females, range 18-65 years, mean age 43, range after IS: 2-128 months, mean 32 months) with acquired AA for signs of PNH. The Ham-test and assessment of phosphatidylinositolglycan (PIG)-anchored surface molecules in peripheral blood cells analysed on a fiuoresconce-activated cell Sorter FACScan by using monoclonal antibodys were performed serially. In four patients indicators of clonal diseases were found: In one patient a PNH was diagnosed ~ to IS with positivity of both the Hamtest and PIG-analyses and clinical evidence of hemolysis. He achieved a complete remission (CR) of the AA. The second patient showed first evidence of a deficiency of PIG-anchored proteins three months after IS, Ham-test was negativ. There was no clinical response to treatment. The third patient developed deficiency of PIG-anchored proteins 18 months after IS in association with relapse after CR, Ham-test was negativ. in the fourth patient was first diagnosed a severe AA in 6/84, treated with antilymphocyte globulin (ALG),methylprednisolone (MP) and androgens followed by a CR. First relapse occurred 2/85, a second course of ALG/MP resulted in a second CR. Second relapse occurred 11/85, monotherapy with ciclosporin A (CSA) was followed by a CR, which was initially CSA-dependent. Despite continuation of CSA-therapy a third relapse was observed 3/89, treatment with ALG, MP and CSA again resulted in a CR. During the whole observation period PNH-tests were negativ. in 9/90 she relapsed again and for the first time a PNH was diagnosed by both the Ham-test and demonstration of PIG-deficiency. By following treatment with ALG/MP and CSA in combination with Interleukin-3 a CR was again achieved. These results demonstrate the importance of long term follow-up investigations in obtaining more information about the frequency of PNH, and most likely clonal disorders in general in AA after immunosuppressive therapy. Dept. of Hematology, Center of Internal Medicine, J.W. Goethe-University Frankfurt/M. Germany Sven de Ves, Marion A. Brach, Yeshinobu Asano, Wolf-Dieter Ludwig, Peter Bettelheim, Hans-J0rgen Cruse, and Friedhelm Herrmann TheTransforming Growth Factor-I~ family of proteins has potent hematopoletic regulatory properties. The major biological effect of TGF-0 on hematopoietic cell growth relies on its reversible inhibition of cell entry into cycle. TGF-[3 can act as a positive or negative regulator of normaland malignant hematopoiesis dependent on the presence of other factors as well as the responding cell type. Available experimental evidence suggests that TGF-13 acst as a selective negative regulator of early hematopoietic progenitor cells while sparing the more committed progenitors.The mechanism by which TGF-fl inhibits hematopoiasis is, however, not completely understood. Blast cells obtained from patients with acute myelegenous leukemia (AML) expressing surface binding sites for human Stem Cell Factor (SCF) proliferetively respond following exposure to this molecule. In the presence of human TGF-I~I, the capacity of SCF to augment the proliferative state of AML blasts was, however, atmoat completely abolished. This inhibitory t~'tion o{ TGF:-~could be reversed by a neutraiyzieg anti-TGF-I]l antibody. Studies on the mechanism of action of TGF-I]I on SCF-induced proliferation of AML blasts revealed that TGF-151 treatment of these cells was associated with downregulatibn of SCF-receptor surface expression (detected with a specific monoclonai antibody) without affecting the transcriptional activity of the c-kit protooncegene encoding the SCF-receptor. A 25 year old female patient presenting in 2/88 with a severe AA, was treated with antilymphocyte globulin (ALG) and methylprednisolone (MP) and reached a complete remission (CR) 2/89. In 7/89 she relapsed and achieved a partial remission (PR) under ciclosporin A (CSA) and prednisolone. In 3/90 the second relapse was diagnosed with an absolute neutrophil count of 500/pl. in 7/90 she was treated within a phase till-study with rh IL-3 500 pg/day given as subcutaneous bolus injection from day 9-90 in combination with ALG/CSA/MP. Fever developed 8 days after start of treatment, blood cultures showed growth of Staph. aureus, ciprofloxacin-therapy was successful. Within the following two weeks the neutrophils increased to 2800/~JI without fever or signs of infection, an unusually rapid increase compared to ALG/CSAJMPtherapy alone. Five weeks after beginning of therapy the patient developed clinical evidence of infection with fever, chills and septic skin lesions. Again staph, aureus was found in blood cultures. Abdominal ultrasound examination showed multiple abscesses of the liver, confirmed by computertomography; a bone scan showed foci in the left tibia and in the head. Antibiotic treatment with imipenem/vancomycin, followed by teikoplanin i.v. and then clindamyein orally for about 6 months resulted in a complete cure. Since 05.09.90 no fever was observed. On 22.10.90 CR of the AA was demonstrated and rh IL-3-therapy was terminated according to the treatment plan. On 19.02.91 CSA was stopped, the patient is still in CR at last follow up 20 months after start of therapy. The early rise of neutrophils under ongoing IS with CSA/MP suggests, that treatment with rh IL-3 was an important factor for the survival of a severe infectious episode in the second relapse of a severe AA. Dept. of Hematology, Center of Intemal Medicine, J.W. Goethe-University FrankfurtlM, Germany Harald Voss 1, Alexander Knuth 2, Christoph Huber 1, Barbara Seliger 1 Anomalies of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R) gene, including amplification and overexpression, have been reported in renal cell carcinoma in vivo. Furthermore, all these tumors coexpress at least one of its ligands, transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-alpha) and EGF, suggesting the existence of an autocrine growth stimulatory loop. We have studied normal kidney and ranal cell carcinoma tissue from 50 patients and 4 corresponding tumor cell lines and examined the structure and quantity of the EGF-R gene and its transcripts using Southern and Northern blot analysis as well as single stranded conformation polymorphism (SSCP). In addition, we analysed the genes and transcripts coding for ligands of the EGF-R, TGF-alpha and EGF. EGF-R gene amplification was detected in all 50 tissue specimens whereas no amplification of the EGF-R gene was detected in the corresponding normal kidney. Studies on EGF-R rearrangement and/ or mutation is in progress. All tumors revealed a significant overexpression of EGF-R and TGF-alpha, but underexpression of the EGF when compared to normal kidney tissue. The four tumor cell lines showed a similar expression pattern of the EGF-R system, however overexpression of the TGFalpha and EGF-R was more pronounced. Interestingly , in 3 out of the 50 renal cell carcinoma and one tumor cell line an aberrant EGF-R transcript of 8.0 Kb was detected.. Our data suggest several mechanisms for the activation of the EGF-R mediated growth stimulatory pathway in renal cell carcinomas in vivo: (1) expression of a structurally altered receptor may have escaped normal control and (2) autocrine/ juxtacrine-and or paraerine stimulating mechanims involving coexpression of receptor and ligands with overexpression of the EGF-R. Tumor temperature may vary greatly depending on the topographical situation (37~ from core to 32~ on the skin). We have shown in human tumor xenografts that the effective ness of oxazaphosphorine cytostatic drugs (cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide) is steeply temperature dependent increasing with rising tumor temperatures from 32~ to 43~ We observed a drug and thermodose dependent increase of the therapeutic efficacy of eyelophosphamide (CP) and ifosfamlde (IFO) in sensitive tumors. However, in primary CP and IFO resistant tumors only hyperthermia at 43~ for 1 hr in combination with the same dose of CP and IFO caused significant tumor regressions. To date, the cause of the enhanced therapeutic efficacy of CP and IFO at elevated tumor temperature is poorly understood. In the tumor models studied we observed increased cytotoxicity of thermochemotherapy with CP/IFO without significant changes of nutritive blood flow, tumor-pH or tumor oxygenation. In order to get more information on the in-vivo pharmacokinetics of CP and IFO we determined the blood concentrations of CP and IFO and of activated CP and IFO following iv. application of the drugs in nude mice under different liver temperatures. The temperature dependent change of the concentration of both activated drugs was considerably less steep than the temperature depending change of the therapeutic efficacy. We assume that the increased cytotoxicity of thermochemotherapy with CP and IFO is caused by the temperature dependency of the alkylating reaction. Dept. of Internal Medicine, Medical University of Lfibeck Ratzeburger Allee 160, D-W-2400 L/~beck, Germany. A.Weiss 1 , D.Buchheidt 1 , A.D6ring 1 , M.Bohrer 2, H.D.Saeger 3 In an ongoing prospective study 21 patients with enlarged peripheral lymph nodes have been examined by a 5 MHz-probe until now. Characteristic criteria have been worked out for a differentiation between reactive lymph node enlargements, malignant lymphomas and an infiltration by a carcinoma. At the same time the lymph nodes have been examined by a computer-supported colour-coded Dopplerultrasound to show the intranodal blood supply. The ultrasound examinations had been photo-documented in detail. A well visible lymph node had been marked and exstirpated consecutively. The fresh material has been examined cytologically, histologically and immunohistologically. In the scope of a comparative examination the documentated pattern of lymph nodes have been correlated with histological slices. In the same period lymph nodes of 20 other patients of well known histology have been examined by the criteria mentioned above. We conclude that an ultrasonic differential diagnosis between a reactive lymph node enlargement, a malignant lymphoma and an infiltration by a carcinoma seems to be possible. We report data concerning 1016 platelet transfusions in 144 hematologic patients, receiving 1-37 HLA-A,B-matched single donor platelet concentrates (PC). Posttransfusion response was analysed calculating the corrected count increment (CCI). 33 (23%) of 144 patients had to be excluded from the study because of the presence of HLA-antibodies. The age of PC (range from 5 to 24 hours in conventional PVC-bags and from 5 hours to 5 days in special gaspermeable bags) showed no influence on CCI, nor after 1 hour neither after 24 hours. Reliable information about the presence of bleeding, splenomegaly, sepsis, disseminated intravascular coagulation or fever could be obtained in 751 of 1016 transfusions, 237 of these 751 transfusions were performed in absence of one or more of the above mentioned conditions. Patients with one or more of these problems showed a significantly reduced CCI after 24 hours compared to those without any factor impairing platelet increment. CCI after 1 hour was not ir]fluenced, as it is in patients with HLA-antibodies, e.g.. These results corroborate the necessity of a strictly monitoring of postransfusion response to PC, especially in patients who seem to be refractory to platelet transfusion. Today, we distinguish three kinds of RLND: diagnostic in stage I, therapeutic primary RLND in stage II A/B and salvage-RLND for residual masses after chemotherapy. The staging of testicular tumors is false negative in 17 -384. Reliable risk factors to definitely define a stage I are not yet defined. Therefore, modified ejaculationprotective RLND with rapid tissue sections is the "therapy" of choice, even now. Fertility is sufficiently preserved and the progression rate of 174 will be outweighed by an easy follow up with longer intervals than under surveillance. RLND alone for stage II A/B results in a progression rate of 494. Currently we prove the value of RLND + adjuvant chemotherapy vs. primary chemotherapy ~ RLND in a prospective multicenter trial. Endpoints will be the impairments by therapy. Advantages are the pathological staging with the possibility of a tailored therapy and the reduction of chemotherapy from 3-4 to 2 courses, whereas the application of two invasive therapies is perhaps an overtreatment. Residual masses after chemotherapy require a surgical intervention. Whereas some authors claim a salvage-RLND for all patients, others try to discriminate patients according to the histology of the primary and the size of residual tumors who don't need this operation. Our own results revealed fibrosis/necrosis in all seminomas < 5 cm and embryonal carcinomas < 3 cm. For primaries with teratoma components all patients with residual disease need RLND. Generally, the preoperative markers have to be negative; only in some special cases without progressive disease and a marker plateau RLND may be beneficial. We studied autologous blood donation (AD) in 427 adults (42% male, 58% female) aged 19-84 years (55+/-17y) scheduled for elective orthopedic surgery. All patients received adequate oral iron substitution. The mean number of autologous units (U) collected per patient was 2.3 (range 1-4). Men showed significantly (p<0.001) higher hb-values prior to first donation (15.2+/-2.4 g/dl), prior to (13.1+/-1.2 g/d0 and post surgery (11.2+/-1.5 g/dl) than women (14.0+/-1.1/11.9+/-1.1/10.4+/-1.4g/dl). Decline of hb during the donation period was independent of sex and correlated with the number of U donated (2.3+/-1.0). Younger donors (<60y) performed slighthly better than older ones (>60y) in this regard. Analysing the influence of time on preoperative hb-regeneration characterized by the point of preoperative donation stop showed that erythropoiesis generally cannot compensate the blood loss caused by AD during the preoperative period. Therefore, the risk of additional homologous blood application especially depends on the predonation hb value apart from the degree of perioperative blood loss. Only 13% of male (n=20) but 25% of female (n=67) (p<0.01) patients needed additional homologous blood transfusion. Women are at a substantial disadvantage with regard to AD, therefore. During the postoperative period most patients' hb-values recovered slower than those of a corn trol group receiving neither autologous nor homologous blood, indicating that the often heared postulate of an advantage in postoperative hb-regeneartion caused by preoperative AD is not true. Ferritine, analysed prior to first donation, correlates well with the number of U donated: 1: 88+/-62 ng/ml, 2:104+/-82, 3:153+/-153, 4:157+/-118 and dropped substantially during the donation period despite of iron substitution. As the number of U donated seems to depend on the level of iron stores we will rather have to analyse the effect of long time predonation iron substitution than that of recombinant human erythropoietin. Here we report a quality control on a series of 3201 single donor cytapheresis platelet concentrates (SDPC) with regard to the requirements for the preparation of SDPC given in the "Richtlinien zur Blutgruppenbestimmung und Bluttransfusion" (published in 1992). According to these guidelines SDPC should contain more than 2"1011 platelets total in a plasma volu~e less than 300 ml and the contaminating leucocytes should not exceede 5"10 v in total. All concentrates in this study were produced running the standard separation protocols as recommended by the manufacturer. The separators and separation protocols we used were: Hydroxyethyl starch (HES), a synthetic analog of naturally occuring starch is used in leukapheresis as a sedimentation agent. HES induces rouleaux formation of red cells and hence produces a sharply defined interface between red cells and buffy coat, resulting in increased leukocyte yields and less erythrocyte contamination of the separation product e.g. granulocyte concentrates. HES has been recommended for the processing of bone marrow iBM) in ABO incompatible transplantations. Here we present a study on the influence of HES in BM processing with cel) separators (cobe spectra, Fresenius AS 104). In a series of 116 routine BM separations prior to cryoconservation 9 separations were performed using HES as sedimentation agent in a concentration of 1:10 v:v. We monitored the influence of HES on the recoveries of white blood cells (WBC), mononuclear cells (MNC), colony forming units (CFU-GM) and red blood cells (RBC Cell counts were performed on a sysmex counter and microscopically, differentation of MNC by microscope and CFU in a semiliquid medium. There was a significant difference in recovery of leukocytes (p=0,002) but no significances in MNC, CFU or RBC recoveries. We conclude from this data that the use of HES in automated BMT processing merelly increases the recovery of granulocytes and does not improve the results of separation, therefore. Peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (PBSC) offers an alternative to autologous bone marrow transplants, especially in malignant diseases with bone marrow contamination. It has been proven in several animal models and in humans that pluripotent stem cells are circulating in a number sufficient to enable sustained trilineage engraftment after transplantation. Stem cell mobilization can be promoted by the administration of various cytokines or chemotherapeutic substances like cyclophosphamide or both. We explored the administration of G-CSF for peripheral stem cell collection in patients with Hodgkin's disease, Non Hodgkin lymphoma and inflammatory breast cancer, who had fully recovered after chemotherapy. G-CSF was administered subcutaneously at a daily dose of 10 ug/kg BW. Leukapheresis was performed on three consecutive days starting on day 5 of G-CSF administration and 3-6xi0 I0 mononuclear cells (MNC) were collected. At present five patients have been transplanted; recovery of absolute neutrophile count (>500) could be observed on day 12 (mean, range 10-12), recovery of platelets (>20.000) on day 15 (mean, range 13-21). The number of CD 34 positive cells in peripheral blood and leukapheresis harvest (HL) was determined by FACS-analysis. Peak values of CD 34+ cells in peripheral blood (max. 10% of MNC) and in HL (max. 14% of MNC) were found between day 4 and day 6 after the start of G.-CSF treatment, lhe colony formation was monitored in peripheral blood and HL. Peak values were reached between day 4 and day 6 of G-CSE treatment. High dose chemoradiotherapy followed by the reinfusion of previously collected and eryopreserved autologous peripheral blood derived hematopoietic stem cells ( PBSC ) has been shown to be successful for the treatment of different malignancies. To harvest PBSC, blood cell separators with leucocyte collection procedures are being used routinely. In previous studies we fomld the best collection results in PBSC-separations with process volumes higher than 10 L. To investigate a potential stem cell mobilization by the separation itself, WBC, MNC, CFU-GM and CD34 positive cells were analyzed in the patients peripheral blood before, during and after the separation as well as in the corresponding fractions of the PBSC-concentrates. After an initial decrease of all cells, MNC, CFU-GM and CD34 positive cells increased after 5-6 L and, at the end of the separation, attained higher concentrations than before the procedure in some cases.  
