71e7ab6f7761152b1d04828587eddde2063b4195
Admission Hyperglicemia as a prognostic Indicator in Trauma
M  Miranda P  Sousa A  Sa M  Andrade A  Graça M  Santos R  Antunes C  Dias A  Carneiro E  Gomes K  Arvaniti D  Lathyris E  Synnefaki M  Nastou E  Blougoura P  Papakonstantinou D  Matamis 

Hospital Curry Cabral Hospital Curry Cabral Cardiology, Hospital Sta Cruz Hospital Curry Cabral Hospital Curry Cabral Hospital Curry Cabral Cardiology, Hospital Sta Cruz Hospital Curry Cabral Hospital Curry Cabral Hospital Curry Cabral 
INTRODUCTION. Cardiac Arrest (CA) is an important cause of death, 50 percent occurring outside hospitals. One-half of these patients are found in Ventricular Fibrillation (VF) or pulseless ventricular taquicardia. Within this group, better survival is achieved with early defibrillation (less than four to eight minutes). Early BLS is also associated with better survival, by delaying the deterioration of the cardiac rhythm to asystole. METHODS. Case report. . We describe the case of a 80 years old man, who suffered CA shortly after arrival to his local health department, for an appointment with his GP. Several weeks before he began to suffer from typical effort angina and that day he was feeling unwell. Basic Life Support (BLS) was started promptly and an Advance Life Support (ALS) team was requested through the national emergency number. Nine minutes after, ALS team arrived and confirmed CA, with VF. The victim was defibrillated with a 200 J shock and BLS resumed. When orotracheal intubation was attempted, masseter muscle contraction was noticed, so BLS was discontinued for reevaluation. The rhythm had become a wide QRS tachycardia with pulse and the victim recovered spontaneous breathing. Partial consciousness was recovered (Glasgow Coma Score: 11). On physical examination blood pressure was 133/62 mmHg, heart rate 130 bpm and pulse oximetry 97%. The patient was transferred to an emergency department. Half an hour later, as he recovered consciousness fully, he complained of chest pain. The ECG showed a sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 75, right bundle branch block and ST segment depression in in leads V4 to V6. Laboratorial tests showed cardiac troponine I 0.78 ng/ml. A coronary angiography performed urgently, disclosed significant left main plus three vessel -coronary artery disease. Left anterior descending artery (LAD) was occluded, with late retrograde flow. Eighteen hours after the CA, a quadruple coronary artery bypass grafting operation was undertaken. During surgery, a fresh thrombus was removed from the proximal LAD. Post-operative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on day 7 after the procedure. Sixteen months later, he remains asymptomatic. CONCLUSION. This case illustrates the possibility of a happy end after an episode of sudden CA, in an old patient with undiagnosed severe coronary artery disease and presumable acute coronary syndrome. Although ALS was started nine minutes after the witnessed collapse, return of spontaneous circulation after the first defibrillation and prompt breathing recovery contributed to the success of the resuscitation maneuvers. The fact that CA occurred in a health care facility allowed prompt BLS, which contributed to the recovery. Furthermore, the speed in the detection and treatment of the acute reversible cause (myocardial ischemia in this case) was crucial for long-term prognosis. INTRODUCTION. Hyperglycemia has suppressive effects on immune function and an associated increased risk of infection, endothelial damage and development of tissue ischemia due to acidosis or inflammation. (1) We aimed to study the possible association between hyperglycemia and outcome in a population of critically ill trauma patients. Analysis of a cohort of trauma admitted in the emergency room in a 6 years period, using the prospective registry that uses TRISS methodology for severity analysis. Percentage, mean, standard deviation, 25th -75th, Chi-square and Fisher's exact test were used for the statistical analysis (p \ 0.05 was consider significant). Hyperglycemia was considered when glycemia at admittance was C 106 mg/d. Patients with hypoglycemia (\ 80 mg/dL) were excluded from the analysis. . 883 patients (85.3 % of 1035 patients) had hyperglycemia. In this group 703 were men (79.6%) with a mean age of 44.49 ± 20.71 (p \ 0.01). Road traffic accidents (56.3%), falls (29.7%), and penetrating injuries (5.8 %) account for most of the injury mechanisms. Patients with hyperglycemia were more severely injured resulting in significant differences concerning Revised Trauma Score (RTS) (5.95 ± 1.42), Injury Severity Score (ISS) (25.15 ± 11.41, p \ 0.001) and probability of survival (69.8 ± 28.59, p \ 0.001). Mortality was 30.1% for the hyperglycemia group and 16.4% for the normoglycemic group (p = 0.001). The logistic regression model showed glycemia at admittance as an independent prognostic factor (OR: 1.003; 95%CI: 1.001-1.004) after controlling for age, gender type of trauma and severity of trauma. CONCLUSION. Increases in 10 points in the glycemia implies an increase of more than 10 times in mortality showing that the simple glycemia admittance determination is of farthest value. To present the evolution of multiresistance markers (MMR) in ICUacquired infections according to the site of infection. Prospective, multicenter, cohort study. Patients admitted to the participating ICUs during the year 2007 were included. Patients were followed until ICU discharge or up to a maximum of 30 days. The following infections were assessed: mechanical ventilationrelated pneumonia (VAP), urinary tract infection related to the urinary catheter (C-UTI), and catheter-related bacteremias/primary bacteremias (PB(VCB). MMR identified were defined according to the CDC (1). Data were collected using a program developed with Acces 97 database. Resistance rates are expressed as % of isolations resistant to the antibiotics selected in respect to each pathogen evaluated. Multiresistance rates for each infection analyzed are presented. Rates of previous years are compared. A total of 12,453 patients admitted to the participating ICUs were included, 1367 of which (11.0%) developed 1577 infections (12.7%) during their ICU stay. A total of 1625 microorganisms were recovered, 926 (57%) of which were Gram-negative pathogens, 506 (31.4%) Gram-positive, 179 (11%) fungi, and 14 (0.9%) of other bacteriologic families. MMR according to the infection focus are shown in table. baumanni was an independent risk factor for mechanical ventilation (32/43 vs. 23/61,P = 0.04) and mortality (28/43 vs. 19 /61,P = 0.03) as compared to the susceptible A.baumanni BSI. The mean SAPS II(simplified acute physiology score) predicted death rate was significantly higher in patients with MDR A. baumanni BSI as compared with those having susceptible A. baumanni (63% vs. 41%,P = 0.04). CONCLUSION. MDR Acinetobacter is more likely to be found in patients with solid malignancy, diabetics and grade IV pancreatitis. It was an independent risk factor for mechanical ventilation, mortality and SAPS predicted death rate in patients. Surveillance of device related infection is one of the mean objectives in Spain. Infection rates (IR) are influenced by both the intrinsic and extrinsic risk factors (RF); the latest vary according to the hospital. Objective: To compare IR in ICU according to the hospital size Prospective study performed through out 3 months per year during 2 consecutive years (2006 and 2007) , using the methodology and database of the ENVIN-HELICS. Characteristics of the patients, use of devices and IR per 100 patients and per 1,000 days of ICU' stay/ device were analysed. Hospitals were classified as small (SH) \200 beds, medium (MH) 200-500 beds and big (BH) [ 500 beds. udy. . 112 ICU were evaluated. Their location was: 14 (12,5%) belonged to SH, 45 (40, 1%) to MH, and 53 (47, 3%) CONCLUSION. Major participation of MH and BH. The severity, length of stay and exposition to risk factors are directly proportional to the hospital size, as well as the multiresistant bacterial infection and IR due to more prolonged stay and devices. Stratification is mandatory in the evaluation of IR according to the ICU size. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. Aventis. INTRODUCTION. Fluid resuscitation in the perioperative care of hypotensive trauma patients can exacerbate the injury sustained during hemorrhagic shock. Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) release human neutrophil peptides (HNP) upon activation and are known to play a pivotal role in reperfusion associated organ injury. We hypothesize that HNP play an important role in mediating proinflammatory and prothrombotic responses during ischemia and reperfusion following hemorrhagic shock. METHODS. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were subjected to hemorrhagic shock initiated by blood withdrawal to reduce MAP to 40 mm Hg within 15 min. After a 60 min hypotensive period, rats underwent isovolumetric resuscitation using either whole blood (B) or an equal mix of whole blood and lactated Ringer's solution (B/R) to restore values of MAP to 80 -90 mm Hg for 1 hr. Blood was drawn for cytokine analysis. PMN-induced inflammation was assessed in a co-culture of human primary pulmonary artery endothelial cells (HPAEC) with primary human PMN stimulated with HNP. Platelet aggregation and expression of CD62P was examined following stimulation with HNP. RESULTS. MIP-2 and TNF-\alpha levels at baseline were similar between B and B/R rats but following HSR were significantly increased in the B/R group (Table 1) . Direct stimulation of HPAEC with HNP increased PMN adhesion, which was associated with IL-6 and IL-8 production from HPAEC and an increased surface expression of CD11b in PMN ( Table 2) . HNP increased P-selectin expression, induced aggregation, and prolonged the transient aggregation mediated by ADP in both human and murine platelets. 1.00 ± 0.00 1.17 ± 0.14 2.03 ± 0.03* IL-6 (HPAEC) 0.49 ± 0.14 0.68 ± 0.09 11.80 ± 0.69* 13.98 ± 3.45 12.65 ± 1.75 114.2 ± 7.29* Fold-increase in Adhesion and CD11b. Cytokine concentrations are pg/mL. *P \ 0.05 CONCLUSION. Resuscitation using the hemodilution method caused significant inflammation associated with PMN infiltration. HNP released from neutrophils play a crucial role in mediating inflammation through activation of the endothelium, leukocytes and platelets. INTRODUCTION. Aggressive fluid resuscitation may improve outcome in septic patients [1] . For selected patient groups, however, this approach can be detrimental by increasing the risk of lung edema and abdominal compartment syndrome [2, 3] . The aim of this study was to test the effects of a high vs. moderate volume fluid administration strategy on hemodynamics, organ function and survival in two relevant experimental sepsis models. METHODS. 48 anesthetized pigs were invasively monitored (systemic and regional flows and pressures). They were randomized (full factorial design) to 3 groups (controls, endotoxin infusion and fecal peritonitis) and 2 treatments (high and moderate volume resuscitation), respectively, for 24 hrs or until death occurred. High volume administration consisted of 20 ml/ kg/h, including 5 ml/kg/h HES 6%; moderate volume administration consisted of 10 ml/kg/h). Ventilation was adjusted to keep the animals normoxic and normocapnic, and plateau pressures were kept at \35 mmHg. Differences between groups were assessed by MANOVA using two between-subject factors (model and volume approach) and time as within-subject factor. Preliminary data on control and peritonitis pigs have been presented previously. RESULTS. The pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP) was reduced to 48 ± 27.6 from 94.8 ± 26.6 mmHg in group B, versus 92.8 ± 21.5 from 95.2 ± 22.7 mmHg in group A (p \ 0.05). The mean pulmonary artery pressure decreased to 42.7 ± 12.8 from 55.8 ± 13.7 mmHg in group B, versus 52.6 ± 13.1 from 54.4 ± 12.6 mmHg in group A (p = 0.05). The pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) decreased to 8.2 ± 3.5 from 10.7 ± 3.8 IU Wood in group B, versus 9.9 ± 3.5 from 10.6 ± 3.2 IU Wood in group A (p \ 0.05). Concerning the increase in the cardiac index, there were no significant differences between the groups. Mortality was 41.2% (10/24) in group A and 15% (3/20) in group B (p = 0.001). CONCLUSION. Bosentan demonstrates a beneficial hemodynamic and clinical effect and represents a most promising factor with an extension in its use to treat secondary pulmonary hypertension. Congestive heart failure has been reported as a common source of unsuccessful extubation, especially in patients with cardiac disease or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Spontaneous breathing trial (SBT) is recommended prior to a planned extubation. We sought to evaluate the ability of transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) to identify a cardiac source of unsuccessful SBT in high-risk patients. METHODS. During a 2-month period, all patients with a congestive heart failure (ejection fraction [EF] B 40%) and/or a COPD who were mechanically ventilated [ 24 h were prospectively studied. TTE was performed prior to (T0) and at the end of (T1) the SBT (30 min, unless unsuccessful). The following measurements were performed in triplicate at endexpiration and averaged: left ventricular end-diastolic (LVEDV) and end-systolic (LVESV) volumes with EF using the modified Simpson's rule, maximal Doppler velocity of mitral E and A waves, E/A and E/E' ratios (tissue Doppler at the lateral mitral ring), stroke volume (SV) using the Doppler method at the level of the aortic ring, and the surface of the color Doppler jet normalized by the left atrial surface in the presence of a mitral regurgitation (MR). In each patients, parameters were compared between T0 and T1 using the matchedpairs Wilcoxon test. Results are expressed in median and 95% confidence intervals. Our local Ethics Committee agreed with the protocol. RESULTS. 16 patients (heart failure, 14; COPD, 3) were studied ; duration of mechanical ventilation: 75 h ). SBT was unsuccessful in 4 patients and another patient who passed the SBT was reintubated within 24 h for progressive accumulation of tracheal secretion due to inefficient cough. The remaining 11 patients underwent both a successful SBT and extubation. Overall, LVEF remained stable between T0 and T1 whereas LV filling pressures significantly increased, as reflected by the higher E, E/A and E/E' values (table; *p \ 0.05). In patients with unsuccessful SBT, E, E/A and E/E' values increased of 19.6 cm/s, 0.67 and 1.97 when compared to 7.9 cm/s, 0.08 and 0.32 in patients who passed the SBT, respectively. When MR was present at T0 (n = 8), its normalized surface increased of 2.1 cm 2 in patient with unsuccessful SBT, and was comparable (+0.14 cm 2 ) in the remaining patients. 6.7/5.8-11.7 T1 126/110-174* 89/67-127 34/27-41 49/42-59 92/70-114* 1.6/0.9-2.2* 9.5/7.0-13.5 CONCLUSION. In this study, SBT significantly increased LV filling pressures and the surface of MR, when present. These variations were more pronounced in the subset of patients with unsuccessful SBT. Even in patients with severe congestive heart failure, the absence of documented variation of LV filling pressure and MR during the SBT appeared as a good predictor of successful extubation. INTRODUCTION. Induced mild hypothermia therapy (MHyT) improves neurological outcome in post resuscitation cardiac arrest (CA) patients with ventricular fibrillation/ tachykardia (VF/VT). Patients with asystole as initial rhythm were excluded from earlier studies due to poor neurological outcome. The present study enrolled both patients with asystole or VF/VT; one of the objectives was to assess neurological function at ICU discharge and six months after CPR. METHODS. Prospective multi-center single arm registry in 49 patients with witnessed cardiac arrest and succesful CPR who were selected for MHyT. Patients had to be [ 18 years old and unconscious at ICU/ER admission (GCS \ 8), with a time interval between cardiac arrest and initiation of MHyT treatment of \ 6 hrs. Treatment was performed for 24 hrs with a target temperature of 32,5°C. Neurological status was documented upon ICU/ER arrival, during MHyT treatment, at ICU discharge and 6 months after the event as measured by the Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS). Temperature measurements were continuously taken throughout the cooling period via bladder catheter. For MHyT treatment the Deltatherm device (KCI, USA) was used. Of the 49 patients included in the registry 31 (63%) had VF/VT and 18 (36,7%) had asystole/PEA as first rhythm. Good neurological recovery at ICU discharge (GOS 5/4) was seen in 22 (45%) of the patients, 9 (18,4%) were neurologically impaired (GOS 3/2) and 16 (33%) died. In the follow up investigation after 6 months 19 patients (38,7%) showed favorable neurological outcome (GOS 5/4), 2 (4%) were severly neurological impaired (GOS 3/2), 26 (53%) died. 2 patients with GOS 5 at ICU discharge were lost to the follow up, one (GOS 5) died due to another event. Good neurological recovery was seen in 45,16 %(n = 14) of patients with VF/VT and in 27,7 % (n = 5) patients with asystole 6 months after CPR CONCLUSION. MHyT improves neurological outcome in patients with witnessed CA regardless of the initial rhythm. Favorable results in VF/VT patients were similar to preceding studies. Hypothermia also appears to provide neurological protection in patients presenting with asystole at ICU discharge as well as 6 months after the event. Hemorrhage remains a primary cause of death in civilian and military trauma. Volume replacement and surgical bleeding control are the most important issues in the treatment of hemorrhagic shock. Bedside indicators of ventricular preload have been proposed as predictors of fluid responsiveness. This goal could be achieved reducing arterial pulse pressure (DPP) variation induced by mechanical ventilation. The systolic pressure variation (SPV) has been shown to be a predictor of fluid responsiveness. This prospective study was undertaken to determine the DPP, SPV and cardiac output (CO) in a swine model of controlled hemorrhagic shock and volume replacement with lactated Ringers' solution and hypertonic saline + 6% with hydroxyethyl starch. METHODS. Fifteen pigs were anesthetized, instrumented and randomized into three groups: Sham (S), lactated Ringer solution (LR) and hypertonic saline in 6% with hydroxyethyl starch 130/0,4 (HHES). Hemorrhage was induced by blood withdrawal by a catheter placed through the femoral artery until a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of 40 mmHg was achieved. This pressure was maintained for 30 minutes. At this point, the animals received 32 ml/Kg/ for 20 minutes (LR) or a bolus dose of HHES,4 ml/Kg for 5 minutes. Thirty minutes after the resuscitation, total shed blood was reinfused to the animals. Sham animals were not bled. DPP, SPV and CO were monitored at the following time points: before hemorrhage (Baseline), when a pressure of 40 mmHg was achieved (Tshock), 30 minutes of MAP of 40 mmHg (T0), 30 min, 60 min,120 min and 240 min after treatment (T30, T60, T120,T240). Statistical analyses were performed using one-way analysis of variance followed by Tukey-Kramer test. A p value of 0.05 was considered statistically significant. RESULTS. During shock, DPP was significant higher in groups LR (51.00 ± 17.59; p \ 0.05) and HHES (53.00 ± 17.32; p \ 0.05) when compared to Sham (16.20 ± 10.96), but no significant differences between them. At time T0, only HHES (49.67 ± 20.21; p \ 0.05) was significantly different from Sham (22.58 ± 11.84) . At time T30, HHES (29.67 ± 17.16; p \ 0.05) differed when compared to Sham (19.18 ± 9.01), but after T60 no significant differences were detected in the three groups. When SPV and CO were analyzed, there were no significant differences at time points. CONCLUSION. Small volume hypertonic saline + 6% with hydroxyethyl starch promotes similar volume expansion as large volume LR, reducing the large dPP induced by hemorrhage. INTRODUCTION. Nowadays, left ventricular assist devices (LVAD) are increasingly used as a bridge to transplant in heart failure patients. These patients are generally anticoagulated with phenprocoumon and aspirin. During heart transplant severe bleeding frequently poses a serious problem. Despite lack of evidence, desmopressin is often administered successfully when other means fail. We hypothesised that apart from aspirin-induced cyclooxygenase inhibition an additional platelet dysfunction is present in these patients. In order to evaluate this aspect we employed multiple monitoring devices for platelet function. METHODS. Blood from 12 out-patients after elective LVAD implantation and 12 healthy matched volunteers was screened with the help of thrombelastography (TEG Ò ), platelet function analyzer (PFA-100 Ò ) and a new whole blood aggregometer (Multiplate Ò ) [1] . Additionally, we measured von Willebrand Factor (vWF) antigen levels and vWF:RCo activity (vWF ristocetin co-factor). The anticoagulation regimen for LVAD patients consisted of 100 mg of aspirin PO daily combined with phenprocoumon (INR: 2.5-3.5) [2] . Oral anticoagulation produced an average INR of 3.5. Aspirin reduced MA-AA (Maximum Amplitude Arachidonic Acid; TEG Ò ) by [ 60% in patients (p = 0.001 vs. controls). The effectiveness of aspirin to suppress arachidonic acid-induced aggregation was also reflected by an almost 75% decrease in the ASPItest (Aspirin Test; Multiplate Ò ) (p \ 0.001 vs. controls) while ADP-induced aggregation was not altered in patients (p = 0.805). Platelet function under high shear was invariably and severely compromised: CADP-CT (collagen adenosine diphosphate closure times; PFA-100 Ò ) were 2.5-fold longer in patients than in controls (p \ 0.001), and 50% of patients had maximal CADP-CT values of 300 s. While vWF antigen levels were 80% higher in patients (p \ 0.001), vWF:RiCO was subnormal (\60%) in 5/12 patients. Ristocetin-induced aggregation was also 3-fold higher in controls than in patients (p \ 0.001). CONCLUSION. This indicates that LVAD out-patients have an additional functional platelet defect, which affects the glycoprotein Ib/vWF axis. Therefore, desmopressin use in the management of bleeding in these patients seems justified. Near Infra-Red Spectroscopy is a novel method for rapid and noninvasive assessment of tissue oxygen saturation (StO2). An association between StO2 (%) and oxygen delivery has been demonstrated during shock, trauma and resuscitation. We sought to explore StO2 during cardiac surgery and its association with post-operative outcome. METHODS. 74 adult patients undergoing first-time, elective, single procedure cardiac surgery requiring cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) were studied. StO2 was measured from the thenar eminence (Inspectra Tissue Spectrometer Model 325, Hutchinson Technology Inc, USA) through anaesthesia and surgery, and arrival on the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Outcome was defined as length of ventilation and ICU stay, post-operative length of stay and morbidity outcome (POMS) on post-operative days 1, 3, 5, 8 and 15 (the presence or absence of a infectious, pulmonary, cardiovascular, wound, haematological, pain, renal or gastrointestinal complication). All clinical information was prospectively collected. RESULTS. StO2 rose from baseline during induction of anaesthesia (81.7 to 88.5, p \ 0.001) then fell during surgery (mean 78.9) with a significant change in minimum StO2 during CPB (75.9 to 68.2 p \ 0.0001). The mean StO2 during the 1st 5 minutes of anaesthesia was lower in those patients with than without POMS on D15 (81.1 ± 7.0 v 87.6 ± 7.7, p = 0.04) with the mean StO2 during those first 5 minutes being predictive of the presence of D15 POMS (ROC 0.762, p = 0.01). Lower mean StO2 during the first 20 minutes of ICU monitoring was observed in those with than without POMS on D3 (72.9 ± 12.9 v 85.5 ± 8.4, p = 0.009) and was predictive of the presence of D3 POMS (ROC 0.793, p \ 0.0001). CONCLUSION. StO2 during anaesthesia and ICU is predictive of post-operative complications on D15 and D3 respectively, with lower StO2 being associated with poorer outcome. Such data suggest that reduced tissue oxygen delivery, as measured by StO2, may be associated with poorer outcome -an association which may in theory be causal. Were this the case, interventions targeted at maintaining StO2 may beneficially impact on such outcome. This hypothesis seems worthy of further exploration. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. This work was supported by an unrestricted educational grant from Hutchison Technology (Inc). We are indebited to the patients and staff at the Heart Hospital, London for their support and cooperation. T. Günther 1 , A. Liebold 2 , G. Noeldge-Schomburg 1 , D. A. Vagts* 1 1 Dep. of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, 2 Dep. of Cardiac Surgery, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany INTRODUCTION. Increased arterial blood lactate levels have been identified as a good predictor of postoperative morbidity and mortality. However, little is known about factors that might influence this increase. Therefore we examined the changes in blood lactate levels during and after cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) as well as blood gas levels, pressure and flow parameters, metabolic values, body temperatures and substitution of catecholamines. We conducted a retrospective clinical study with consecutive patients (n = 403) undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass for cardiac surgery at a university hospital. The difference between pre-and postoperative lactate levels was obtained and its relationship to the perioperative factors was analysed. Patients were assigned to three groups: slight increase in lactate levels (SIL, n = 154, increase \ 0.8 mmol/L), medium increase in lactate levels (MIL, n = 105, 0.8 mmol/L B increase \ 1.4 mmol/L) and high increase in lactate levels (HIL, n = 144, 1.4 mmol/L B increase). Differences between the three groups in the potential risk factors were identified by one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni correction. Correlations were assessed with either Spearmans rank correlation test or Pearsons correlation test, as appropriate. RESULTS. Analysis of variance indicated that the three groups differed significantly in maximum glucose concentration during CPB (p \ 0.001) and during ICU stay (p \ 0.001), application of insulin during CPB (p = 0.001) and during ICU stay (p \ 0.001), total perfusion duration (p \ 0.001) and aortic clamp duration (p = 0.002). Correlation analysis identified all of these potential risk factors to be positively correlated to the increase of arterial blood lactate levels (p \ 0.001). Correlation of increase in lactate to the administration of catecholamines was not verified. CONCLUSION. Hyperglycemia and long CPB duration are associated with increased lactate levels. Attempts to reduce glucose concentration and CPB duration may result in lower lactate concentrations after cardiac surgery. INTRODUCTION. ECG abnormalities after cardiac valve surgery may be similar to those seen during spontaneous myocardial infarction, and few reports describe them. In patients who have undergone valve surgery, new ST-T abnormalities are common but not necessarily diagnostic of myocardial ischemia. However, when new Q waves appear in territories other than those identified before surgery, myocardial infarction should be considered, particularly if associated with elevated biomarkers, new wall motion abnormalities or haemodynamic instability (1) (2) . The purpose of this study is to asses the incidence of ST-T abnormalities and perioperative myocardial infarction, clinical manifestations (electrocardiographic, echocardiographic, biomarkers elevation) and prognosis, in patients with cardiac valve surgery without coronary artery disease. METHODS. Retrospective analysis of patients who underwent cardiac valve replacement in a Tertiary University Hospital over a ten year period. After surgery, the patients were routinely admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). We excluded patients with angiographically significant coronary lesions before surgery and those with aortic dissection. Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS 12.0. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) ; Mechanical ventilation (hours) 40 ± 13 (0-360); Intraaortic balloon pump 23.3% (n = 7); Low cardiac output 37%;(n = 11); ST changes Inferior leads:46% (n = 14); Inferior + right:20 % (n = 6); Anterior:16.7 % (n = 5); New onset Q waves 60 %;n = 18; Cardiogenic shock 13.3%;n = 4; Emergency coronary artery bypass 10 %;n = 3; Mortality causes: Cardiogenic shock n = 4; Multiple organ failure n = 2; Mortality: 20%; n = 6. CONCLUSION. perioperative myocardial infarction following valve surgery is a fairly uncommon complication, that must be suspected in patients with ST abnormalities; in our patients, it is associated with increased mortality. Inferior leads were the most frequently affected, with high proportion of right ventricular dysfunction. Strategies must be directed towards early diagnosis, including angiography in patients hemodynamically unstable.  I. Sekkat* 1 , P. Lequeux 2 , J. J. Massaut 3 1 Anesthesiology, ULB, Bruxelles, 2 Anesthesiology, CHU Tivoli, La Louvière, 3 Intensive Care, CHU Brugmann, Bruxelles, Belgium INTRODUCTION. The monitoring of mixed venous saturation(SVO2) necessitates the use of a Pulmonary Artery Catheter. SVO2 measurement is now frequently replaced by the measure of venous saturation in the superior vena cava (ScVO2). The aim of our study is to analyze the correlation between ScVO2 and SVO2 and their predictive value of low output state following cardiac surgery. METHODS. SVO2, ScVO2 and cardiac output were monitored in 15 patients during 24 h following cardiac surgery. SVO2 and continuous cardiac output were monitored using optical pulmonary Swan Ganz catheter and Vigileo monitoring from Edwards LifeScience. ScVO2 was monitored using optical central venous catheter and monitoring from Pulsion. Data were collected every two seconds. Paired data for ScVo2 and SVO2 were analyzed with T test and linear regression. Logistic regression was used to predict low output state from ScvO2 and SVO2. The statistical analysis was performed using Stata 8 for UNIX. RESULTS. ScVO2 underestimates SVO2 (SVO2 = 62.88 +-6.20, ScVO2 = 57.35 +-9.20, p \ 0.0001 at paired T test) and poorly correlates with SVO2 at linear regression (R 2 = 0.57, ScVO2 coefficient = 0.446, const = 37.45). Predictive value of ScVO2 for low output state as defined by a CI \ 2.4 l/min was poor (*LROC = 0.6) at logistic regression as compared with SVO2 (LROC = 0.69). CONCLUSION. ScVO2, on the average, underestimates SVO2 and is only of low value to detect low output state following cardiac surgery. INTRODUCTION. ASV maintains an operator preset alveolar minute ventilation by providing automatic selection of ventilatory settings and continuous breath by breath adaptation (1) . We studied the influence of ASV on need for sedatives (propofol) and tes (morphine) in patients after CABG. METHODS. Randomized controlled trial comparing ASV with pressure control/pressure support (PC/PS)-mechanical ventilation (MV) in 128 patients after Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting (CABG). Data on prescribed propofol and morphine were retrieved from the patient data management system (in the ICU) and from the patient's charts (in the OR). Data are means ± SD, or medians [IQR] where appropriate. Statistics: T-tests were used to analyze differences between groups; non parametric tests were used when applicable RESULTS. There were no differences between ASV-and PC/PS-MV patients regarding demographics, length of stay in ICU/hospital, and creatinine levels. Sedation use in the OR was similar. Duration of intubation and mechanical ventilation was 16.7 ± 6.1 h versus 17.9 ± 1.0 h with ASV and PC/PS-MV, respectively (P = 0.35). There were no differences in prescribed propofol and morphine (Table 1) . INTRODUCTION. Acute renal failure requiring renal replacement therapy (RRT) is common in critically ill patients. Mortality in this group of patients is high, ranging from 28 to 90%. The purpose of the study was to define the outcome of patients requiring haemofiltration (HF) during critical illness and outcome following discharge from our adult general ICU, over a 3 year period, of patients still requiring RRT at time of hospital discharge. Between January 2004 and December 2006, 436 patients (total admission were 3890) received RRT in our ICU as noted by our database. We looked into the ICU and hospital mortality and their relation to renal plus respiratory or renal plus cardiovascular or both. All patients requiring long term renal support were available from our computer based registry. Of the 436 patients, 47% of patients were admitted with a respiratory cause and 35% with cardiovascular cause. The average number of ventilator days was 9.3 and average haemofiltration 5.49 days. Our ICU mortality was 37%. 11.9% subsequently died in hospital. 17% were transferred to other hospitals in the region following critical care discharge. 54 patients were identified as having pre-existing renal impairment and hospital mortality in this group was 46.29%. Of the 382 patients admitted to ICU with normal renal function pre critical illness, 10 still required RRT at time of hospital discharge. At the end of 1 year of follow up, 4 had died, 3 were still on haemodialysis (Abdominal aortic aneurysm repair, perforated duodenal ulcer and diabetic ketoacidosis) and 2 patients were being monitored. By 2 years post follow up no patients required RRT. The monitored patient's diagnoses were TTP and SLE. The mortality of patients admitted with specific organ failures were CONCLUSION. Of the survivors of critical illness requiring RRT, 2.61% required RRT for up to one year following ICU discharge. 2 years after discharge no patients with normal renal function preadmission required RRT. The mortality of patients discharged from hospital still requiring RRT was 40%. These results have implications for what patients, or the patient's relatives, are told when RRT is deemed necessary during critical illness. It also has implications for those commissioning RRT services in survivors of critical illness. Our mortality for patients requiring RRT is low. The lower mortality for 3 organ failure versus 2 probably represents non escalation treatment limitations and needs further investigation. INTRODUCTION. Patients suffering critical illnes are at risk of developing post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). We assessed prevalence and risk factors for PTSD symptoms in patients who required mechanical ventilation one year after ICU stay. METHODS. Two-hundred and eighty-seven patients who required mechanical ventilation [ 48 h were enrolled in a prospective, nonrandomized, multicenter study in Chile (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00403208). Main exclusion criteria were neurologic impairment and end-stage organ disease. One-year mortality was 48%, and survivors were screened telephonically for memories of traumatic experiences during ICU stay (nightmares, panic, pain, and suffocation) and PTSD symptoms by means of the post-traumatic stress syndrome-10 (PTSS-10) scale. PTSS-10 score [ 35 was defined as PTSD. Statistical analysis included MannWhitney and Fisher's exact tests for univariate analysis, and multiple logistic regression to test risk factors for PTSD. RESULTS. Fifty percent (75/149) of patients answered the questionnaire (52 could not be reached, 14 refused consent, and 8 were not able to respond). Average PTSS-10 score was 29 ± 14, and 20 (37%) patients had a score [ 35. Gender (M:24 ± 11 vs. F:35 ± 14, p \ 0.001), medical condition (p \ 0.015) and oxygenation index at 24 h (p \ 0.009) were correlated to PTSS-10 score. No relationship was found between hypnotics, analgesic and neuromuscular blockade use and doses, or level of sedation during mechanical ventilation and PTSD symptoms. Patients with traumatic memories had a greater prevalence of PTSS-10 [ 35 (p \ 0.005). Multivariate analysis showed only gender to be predictive of PTSD symptoms. CONCLUSION. Prevalence of PTSD symptoms in patients surviving critical illnes and mechanical ventilation was more frequent in women, and similar to other studies. None of sedation variables studied was related to PTSD symptoms. INTRODUCTION. Intensive Care Unit (ICU) survivors are at risk for physical or psychological sequelae after critical illness. Medical practioners outside the ICU may not recognize or understand these sequelae. While there are no consensus recommendations of how to organize ICU follow-up, experiences of others suggest that repeated follow-up may be valuable for evaluation after intensive care. In 2007 a multidisciplinary follow-up team was formed, consisting of three physicians, two nurses and a physiotherapist from the General ICU. Hospital psychiatrists were involved to dsicuss consensus for patient referrals, as well as the Pain Clinic. Patients treated for 4 days or longer in the General ICU are seen in the ward by a nurse from the follow-up team 2-5 days after ICU discharge. Patients are briefed about their ICU stay, and the ICU follow-up is described shortly. Visits to the ICU Follow-up Clinic are 3, 6 and 12 months after ICU discharge. Prior to each visit patients fill in ICU Memory Tool, Short Form-36, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HAD) and Impact of Event Scale (IES). At each visit the patient meets a nurse, a physician and a physiotherapist from the ICU. Memories from the ICU are ventilated and the course of illness and treatments during the ICU stay are described. Patients with [25 points in IES or [10 in any of the two subscales of HAD are referred to a collaborating psychiatrist. Patients with mean daily pain score above 3 on the Visual Analog Scale or with untreated neuropathic pain are referred to the Pain Clinic. Questionnaire results and potential further referral are discussed with the patient. Muscle strength, mobility and restrictions in physical functioning are evaluated and the patient performs a 6 minute walking test. If necessary patients are referred to their local out-clinic physiotherapist. RESULTS. During the first year of follow-up, 95 patients who spent [96 h in the ICU and survived to follow-up were invited and 57 came for follow-up. Eight patients were referred for more extensive psychiatric evaluation, of which four were found to be in need for specific treatment (cognitive behavioural therapy, antidepressive treatment) or repeated assessment. Two patients were referred to the Pain Clinic. Thirty-eight patients were found to be in need of physiotherapy recommendations or referral. Evaluation of the follow-up indicates a high degree of patient satisfaction. CONCLUSION. Follow-up of ICU survivors by an ICU-based multidisciplinary team is feasible and can help identify unmet physical and psychological needs of ICU survivors during the first year after intensive care. A liaison between ICU clinicians and other specialists for referral of patients with psychological, somatic or pain sequelae is essential. INTRODUCTION. Morbidity after intensive care spans from impaired physical function to mental problems. However, few ICUs have regular follow-up routines. In rural areas it is inconvenient for patients to visit an out-patient clinic. From January 2006 we implemented a two-step follow-up in our ICU, and the experiences from the first two years are presented METHODS. The study was conducted in a 10 bed general ICU. All survivors ([ 16 years) with a LOS [ 48 h were eligible. 3 months after ICU discharge they were contacted by telephone, two questionnaires (EQ 5D and Karnofsky score) were applied, and a semistructured interview performed. This part was performed by one of six trained ICU nurses. If the patient expressed a wish for a follow-up, or the interviewer deemed this necessary, patients were invited to the out-patient clinic at the hospital. RESULTS. During the first two years, 738 adult patients were treated in the ICU, mean SAPS II score was 41.9, hospital mortality 24%. 214 (75%) of 285 eligible patients were followed up, and 57 patients wanted a second follow-up at the hospital. The figure shows results from EQ-5D (mean sum before 0.78 and after 3.25). The mean Karnofsky score was 66. An unpleasant memory was reported by 57%, most often hallucinations (24%) or anxiety (11%). In 6% pain was remembered as a problem. CONCLUSION. Three months after the ICU stay the daily life of a large part of our patients were still reduced, with perceived QOL worse than pre-ICU. However, most patients seem to cope with such problems without the need for a second consultation in our ICU, making this model cost-effective. INTRODUCTION. Acinetobacter baumanii is an important cause of infections in patients in intensive care units. Sulbactam combinations are bactericidal against A.baumanii in in vivo models. Tigecycline, the first clinically available semisynthetic glycylcycline approved for clinical use, has been shown to have potent activity against a wide variety of gram-positive and gram-negative pathogens, including multidrug resistant (MDR) strains. We prospectively studied the efficacy of tigecyclin versus a high dose regimen of ampicillin-sulbactam (A/S) in patients with Ventilator Associated Pneumonia (VAP) caused by A.baumanii. METHODS. Twenty-three mechanical ventilated patients [ 72 h (mean age: 70 ± 7) that developed VAP and had positive A. baumannii tracheal aspirates were enrolled in the study. The case was considered to be aetiologically confirmed if A. baumannii was isolated and quantitative culture of broncho-alveolar lavage ([ 104 cfu/mL) was achieved. The antimicrobial susceptibility of the isolates was determined using the disk-diffusion (Kirby-Bauer) method, the VITEK II system and the E-test method (AB Biodisk, Solna-Sweden). All isolates exhibited resistance to almost all antibiotics routinely tested, excluding colistin. Susceptibility to tigecyclin was intermediate. Ten of the patients received tigecyclin intravenously (Group A), as monotherapy (50 mg twice daily) while thirteen of them received 9 g A/S (Group B) three times daily (cumulative dose of 9 g sulbactam daily, adjusted for creatinine clearance). Follow up cultures and clinical evaluation of all patients was performed five days after the initiation of therapy. Clinical success was defined by a lessening of the signs and symptoms of VAP, while microbiologic success was defined as eradication of the pathogen in BAL cultures. RESULTS. Follow up BAL revealed microbiologic success in 8 patients of Group A (80%) and 10 patients of Group B (77%) (p = 0.86). Clinical success was observed in 7 patients of Group A (70%) and 10 patients of Group B (77%) (p = 0.7). There was no significant difference in 14 days and 30 days mortality between the two groups. Adverse reactions occurred in 2 patients (15.3%) of Group B (reversible nephrotoxicity and diarrhea), which did not lead to discontinuation of treatment. Toxicity was not observed with tigecyclin use. CONCLUSION. In this study tigecyclin and high-dose ampicillin/sulbactam were comparably effective treatment options for MDR A.baumanii VAP, while tigecycline therapy seems safer. The administration of these regimens could prevent the excessive use of polymixins in intensive care units and the subsequent development of pandrug resistant strains. INTRODUCTION. Retrospective studies have reported good clinical and microbiological success rates using intravenous colistin as monotherapy to treat multiresistant A. baumannii ventilator associated pneumonia (VAP), comparable to that obtained with imipenem at the time to treat VAP due to imipenem-susceptible strains. However, colistin as monotherapy led to poor results in mouse pneumonia by multiresistant A baumannii, due to inadequate penetration into the pulmonary parenchyma. METHODS. Between November 2003 to December 2006, 74 consecutive patients developed microbiologically documented VAP due to A. baumannii susceptible only to colistin. Twenty four from these patients were excluded from the study as they were requiring antibiotics against Gram negative bacteria for infections other than VAP, or they were considered to suffer from multimicrobial VAP. The rest were prospectively, randomized to administer colistin only (3 MU three times daily, adjusted for creatinine clearance) (Group A) or combination therapy with colistin (dose as group A) and ampicillin/sulbactam 24 (16 + 8) gr IV (Group B). Eleven more patients were also excluded in the course of the study due to development of confirmed infections from microorganisms other than A. baumannii. Finally, Group A consisted from 19 patients (age 56.6 ± 14.3) Group B consisted from 20 patients (age 56.9 ± 18.7). The clinical response of VAP (improvement of symptoms, clear decrease of purulent bronchial secretions, constant decrease of vasopressors) was assessed on day 5th of treatment. RESULTS. Group A did not differ to Group B in APACHE II on admission to ICU (14.5 ± 3.1 vs. 16.5 ± 4.7), SOFA score on diagnosis of VAP (7.6 ± 2 vs. 7.9 ± 3.1), the clinical presentation with septic shock (52.9 vs. 47.1%), or the existence of bacteremia. In univariate logistic regression analysis only the combination treatment (70% vs. 15.8, p = 0.001, OR = 12.44 (2.6-59.3) ) and SOFA B 8 (58.3 vs. 20%, p = 0.024, OR = 0.179 (0.04-0.8)) were associated with clinical response of VAP. CONCLUSION. Combination therapy with colistin and high dose of ampicillin/sulbactam seem to be more effective in VAP due to multiresistant-only colistin sensitive-A. baumannii VAP. INTRODUCTION. The emergence of multidrug resistant (MDR) gram-negative bacteria necessitated the revival of older antibiotic drug classes such as polymyxins (colistin) and tetracyclines. Tigecycline, the first clinically available semisynthetic glycylcycline approved for clinical use, has been shown to have potent activity against a wide variety of grampositive and gram-negative pathogens, including MDR strains. We retrospectively evaluated the efficacy of tigecyclin versus colistin in patients with Ventilator Associated Pneumonia (VAP) caused by A.baumanii. METHODS. Twenty-five mechanical ventilated patients [ 72 h (mean age: 70 ± 7) that developed VAP and had positive A. baumannii tracheal aspirates were enrolled in the study. The case was considered to be aetiologically confirmed if A. baumannii was isolated and quantitative culture of broncho-alveolar lavage ([ 104 cfu/mL) was achieved. The antimicrobial susceptibility of the isolates was determined using the disk-diffusion (Kirby-Bauer) method, the VITEK II system and the E-test method (AB Biodisk, Solna-Sweden).Interpretation of the susceptibility results was in accordance to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI). All isolates exhibited resistance to almost all antibiotics routinely tested, excluding colistin. Susceptibility to tigecyclin was intermediate. Ten of the patients received tigecyclin intravenously (Group A), as monotherapy (50 mg twice daily) while fifteen of them received colistin intravenously, as monotherapy or in combination with cefepime (3*106 IU three times daily, adjusted for creatinine clearance) (Group B) . Follow up cultures and clinical evaluation of all patients was performed five days after the initiation of therapy. Clinical success was defined by a lessening of the signs and symptoms of VAP, while microbiologic success was defined as eradication of the pathogen in BAL cultures. RESULTS. Follow up BAL revealed microbiologic success in 8 patients of Group A (80%) and 10 patients of Group B (66,6%) (p = 0.86). Clinical success was observed in 7 patients of Group A (70%) and 9 patients of Group B (60%) (p = 0.7). There was no significant difference in 14 days and 30 days mortality between the two groups. Adverse reactions occurred in 5 patients (33%) of Group B (reversible nephrotoxicity), which did not lead to discontinuation of treatment. Toxicity was not observed with tigecyclin use. CONCLUSION. Colistin and tigecycline seem equally effective in eradication of multidrug resistant A. baumanii in BAL cultures of patients with VAP. However, tigecycline administration seems to be safer than colistin in the clinical treatment of these patients. More data are needed, in order to clarify the role of these regiments in the treatment of A.baumanii infections. INTRODUCTION. Whilst antibiotics have reduced mortality from sepsis, their use is associated with increased healthcare associated infections, emergence of drug-resistant organisms, increased hospital length of stay, morbidity and mortality and increased cost. There is now evidence that strict control over antibiotic prescription, with appropriately shortened durations of regimes reduces cost, does not compromise outcome, and may be beneficial in critically ill patients [1, 2] . We performed a retrospective analysis of 56 patients admitted consecutively to our ICU with severe pneumonia over the past 12 months and evaluated the suitability of antibiotic chemotherapy based on choice of agent, duration of therapy, modification following assessment of the clinical state of the patient and microbiological data. We excluded patients with chronic immunodeficiency states or those who died within 24 h of admission to the ICU. Data analysis was performed using the InStat v.3 statistical package (GraphPad Software Inc, USA). Of the 56 patients, 31 (55.4%) received appropriate antibiotic chemotherapy, 8 (14.2%) received an incorrect antibiotic, and 17 (30.4%) received an inappropriately long duration of therapy based on microbiological data, clinical response and current hospital guidelines. Sputum cultures/tracehal aspirates taken on admission were positive in 13 (23.6%) patients despite clinical evidence of pneumonia. The incidence of hospital acquired infection (HAI) was significantly higher in those patients receiving incorrect antibiotic choice or prolonged duration of therapy (12 vs. 6 infections, p = 0.023). When stratified by duration of therapy, those patients receiving B 5 days of antibiotics had significantly reduced ventilator days (5.8 vs. 10.2 days; p = 0.027), duration of ICU stay (6.9 vs. 12.4 days; p = 0.02), and reduced HAI (3 vs. 14 episodes; p = 0.0093) despite being comparable for age, relevant comorbidities, and severity of illness (APACHE II score 19.6 vs. 19.4; p = 0.9). CONCLUSION. 1. Shortened antibiotic regimes based on clinical assessment, response to empiric therapy and microbiological data are associated with reduced incidence of hospital acquired infections, ventilator days, and duration of intensive care length of stay. 2. Accurate diagnosis of infection may be improved using biochemical markers such as procalcitonin assay or clinical infection scores such as CPIS (Clinical Pulmonary Infection Score) given the low yield from sputum culture/tracheal aspirate. INTRODUCTION. An optimal anticoagulation strategy during CRRT in critically ill still remains unresolved issue. It is well known that cooling of blood decreases its ability to clot. Therefore, we developed and experimentally tested a device designed for regional blood cooling in CRRT extracorporeal circuit as a non-anticoagulant measure to prevent circuit clotting. We developed the device for selective cooling of extracorporeal circuit (20 centigrade) allowing blood rewarming (38 centigrade) just before returning into the body. 12 anesthetized and ventilated pigs were randomized to receive either 6 hrs of continuous hemofiltration with application of this device (COOL; N = 6) or without it (CONTR; N = 6). In neither of these groups any anticoagulant was used. In 15, 60, 180, 360 min after starting hemofiltration variables related to circuit patency (time to clotting [TC], number of alarmtriggered pump stopping, venous circuit pressure [VP]) were assessed. In addition, thrombinantithrombin complexes [TAT circ], a marker of coagulation activation in circuit were measured. RESULTS. Data are median and interquartile range. While the patency of all circuits treated with selective cooling was well maintained within the observation period, 5 of 6 sessions were prematurely clotted in untreated group (TC 197 min (180; 240) ). Similarly, the number of alarm-triggered pump stopping was significantly higher in nonintervened group (COOL 1.5 (0; 2) vs. CONTR 6 (5;7)). Vt's of 6-8 ml.kg -1 of ideal weight have been recommended; this weight is calculated using a formula based on patients' height. Our unit advocates use of this guidance in determining ventilator settings for patients with ARDS and ALI (based on oxygenation criteria), but our compliance with this guidance was not known. The Soehnle Professional 3020 system is an industrial use electronic scale which allows patients to be weighed without being moved; its use has not previously been described in a critical care setting. Prospective audit of tidal volumes achieved per kg of actual and ideal weight in fully ventilated patients with ARDS or ALI. During October and November 2007, 20 patients were assessed. Vt's were recorded for each of the first 24 h of ventilation. Values were excluded if an assisted breathing mode was in use. Notes and x-rays were reviewed to confirm diagnoses of ARDS/ALI. Patients without X-ray changes were included in the analysis. Patients were measured to calculate ideal weight, and weighed using a Soehnle Professional 3020 system. This uses chocks placed under bed wheels to weigh bed and patient together, allowing deduction of the weight of the bed and equipment to derive patient weight. The weight of all equipment on our ICU was measured prior to introduction of the scales. PaO 2 at the time of highest FiO 2 requirement was recorded, and highest Pinsp used during the first 24 h. RESULTS. 17 patients met oxygenation criteria for ALI, 12 of these met criteria for ARDS. Actual weight was greater than ideal weight in 12 patients. Average actual weight was 149.9% of ideal weight. Only 5 patients received low Vt ventilation (6-8 ml kg -1 ideal weight). A further 5 had median Vt between 8.0 and 8.5 ml kg -1 ideal weight. 1 patient required peak inspiratory pressure over 30 cm H 2 O. Median Vt was 9.2 ml kg -1 of ideal weight and 6.7 ml kg -1 of actual weight. There were no adverse incidents related to use of the Soehnle scales, and staff required only 10 minutes training in their use. CONCLUSION. Compliance with low Vt was good in terms of actual weight but relatively poor in terms of ideal weight. Patients were being ventilated with excessive Vt. Compliance with low Pinsp was very good. Ideal weight was lower than actual weight and this seems likely to be a factor in the tendency to excessive Vt. The Soehnle 3020 system is a safe way of weighing unstable critically ill patients. INTRODUCTION. During volume controlled ventilation (VCV), several factors can modify the volume (VT) really delivered to the patient's lung, such as ambient pressure and temperature, water content, and the amount of compressed gas in the tubings. Consequently, the preset VT can differ from the VT delivered to patient's lungs. This bench study aimed at assessing the ability of ICU ventilators to accurately deliver a pre-set VT, by compensating compressed gas and accurately predicting final VT in body temperature and pressure, saturated with water vapour (BTPS) conditions, from initial ambient temperature and pressure dry gas conditions (ATPD). METHODS. Ten ICU ventilators with compensation of compressed gas (Avea, Elisée350, Engström, Esprit, Evita XL, Extend, PB7200, PB840, Servo I) and three ventilators without compensation (Bird 8400, Avea compensation off, Servo I compensation off) were evaluated using a Michigan lung test model. We compared three pre-set VT (300, 500 and 800 ml), with three simulations of the respiratory system (obstructive, restrictive, normal), with and without an inspiratory pause. With two pneumotachographs, we measured the VT delivered by the ventilator in ATPD conditions and the VT received by the test lung, and used appropriate corrections for simulating BTPS conditions. Overall, the compensation algorithms for compressed gas allowed to reduce errors on delivered VT in ATPD condition (P \ 0.05). Errors persisted, however, from at ATPD to BTPS condition with frequent overestimations (the figure averages values for all ventilators without versus with compensation). Large errors persisted frequently for all respiratory system conditions, from -10% to +24 % of the preset VT. CONCLUSION. Errors in delivered volumes were significantly different between both groups of ventilators. Despite technological improvements, performances of ventilators remain heterogeneous regarding the accurate delivery of VT. INTRODUCTION. Injured lungs consist of fast and slow compartments characterized by fast and slow inhomogeneously respiratory time constants (au). So far, regional au has only been determined in animal models of acute lung injury (ALI) by dynamic computed tomography. The aim of our study was to determine regional au and the dependency of au on different positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) levels in patients with acute ALI using electrical impedance tomography (EIT). Five adult patients with ALI caused by pneumonia were included. To determine the inspiratory au, sustained step increase in airway pressure was performed from 0, 8 and 15 cm H 2 O of PEEP to 35 cm H 2 O. EIT scans were obtained at a rate of 25 cycles/s using the Goe-MF II device (Cardinal Health, Hoechberg, Germany). Regional au and the percentage of the corresponding lung tissue were calculated by a bi-exponential fit of the data from the global, ventral and dorsal lung regions in the chest cross-section. The results of the global regions are shown in Table 1 . Higher au values and percentages of lung tissue with slow au were found in dorsal than in ventral regions. Higher PEEP levels decreased the fast and slow au in global and dorsal regions without significant changes in compartment size. INTRODUCTION. Lung protective ventilation strategies for acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) consider the use of a reduced tidal volume (V T = 6 ml/kg) (1) . Extracorporeal CO 2 removal with the aim of further reducing V T may additionally limit injurious effects of ventilation in severe ARDS. However, ventilation with V T \ 6 ml/kg may cause pulmonary de-recruitment. The aim of this prospective experimental animal study was to evaluate the distribution of regional lung ventilation during ventilation with 5 ml/kg V T combined with extracorporeal CO 2 removal compared to 10 ml/kg V T without extracorporeal CO 2 removal by using electrical impedance tomography (EIT). METHODS. 10 anesthetized supine pigs (50 ± 5 kg, mean ± sd) were ventilated in a pressure-regulated volume-controlled mode. A pumpless arteriovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenator (interventional lung assist (ILA), Novalung, Hechingen, Germany) was connected to one femoral artery and vein before acute lung injury was induced by repeated saline lavage. Inspiratory oxygen concentration was increased to 100% and positive endexpiratory pressure (PEEP) was set 2 cmH 2 O above the lower inflection point determined by a constant low flow inflation maneuver. Subsequently, 5 animals were ventilated with 10 ml/kg V T and clamped ILA for 30 min followed by a 30 min period of ventilation with 5 ml/kg V T and open ILA. The other 5 animals were ventilated in reversed order. Regional lung ventilation was determined from EIT measurements (EIT system Goe MF II, Cardinal Health, Höchberg, Germany) during baseline conditions at ventilation with 5 and 10 ml/kg V T in the normal lung, after induction of lung injury as well as 5 and 30 min after ventilation with low V T and open ILA or high V T and clamped ILA, respectively. Changes in ventilation distribution were calculated as anterior-to-posterior shifts in ventilation evaluated from ventilation profiles and so-called centers of ventilation (2). . A significant shift in ventilation towards the dependent lung regions was observed in injured lungs after having set PEEP using pressure-volume curve. This shift in ventilation was not influenced by the lower V T ventilation combined with ILA and maintained over the whole time period independent of the chronological order. The center of ventilation was located at 50.5 ± 2.5 % of the anterior-to-posterior chest diameter during low V T and open ILA and 50.1 ± 2.2 % during high V T and clamped ILA, respectively. CONCLUSION. Spatial distribution of ventilation in the lavaged lung is not impaired by the use of lower V T ventilation strategy in combination with ILA under the prerequisite that PEEP is adequately set. INTRODUCTION. Ventilation with high tidal volumes may harm the lung in acute lung injury (ALI) by increasing both lung inflammation and permeability of the alveolar-capillary membrane, resulting in increased mortality. Whether high or low PEEP or prone positioning (PP) improves patient outcome remains controversial. Mathematical analysis of the expiratory pressure-volume (P-V) curve allows determination of specific points (inflection point (c) and point of maximal compliance decrease (Pmcd)) which might help tailoring PEEP level from individual characteristics of respiratory mechanics. The aim of this study is to evaluate regional lung inflammation, perfusion, ventilation and aerated volume assessed with Positron Emission Tomography (PET) in supine position (SP) at 2 PEEP levels, and in PP during experimental ALI. METHODS. ALI was performed in 21 piglets by tracheal instillation of hydrochloric acid. Animals were then randomly assigned to 3 experimental groups, based on the characteristics of their expiratory P-V curve. 14 animals were studied in SP with PEEP = c + 2 cm H2O (c + 2 group, n = 7), or = Pmcd + 2 cm H2O (Pmcd + 2 group, n = 7). The 7 remaining animals were studied in PP with PEEP = c + 2 cm H2O (PP group). Tidal volume was then adjusted in all groups to keep plateau pressure below 30 cm H 2 O. 2 hours after randomization, ventilation and aerated volume, tissue fraction (FT) and perfusion were assessed with PET using inhaled 13 N, density analysis and 15 O labelled water, respectively. Lung inflammation was assessed with PET as lung uptake of 18 F-FDG (Ki) normalized by tissue fraction (Ki/FT). RESULTS. PEEP was significantly higher in the Pmcd + 2 group (13 ± 3) than in c + 2 (5 ± 3) and PP (4 ± 2 cm H2O) groups. Tidal volumes were significantly reduced in the Pmcd + 2 group (6.2 ± 1.6 ml/kg) as compared to c + 2 (9.4 ± 0.7 ml/kg) and PP (9.4 ± 1.4 ml/kg) groups. In SP, increasing PEEP level did not significantly modify anterior-to-posterior distribution of both ventilation and perfusion. PP significantly redistributed perfusion and ventilation towards ventral regions. The values of Ki/FT were significantly lower in the PP group, as compared to both SP groups. CONCLUSION. In this model of ALI, high or low PEEP level did not reduce lung inflammation. PP decreases lung inflammation, as compared to SP. This effect might be related to a protective effect of PP on ventilator-induced lung injury. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. Hospices Civils de Lyon and IBA radio-isotopes France. INTRODUCTION. Contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN; increase in serum creatinine of [=0.5-mg/dl and/or [=25% within 48 h after contrast-medium) is the third leading cause of hospital-acquired acute renal failure. CIN is frequently found in ICU-patients, and it is associated with increased mortality and prolonged hospitalisation. Hydration as well as theophylline are among the most promising prophylactic approaches. Several studies suggest, that hydration with sodium bicarbonate might be superior to hydration by saline. Therefore, it was the aim of our double-blind study to compare the effects of a hydration with sodium bicarbonate (B) to hydration with saline (S) in addition to prophylaxis with theophylline.  After major trauma to the muscles, myoglobin is released into the systemic circulation. Myoglobin can precipitate thereby impeding renal function. This can lead to myoglobinuric renal failure, with an incidence of 4-33%. A recommended therapeutic approach to prevent myoglobinuric renal failure is the alkalinization of the urine by administering sodium bicarbonate. Retrospective clinical studies and small trials advocate this therapy. However, two recent larger retrospective trials suggested that alkalinization of the urine does not offer any benefit over hydration and maintaining forced diuresis in these patients. We therefore tested the hypothesis, that forced diuresis with large-volume crystalloid infusion is equally effective in protecting renal function in patients with severe rhabdomyolysis than additional alkalinization of the urine. After institutional approval 30 consecutive trauma patients were enrolled in this study. To be eligible the patients had to have a serum myoglobin above 2000 mmol/l. Patients were excluded from the study if they had any preexisting renal disease. After enrollment the patients were randomly assigned to two treatments. In the Control Group patients received 5 ml/kg/h Ringer Lactate to achieve a diuresis of 3-4 ml/kg/h. If diuresis was not sufficient 100 ml of Mannitol 20% was administered three times daily. If diuresis still did not achieve targeted volumes a continuous infusion of 0,05 mg/kg/h furosemide was started, and titrated to achieve the targeted diuresis. In the second, the Alkaline Group, patients received the same volume and diuretics management as the Control Group. Additionally active alkalinization of the urine was performed by the administration of sodium bicarbonate. An initial bolus of 100 mmol Sodium Bicarbonate was given followed by a continuous infusion of 0,1 mmol/kg/h. The continuous infusion of Sodium Bicarbonate was then adjusted to keep the urinary pH [ 7. Renal Injury was defined according to the RIFLE Criteria for Acute Kidney Injury. If diuresis decreased \ 0,5 ml/kg/hr despite the above mentioned efforts to increase diuresis, or the patients blood urea nitrogen increased [ 100 mg/ml, or serum creatinine increased C 4 mg/dl, continuous veno-venous hemofiltration was started. The study was stopped after 72 h or when serum myoglobin decreased \250 mg/dl. . 30 patients were included in the study, 15 in each group. The APACHE scores were similar in both groups. The incidence of Risk, Injury and Failure were comparable in the two groups (table) . One patient in the Alkaline Group and no patient in the Control Group had to undergo hemofiltration. Urinary ph in the Alkaline/Control Group after 24 h was 7,3 ± 0,4/ 6,8 ± 0,5 and after 48 h 7,5 ± 0,3/7,2 ± 0,3.  Growing interest surrounds the role of microvascular dysfunction and renal hypoxia in the initiation and development of acute renal failure. Regarding ischemiareperfusion(I/R)-induced ARF, this role is poorly understood. In the kidney nitric oxide(NO) is important for adequate endothelial function and regulation of oxygen metabolism. Therefore the aim of this study was to investigate if early I/R-induced renal microvascular hypoxia can be prevented by nitric oxide synthase(NOS) inhibitors. Prospective animal study, where 28 rats were divided in 4 groups: (1) I/R group underwent a 30 minutes supra-renal aortic clamping (n = 7), (2) I/R treated with a non selective NOS inhibitor L-NAME (n = 7), (3) I/R treated with a selective iNOS inhibitor L-NIL(n = 7) and (4) time-control group(n = 7). Cortical (C\muPO 2 ), and medullary(M\muPO 2 ) microvascular oxygen pressure, renal oxygen delivery(DO 2ren ), renal oxygen consumption(VO2ren) and renal oxygen extraction(O 2 ER) were measured using oxygenquenched phosphorescent method throughout 2 h of reperfusion (1) . Renal function was assessed with creatinine clearance and excretion fraction of Na + . RESULTS. While renal arterial resistance increased (+192% vs. baseline, p \ 0.05), renal blood flow, C\muPO 2 and M\muPO 2 dropped 2 h after the reperfusion (-70, -42 and -42% respectively, p \ 0.05), as well as DO 2ren and VO 2ren (-70%, p \ 0.0001, and -28%, p \ 0.05). Whereas L-NAME further decreased DO 2ren , VO 2ren , C\muPO 2 and M\muPO 2 , and deteriorated renal function, L-NIL partially prevented the drop of DO 2ren , C\muPO 2 and M\muPO 2 (53 ± 4 vs. 39 ± 3.5 and 41 ± 1.8 vs. 30 ± 2.8 mmHg respectively, p \ 0.05)and increased VO 2ren (0.37 ± 0.04 vs. 0.13 ± 0.01 ml min g -1 , p \ 0.05) in comparison with baseline value. L-NIL also prevented deterioration of renal function. Both L-NIL and L-NAME increased O 2 ER. CONCLUSION. This study showed that microvascular hypoxia occurs in early stage of renal I/R and demonstrates that microcirculation-targeted therapeutic strategies based on iNOS inhibition have beneficial effects on renal oxygenation and function. In contrast, inhibition of eNOS further decreased microvascular PO 2 highlighting its role in post-ischemic microvacular oxygenation regulation. Furthermore, inhibition function of NO on renal oxygen consumption during ischemia-reperfusion is described.  Previous studies have shown that neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) is an early predictive biomarker of ischemic and nephrotoxic AKI (1, 2) .The ability to use NGAL as a biomarker for early AKI has never been studied in critically ill adult patients with mixed etiologies. Therefore, we assessed the ability of urine (uNGAL) and plasma NGAL (pNGAL) to predict AKI development and characterize the degree of AKI in a heterogeneous adult ICU population. We conducted a prospective cohort study of critically ill adult patients from 21st ESICM Annual Congress -Lisbon, Portugal -21-24 September 2008 S195 METHODS. Sixty two patients admitted to the ICU with a diagnosis of severe sepsis were recruited. IFNgamma, IL-10, IL-23 and IL-27 were assayed on ICU admission using QRT-PCR. IL-6 protein was assayed using ELISA. Recursive partitioning dichotomised each patients' ratio of IL-10:IFNgamma and IL-27:IL-23 into either a high and low category, with a score of 1 for high and 0 for low. A composite figure, termed a cytoscore and ranging from 0 to 2, is then calculated for each patient. There is a direct relationship between the absolute ratio of both IL-10:IFNgamma and IL-27:IL-23 mRNA and increased mortality (p \ 0.05). The robustness of the cytoscore is described in Table 1 . The cytoscore accurately describes the temporal pattern of survival in patients with sepsis (p log rank \ 0.0001, figure A) . Addition of IL-6 protein data can add an extra layer of complexity to the score by describing a very high risk group (cytoscore 3) characterised by early ICU mortality (figure B). CONCLUSION. For those patients with a reported PCT \ 0.5 ng/ml or PCT [ 10 ng/ml, we show a good correlation between reporters. Conversely, PCT of 0.5-2 ng/ml and 2-10 ng/ml show greater variation. This is a significant finding as we know that mortality increases when PCT rises above 1 ng/ml (1) and our study has shown that 30% of BMS would have reported such results in the range outside this value (implying a more severe illness and worse prognosis). This range where there was considerable error for reporting is probably the most important of the 4 values as the transition from 0.5-2 to 2-10 also represents a change from moderate systemic inflammatory response to severe response most likely due to infection. The difficulty experienced when interpreting those bands appears to be because the band colour is frequently non monochromatic making correlation with the reference card problematic. It is imperative to realise this is only semi-quantitative and therefore it is open to individual interpretation. INTRODUCTION. In septic shock, both adrenal insufficiency and inadequate plasma concentrations of arginine vasopressin (AVP) may contribute to the failure to restore vascular tone, respectively (1, 2) . Infusion of a vasoconstrictor hormone like AVP increases arterial blood pressure in septic shock (3) . Measurement of endogenous plasma concentrations of AVP could answer the question whether such an AVP therapy reverses an endogenous deficiency or simply constitutes a pharmacological intervention to increase peripheral vascular tone. In this prospective, controlled study, we measured AVP and copeptin plasma concentrations in 50 patients with sepsis or septic shock and in ten patients with infection but no systemic inflammation during the first seven days after intensive care unit (ICU) or hospital admission. Hemodynamic, laboratory and clinical data were recorded daily in all patients during the first seven days after ICU or hospital admission. At the same time points blood was withdrawn to determine plasma AVP (radioimmunoassay) and copeptin (immunoluminometric assay) concentrations. A mixed effects model was used for statistical analysis. RESULTS. The AVP response was different between the three study groups (p \ 0.001), but did not change over time (p = 0.12). While patients with sepsis and septic shock had significantly higher AVP levels than patients with infection (both p \ 0.001), there was no difference in AVP concentrations between patients with sepsis and septic shock (p = 0.98). No difference in AVP concentrations was observed between survivors and non-survivors at day 28 (p = 0.87). In patients with sepsis, serum osmolarity (p \ 0.001), arterial pH (p = 0.001) and PaO2 (p = 0.04) were indirectly associated with the course of AVP plasma levels, while it was serum osmolarity alone in patients with septic shock (p = 0.03). Plasma AVP concentrations were correlated with copeptin (r = 0.476, p \ 0.001), but this correlation was influenced by continuous veno-venous hemofiltration (p \ 0.001). CONCLUSION. Sepsis induced a stronger AVP response than infection without systemic inflammation. However, a lacking difference in AVP plasma concentrations between patients with and without shock indicates comprehensive dysfunction of the AVP system in sepsis. Our data support the hypothesis that an impaired AVP response is at least partly responsible for the failure to restore vascular tone in septic shock. INTRODUCTION. Decrease in monocyte HLA-DR (mHLA-DR) in ICU patients has been proposed as a marker of immunity associated with poor prognosis but never evaluated in a large multicentric population. Objective: To test mHLA-DR as a marker of mortality and secondary infection risk in a large multicentric population of patients in septic shock with at least 2 organ dysfunction. Prospective multicentric study (4 ICU units CONCLUSION. Markers of collagen synthesis and degradation are increased in patients with severe sepsis and may be used as markers of disease severity and outcome. Fibrosis may be one mechanism in the pathogenesis of organ dysfunctions. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. The study was supported by a grant from Instrumentarium Foundation and from Oulu University Hospital, Finland. Advances in neuro-critical care VII: 0770-0772   0770   CONSCIOUS-2: CLAZOSENTAN TO OVERCOME NEUROLOGICAL ISCHEMIA  AND INFARCTION OCCURRING AFTER ANEURYSMAL SUBARACHNOID  HEMORRHAGE (ASAH) INTRODUCTION. In CONSCIOUS-1, a dose-finding study, intravenous clazosentan (1, 5, and 15 mg/h vs. placebo) significantly and dose-dependently reduced angiographic vasospasm in patients with aSAH. A trend towards a decreased incidence of morbidity/mortality was also observed in a post-hoc analysis, using centrally-assessed computed tomography scans and a morbidity/mortality endpoint that included neurological deterioration, rescue therapy and hypodensities due to vasospasm on computed tomography. These findings support the notion that decreasing vasospasm may improve clinical outcome in aSAH patients and led us to design the CONSCIOUS-2 trial. METHODS. CONSCIOUS-2 is a randomized, double blind, placebo controlled study to investigate the effect of intravenous clazosentan in reducing vasospasm-related morbidity and all-cause mortality after aSAH. Patients are randomized 2:1 to clazosentan (5 mg/hr) or placebo, to start within 56 h of aSAH and continuing until Day 14 post aneurysm rupture. RESULTS. Main Inclusion criteria: (1) INTRODUCTION. Therapeutic hypothermia protects from neurological sequels and death after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest [1, 2] and it is recommended in the ERC Guidelines [3] . The Hypothermia Registry is a database on the Internet designed to enable evaluation of patients treated with intensive care after cardiac arrest. METHODS. Data on patient and cardiac arrest characteristics, hypothermia treatment, adverse events, clinical investigations and general intensive care was registered. Outcome was documented as neurological score at ICU and hospital discharge and at six months using the Cerebral Performance Category (CPC) scale [4] : CPC 1-2 representing a good outcome and 3-5 a bad outcome. Only centres reporting all cardiac arrest patients were included. Between October 2004 and March 2007 1109 patients from 37 centres in 7 countries were entered in the Registry of which 952 were treated with therapeutic hypothermia (TH) and 157 without. In this abstract the TH group is described. The median age was 63 years, 73 % were men and in 68% the initial rhythm was VT/VF. The time to initiation of TH was 90 minutes and the time to achieve core temperature less than 34°C was 240 minutes. Overall cooling rate was 0.6 degrees C/h. All patients, except 9, reached the target temperature. 38% developed pneumonia, 5% had a bleeding requiring transfusion and 29 % had a serious event of arrhythmia during the ICU stay. Data at 6 month was evaluated for 931 patients. 52 % were alive at follow up and 92 % of them had a good neurological outcome; in the groups with initial rhythm asystole/PEA and VT/VF good outcome was 26 % and 60 % respectively. Our results indicate that half of the patients in an unselected cardiac arrest population admitted to intensive care for TH are alive at 6 months and they survive with a good neurological function. Patients with asystole and PEA have a better outcome than previously reported. The safety aspects compare well with previous studies on TH. Therapeutic hypothermia was feasible to use in all centres.  To avoid complications of the volume load, used for the cerebral perfusion support in brain trauma, we tried to determine volume responsiveness in these category of patients. We examined 30 patients with severe brain trauma. (GCS score \ 8, sedation, artificial ventilation). The stroke volume (SV) and its variability (SVV) were determined by the bioimpedans method. Additionally we determined the variability of other haemodynamic parameters: BP, HR, CI, EF and peripheral pulse, which reflect the type of central autonomic regulation (were showed in our previews works) . Especial attention were paid to the P4 (0.2-0.5 Hz) bands of SVV, which predominantly connect with breathing, as a main marker of hypovolemia. All the comparisons were made before and after increasing of PEEP to 5 and then to 10 cm H2O. These were made before and after infusion of Stabisol (app. 10 ml\kg). RESULTS. All patients were divided in two groups: A-18 patients (responders on volume load by the increasing SV) and B-12 patients (nonresponders: not only the absents of SV increasing, but in some cases -worsening the type of central regulation of haemodynamic). In group A the increasing PEEP to 5 and 10 cm H2O before volume load showed the decreasing of BP, rising HR and the grate increasing of P4 SVV. After volume load the same changes were only if PEEP was 10 cm H2O. It's probably related with no complete compensation of hypovolemia. In group B the same PEEP increasing before volume load did not revealed any changes in haemodynamic. After volume load PEEP increasing to 10 cm H2O induced some increasing of SV. CONCLUSION. PEEP may be used in severe brain trauma for evaluation of the range of hypovolemia and volume responsiveness prediction. PEEP-the test that allows to estimate if addition volume expansion is needed and help to avoid the exertion of regulatory systems in other cases. INTRODUCTION. The Ventilator Bundle-elevation of the head of the bed, daily sedation vacations, peptic ulcer prophylaxis and DVT prophylaxis-has been promoted by the IHI as ''a series of interventions that, when implemented together, will achieve significantly better outcomes than when implemented individually.'' However, rigorous evidence for the bundle approach is weak. In May 2006, the Welsh Critical Care Improvement Programme (WCCIP) launched implementation of care bundles at the national level. By August 2006, the Ventilator Bundle had not only been introduced in all 14 critical care sites in Wales, but WCCIPmonitored compliance rates indicated national compliance of over 95%. To date, no evaluation of patient outcomes has been attempted. Opportunistically, 13 critical care units from 12 of the 14 sites participate in the Case Mix Programme, the national comparative audit of critical care, enabling a comparison of outcomes before and after implementation and achieving high compliance. METHODS. Data covering the implementation date were available from 10 of the 13 units. Data were extracted for all admissions, since 2002, who were ventilated during the first 24 h following admission. The effect of implementation of the Ventilator Bundle on hospital mortality (for all ventilated admissions) and on unit length of stay (for unit survivors) was assessed using multilevel models adjusted for time trends, seasonality and predicted risk of death (ICNARC model). Implementation of the Ventilator Bundle was modelled including a lag of two months following implementation, to allow for the observed delay in reaching maximal compliance. . 10,656 admissions were included in the analysis. Units had a median of 51 months data pre-implementation (range 2-54) and 19 months post-implementation (range . Most units implemented the Ventilator Bundle between March and August 2006, although two units had implemented it previously. Crude hospital mortality for ventilated admissions was 42.0% pre-implementation and 42.8% post-implementation. Mean unit length of stay for survivors was 7.1 days pre-implementation and 6.3 days post-implementation. Implementation of the Ventilator Bundle was not associated with any significant reduction in hospital mortality (odds ratio 0.96, 95% confidence interval 0.81-1.14) or in unit length of stay for survivors (ratio of geometric means 0.98, 0.88-1.10). CONCLUSION. Despite widespread implementation and high levels of compliance across Wales, no significant impact on patient outcomes was identified. Possible reasons for lack of impact may include: that 1.5 years is too early to detect impact; that compliance does not necessarily equate to delivery of bundle elements (consideration and rejection of an individual element equates to compliance); or that the evidence base for bundles is weak -both for individual elements and collectively. While the failure to identify any demonstrable effect on patient outcomes in our study may disappoint those that support the bundle approach to quality improvement, it should not detract from the importance of following current best practice in the management of these patients. INTRODUCTION. Unintended tube removals (UTR) are frequently observed adverse events in ICUs and potentially involving serious complications. We monitored UTR in our ICU for a 2-year period to assess the incidence, the patient conditions at the time of event occurrence to analyze the system factors associated with UTR and to evaluate the effect of targeted interventions. METHODS. Demographic and clinical information was prospectively collected on all patients admitted in our ICU. Additional information was collected for patients who experienced an UTR. A dedicated staff analyzed the UTR bi-monthly using a system-factor approach to inform the ICU team on the rate and the potential cause of events and to propose, implement and improve care management protocols. A conditional logistic regression stratified on length of stay was used to identify risk factors of tube removals. Segmented linear regression analysis was conducted to test for the effect of the improvement interventions. INTRODUCTION. NICCIMS is a prospective regional audit study designed to analyse occurrence of adverse events in intensive care units (ICUs). An anonymous database has been installed in seven ICUs since September 2007 facilitating central analysis of all reported incidents in N.Ireland. The first NICCIMS report revealed that incidents relating to airway and central venous catheters were the events with highest potential impact as well as marked variability in frequency between the 7 units. Following collation of data related to these events we examined if effective local policies exist. Questionnaires were sent to the lead consultants, lead nurses and educational supervisors in the participating ICUs. The questions were related to the presence or absence of policies, and their content, regarding securing of airway devices and management of central venous catheters. Responses were compared between staff within units to assess agreement. RESULTS. 100% response rate was achieved. 5 out of 7 units claimed to have a written policy regarding endotracheal tube (ETT) fixation. However there was disagreement as to the existence of a policy between the lead clinicians and lead nurses in 4 out of 5 units. In 5 out of the 7 units, percutaneous tracheostomies are performed in more than 80% of cases, but in 2 units surgical tracheostomies are performed in 70-98%. There appears to be more adverse events reported related to tracheostomies from the latter 2 units. All units claimed to have written policies related to central venous catheters, but in 2 units there was disagreement between staff as to the existence of a policy. 57% respondents stated the policy is only followed 'most of the time'. If staff were aware of a policy they said subclavian was the primary site of choice but staff unaware of a policy said they were using the internal jugular site. CONCLUSION. A wealth of information regarding adverse events has been collected through NICCIMS. The presence of effective policies is likely to reduce the possibility of an incident as it provides staff with an agreed management approach. However, effective policies do not appear to be present in all ICUs. Discordance between clinicians and nursing staff regarding the existence of policies suggest an ineffective policy as staff are unaware of it, and therefore are highly unlikely to achieve the aim of the policy which may give rise to increased adverse events. There is an opportunity for regional policies to be agreed between units to simplify and unify our approach to enhancing safety. Institute for Clinical Excellence in the United Kingdom (NICE) has expressed concern that ''Clinical audit has a mixed history in the NHS, and for every success story there are just as many projects that have run into the ground without demonstrating any significant contribution to quality of services.'' To improve this process, the Clinical Governance Support Team of the NHS has designed an Audit Project Assessment Tool (APAT) which assesses individual projects against national guidelines for good clinical audit. A maximum of 25 points are available and audit projects scoring more than 16 are regarded as good projects. This study examined whether the audit programme our institution was effective and associated with improved clinical governance. Presentations from clinical audit meetings from a 24 month period were retrospectively reviewed by two independent investigators and the following questions assessed. (1) How many of the projects were true audits? (2) Were the audit projects prospective or retrospective? (3) How many re-audits had been performed? (4) If re-audit showed improvements in performance? (5) What were the APAT scores of the projects? RESULTS. Twenty-nine audit projects were presented during this period of which 25 were available for review. Of the projects reviewed, 22/25 (88%) were considered to be true audit projects of which 2/22 (9%) had a research overlap. 22/22 (100%) were retrospective and there were 4 (16%) re-audits during the period of investigation. Of the re-audits, 3 showed an improvement in performance and 1 showed deterioration. The APAT scores ranged from 9/25 to 21/25. Eleven projects (50%) scored greater than the 16 points required to be considered a good audit. It was noted that there was a paucity of multi-disciplinary audit projects in the cohort studied. CONCLUSION. This study shows that a well-coordinated active audit programme was in place at the above institution. However, objective evidence of clinical governance benefit was lacking and 50% of the audits would have been rejected if the APAT tool had been used prospectively. We believe the results of this study are likely to be similar to other institutions experiences and to improve future performance, we suggest all new projects are prospectively assessed using the APAT tool at outset, and poorly scoring studies rejected. In addition, a database of past and proposed audit projects should be constructed to facilitate re-audit where performance improvement is indicated and to highlight deficits in areas (such as a lack of multidisciplinary audits). Clinical leads need to be identified to provide coherence to the process and to report to unit governance meetings. is an easy-to-understand method to monitor outcomes (1) and a powerful tool to show developments in clinical practice (2) . It has been seen as a promising tool for real-time outcome monitoring (3) . Constant data delivery is a fundamental issue for the VLAD usability within a benchmarking project. A constant reporting cycle helps the units to routinely follow outcomes compared with those of similar units. Intensive Care Units (ICU) in Finland have measured their performance and quality of care since 1994. At present 24 Finnish ICUs compare continuously their performance within the Finnish Intensive Care Quality Consortium (FICQC). Data covering the ICU stay are delivered to the centralized benchmarking database both manually (4 units) and with an interfacing software (20 units), presenting 15 and 85% of IC period records respectively. The hospital discharge data and long-term status data are delivered with an internet application. Primary admissions from 2007 (N = 17,517) were included. Hospital discharge status was selected as a primary outcome parameter.The reconstructed figure (Fig 1) shows the data accumulation at 1st September 2007 and the actual data delivery differences between ICUs. Sixty four percent (64%) of HDD was recorded within 30 days and 83% within 60 days. Average delay from hospital discharge to hospital discharge data (HDD) recording was 31.2 days (95% CI 30. 6-31.8 ). Delays to register HDD were significantly shorter (24.5 days, SD 32.9) for dead patients than for survivors (32.5 days, SD 39.2). Mean HDD delivery after hospital discharge varied between units from 6.4 (SD 20.4) days to 63.7 days (SD 40.1). CONCLUSION. Short and known reporting delays from ICU discharge and hospital discharge status recordings shorten the benchmarking reporting cycle and improve the report usability. Faster non-survivor data delivery is due to the data delivery protocol. Local possibilities to organize the data delivery cause variation between the ICUs. The recording delays and the variation between ICUs should be taken into account when benchmarking the ICU performance and outcome. CONCLUSION. IMS improved detection of instability as compared to conventional four channel monitoring in a SDU and decreased both the total number of unstable patients and the instability duration. Use of the IMS also increased the probability that MET activation would be called for serious instability. Further study will determine the relationship between improved detection and treatment approaches for unstable patients. METHODS. In a 10-bed polyvalent ICU located in a 1400 bedded community and teaching hospital a PIMS (Centricity Critical Care Clinisoft; G.E. healthcare) was introduced on June 1st 2005. Before the implementation of the PIMS fluid and medication orders were written by hand by the physicians on a daily medication chart. After the implementation, drug prescriptions were entered via the keyboard. The system was developed to supply pre-defined fluids and medication protocols, as well as default medication dosages and drug interaction warnings.To compare the frequency of medication errors before and after the implementation of the PIMS, data of two periods of 15 days each (30 to 15 days before and 60 to 75 days after) were prospectively collected and analyzed. For each period, 150 patient/days were considered. No one of the staff members, but the ICU director, was made aware of the ongoing study. Patients charts were daily revised between 7.00 and 8.00 AM by two independent physicians, not directly involved in patients care. Fluids and medication orders were revised looking for medication errors. The ICU director was immediately notified about any identified error, to allow immediate correction during the ward round. Errors were classified as Type 1 (clinically relevant and potentially dangerous) or Type 2 (registration errors without clinical relevance). CONCLUSION. the implementation of a PIMS in ICU was followed by a highly significant reduction in medication errors. Although PIMS are expensive, they may lead to a dramatic amelioration in the quality of care. The economic impact of the reduction in medication errors needs to be further investigated. (1) and improved quality of teaching (2) . In this context, it seemed relevant to create a website about echography in the ICU, accessible 24/24, recalling the fundamentals (main measures, normal and pathological values), illustrated by images and videos. This work reports the initial conditions of use. Echorea.org is a free website, with intuitive ergonomy. It consists of files organized into three categories allowing three possible approaches: by diagnoses, by ultrasound signs, or by clinical signs. Practical clinical cases complement theory. Most assertions are justified by bibliographic references at the bottom of sheet with pubmed link. The dates, times and origins of visits has been collected day by day by an online software. CONCLUSION. The pace of consultation to echorea.org is continuing but presents 2 particular peaks which appear to correspond to the search for timely information out of senior coaching (afternoon, custody). The number of connections reported to the medical presence is higher at night and on weekends. The chosen support seems therefore to satisfy two conditions: -A virtual companionship (3) by a modern and easily accessible support dealing with the complexity and magnitude of knowledge to be retained, particularly when people lack accompaniment, especially in custody (37.5% of connections at night and 23% at WE). Thus, 27% of visitors have already visited at least once. -Ease of access to dense but illustrated information. Internet allows a wide, fast and free diffusion (1), maintaining a rate of newcomers to the site of 73%. Connections was initiated by the hospital, the faculty, and the home. Echorea.org is visited throughout France but also abroad. The translation into English is one of the main projects in the short term.  We first compared, for 1158 sequences of SC recordings, the mean EtCO2 with the corresponding Max EtCO2; 10 aberrant values needed to be discarded. We then calculated the differences between mean EtCO2 or maximum EtCO2 and PaCO2 over different periods. Comparisons were performed only when mean and/or maximum EtCO2 were available shortly before and after the blood gas sampling. Mean* EtCO2-Max* EtCO2 (N = 1158) -3 ± 6 -2 (-4; -1) Mean* EtCO2-PaCO2 (N = 74) -11 ± 13 -9 (-13; -6) Max EtCO2 (5 min  Recently a new ultrasound dilution (UD) method was introduced that uses insitu arterial and venous catheters to measure COUD and Central Blood Volume (CBV). The method is based on measurement of decrease in blood ultrasound velocity caused by injecting isotonic saline. The purpose of the study was to compare UD measurements with transpulmonary thermodilution (TT) measurements (COTT & Intrathorathic Blood Volume ITBV, parameter analogous to CBV). METHODS. Eight adult patients (age 34-64) with hematological malignancies were included in the study. Indications for invasive monitoring were: sepsis and acute lung injury (3); ARDS (1); septic shock (2); acute congestive heart failure (1); intracranial hemorrhage (1) . For TT measurements 3 injections of 20 ml cold 5% dextrose were performed into 5Fr PiCCO femoral arterial catheter. For UD measurements, an extracorporeal AV loop was connected between insitu A-V catheters. Reusable UD sensors were clamped on the arterial and venous limbs of the loop. Pump circulated blood from the artery to the vein at 8-12 ml/min for 5-7 min. Three UD readings (COstatus, Transonic Systems Inc., USA) were obtained by injecting 20-30 ml of body temperature isotonic saline. At the end of the session, the system was flushed with heparinized saline until the next measurement session. RESULTS. 51 pairs of averaged data were obtained for comparison. For CO, correlation was R = 0.94; COUD = 1.07*COTT-0.40 L/min; bias was 0.32 L/min and the error (2SD/Mean of TT) was 18%. For volumes, correlation was R = 0.90; CBV = 0.76*ITBV + 80 ml; bias was 401 ml (CBV \ ITBV) and the error was 21%. Loss of thermal indicator could possibly lead to overestimation of ITBV. The % error for both CO and volumes is considered clinically acceptable (\ 30%). CONCLUSION. First clinical comparison of UD vs. TT produced close agreement in adult hematology patients. New UD method works off existing catheters; is quick to set up and involves no blood loss. INTRODUCTION. Critically ill patients are characterized by increased loss of muscle mass, partially attributed to sepsis and multiple organ failure, as well as immobilization, which may lead to the presentation to critical illness polyneuromyopathy (CIPNM).Recent studies have shown that electrical muscle stimulation (EMS) may be an alternative to active exercise in COPD and CHF patients.Our aim was to investigate the EMS effect on muscle mass preservation of critically ill patients with the use of ultrasonography (US). In this prospective study 29 critically ill patients (age:56 ± 21 yr) (APACHE score:20 ± 5) (SOFA score:9 ± 3) were randomized after stratification upon admission to receive EMS sessions (45-min/5 days per week) of vastus lateralis, vastus medialis and peroneus longus muscles of both lower extremities (EMS-group) or to the control group (non-EMS).Nineteen patients were finally evaluated, 8 patients in the non-EMS and 11 patients in the EMS group.Muscle mass was evaluated with US, by measuring the Cross Sectional Diameter (CSD) of the quadriceps muscle (rectus femoris-vastus intermedius).US images were obtained using a GE Vivid 7 model ultrasound scanner with a 7.5 LHz linear probe.The position of the probe was selected at the midway between the anterior superior iliac spine and the midpoint of the patella and was placed ventral to the transverse plane and perpendicular to the skin.The measurements were performed on the 2nd and 7th day fo11owing admission.The MRC scale for the clinical evaluation of muscle strength was used for the diagnosis of CIPNM (cut off \48/60). Rectus femoris CSD decreased significantly in the non-EMS group (from 1.48 ± 0.42 to 1.24 ± 0.35 cm, p \ 0.05).In the EMS group the CSD of rectus femoris decreased although not significantly (from 1.37 ± 0.43 to 1.33 ± 0.40 cm, p [ 0.05), however there was a significant between-group difference in the CSD decrease (EMS group: 0.04 ± 0.19 cm vs. non-EMS: 0.23 ± 0.11, p \ 0.05).Vastus intermedius CSD decreased in both groups, however the decrease was not significant in the EMS-group (EMS group: from 0.75 ± 0.35 to 0.73 ± 0.34 cm, non-EMS: from 1.39 ± 0.63 to 1.05 ± 0.48 cm).There was a significant difference (p \ 0.05) in the vastus intermedius CSD between EMS-group (-0.26 ± 0.19 cm) and non-EMS (0.34 ± 0.20 cm). In the non-EMS group 25% of the patients were diagnosed with CIPNM as compared to none in the EMS-group. CONCLUSION. This is the first prospective randomized study for the evaluation of EMS for the preservation of muscle mass in critically ill patients and for the prevention of CIPNM. These preliminary data imply that EMS may preserve the muscle mass of critically ill patients and could have a decisive role for the prevention of CIPNM  There is a need to determine the modification of the function as an indicator of the use of respiratory physiotherapy. The Method Functional Approach suggests that the action of the physiotherapist is based on the prioritization of signs and symptoms as functional markers in the interpretation of functionality. Objective: To determine the incidence of pneumonia and atelectasis in two groups of patients in the postoperative care of cardiac surgery undergone. METHODS. Prospective,randomized,controlled and blinded. The study was conducted at the Unit for Post-Operatório of Heart Surgery (UPC), Hospital Portuguese -Salvador/BA. 150 included in the study, patients must be 18 years old, that had hemodynamic stability. All patients were evaluated by physical therapists trained in both the pre about in the postoperative. After randomization, patients in Group I (control) were treated with NCPAP 20 cm/ H2O, 30 min of 4/4 h until the time of discharge from the UPC, the patients in group II (experimental) were treated in accordance with the routine of Physical Therapy, Method Functional Approach. RESULTS. The length of stay in UPC, 73.52 ± 36.33 h (about three days). There was no statistically significant difference between the groups studied. 9.8% had a diagnosis of atelectasis and 5.0% were diagnosed with pneumonia and was hired in group I, 12.7% had a diagnosis of atelectasis and 5.7% were diagnosed with pneumonia and were in Group II, there was no statistically significant difference between groups. Patients in group II, 64.7% of the interventions made was kinesiotherapy, appear drills active and walking, there was a relatively low frequency with regard to the need for interventions linked to respiratory. INTRODUCTION. Threshold can be used as a physiotherapic tool in order to increase muscle strenght. This effect can be useful in weaning patients. However there are still controversies considering its advantages during weaning from mechanical ventilation (MV). This study aims to evaluate the effects of the threshold in such situation. Patients under MV for more than 48 h and prone to weaning were randomly assigned to control or to the threshold group (trained twice daily). They were followed until extubation, tracheotomy or death. All cardiorrespiratory variables, maximal inspiratory and expiratory pressures (MIP and MEP), length of weaning and success or failure were registered. Statistical analysis was performed using ANOVA, Mann-Whitney U test and Chi-Square test, where appropriate. It was considered a significant level of 0.05. Eighty-six patients were studied (52% men, mean age 63 ± 17 years, 48% with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). No differences were observed when comparing initial versus final cardiorrespiratory variables in both groups, with exception of the MIP (varied from -33,72 ± 13,5 cmH2O to -40,81 ± 12,67 cmH2O in the threshold group and from -37,67 ± 10,49 cmH2O to -34,19 ± 10,85 cmH2O in the control group, p \ 0,001), MEP (varied from 25,47 ± 12,48 cmH2O to 29,65 ± 12,02 cmH2O in the threshold group and from 29,65 ± 11,97 cmH2O to 26,86 ± 11,6 cmH2O in the control group, p \ 0,05) and tidal volume (varied from 386,16 ± 236,56 ml to 436,16 ± 228,39 ml in the threshold group and from 361,91 ± 168,81 ml to 357,14 ± 121,35 ml in the control group, p \ 0,05). No differences were observed in length of weaning (1,36 days with threshold group versus 1,98 days in control group, p [ 0,05) and weaning success (83,7% with threshold group versus 76,7% in control group, p [ 0,05). CONCLUSION. Threshold during weaning from MV can cause an increase in MIP, MEP and tidal volume. However, in this group of patients it was not associated with a decrease in length of weaning or an increase in weaning success. (1) . To counteract these effects there has been an increasing move towards early rehabilitation on Intensive Care units (ICU), with some evidence suggesting shortened lengths of stay (LOS) in response to these interventions (2) . Following an earlier study at Manchester Royal Infirmary, which highlighted a significant reduction in LOS in response to early rehabilitation (3), a structured rehabilitation programme was implemented with the aim of decreasing overall length of stay and subsequently improve outcomes such as overall mortality. This study aimed to determine the effect of the introduction of a structured rehabilitation programme for patients admitted to critical care. METHODS. The structured rehabilitation programme was implemented at the beginning of 2004. Physical function is improved by each patient having an individualised programme that starts in ICU as soon as the patient is conscious and is adjusted accordingly throughout the remainder of his or her hospital stay. Primary outcome measures used were mean ICU and post ICU LOS, with secondary measures of mortality. Baseline data was obtained retrospectively, with annual figures presented for the three years following the introduction of the rehabilitation programme. Data were analysed using students t-test. In the year prior to the introduction of the structured rehabilitation programme the mean LOS on ICU was 9.8 days. Initially on introduction although a mean reduction of 0.9 days was observed this was not statistically significant. However in the following two years a significant reduction in LOS was then observed, with mean LOS falling to 8 days in 2005 (p \ 0.05) and 7.7 days by 2006 (p \ 0.01). Overall mortality also significantly fell from 45% in 2003 to 35% in 2006 (P \ 0.01). INTRODUCTION. Critical tissue oxygen availability may affect jejunal motility, and this can further be modified by nitric oxide. We studied ex vivo jejunum motility after exposure to two different conditions of low oxygen availability: hypoxic hypoxia and cardiac tamponade. We hypothesized that cardiac tamponade and hypoxic hypoxia decrease jejunal motility. METHODS. 24 anesthetized and mechanically ventilated pigs were randomized to cardiac tamponade (CT, n = 8), hypoxia (HH, n = 8) or control (C, n = 8). In CT, cardiac output was reduced in 6-h steps to reach 50, 40 and 30 ml kg -1 min -1 . In HH, FiO2 was reduced in 6 hrs to reach a PaO2 of 50-60 mmHg and then at 12 h to \ 50 mmHg. The lowest levels were maintained until 24 h or until death occurred. Cardiac output was measured by thermodilution and regional blood flows by Doppler ultrasound. At the end of the animal experiment, jejunal samples were analyzed by the tissue bath method. Acetylcholine (1-100 lM) and sodium nitroprusside (SNP, from 1 to 100 lM) effects were tested by constructing dose response curves. Maximum force and maximum relaxation values were calculated. Vascular reactivity data from the same animals are presented in another abstract. RESULTS. Cardiac output decreased in CT from 77 ± 14 to 44 ± 12 ml/kg/min, increased in HH from 75 ± 15 to 113 ± 26 ml/kg/min, and did not change in controls (time-group interaction; p = 0.001 [ANOVA for repeated measurements]). Superior mesenteric artery blood flow decreased by 30 ± 5% in CT, and increased by 2 ± 17% in HH and 22 ± 15% in controls (p = 0.04). Acetylcholine dose response is presented in figure 1 . Maximal acetylcholine responses were 119 (105-137)%, 160 (137-165)%, and 142 (124-181)% in CT, HH and C, respectively (p = 0.06). There were no differences in sodium nitroprusside-induced relaxation between the groups. CONCLUSION. Jejunum motility is preserved after exposure to CT and HH. Ex vivo jejunal motility is not related to tissue oxygen delivery within the range of this experiment. The role of regional mediators should be addressed in further, larger series. INTRODUCTION. Acute renal failure (ARF) is a common complication seen in 10-23% of patients admitted to the intensive care unit. When occurring, ARF leads to an increased mortality rate. The primary causes of death in this group of patients are extra renal, including infection, shock, sepsis, and respiratory failure. Post mortem examinations in these patients reveal cellular infiltration of lungs and kidneys. It is possible that ARF elicits an extra renal inflammatory reaction responsible for the increased mortality. We therefore investigated the effect on the immune system of renal ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) compared with I/R of the hind legs in mice. METHODS. 80 mice in 4 groups A, B, C, D. A were subjected to I/R of the kidneys. B had unilateral nefrectomy. C were only anaesthetized. D had I/R to the hind legs. In each group, 2 and 24 h following the primary intervention, 10 mice were sacrificed and humoral inflammatory markers, lung and kidney tissue was obtained. The measured parameters included the adhesion molecule of CD11b, TNF-alfa, and MHCII on monocytes. In lungs and kidneys, TNF-alfa and myeloperoxidase (MPO) was measured. RESULTS. In all the I/R groups we observed an up-regulation of CD11b and a downregulation of MHC II. As illustrated in the figure, a pronounced increase in MPO was observed in the kidneys following I/R of the kidneys as compared to I/R of the extremities. In contrast the concentration of MPO in the lungs was more pronounced in the group exposed to I/R of the extremities. CONCLUSION. Reperfusion following ischemic injury results in increased levels of inflammatory markers. Upon I/R of the hind legs, the inflammatory response in the lungs was more pronounced than following induction of I/R in the kidneys. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. Danielsens foundation. INTRODUCTION. While increased arterial lactate concentrations in sepsis have been attributed both to inadequate tissue oxygen delivery and impairment of oxygen extraction capabilities, they are the consequence of decreased hepato-splanchnic perfusion when cardiac output is low. We hypothesized that tissue oxygen delivery is adequate in sepsis, and therefore, the contribution of hepato-splanchnic lactate exchange to systemic lactate flux is not increased. METHODS. 24 anesthetized pigs were randomized to fecal peritonitis (P), cardiac tamponade (CT), or to serve as controls (n = 8 per group). Systemic (thermodilution) and regional (ultrasound transit time) flows and lactate concentrations were measured and oxygen transport and lactate exchange were calculated over 24 h. RESULTS. Cardiac output increased in P (116 ± 37% of baseline) and decreased in CT (59 ± 18% of baseline), hepatic arterial blood flow increased in P and remained unchanged in CT, and portal flow decreased in CT and remained unchanged in P (time-group interaction: all p \ 0.03). In CT but not in P, hepatic oxygen consumption decreased (60 ± 38% of baseline and 101 ± 44% of baseline, respectively; p: 0.049). Lactate data are shown in the table.  Increasing systemic lactate flux in peritonitis is a consequence of an early increase in regional, extra-splanchnic lactate production without signs of tissue hypoxia but with a failure to increase hepatic lactate extraction. In cardiac tamponade, regional, extrasplanchnic lactate production is accompanied by hepatic tissue hypoxia and net hepatic lactate production. INTRODUCTION. Mortality in critically ill patients with acute renal failure (ARF) is unacceptably high. Acute circulatory and respiratory failure at admission to an intensive care unit have been identified as the most important risk factors for the development of ARF. The aim of this study was to assess the effect of acute reduction of either cardiac output or arterial oxygen saturation on renal oxygen transport and kidney function. Prospective, randomized, controlled study in 24 anesthetized, mechanically ventilated pigs (weight: 42 ± 3.2 kg). In cardiac tamponade (CT; n = 8), cardiac output and blood pressure were reduced by filling the pericardial sac with HES 6%. In hypoxic hypoxia (HH; n = 8), FiO2 was reduced. Systemic (thermodilution) and renal (ultrasound Doppler) blood flow were measured at baseline and at 6 and 12 h. 8 animals served as controls. Differences between groups were assessed by repeated measurements ANOVA [RMA], all pvalues are time-group [T 9 G] interaction). Control animals remained stable. Cardiac index decreased in CT from 72.5 ± 14.2 to 57.3 ± 11.7 mlkg-1 min-1 and increased in HH from 71.5 ± 14.4 to 106.2 ± 27.4 mlkg-1 min-1 (p \ 0.001). Arterial blood pressure remained stable in HH, while decreasing in CT from 73.6 ± 12.7 to 58 ± 14.9 mmHg (p \ 0.06). In HH, arterial oxygen saturation decreased from 97 ± 0.0 to 68 ± 11 (p \ 0.001). Renal blood flow and oxygen delivery decreased in CT from 4.9 ± 0.7 to 3.5 ± 1.0 ml kg -1 min -1 , and from 0.64 ± 0.15 to 0.43 ± 0.12 ml kg -1 min -1 , respectively (both p \ 0.04). Renal perfusion pressure decreased in CT from 68.29 ± 13.9 to 47.14 ± 15.97 (p \ 0.025). In HH, arterial and renal venous oxygen content decreased from 118.5 ± 6.6 to 89.0 ± 17.6 ml/l, and from 82.83 ± 12.4 to 50.9 ± 12 ml/l (both p \ 0.05), while renal blood flow and oxygen delivery were maintained. In CT, creatinine clearance and urinary output decreased from 43.65 ± 8.45 to 27.25 ± 12.13 dl/hr (p = 0.09) and from 1.23 ± 0.7 to 0.48 ± 0.3 ml/kg/h (p = 0.08), respectively, and fractional sodium excretion from 2.03 ± 2.12 to 0.41 ± 0.2 (p = 0.035). These variables remained unchanged in HH and in controls. Reduced renal blood flow and blood pressure but not reduced renal oxygen content are associated with ARF. Over the short term, severe arterial hypoxemia (SpO2 B 70%) seems to be well tolerated when systemic hemodynamics are not compromised. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. Supported by grant 3200BO/102268 from the Swiss National Fund and by a grant from Novartis. In recent years there has been increasing evidence that resuscitation strategy with different fluids can have divergent impacts on the immune response and cytokines release. This study was undertaken to measure the IL-8 in the serum samples and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) during acute normovolemic hemodilution (ANH) performed with hydroxyethyl starch (HES), normal saline solution (NSS) or gelatin (GEL). METHODS. Twenty eight pigs were anesthetized, instrumented and randomized into four groups: Control, ANH + HES, ANH + NSS and ANH + GEL. Animals in the ANH group were submitted to acute normovolemic hemodilution to a target hematocrit of 15% with volume replacement performed with HES 130/0,4, GEL both at a 1:1 ratio or with NSS at a 3:1 ratio. The withdrawn blood was returned to the animals 120 minutes after the end of hemodilution. Cardiac Index (l/min/m2) was determined at the following time points: before ANH (Baseline), after instrumentation (INST), immediately after ANH (H), 60 minutes after ANH (60H), 120 minutes after ANH (120H), 60 minutes after blood infusion (60BI) and 120 minutes after blood infusion (120BI). The measurement of IL-8 (pg/ml) was performed with blood samples collected at the femoral vein immediately after ANH (H) and in the BALF after the end of the experiment. The cytokine IL-8 quantification was determined by Enzyme Linked Immuno Sorbent Assay (ELISA). One-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was performed to evaluate differences among groups. A p value of 0.05 was considered statistically significant. RESULTS. Cardiac Index (CI) was significant higher in groups ANH + HES (7.3 ± 1.2; p \ 0.05) and ANH + GEL (7.7 ± 1.0; p \ 0.01) when compared to Control ( INTRODUCTION. Sepsis is a major clinical problems in ICU. Many critically ill patients with severe sepsis develop ARF (acute renal failure) as a part of multiple organ failure (MOF). Sepsis is characterised by an uncontrolled immune response with release of proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as Il-6, TNF-\alpha, Il-10. A potential application of high volume continuous veno-venous haemofiltration is the extracorporeal removal of inflammatory mediators in septic patients, which can lead to an immunomodulatory effect. Aim of our study is to investigate the effect of high volume continuous haemofiltration on the transcriptional activity of mononuclear cells (PBMC). We enrolled 10 medical and surgical patients from our ICU suffering severe sepsis or septic shock. High flux CVVH was carried out and blood samples were obtained before the beginning of CVVH (T0), after 12 h (T1) and daily (T2-T4). Primary outcome measure was trend of IL-6 gene expression in our patients during CVVH. RESULTS. Figure 1 shows trend of IL-6 gene expression. We observed Il-6 mRNA drop after 12 h of treatment (T1), then a progressive increase at 24, 48, 72 h. Our data show an improvement of transcriptional activity of PBMCs in septic patients treated with high flux CVVH. These data could represent an expression of attenuation of sepsis-related immunoparalysis. . Little attention has been given to the status of gastrointestinal tract despite gut dysfunction occurs frequently among critically ill patients (CIP).The gut has often been suggested to be one of the essential factors in the pathogenesis of MODS and, CIP are susceptible to injury of the gastrointestinal tract. The aim of this study is to identify enteric dysfunction (ED) at admission and discharge, its association to other organ dysfunctions (OD), according to OD is acute or chronic, primary or secondary, its evolution to organ failure (OF) or not, and its relations to severity and outcome. CONCLUSION. Prevalence of ED is considerable. Its influence in overcome and severity is important. ED is the most prevalent primary OD. The majority of CP with ED presented MODS. Cardiovascular, respiratory and renal OD were mostly associated to ED. The association of ED to sepsis, tumor, metabolic acidosis and invasive ventilation is clinically relevant. INTRODUCTION. The objective of this study was to evaluate efficacy of corticosteroid therapy in a broad population of patients with septic shock not only who had relative adrenal insufficiency (RAI) but also who did not have RAI according to the results of high or low dose corticotropin stimulation tests. INTRODUCTION. The hypotalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis is a major determinant of the host's response to stress and its dysfunction can be present in septic shock. Adrenal dysfunction has been associated to higher mortality (1) . However, the evaluation of the adrenal response is difficult (2) and substitutive use of low dose of steriods in septic shock is controversial (3) . The objective of the study is to evaluate the prognostic value of the adrenal response to corticotropin in patients with septic shock treated with hydrocortisone. METHODS. Prospective, observational study in a medical-surgical ICU. All adult patients admitted in the ICU last year with septic shock were consecutively included, except those already treated with steriods. Epidemiologic and treatment data using sepsis bundles were collected. Cortisol level at To, the response to the corticotropin test (250 micrograms) and the initial lactate were measured during the first 24 h. All patients received hydrocortisone 300 mg/day until the result of the corticotropin test and it was suspended when delta cortisol was greater or equal to 9 mcg/dl. The prognostic value of the adrenal response to corticotropin was studied comparing data between survivors and non survivors by Student's t test for continous variables and X 2 or Fisher exact test for categorical variables. ROC curve and Youden's index were used to select the cortisol level at To that better discriminated mortality. INTRODUCTION. Inflammatory markers have been used in the diagnosis and follow-up of VAP, but their potential role in predicting the risk to develop VAP is unknown. This capacity has been proved in the case of community-acquired pneumonia. We prospectively assessed the evolution of inflammatory markers in mechanically-ventilated (MV) patients and their predictive and diagnostic role for VAP. Sequential measurements of C-reactive protein (CRP), procalcitonin (PCT) and cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10 y TNF-alpha) were done in 44 MV patients. Exclusion criteria were active infection at ICU admission and subsequent extrapulmonary infection. Patients were divided into three categories: patients without VAP suspicion (n 24), patients with clinical suspicion of VAP but without microbiologycal confirmation (n 11) and patients with microbiologically-confirmed VAP (n 9). At admission, demographics, severity scores, and clinical and standard laboratory values were similar in the 3 groups, but serum levels of IL-6 and IL8 were higher in patients with confirmed VAP (526 ± 221 for IL-6 and 68 ± 38 for IL-8 pg/mL) compared with those without suspicion or non-confirmed suspicion of VAP (174 ± 39 and 185 ± 55, respectively for IL-6, p = 0.041, and 4 ± 2 and 15 ± 3, respectively for IL-8, p = 0.022). At onset of VAP, serum levels of IL-6 (1232 ± 343 pg/mL) and IL-8 (52 ± 11 pg/mL) were also higher in patients with confirmed VAP, compared with those without suspicion or non-confirmed suspicion of VAP (151 ± 44 and 364 ± 147, respectively for IL-6, and 12 ± 2 and 34 ± 4, respectively for IL-8, p \ 0.001 both). Serum levels of CRP and PCT, as well as CPIS and SOFA Score, were also highest in patients with confirmed VAP. The BAL levels of cytokines were similar between confirmed and non-confirmed VAP. However there is a relative paucity in underlying evidence for its use and this study aims to investigate EVLW as a prognostic marker and assess its relationship to other clinical and pulmonary parameters. A prospective observational one-centre cohort-study in a mixed-bed ICU of a university hospital. 38 consecutive patients with SIRS and circulatory failure. Outcome parameters were time in ventilator, ICU-length of stay, ICU-mortality and 6 month-mortality. The clinical parameters investigated were PF-ratio, PEEP, APACHE-and SOFA-score. CI, ITBVI and P-lactate were also analysed. RESULTS. There were no differences between survivors and non-survivors in EVLWIbaseline and EVLWImax. EVLWI did not correlate significantly to the clinical parameters. When divided into subgroups according to EVLWImax, a low and a very high EVLWImax were associated with high mortality, whereas the middle group had a lower mortality. When further analysed, the non-survivors with low EVLWImax were significantly older than the rest of the study material. For patients \ 70 yo, EVLW was increased in the non-survivor group. Regardless of age, all patients with EVLW [ 20 did not survive. CONCLUSION. EVLWI can be used as a prognostic marker in younger patients with SIRS/ sepsis and values above 20 mL kg-1 indicates a bad prognosis. In patients with advanced age, however, it should be interpreted more carefully. INTRODUCTION. Hemodynamic management,in surgical patients,is associated sometimes,to progressively decreasing of Hb oxygen saturation(SaO2Hb),because of the stagnant ischemia (surgical stress),or hemodylution,following the hyper volemic repletion [2] .Our study intended to observe the local O2 metabolism alteration [5] ,as a source for oxidative stress(OxS)production,and to verify the effects of antioxidant therapy.The study was approved by the Ethical Committee of UMF Craiova METHODS. a prospective study realized upon 70 patients from Plastic and Reparatory Surgery (Emergency Hospital Craiova) who needed of reparatory interventions to the distal part of the limbs:duration of 4 ± 1 h.Patients were divided into three groups A:good healing of wound (40cases), B:bad or nonhealing (30 cases),and control (10 cases),without surgical interventions.We noted the evolution of the local morpho-clinical aspects induced by the stagnant ischemia,after the cuff inflation at the site of intervention.We prelevated the samples of blood at (T1), preoperative at 48 h postoperative (T2) and to the outcome (T3), to determine the following values: lactate, C-reactive protein (CRP), procalcytonin (PCT), SaO2Hb [3] , oxidative stress index (OSI) and total antioxidant potential (TAOP CONCLUSION. Tissular exposure to the oxidative status induces a variability of local cellular reactions, representing the kind of their adaptability. To recognize the local mechanism of OxS production could be used to verify the adequate therapy and to predict the quality of wound healing. INTRODUCTION. Sepsis and specially patients with septic shock, have a high morbimortality, because of its quick evolution to multiorgan dysfunction syndrome (MODS). Acute renal failure (ARF) is common and continuous renal replacement therapies (CRRT) play an important role in the clinical management of septic patients. Nowadays optimal CRRT in criticallly ill patients are directed to achieve depuration doses [ 35 ml/kg/h (high volume hemofiltration-HVHF). The timing of these techniques is still controversial but many authors suggest that an early initiation of CRRT in septic patients is related to a better outcome. The objective of our study was to analyze the impact of an early CRRT strategy in patients with septic shock and ARF. We included 32 patients with septic shock and ARF admitted to an intensive care unit (ICU) in a prospective and observational study. CRTT with HVHF was initiated in all patients. Two different groups were studied attending to the time of HVHF initiation (based on RIFLE score). Group I: HVHF initiated in early stages of RIFLE score (Risk and Injury). Group II: HVHF initiated in Failure stage of RIFLE score. Group I: 9 patients were included (n = 9); mean age 58 ± 16 years, 5 were males, mean APACHEII 24 ± 8. 90% of these patients were on mechanical ventilation (MV) at the beggining of HVHF, 22% had disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and 22% had liver failure. Mean ultrafiltrate dose was 43,5 ± 6 ml/kg/h. Group II: 23 patients were included (n = 23); mean age 61 ± 13 years, 17 were males, mean APACHE II 29 ± 9. 100% of these patients were on MV, 61% had DIC and 39% liver failure. Mean ultrafiltrate dose was 43,7 ± 6 ml/kg/h. We did not observe adverse effects related to HVHF. 28 day survival was 89% in group I and 30% in group II with an important statistical significance (p \ 0,004). Days on HVHF were 6 ± 3 days in group I and 7 ± 6 days in group II. CONCLUSION. Early initiation of HVHF in septic shock patients with ARF seems related to a better survival in our study. We need further and much larger studies to confirm our results. INTRODUCTION. Some patients with cardiogenic shock present during their evolution a systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) that can be interpreted erroneously as septic shock.In this study we attempt to establish the usefulness of procalcitonin in those patients with cardiogenic shock and associated SIRS with suspicion of sepsis. A group of patients with cardiogenic shock and suspicion of sepsis were studied prospectively.We compare patients with cardiogenic shock and proved associated sepsis(G1) with those that they did not develop it(G2).The diagnostic of sepsis was established according sepsis criterions defined by ACCP and by microbiologic results.We analyzed :age,sex,-APACHE II and SAPS index,procalcitonina (PCT)and C-reactivates protein(PCR) levels,leukocyte count,lactate levels,type of shock according to hemodynamic parameters,focus of sepsis, isolated germens, mechanical ventilation days,ICU days and mortality.The Fisher Test and Spearman correlation was used for the study of the variables.A p \ 0,05 was considered statistically significant. A total of 32(100%)patient with cardiogenic shock and suspicion of sepsis were studied,11(34%) had associated sepsis confirmed with positive cultures(G1),while 21 (66%)did not present it(G2).The PCT test was positive for bacterial infection in 91% (10) INTRODUCTION. Off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting (OPCAB) can be accompanied by hemodynamic and respiratory disorders and postoperative pain, requiring adequate monitoring and treatment. Epidural anesthesia (EA) using continuous infusion of local anesthetics combined with fentanyl can provide effective analgesia and reduce the number of perioperative complications in thoracic surgery. However, the role of EA as a component of multimodal patient controlled analgesia (PCA) in OPCAB still remains disputable. Thus, the main goal of our study was to assess the efficacy of high thoracic EA followed by postoperative patient-controlled epidural analgesia with infusion of ropivacaine/fentanyl mixture in OPCAB patients. We enrolled 35 patients, who underwent elective OPCAB during anesthesia with propofol and fentanyl, in an ongoing prospective study. The patients were randomized into three groups with hemodynamics guided by PiCCOplus monitor (Pulsion Medical Systems, Germany) and postoperative pain control aiming at a visual analog scale (VAS) score in rest \ 30 mm. All groups received lornoxicame 8 mg IV before OPCAB and every 8 h postoperatively. The control group (n = 11) received fentanyl postoperatively at an initial infusion rate of 0.7 mcg/kg/h IV. The epidural infusion (EI) group (n = 13), after placing the epidural catheter at Th2-Th4 level before OPCAB, received EA with ropivacaine 0.75% 1 mg/kg and fentalyl 100 mcg followed by postoperative continuous EI of ropivacaine 0.2% and fentalyl 2 mcg/ml at an infusion rate of 5-10 ml/h. The epidural infusion/PCA (EI/PCA) group (n = 11) received the same regimen of EA followed by EI combined with PCA using a programmable infusion pump (Graseby 3300, UK) with bolus 1 ml and lock-out interval 12 min. The measurements included hemodynamics, blood gases, VAS, and drug consumption throughout 24 h after OPCAB. Data were assessed using \chi 2 test or ANOVA followed by Scheffe's test or test of contrasts when appropriate. p \ 0.05 was regarded as statistically significant. RESULTS. Demographic data did not differ significantly between the groups, as well as mean VAS scores (within 20 mm in rest and 40 mm in coughing in all groups). The consumption of propofol, fentanyl, and nitroglycerin was significantly lower in both EA groups. The incidence of colloid administration was 86% during EA vs. 36% in the control group (p = 0.04). Mean arterial pressure and extravascular lung water were reduced in the EI and the EI/PCA groups (p \ 0.05). In parallel, EA increased the PaO 2 /FiO 2 ratio (p \ 0.05). The duration of mechanical ventilation tended to decrease in the EI/PCA group (p = 0.1). CONCLUSION. The perioperative epidural administration of ropivacaine/fentanyl provides adequate analgesia, attenuates arterial hypertension, decreases extravascular lung water, and increases arterial oxygenation thus improving lung function in OPCAB. INTRODUCTION. Since the approval of the Anaesthetic Conserving Device (ACD), the use of volatile anaesthetics in the intensive care unit (ICU) has become a more cost-effective and easy way of sedation than vaporizer techniques (1) . Inhalational sedation has been studied with isoflurane (2,3), but sevoflurane has scarcely been evaluated to date (4, 5) . We studied the efficiency and practicability of a postoperative inhalational sedation with sevoflurane using the ACD compared to propofol in the ICU. After approval from the ethical and governmental committee, 70 patients following major abdominal, vascular or urological surgery were allocated to this prospective, randomized, single-blinded study, to either receive sevoflurane (n = 35) via the ACD (endtidal 0.5-1 Vol%) or intravenous propofol (n = 35) for postoperative sedation up to 24 h. Primary endpoint was extubation time from termination of sedation. Further focus was set on sedation quality using Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale (RASS) and BIS values, recovery times and the consumption of anaesthetics. Both study groups were similar in terms of demographic and perioperative data. Time of sevoflurane and propofol sedation was similar (mean 10 h). Mean sevoflurane consumption was 3.7 ± 1.1 ml/h to obtain endtidal sevoflurane concentrations of 1.1 ± 0,4Vol%. Mean administration of propofol was 2.5 ± 0.7 mg/kg/h during sedation. Sedation quality including RASS and BIS values were similar in both groups throughout the time of sedation (50-65), and during recovery from sedation to extubation. Mean extubation times were significantly shorter (p \ 0.001) with sevoflurane than with propofol (24.7 ± 31.8 min vs. 81.6 ± 45.8 min), as well as eye opening (11.1 ± 18.8 min vs. 32.5 ± 32.4 min) and following commands (10.9 ± 9.4 min vs. 40.6 ± 37.6 min). Ventilator time was significantly shorter (p \ 0.01) in the sevoflurane group (10.2 ± 4.5 h vs. 13 ± 5.7 h). Length of ICU and hospital were comparable between the groups. CONCLUSION. Postoperative sevoflurane sedation using the Anaesthetic Conserving Device appears to be a valid and safe alternative to the commonly used intravenous propofolbased regimen. Sevoflurane provided a comparable sedation quality to propofol at end-tidal concentrations of 1.1 Vol% (0.54 MAC). Patients showed a faster and more predictable return of recovery after sevoflurane, and shorter times of mechanical ventilation. INTRODUCTION. Hyperglycemia typically occurs after major surgery due to alterations in glucose metabolism. Maintenance of normoglycemia prevents morbidity and reduces mortality in the critically ill (1) . The objective of this study was to determine whether human soluble insulin (ActrapidÒ, Novo Nordisk) or insulin analogon insulin aspart (NovoRapidÒ, Novo Nordisk) allows a better glycemic control. Prospective, randomized double blind study. We included 50 ICU patients after elective cardiac surgery. Actrapid (n = 25) or NovoRapid (n = 25) was given as a continuous infusion according to a protocol. The study ended 48 h after admission. Blood glucose concentrations and insulin consumption were calculated for 8 intervals (6 h each). ANOVA for repeated measurements was performed to compare glucose concentrations and insulin consumption. No difference was found in glucose concentrations (p = 0,481). A difference was found in the amount of insulin necessary. The patient group administered insulin aspart needed less international units/h (IU/h) of insulin compared to the group administered human soluble insulin (p = 0.032). Our results indicate a higher efficacy of insulin aspart versus human soluble insulin in intravenous treatment of hyperglycemia. INTRODUCTION. When we use opioid antagonists to restore intestinal motility after opioid treatment we assume a uniform drug effect on small bowel and colonic motility. To exclude possible regional differences experimental studies are necessary. This study uses two different settings to evaluate the effect of naloxone and remifentanil on small bowel as well as colonic motility. (1): A tissue bath with mounted guinea pig small bowel segments allows the evaluation of the pressure threshold (PT)-the intraluminal pressure necessary to trigger a peristaltic contraction. A drug-induced increased PT reflects inhibition of peristalsis, while a decreased PT reflects stimulation of peristalsis. Colonic motility (2): A tissue bath with guinea pig colonic segments fixed on a polyacrylic tray allows the evaluation of the transit time (TT)-the time necessary for a wooden pellet to perambulate. A decrease of the TT reflects stimulation, and an increase inhibition of peristalsis. After stable peristaltic activity in both settings the effect of increasing concentrations of remifentanil and naloxone alone were evaluated. In the second step naloxone and remifentanil were given together. Dose response curves were constructed, two way ANOVA (Sigma Stat) was used for statistics, p values B 0.05 were considered significant. Remifentanil has a concentration-dependent inhibitory effect on small bowel as well as colonic motility. Naloxone per se does not affect small bowel motility, but the inhibitory effect of remifentanil is antagonized. On colonic motility naloxone has a moderate inhibitory effect and the inhibitory effect of remifentanil is mitigated and not antagonized (figure). CONCLUSION. This study clearly demonstrates a regional different effect of naloxone alone and in combination with remifentanil on small bowel and colonic motility. RESULTS. Bladder pressure measurements were obtained at 4 h intervals. In all patients abdominal decompression was performed and a cover bag was placed. In Group A, 9 (56,25%) patients died (3 multitrauma, 2 with ruptured abdominal aorta aneurism, 1 with small bowel ischemical necrosis, and 2 with acute pancreatitis). In Group B, 6 (20,68%) patients died (2 multitrauma, 2 with ruptured abdominal aorta aneurism, 1 with small bowel ischemical necrosis, and 1 with acute pancreatitis) AvsB p \ 0,005 (Chi-square test). CONCLUSION. Abdominal Compartment Syndrome is occurred more frequently than it has been expected. Mortality is still high, even with continuous patient monitoring, and early abdominal decompression. Further studies regarding physiopathological meccanisms may be determinant in treating this syndrome definitely.  Little is known about the risk for urinary tract infection (UTI) in relation to intravesicular pressure monitoring as estimate for intra-abdominal pressure (IAP) (1) . No data with regard to the FoleyManometer has been published so far. The FoleyManometer is a closed sterile system that uses freshly produced urine as IAP transmitting medium compared to other techniques that use saline (2). METHODS. Retrospective database review of 5890 patients admitted to the 12-bed medical ICU of a tertiary hospital between 1/1/2000 and 31/12/2007. Four time periods with regard to IAP measurements were compared: period 1 (2000-2001) where IAP was measured in 28 patients, period 2 (2002-2003) with 146 patients, period 3 (2004-2005) with 422 patients and finally period 4 (2006-2007) with 501 patients. The following IAP measurement methods were used: a modified Cheatham technique (period 1 and 2), the 1st version FoleyManometer with 35 mL reservoir (period 3), and the FoleyManometer LowVolume (LV) with less than 10 mL infusion volume (period 4). The UTI rates were adjusted for disease severity by multiplying each crude rate by the ratio of control (group 1) versus study (groups 2-4) patient SAPS II probability of mortality. The standard Foley catheter used was the 14Fr Bard Biocath and urine drainage tubing, collection bags and FoleyManometers were replaced every 10 days. RESULTS. Table 1 summarizes the patient data. The number of patients admitted decreased over the 4 periods but ICU length of stay increased from 4.1 tot 7.1 days. The total number of urine cultures taken and the number per patient increased from 915 to 1896 and from 0.5 to 1.7, respectively. The chance of identifying a UTI per urine culture sample remained stable at around 11%. The crude and adjusted UTI rates per 1,000 catheter days did not change significantly over time, although the FoleyManometer LV seems to decrease the UTI risk. INTRODUCTION. Immediate tracheal extubation of selected adult patients after liver transplantation (LT) is common practice. Historically, most of liver transplant patients have been extubated, within 10-12 h following surgery in our hospital. Today, new drugs and techniques, advanced monitoring and improved perioperative patient care contribute to rapid and uneventful recovery from surgery, fewer postoperative complications, shorter hospitalization, increased patient satisfaction and a better outcome. Recently, we tried to extubate aggressively in the operating room (OR) rather than in the intensive care unit (ICU). We hypothesized that selected patients may be safely extubated in the OR after living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) and avoid potentially deleterious effects of artificial ventilation and sedation. After May 2006, we chose immediate extubation in the OR unless a specific contraindication was identified. We have excluded emergent cases. Charts of all patients undergoing elective LDLT between January 2004 and December 2007 were reviewed to audit safety and outcome of this approach. At first, we identified 20 patients extubated in the OR (Group A). Then, we made the matched control group (Group B) using age, operation time, the amount of bleeding, and MELD score as matching variables. Patients in the Group B were extubated in the ICU after 10-12 h after LDLT. We have analyzed postoperative liver function tests, such as aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and prothrombin time (PT) taken at postoperative day 1, 2, 4 and 7. We have also collected respiratory complication, the incidence of reintubation, ICU stay, and hospital stay. We could not find any significant differences in the patient characteristics and background between two groups. 20 patients were extubated in the OR safely. All patients did not need reintubation during postoperative course. In the group A, we had only one patient needed non-invasive positive pressure ventilation within 72 h after extubation. About the postoperative liver function test, mean AST and ALT were not significantly different between two groups. However, a mean PT-INR in the Group A was significantly decreased compared with Group B on POD 1, 2, 4, 7. (p value: \ 0.0001). We have also found that T-Bil at POD 4, 7 were lower in the Group A compared with the Group B (p value: 0.04, 0.03). We could not find any significant differences about the respiratory complication, such as effusions and pneumonia. We also could not find any differences in postoperative complications and clinical outcomes between two groups. CONCLUSION. Our early experience with 20 LDLT recipients extubated immediately after surgery showed good emergence from anesthesia safely. Postoperative liver function tests were better in the early extubation group than in the control group. Early extubation in an OR might facilitate the recovery of liver function after LDLT. INTRODUCTION. This study was to investigate the role and safety of VoltarolÒ Diclofenac 100 mg suppositories in patients following routine coronary artery bypass surgery. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have been used post-operatively as part of a multi-modal analgesia regime in many types of surgery. With the aim to reduce ventilator dependency postoperatively and to reduce the morbidity and time spent in hospital by patients after CABG (1), it was hypothesised that by using rectal paracetamol and a rectal NSAID there would be a reduction in opioid requirements, that would facilitate earlier extubation. METHODS. Eighty patients were intended for inclusion, powered on detecting a 20% reduction in morphine use over the first 48 h post-operatively. After hospital ethics approval and informed consent, patients fulfilling the inclusion criteria were randomised to recieve Diclofenac (A) or placebo (P)combined with Paracetamol, if the attending clinician deemed the patient to be 'fast-trackable' (planned extubation within 90 minutes). The physicians and data collectors were blinded to the content of the active component in the suppository until the end of the trial. After transfer to CITU patients were commenced on a morphine patient controlled analgesia protocol which was initially nurse administered, 1 mg boluses and a 1 min lock out. The patient was assessed and extubated in accordance with the standard Derriford Fast Policy. Following extubation the PCA was reprogrammed to 1 mg bolus and a 5 minute lockout. All patients were prescribed regular Paracetamol orally or per rectum and received Aspirin 75 mg the day after surgery. Morphine use, and a 10 cm Visual Analogue Score were recorded at various time points. Secondary outcomes were drain losses, blood product use, change in creatinine level, need for renal support and hospital stay. RESULTS. Sixty one patients were recruited who were eligible for the trial and full data were available for 55 patients. Recruitment was stopped early due a change in prescribing policy with the introduction of intravenous paracetamol into the hospital formulary. The 24 h morphine use was lower in the active group 24.8 mg (15.8), compared with 33.8 mg (17.8) in the control group (total morphine (SD)). There was no difference in pain scores during the trial period. Extubation times were not significantly different although there was a trend towards earlier extubation in the active group. There were no differences in drain losses over the 24 h period nor rise in serum creatinine levels. CONCLUSION. This study shows that the use of rectal Diclofenac following cardiac surgery reduces the 24 h morphine requirements. The use of NSAIDs appears to be safe with no alterations in post operative bleeding, renal function or post opeartive drains loss. There was no significant reduction in extubation time. A larger trial would be needed to decide if a significant reduction in extubation time was possible. INTRODUCTION. Acid-base disorders are frequently observed in cirrhotics; however, modifications during hepatectomy and their impact on prognosis have never been investigated. The aim of this study was to examine modifications of acid-base balance of cirrhotic patients undergoing hepatectomy for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). METHODS. Two hundred and two hepatectomies for HCC on cirrhosis were reviewed. Arterial blood samples were collected immediately before and at the end of resection. Preresection and postresection acid-base parameters were compared and related to patient characteristics and postoperative course. The accuracy of acid-base parameters in predicting postoperative liver failure, defined as an impairment of liver function after surgery that led to patient death or required transplantation, was assessed using receiver operating characteristic analysis (ROC). All patients showed a significant reduction in pH, bicarbonate, and base excess at the end of hepatectomy (P \ 0.001 in all cases), worsened by intraoperative blood loss (P \ 0.010) and preoperative Model for end-stage liver disease score C 11 (P \ 0.010). ROC curve analysis identifies patients with postresection bicarbonate \ 19.4 mmol/L at high risk for liver failure (50.0%) whereas levels [ 22.1 mmol/L did not lead to the event (0%; P \ 0.001). Postoperative prolongation of prothrombin time and increases in bilirubin, creatinine, and morbidity were also more frequent in patients with lower postresection bicarbonate, resulting in a longer in-hospital stay. CONCLUSION. In cirrhotic patients, a trend toward a relative acidosis can be expected during surgery and is worsened by the severity of the underlying liver disease and intraoperative blood loss. Postresection bicarbonate level lower than 19.4 mmol/L is an adverse prognostic factor. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. Support was provided solely by departmental sources. (1). A recent study has suggested there may be a link between derangements in ScvO2 and outcome in the high risk surgical patient (2) . It was postulated this may be due to fluid depletion despite ''normal'' values of other parameters. During liver resection, patients are deliberately fluid restricted to assist surgery. We would therefore expect this patient group to be at high risk of developing a low ScvO2. Those patients may be at high risk of peri-operative morbidity. We therefore aim to ascertain the incidence of low ScvO2 (\65%) in patients having a liver resection. METHODS. An observational study collecting physiological data normally recorded as part of standard practice: heart rate, blood pressure, central venous pressure and pulse oximetry. Blood samples are also taken for ScvO2. Recordings are made at the time of placement of the central venous catheter, when the liver resection is completed, on arrival on the intensive care unit (ICU) and then 6hr, 12hr and 18hr after arrival on the ICU. We intend to recruit 40 patients. We have so far recruited 27 patients into the study. 62% of patients have an ScvO2 less than 65% in the early post-operative period.  We describe the management of a patient with critical coronary artery disease and poor left ventricular (LV) function who also had phaeochromocytoma. Although a staged approach to surgery for coronary artery disease and phaeochromocytoma has previously been described 1 , this rare problem has never been described for patients with poor LV function. A 59-year-old man with severe triple vessel disease, including 90% left main stem stenosis, poor LV function (EF 10%) and an apical LV aneurysm following a previous myocardial infarction, was admitted for coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) and aneurysmectomy. Following induction in anaesthesia, the operation was abandoned due to uncontrolled hypertension, and he was admitted to our intensive care unit (ICU) where a pulmonary artery catheter (PAC) thermodilution showed cardiac index (CI) 1.6 l min -1 m -2 and systemic vascular resistance (SVR) 3205 dynes s -1 cm -5 . Urinary catecholamines were elevated and a CT scan showed an adrenal phaeochromocytoma. The patient was pre-optimised with long acting (T 24 h) alpha-adrenergic blocker phenoxybenzamine followed by etablockade with carvedilol and rehydration. A multidisciplinary meeting was called to plan treatment and a combined adrenalectomy-CABG was decided to be the safest approach. The phenoxybenzamine was stopped 2 days prior to readmission to the ICU where a PAC was used for calculations of cardiac output and SVR. Initial measurements revealed pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 4 mmHg, CI 2.6 l.min -1 m -2 and SVR 1548 dynes.s -1 cm -5 . Infusion of short acting (T 19 min) alpha-blocker phentolamine was started initially at 0.2 and gradually increased over the next three days to 0.6 lg.kg -1 min -1 aiming at SVR of 1200 dynes.s -1 cm -5 . Before anaesthetic induction an intraortic balloon pump (IABP) was inserted and used throughout the perioperative period. A sternolaparotomy was performed followed by adrenalectomy, with excellent haemostasis prior to systemic heparinisation. Blood pressure was controlled without problems. Once the adrenal tumour was removed the phentolamine infusion was stopped and cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) established. CABG and left ventricular aneurysmectomy were performed. During this time (bypass 59 minutes) the effects of phentolamine had substantially reduced, and CPB was weaned using dopamine 5.8 lg kg -1 min -1 and vasopressin 0.01 U kg -1 min -1 . The initial readings in ITU post-operatively showed PCWP 9 mmHg, CI 4.9 l.min -1 m -2 and SVR 418 dynes.s -1 cm -5 . The CI was maintained above 3 l.min -1 m -2 and the IABP, dopamine and vasopressin were slowly weaned over the next 48 h. The patient was discharged home on day 10. At follow-up the patient was asymptomatic, but left ventricular function although improved remained poor The key to success is likely to be the multidisciplinary approach and the staged use of vasoactive medication in the ITU which allowed controlled systemic vascular resistance by means of short acting alpha-blocker infusion in the pre-operative period and vasopressin in the post-operative period. INTRODUCTION. Preoperative preparation with pheochromocytoma makes the patients safe for surgical removal of the tumor. It usually performed by alpha-adrenergic blockers. In this study we reviewed the antihypertensive efficacy of Doxazosin when used in monotherapy or in association with a beta-blocker, Atenolol METHODS. We enrolled 22 patients with pheochromocytoma into two groups. D GROUP (11 patients) received only Doxazosin (1 mg-8 mg /day, taken orally) for two weeks. D + A GROUP (11 patients) was prepared for two weeks with the use of Doxazosin (2 mg-16 mg/ day) plus Atenolol (50-100 mg daily). We measured pre-, intra-and post-operative blood pressure, heart rate, volume replacements and catecholamines levels . After treatment, the both groups had a mean blood pressure value of 128/ 86 mmHg with a regular heart rate of 75 beats/min. Intraoperative hypertension occurred in 4 patients in the D Group (37 %) and in 3 patients in D + A GROUP (28 %) .There was no significant difference among the two groups . No dysrhythmia was seen until removal of the tumor. The operative and postoperative volume replacements were similar into two groups. Urinary and plasma cathecolamines levels decreased during both Doxazosin and Doxazosin plus Atenolol therapy. CONCLUSION. We conclude that Doxazosin is a efficacious agent used alone or in association with Atenolol for preoperative preparation in patients with pheochromocytoma. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. Università degli Studi di Napoli ''Federico II''. D. Arias*, E. Curiel, M. Prieto, J. Muñoz, G. Quesada Intensive Care Unit, Carlos Haya Hospital, Málaga, Spain Post-surgery pain is the cause of undesirable physiopathologic effects, of an increase in morbility, mortality and in costs applied to processes. Pain control with remifentanyl, an opioid agonist of u receptors, with a short mean life, is an adequate option. The analgesia efficacy and the safety of remifentanyl in maxillo-facial surgery patients is analyzed. All consecutive adult patients who underwent maxillo-facial surgery, admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) along 2007, were included in this study. Remifentanyl (0.15mcg.Kg-1.min-1) perfusion was initiated at admission and progressive weaning acquired before patients were discharged. We compiled hemodynamic (heart rate and blood pressure) and respiratory (respiratory rate and mixed blood oxygen saturation) parameters, the degree of sedation and post-anaesthetic recovery (Ramsey and Campbel scales), postoperative pain severity through elementary verbal (EVS) and visual analogical (EAV) scales at admission, 30 and 60 minutes after, and 6 h later; its side effects and the need for rescue analgesia. Data were registered as percentage or median. We applied ANOVA with multiple measures to compare cuantitative mean variables. RESULTS. Fifty six patients were included (30 of them male) with a median of 63 years old. Surgery was due to tumour pathology in 43 patients (78%). Twenty seven (48%) were in the ASA III range group, most of them males (p \ 0.008). The median length of mechanical ventilation in these patients was of 4 h. An EVS \ 2 in 91% and an EAV \ 4 in 100% was attained, being the sedation level 2-3 (Ramsay scale) and 0-1 (Campbel scale) the most frequently measured. There were no statistically significant differences in the measure of systolic blood pressure (p = 0.124), nor in cardiac rate (p = 0.39), neither in respiratory rate (p = 0.14) in the different cutting points. Six patients (10.7%) suffered side effects, most of them (7%) described as bradycardialhypotensive status, and the same percentage (10.7%) needed rescue analgesia, usually nonsteroid anti-inflammation drugs. CONCLUSION. Remifentanyl was effective for the management of pain in the inmediate postoperative period in patients who underwent maxillo-facial surgery patients. Hemodynamic and respiratory parameters maintained stable along its administration, not showing statistical differences in the cutting points of the study. An adequate pain control was attained (EVS \ 2 and EAV \ 4) and the side effects were limited.  We report a clinical case of spontaneous aortic rupture and emergency surgery of a 32-y old parturient patient, 10-day after c-section, previously healthy, with intensive care management for 72 h postoperatively in the post anesthetic care unit. Family history, phenotype characteristics and the clinical onset of this emergency episode foster the suspicion of vascular type of Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes (EDS sub-type IV). This vascular type represents 5% to 10% of all cases of EDS which have an estimated prevalence of 1/10,000 to 1/25,000 in general population. The intensive care management of potential fatal complications of EDS presents special challenges for anesthesiology and intensive care teams. Female patient, 32 years old, 10th day after labour (c-section dued to fetal bradycardia), transferred from a district hospital with hipovoelemic shock and angioCT diagnosing aortic rupture. An emergent laparotomy and intensive care procedures were instituted (invasive pressures, fluid and blood therapy, anesthesic and analgesia drugs, monitoring and register). The surgery revealed an aortic spontaneous dissection with difficult placement of 2 different aortic graft anasthomosis dued to extreme tissue fragility. The patient was heavily sedated with propofol 10-20 ml/h and remifentanyl 1-3 mcg/kg/min during 72 h postoperatively for clinical control and evaluation. Blood pressure limits were defined and maintained along with hemodynamics and physiologic normal range variables. Additional measures included non-invasing monitoring (CT angiography, ultrasound for CVP and pleural effusions, X-rays and echocardiography), prudent management of invasive procedures, diagnostics tests-histology, skin fibroblasts and DNA (COL3A1) and clinical findings (facial dismorphy, ecchymoses and haematomas, bruising, pale thin skin with visible subcutaneous vessels). All clinical criteria for EDS type IV were met-positive family history, acrogeric patient and first instance arterial complication. CVP was withdrawn on the 4th day postoperatively. No intensive care related complications were found. CONCLUSION. The vascular type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, known autossomic dominant connective tissue disorder, in an undiagnosed young parturient was responsible for a spontaneous aortic dissection with specific anesthetic and intensive care management. The disease frequently involves the proximal branches of the aortic arch, the descending thoracic aorta and the abdominal aorta. Potentially fatal complications of vascular EDS are increased by pregnancy, even during post-partum period. [ 50% of Rivers's study patients were ventilated during the first six h but causes, timing or impact of MV were not specified. SSC bundles do not include this intervention. We conducted a prospective observational multicentric study to determine the effect of this maneuver on ScvO2 in critically ill patients. We hypothesized that this isolated intervention may contribute significantly to achieve ScvO2 [ 70% in most patients. METHODS. During 6 months all consecutive ICU patients with a central venous catheter in place, and in whom intubation and connection to MV was decided were included. We evaluated immediately before and 15 minutes after intubation the following parameters: HR, RR, MAP, lactate, ABGs, arterial O2 sat (StO2), ScvO2 and O2 extraction (O2 ER). Demographics, SOFA, APACHE and concurrent inotropic or vasopressor use were also registered. Results are expressed as mean + SD. Statistical analysis included Chi square test, t test and ANOVA. RESULTS. 103 patients were included (age 58 ± 17; severe sepsis 46%; APACHE II 26 ± 7; SOFA 9 ± 8; mortality 32%; more frequently intubated for shock or respiratory failure). ScvO2 increased in 81% (mean 7.08 ± 8.55) and was associated with a significant decrease in O2 ER. In a subgroup of 24 pts fulfilling Rivers's admission criteria (hypotension or lactate [ 4 mmol/l), 21 pts (87.5%) increased dramatically their ScvO2 (mean 9.5% ± 7.43 (57.7-67.2%)) and 10 pts (41.7 %) achieved a ScvO2 [ 70% with this sole maneuver. We found no correlation between changes in StO2 and ScvO2. CONCLUSION. The isolated maneuver of sedation and connection to MV is highly effective in increasing ScvO2 and decreasing O2 extraction in critically ill patients. Almost 90% of septic patients increase dramatically ScvO2 with normalization in 41.7%. This maneuver should be considered earlier in resuscitation protocols and probably tested in future trials against protocols considering only increases in DO2. INTRODUCTION. The diagnosis of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is notoriously difficult in the critically ill. When the pretest probability according to the 4T scoring system is high, heparin anticoagulants are stopped and pre-emptive treatment with alternative nonheparin anticoagulants is started awaiting test results. The decision to start alternative nonheparin anticoagulants in patients with low or intermediate pretest probability is questioned. Moreover, continuation of heparin anticoagulants does not disturb the diagnostic process in case of spontaneous recovery of the platelet count. We investigated the safety of withholding non-heparin anticoagulants in low and intermediate pretest probability awaiting the test results. METHODS. Case-control study of critically ill patients suspected of HIT with low and intermediate pretest probability in whom HIT-antibody testing was performed between January 2006 and December 2007. Ideally, we use a strictly structured diagnostic and therapeutic strategy. If the pretest probability is low, HIT is considered unlikely, no laboratory testing is done and heparin anticoagulants are continued. If intermediate, HIT is considered possible, HIT-antibody (ELISA) testing is done and heparin anticoagulants are continued. If high, HIT is considered likely, HIT-antibody testing is done and heparin anticoagulants are stopped and fondaparinux 2.5 mg/day is started pre-emptively awaiting the test results (bridging therapy). We compared continuation of heparin anticoagulants with fondaparinux bridging therapy. Primary endpoints were the occurrence of new thromboembolic complications (TEC) and new bleeding complications during the period awaiting the test results. In 30 patients, 8 tests were performed for low pretest probability and 23 tests were performed for intermediate pretest probability. The median duration of waiting for the test results was 2 days (range 1-9 days). In sixteen cases heparin anticoagulants were continued and in 15 cases fondaparinux bridging therapy was started. Two new TEC occurred (1 during heparin versus 1 during fondaparinux; Fisher exact p = 1.0). Six new bleeds occurred (5 during heparin versus 1 during fondaparinux; Fisher exact p = 0.17). CONCLUSION. Fondaparinux can be safely withheld as bridging therapy in patients with low and intermediate pretest probability without increased risk of new TEC. K. Tamme* 1 , L. Liivlaid 1 , R. Kitus 1 , A. Reintam 2 , J. Starkopf 1 1 Clinic of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, 2 Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care, East Tallinn Central Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia INTRODUCTION. Intra-abdominal hypertension (IAH) and abdominal compartment syndrome (ACS) have been increasingly recognised as causes of significant morbidity and mortality over the past decade 1 . The aim of the study was to analyse the incidence and treament methods of ACS in the general ICU of Tartu University Hospital. METHODS. Retrospective analysis of prospectively stored data and patients' charts. Of 1374 patients admitted to the ICU from January 1, 2004 to December 31, 2007 intraabdominal pressure was measured in 556. The case-mix does not include cardiac surgical and neurosurgical patients. ACS developed in 21 cases (1,5% of all patients). Primary ACS occurred in 18 and secondary in 3 cases. Tertiary ACS developed in 5 patients (altogether 7 episodes). APACHE II score of the ACS patients on admission was 17,9 ± 6,9 (mean ± sd), and SOFA score 9,8 ± 2,9 (mean ± sd). Mortality rate was 61,9% (overall ICU mortality 24,4%). ACS was documented in clinical diagnosis in 2 cases (both from 2007). In 10 cases ACS was mentioned in the patients notes. Despite that all patients received at least one method of conservative treatment 2 . Nasogastric aspiration was used in 21, laxatives and additional sedatives or analgesia in 15, CVVHD in 13, neuromuscular blockade in 8, enema in 6, paracentesis in 4, rectal gas tube in 2 and negative fluid balance in 2 patients. 14 patients were operated at least once during their disease; in 7 tension-free abdominal closure with nylon mesh was used. 2 operations were performed specifically for ACS, decompressive laparotomy and tension-free abdominal closure was performed. CONCLUSION. ACS occurs seldom but mortality is high. More aggressive conservative treatment can be recommended. Tension free abdominal closure should be applied after laparotomy in all patients with or at risk of ACS.  A retrospective analysis was performed in 32 septic shock patients diagnosed to have DIC according to the JAMM DIC criteria, who were admitted to our intensive care unit from July 2005 to February 2007. The patients were separated into two groups for analysis: the AT group (21 cases), in which the patients were treated with AT within 24 h of the DIC diagnosis, and the non AT group (11 cases) , in which no AT treatment was administered. RESULTS. The average Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) II score (AT group, 27.8 ± 8.0; non AT group, 31.0 ± 7.5) and the average sepsis-related organ failure assessment (SOFA) score (AT group, 11.5 ± 4.3; . non AT group, 14.9 ± 5.3) were not significantly different between the two groups. The AT group showed a good outcome ( Figure) , with significant improvement of the PAI-1 (day 0, 144.9 ± 58.2 ng/ml; day3, 59.9 ± 39.4 ng/ml; p \ 0.0001) and protein C (day 0, 33.5 ± 9.9%; day3, 50.8 ± 30.2%; p = 0.0104) levels. CONCLUSION. Early institution of AT treatment after confirmation of the diagnosis according to the by JAAM DIC criteria seems to be an effective strategy in the management of septic DIC. And we suggested that AT treatment was effective for improvement of coagulation factor that connection with the septic shock was reported. INTRODUCTION. Eosinophilia has an important role in skin reparation as it has been published in numerous studies. However its incidence and the meaning in the critical burn patient have not been reported up to now. We present a prospective study including 178 critical burn patients (total body surface area over 20%) between March 2003 and December 2006. Blood samples were taken for eosinophilia detection and the relation with burn characteristics, patient evolution, drugs, surgery, skin grafts, concomitant diseases and blood transfusions was studied. RESULTS. 33 patients (18.5%) showed eosinophilia over 700/lL (range 700-4300/lL). Patients presented the following characteristics: 22 were male and 11 female, being mean age 43 ± 21 years old. Mean total body surface area was 41.57% ± 21. Mechanism was flame in 73%, scald in 12% and electric in 12%. Main depth affected was papillary dermis in 2%, reticular dermis in 66% and subcutaneous layer in 32% of the patients. Days under mechanical ventilation and ICU stay were 1.7 ± 22.8 and 46 ± 28 respectively. Eosinophilia started 17 ± 14 days after admission with a mean of length of 8 ± 11 days. The higher eosinophils account was recorded on day 20 ± 17. 19% of the patients showed a second peak in their eosinophilia starting on day 30.6 ± 14.5; 5% of the patients had a third episode and one of them showed a fourth peak. Multivariate analysis was done, and no correlation was found with drugs, burn characteristics or mechanism, total body surface area, anaemia, renal insufficiency, suprarenal impairment, diabetes mellitus, respiratory disease, blood transfusions, days of stay and mortality. Relation with surgery or autologous skin grafts and Biobrane could not be demonstrated although there was a trend for eosinophilia to show on 5 to 10 days after surgery. Eosinophilia levels were higher the latest days of stay at the ICU, remaining elevated in 27% of the patients at discharge. CONCLUSION. Eosinophilia is frequent in burn patients. Its late apparition suggests that eosinophils stimulus is related with the activation of several skin recovery mechanisms that favour cutaneous reparation. Further studies must be done, investigating possible relations with promyelocytic cells pathways and skin biopsies should be taken to deepen in the appropriate meaning of the eosinophilia. INTRODUCTION. HELLP syndrome is a life-threatening obstretric complication considered by many to be a variant of pre-eclampsia. HELLP is an abbreviation of Hemolytic anemia, Elevated Liver enzymes and Low Platelet count. It is considered one of preeclampsia's manifestations. It is believed that represents a vasculopathy mediated by an abnormal concentration of vascular growth factors, but, nowadays, controversies in the diagnosis and management of HELLP syndrome persist. We report our experience within our Gynecological ICU. Prospective study from January-2001 till December-2007. Data from all woman admitted in our ICU, suffering from HELLP syndrome, were recorded (clinical, obstetrical and demographical data, complications, fetal and maternal mortality and stay in the ICU) and were expressed in percentage, median or mean. T-test and chi-square test were used in a SPSS program. We recorded 43 patients with HELLP syndrome.Demographical and clinical data are registered in Table 1 .Delivery was caesarean section (97.7%) and vaginal labor (2.3%). The maternal deaths were due to accute liver failure and multiorganic failure. Fetal deaths were related (p = 0.001) to low birthweight (\ 1 kg).Gestational age in fetal deaths is lower than in fetal survival (p = 0.001).The length of stay was 7 days.(Table1.PreHBP:previous high blood pressure; Gestati.Week:Gestational Week; SBP/DBP:systolic blood pressure/diastolic blood pressure; m:mean; M:median)  To evaluate the concentration of pro-atrial natriuretic peptide in patients with sepsis, severe sepsis and septic shock. To assess the diagnostic and prognostic value of mid-regional pro-atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) levels with these diagnoses. To assess the correlation of pro-ANP levels with those of interleukin-6, interleukin-8, interleukin-10, procalcitonin, lipopolysaccharide-binding protein and physiological scores METHODS. Serum concentrations of pro-ANP was determined using the immunoluminometric assay in 28 patients admitted to the medical intensive care unit for sepsis (6), severe sepsis (7), and septic shock (15). Pro-ANP levels as well as those of procalcitonin, interleukin-6, interleukin-8, interleukin-10 and lipopolysaccharide binding protein were measured on day 1 and during the course of the stay at the intensive care unit. The diagnostic and prognostic value of pro-ANP was compared with that of the Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE II) and SOFA score. Mid-regional pro-ANP was detected in serum using immunoluminometric assay (ILMA). Pro-ANP was also determined in 15 healthy adults. RESULTS. No significant differences of pro-ANP levels were found in patients with sepsis, severe sepsis and septick shock (385,3 pmol/l, resp. 209 pmol/l, resp. 888 pmol/l). On the day of admission, pro-ANP levels were not significant different in survivors compared to nonsurvivors(396,4 pmol/l, resp. 816,8 pmol/l, p = 0,077). Pro-ANP levels on the day of admission were significant lower than pro-ANP levels taken on the last day of the stay on ICU (816,8 resp 1254,4 pmol/l, p = 0,0108) in the group of non-survivors . In a receiver operating characteristic curve analysis for survival, the cut -off 664 pmol/l on the day of admission on ICU had a sensitivity of 41,7% and specificity of 87,5%.The area under the curve(AUC) for pro-ANP was 0,625. The cut-off 503,4 pmol/l on the last day of the stay on ICU was found to have a sensitivity of 83,3% and specificity of 68,7%. The area under the curve was 0,797. We found the correlation between pro-ANP, SOFA and APACHE II score in survivors. In nonsurvivors only pro-ANP and APACHE II correlation was found. The correlation was determined between pro-ANP and procalcitonin in non-survivors. No correlation was found between pro-ANP and IL-6,IL-8,IL-10 and lipopolysaccharide binding protein. CONCLUSION. We did not find statistically significant differences of pro-ANP levels in patients with sepsis, severe sepsis and septic shock. Pro-ANP levels on the day of admission were not significant different in survivors and non-survivors. Pro-ANP levels on the day of admission were significant lower than the last pro-ANP levels in the group of non-survivors . Further studies are necessary for the evaluation of pro-ANP as a diagnostic and/or prognostic parameter in patients with sepsis. INTRODUCTION. Induced mild hypothermia (IMH) has improved neurological outcome in patients after cardiac arrest. However, the prediction of outcome in the first days remains challenging. After stopping active cooling, there is a wide variation in normalization of temperature. Some patients must be actively rewarmed because of slow spontaneous rewarming, probably due to cerebral injury. Rapid normalization of temperature after stopping active cooling might reflect an intact brain stem function. Therefore, we studied whether the mode of rewarming (active versus passive) was prognostic of neurological outcome in a population of resuscitated patients treated with IMH. We retrospectively studied the data of all consecutive patients treated with IMH in our mixed medical and surgical intensive care unit between January 2006 and January 2008. Inclusion criteria were: (1) treatment with IMH after resuscitation for cardiac arrest, (2) target temperature of 32-34°C achieved. Patients whose condition necessitated premature stopping of IMH were excluded. Patients were divided into two groups according to the mode of rewarming: active or passive. Neurological outcome was determined according to the Glasgow Outcome Scores at ICU and hospital discharge (GOSic and GOShp). GOS ranges from 1 to 5: 1 = death, 2 = vegetative state, 3 = severe disability, 4 = moderate disability, 5 = good recovery. A GOS of 4-5 was defined as favorable and a GOS of 1-3 as poor. The groups were compared by means of Pearson's Chi-square test and relative risk (RR). A p \ 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Ninety-six patients met the inclusion criteria. Sixty-six patients were passively rewarmed and 30 actively. The median duration of rewarming to 36°C was 775 minutes (approximately 13 h). As shown in the table, 44% of the passively rewarmed patients had a good neurological outcome at ICU discharge, compared with 20% of the actively rewarmed patients (p = 0.02). The relative risk for a good neurological ICU outcome was significantly lower in the actively rewarmed group (RR 0.73, 95% CI 0.57-0.94). For hospital outcome, there was a strong trend to a better neurological state in the passively rewarmed group. Unfortunately, the difference did not reach statistical significance, probably because of the small number of patients. [1] . Although a short time to reach target temperature (33 0C) is likely to be an essential aspect of MH, the HACA trial showed survival benefit even when target temperature of 33 0C was reached beyond 12 h after cardiac arrest [2] . We hypothesized time required to reach target temperature to be related to (neurological) outcome. CONCLUSION. Time required to reach target temperature with MH in our ICU confirms results from others [3] . We found no relation between time required to reach target temperature with MH and (neurological) outcome. However, since there were significant differences in case-mix, larger studies are needed. INTRODUCTION. Induced hypothermia (IH) has shown a beneficial effect on neurological outcome in out-of-hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA)victims in recent trails. Hypothermia increases the risk on infections due to immune suppression. The aim of the study was to evaluate the incidence of lower respiratory infection (LRI) in the first 5 days in OHCA patients treated with IH and the possible effect on the outcome. Retrospective cohort study in a university hospital in the period between January 2005 and June 2007. An endovascular cooling technique was used (Alsius CoolGard TM System). During 24 h IH was installed at a temperature between 32-33°C. LRI was defined by the presence of at least 2 of the following: fever [ 38°C, witnessed aspiration, new pulmonary infiltrate on chest radiography and isolation of a respiratory pathogen in an endotracheal aspirate. Data was collected on demographics, initial rhythm, incidence of LRI, isolated microorganisms in endotracheal aspirate, lenght of stay on ICU, ICU-and In-hospital mortality and neurological outcome at discharge ICU (Pittsburgh cerebral-performance category, CPC 1-2 was defined as good outcome). RESULTS. 82 OHCA victims were treated with IH. Isolated microorganisms in endotracheal aspirate are presented in Table 1 .LRI was present in 88%. Antibiotics were overall prescribed in 89%. Length of stay on ICU was prolonged in the presence of LRI (LRI 8.5 ± 5.1 days; no LRI 4.0 ± 1.4 days). There was no obvious influence of LRI on mortality or neurological outcome. INTRODUCTION. Therapeutic hypothermia (TH) is gaining acceptance as a treatment modality for cerebral protection in post cardiac arrest coma. The Netherlands has a population of almost 17 million people. The mean age is 78 years for men and 82 years for women. A quarter of the population is over 65 years of age [1] [2] . The aim of this study was to compare the outcome of elderly patients treated with TH (C75 years) versus younger patients (\ 75 years). We analysed the outcome of all patients treated with TH since the implementation of TH in relation to their age. In the period between April 2005 and December 2007 seventy eight patients were treated with TH on our ICU. The hospital mortality in the elderly group was 92% and in the younger group 85%, p = 0.32. Mechanical ventilation days, ICU and hospital LOS showed no significant difference between the groups. Neurological outcome in the elderly survivors was almost as good as in the younger survivors (CPC after six months 1.9 ± 1.3 vs. 1.47 ± 0.9). INTRODUCTION. Hypothermia is a common treatment after CPR to avoid brain cell apoptosis. In some children after severe hypoxia and prolonged cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) treated with 24 h hypothermia we detected cerebral hyperperfusion (low Resistance Index RI and high systolic and diastolic cerebral blood flow) by transcranial Doppler-Ultrasound(DU)during re-warming (0.1 degree Celsius/h). These children who developed hyper-perfusion under re-warming died or were severely brain damaged. Prior to the rewarming their cerebral structure and ventricle size was normal indicating that there was no brain oedema or swelling. Under re-warming they showed hyperperfusion RI 0.3-0.5, a hyperdense echogenity of the brain tissue, and decreasing ventricle sizes and pre-final an RI of 1,0 and at the end now flow. We interpreted this as reperfusion injury well known from the beginning of the era of hypothermia used for cardiac surgery. We needed to question: we were we doing it right? METHODS. After CPR four children aged between 2 and 16 years, pH 6. CONCLUSION. Despite the fact, that this is a very small number, we believe that reperfusion injury after hypothermia should not be underestimated and furthermore that in the past, even holding the right treatment in our hands we might have destroyed the success of hypothermia on the one hand by not cooling not long enough and on the other hand not by rewarming slow enough. A. F. van der Sluijs*, J. Horn Intensive Care, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands Decompression sickness (DCS) is a possible life-threatening complication of scuba (self-contained underwater breathing apparatus) diving and requires early recompression therapy (with hyperbaric oxygen) when severe symptoms are present. During diving nitrogen is absorbed into bodily tissues, which expands during decompression leading to air bubbles. These bubbles may cause local tissue damage or secondary ischaemia when air bubbles enter the circulation. However, not all patients who collapse during or shortly after diving have decompression sickness and recompression therapy might lead to a significant delay in diagnostics. This possibly results in serious deterioration of the patient's clinical condition. METHODS. We present two diving fatalities, treated with hyperbaric oxygen for suspected DCS. RESULTS. CASE I: a 46-year-old female diving instructor developed shortness of breath during scuba diving and lost consciousness when she reached the surface. Basic Life Support was performed for at least 10 minutes. Due to pulmonary edema, probably as a result of aspiration of water, the patient had to be ventilated with high pressures to ensure oxygenation. A chest CT-scan showed small amounts of air in the left internal jugular vein and in the vena cava superior, raising the suspicion of DCS. She was treated with recompression therapy for 5 h. The patient remained in an anoxic-ischaemic coma after cardiopulmonary resuscitation and eventually she died. Retrospectively, she had complained of dyspnoea, swollen legs and muscle cramps since three weeks. She was diagnosed with hyperthyroidism (TSH \ 0,01 mE/l, FT4 [ 70 pmol/l) and a dilated cardiomyopathy with acute decompensation during diving. The air bubbles in the venous system seen on CT-scan were caused by a peripheral drip system. CASE II: a 28-year-old male with a family history of arterial dissections developed a dysarthria while playing underwater-polo. Shortly after climbing out of the pool he lost consciousness and was presented on our ER. Brain CT-scan showed no abnormalities and DCS was considered. After consultation of specialized diving physicians, recompression therapy with hyperbaric oxygen was initiated to treat a possible cerebral artery gas embolism. During this treatment his neurological condition deteriorated dramatically. Repeated imaging by CT and MRI showed ischaemic lesions in the brainstem and cerebellum, together with an irregularity of the right vertebral artery. 48 H later the patient was brain dead and supportive treatment was withdrawn. Post-mortem examination showed multiple dissections in the vertebro-basilar arteries. CONCLUSION. These two cases clearly show that loss of consciousness or other neurological symptoms occuring during or shortly after diving are not always caused by DCS. Treating physicians have to consider all possible options and seriously seek for other explanations. NEUROLOGICAL OUTCOME AND MORTALITY AFTER CARDIAC ARREST AND PROTECTIVE HYPOTHERMIA Its diagnostic value has been extended beyond ischemic syndromes, like sepsis, pulmonary embolism and chronic renal insufficiency. TnI elevation in non-traumatic acute brain injury has been associated to worse prognosis. We proposed to examine TnI elevation in severe trauma patients and in particular traumatic brain injury (TBI) and its prognostic significance. Cohort of trauma patients admitted in the emergency room (ER) over a 5 yearperiod with serial TnI measurements as part of a screening trauma protocol. A subpopulation with isolated TBI and intensive care unit admission (ICU) was studied. Patients with shock (systolic pressure \ 90 mmHg or lactate [ 4) were excluded. TnI measurement C 0.07 lg/dl was considered positive. Univariate and multivariate logistic regressions were performed to determine prognostic significance of TnI elevation as well as to determine independent factors related to its positivity. METHODS. 25 patients with intracranial hemorrhage and GCS 4-9 enrolled in the study. All patients had invasive ICP and central hemodynamic monitoring (PICCO plus or Swan -Ganz). ICP elevation higher than 20 mm Hg was an indication for the treatment. We used 15% mannitol -400 ml (n = 38), 10% NaCl -200 ml (n = 17) and HyperHAES (7,2% NaCl in 6% HES 200/0,5) -250 ml (n = 31) to decrease ICP. ICP and cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) were registrated before infusion and 5, 30, 120 minutes after it. RESULTS. PaO2, PaCO2 and blood temperature were comparable between groups during the investigation. Mannitol infusion decreased ICP from (M ± SD) 30 ± 6 mm Hg to 17 ± 6 mm Hg (p \ 0,05). After 30 min ICP was 17 ± 7 mm Hg (p \ 0,05), but after 120 min more than 20 mm Hg (24 ± 9 mm Hg). The same results were obtained during the 10% NaCl infusion. ICP decreased from 30 ± 8 mm Hg to 16 ± 4 mm Hg (p \ 0,05). After 30 min ICP was 15 ± 5 mm Hg (p \ 0,05), but after 120 min -22 ± 5 mm Hg. HyperHAES decreased ICP from 28 ± 5 mm Hg to 16 ± 6 mm Hg (p \ 0,05). After 30 and 120 min ICP was in normal ranges (12 ± 6 mm Hg (p \ 0,05) and 16 ± 8 mm Hg (p \ 0,05)). The 15% Mannitol infusion increased CPP from 73 ± 18 mm Hg to 90 ± 21 mm Hg (P \ 0,05). After 30 and 120 min CPP was 89 ± 21 mm Hg (P \ 0,05) and 80 ± 18 mm Hg. 10% NaCl increased CPP from 74 ± 17 mm Hg to 90 ± 30 mm Hg. After 30 and 120 min CPP was 90 ± 26 mm Hg (p \ 0,05) and 81 ± 18 mm Hg. HyperHAES markedly increased CPP from 72 ± 16 mm Hg to 94 ± 14 mm Hg (p \ 0,05). After 30 and 120 min CPP was 92 ± 15 mm Hg (P \ 0,05) and 87 ± 17 mm Hg (p \ 0,05). CONCLUSION. Infusion of 15% Mannitol, 10% NaCl and HyperHAES (7,2% NaCl in 6% HES 200/0,5) is an effective method of ICP management, but HyperHAES has the most prolong effects on the intracranial and cerebral perfusion pressures. A. Mas* 1 , P. Saura 1 , J. Zorrilla 2 , D. García 2 , R. Rafat 2 , A. Sanchez 2 1 Intensive Care Unit, 2 Emergency Department, Fundació Althaia, Manresa, Spain INTRODUCTION. The presence of nasal flaring is related to severe respiratory failure, but only few studies in healthy adults have demostrated the relationship between alae nasi muscle activity and hypercapnia and between this sign and an imposed respiratory load. Other studies questioned the usefulness of respiratory rate to assess dyspnea severity, as this measurement is difficult and poorly reproducible in the Emergency department scenario. The aim of our study was to evaluate the utility of nasal flaring detection in the assessment of severity in patients with dyspnea. METHODS. Prospective observational study of 50 patients attended in the Emergency Department (ED) with dyspnea as major symptom and triage level II or III in the SAT (Sistema Andorrà de Triatge). We recorded vital signs, oxygen saturation, arterial blood gases and nasal flaring presence at ED arrival. We recorded hospital admission necessity, UCI admission, mechanical ventilation and lenght of hospital stay (LOS). . 7 patients were excluded (respiratory rate not recorded) and 43 patients were analyzed. Only 7 patients (15%) had evident alae nasi activity. Patients with nasal flaring were more taquipneic (Respiratory rate 25 ± 6 vs. 38 ± 5 breaths/min, p \ 0,05) and acidotic (pH 7,42 ± 0,05 vs. 7,34 ± 0,12, p \ 0,05), and had lowest level of bicarbonate (HCO3 30,5 ± 7,1 vs. 22,0 ± 5,6 mEq/L, p \ 0,05). There was no significant differences in PaO2 or PaCO2 between groups. 29 patients in the no nasal flaring group (80,5%, LOS 8 ± 7 days) and 6 patients in the nasal flaring group do (85,7%, LOS 9 ± 8 days)needed hospital admission. CONCLUSION. Evident alae nasi muscle activity at ED arrival in patients with dyspnea could be a non invasive indicator of metabolic acidosis. METHODS. The translation of the instrument was done according to the guidelines suggested by The Translation and Cultural Adaptation group. In the validation process the applicability of the Swedish version of the instruments was tested in a Swedish intensive care unit. RESULTS. Fourteen adult patients were included in the study, forty paired tests were carried out, and eighty CAM-ICU instruments were completed. The participating patients were given CAM-ICU ratings at least twice during the patients' stay in ICU. Interrater reliability was very good. In our material we recognized a delirium rate of 48 %, which is in accordance with previous studies. CONCLUSION. The translation of the instrument CAM-ICU showed good correlation with the original version and could therefore be applicable in a Swedish ICU setting. Although there are limitations in using CAM-ICU, previous studies reveal a need for a homogeneous screening instrument making it possible to detect and determine ICU delirium; and from this basis are able to implement and make the necessary decisions required in medical and nursing care practice preventing ICU delirium.  A point in time observational study without advanced notice for 3 h/daily, on a level 3 intensive care unit. Simultaneously we collected data through a postal survey about the knowledge of content of the guidelines for hand hygiene among nurses and medical staff. A total of 281 opportunities for hand hygiene were observed. Overall compliance with hand hygiene recommendations was 25 %. There is a negative association between glove use and subsequent hand hygiene. Survey 28 (50 %) nurses and 7 (50%) physicians answered 13 questions about the local guidelines for hand hygiene. The outcome of the postal survey showed a lack of knowledge of the content of the local guidelines, although the medical workers believed that they had a good understanding of the content of the local guidelines. INTRODUCTION. Current studies reveal a lack of consensus for the evaluation of physical and psychosocial problems after ICU-stay and their changes over time. The aim of this study was to develop and evaluate the validity and reliability of a questionnaire for assessing physical and psychosocial problems over time of patients following ICU-recovery. METHODS. The questionnaire was constructed after a review of the literature in three sets, physical problems, psychosocial problems and follow-up care. It was tested for face, content, construct, concurrent validity as well as stability and internal consistency reliability. Thirtynine patients completed the questionnaire, 17 were re-tested. Face and content validity were tested by nurses, researchers and patients and seem to be satisfying. The questionnaire showed good construct validity in all three sets and had strong factor loadings (explained variance [ 70%, factor loadings [ 0.5) for all three sets. There was good concurrent validity compared with the SF12 (rs 0.5). Internal consistency was shown to be reliable (Cronbach's a 0.70-0.85). Stability reliability on retesting was good for the physical and psychosocial sets (rs 0.5). CONCLUSION. The 3-set 4P questionnaire was a first step in developing an instrument for assessment of former ICU-patients' problems over time. The overall validity was good, but some items must be modified to obtain stronger validity. Regarding reliability test-retest showed good correlation in two of the three sets. Since the sample size was small, further studies are needed to confirm the questionnaire. METHODS. This unstructured observation study was conducted in two medical-surgical university hospital ICUs during April and June in 2007. It included 12 charge nurses and 8 physicians acting as a shift leaders managing daily activities. The think-aloud technique was used as a study method and voluntary participants were observed during one shift. Verbalizations of thoughts were recorded while study subjects performed their tasks. Protocol analysis with the first and the second verbalization levels was applied to the analysis (1) and software program NVivo7 Ò was used in the data analysis. Altogether 92 h and 26 minutes of saturated data was recorded. Both charge nurses and physicians made more second level decisions than the first level which meant that they needed more information or reasoning before their decisions. Decisions and information about human resources were mostly emphasized by the nurses and medication by the physicians. The general patient information with information about patients' vital signs was highly needed in both groups. CONCLUSION. Charge nurses and physicians at the ICUs are making several decisions per day concerning the fluent patient care flow and managing a vast amount of information related to their decisions. The processes of decision making differed from each other but the information needs were quite similar. While most of the information was stored in the units database most of the decisions and information were managed via papers and with the help of the decision makers' own memory. INTRODUCTION. Although acute bowel obstruction is a common emergency, immediate and correct diagnosis is essential, and appropriate treatment is of utmost importance, accurate early recognition of bowel strangulation in these patients still remains a difficult problem. The aim of this study was to identify clinical and laboratory predictors of bowel ischemia and necrosis in bowel obstruction. Prospective study of all adult patients with acute small or large bowel obstruction in a one-year period (n = 206). Operated patients (n = 87, 42.2%) were divided in Ischemia Group (n = 30, 14.6%) and Non-ischemia Group (n = 57) and additionally into Necrosis (n = 20, 9.7%) and Non-necrosis Group (n = 67) according to the presence of intestinal ischemia (reversible and irreversible) and necrosis, respectively. Comparison between Ischemia and Non-ischemia Group was performed to identify predictive factors of ischemia and between Necrosis and Non-necrosis Group for predictors of necrosis. Data analyzed were: age, sex, initial vital signs, symptoms as well as clinical examination findings and blood results (WBC, LDH, CPK, phosphate, amylase, base deficit, metabolic acidosis) on presentation at the emergency department, time between symptoms onset and arrival and between arrival and operation, and obstruction cause. INTRODUCTION. Intrahospital transport of critically ill patients from intensive care unit to any other place of the hospital for diagnostic or therapeutic procedures has implicit hazards; his physiologic reserve is poor and minor adverse issues can produce serious complications. The aim of this study was to describe the characteristics and immediate consequences of the transport of neurointensive care unit (NICU) patients to computerized tomography unit for non invasive diagnostic procedures with the use of guidelines for transportation of the Instituto Neurologico de Antioquia (INDEA) in Colombia. Prospective study between March 2007 and April 2008. TISS-28 and FOUR Score were assessed before transport; cardiovascular, respiratory, neurological and therapeutical conditions were monitored and reported at the beginning of transport, every five minutes during transportation and 1 h after return the patient to the NICU. . Two hundred ninety-three intrahospital transports of neurocritically ill patients were evaluated; the average duration of transport was 24 ± 7.56 minutes. Diagnosis patients on whom the transport was done were: traumatic brain injury (41.3%); after neurosurgery of central nervous system tumors (19.1%); after endovascular treatment of intracranial aneurysms or vascular malformations (11.2%); after neurosurgical clipping of aneurysms (10.2%) and hemorrhagic stroke (8.8%). TISS-28 was 38 ± 6.1 points and FOUR Score was 9 ± 3.3 points. The transport team included: nurse in chief and nurse assistant in 100% of transportations, respiratory therapist in 81.3% and medical doctor in 1%. Rates of medical problems with clinical significance during the evaluated period of transport were: intracraneal pressure higher than 20 mmHg in 53%; cerebral perfussion pressure lower than 60 mmHg in 26.3%; alteration of partial pressure of end-tidal carbon dioxide in 21.3%; alteration of systolic blood pressure in 5.8%; alteration of heart rate in 1.7% and decrease of oxygen saturation in 0.6%; only one medical complication was life-threatening. None of technical complications (12.3%) was life-threatening. CONCLUSION. Rate of adverse outcomes generated by the transportation of neurologic and neurosurgical critically ill patients can be minimized through use of guidelines for transportation: careful planning, selection of appropriate transport equipment, specially qualified team and proper patient evaluation and stabilization.  Invasive mechanical ventilation is required in 30% of patients with Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) and is associated with pneumonia and increased mortality. Our objective was to determine the incidence, characteristics, outcomes, and risk factors of pneumonia in GBS patients receiving mechanical ventilation. Design: Study of a prospective database. Setting: Intensive care unit in a university hospital. Patients: 81 patients who required intubation for GBS were included. Neurological findings, vital capacity (VC), and signs of respiratory distress were recorded at admission and at intubation. A score predicting the risk of intubation (0-4) was calculated for each patient. Pneumonia was diagnosed based on predefined criteria and retrospectively confirmed by two observers. Early-onset pneumonia was defined as pneumonia diagnosed within 5 days after intubation. RESULTS. Mean vital capacity was 57 ± 22% of predicted at admission and 33 ± 11% at intubation. Pneumonia developed in 63 (78%) patients, including 48 with early-onset pneumonia. Bacteria were consistent with aspiration. Of the 63 patients with pneumonia, 11 (18%) had septic shock, 6 (10%) had ARDS, and 9 (14%) died. In the univariate analysis, milder weakness, a lower risk of intubation (score \ 2), and time from admission to intubation [2 days were associated with early-onset pneumonia. Time from admission to intubation was the only independent predictor (P = 0.0009) in the multivariate logistic regression model. Early-onset pneumonia is a common and severe complication that is related to aspiration in patients with GBS. Delaying intubation may increase the risk of early-onset pneumonia. INTRODUCTION. Alpha-2 adrenergic agonists reduce mortality and myocardial infarction following vascular surgery. During cardiac surgery, they reduce ischemia and may also have effects on mortality and myocardial infarction (1, 2, 3, 4, 5) . Few data exist about the effects of Clonidine following the weaning in this setting. Design: Analysis of a prospective, randomized and double blinded collected database. Setting: Intensive Care Unit (ICU) in an University Hospital. Patients: A total of 40 patients aged 30-80 (31 M, 9 F; ASA II-III) submitted to elective on-pump cardiac surgery from August 2007 to January 2008. Randomization: On ICU admission, once obtained a preoperative informed consent, the patient was assigned to group 1 (Clonidine, intervention group) or group 2 (Placebo, control group). Interventions: The patients of Group 1 received intravenous (IV) bolus of Clonidine 0.5 microg/kg followed by continuous infusion of 1-2 microg/kg/h all over the weaning protocol phase. The patients of Group 2 received IV continuous infusion of Sodium Chloride 0.9% all over the weaning phase. Data collection: We evaluated hemodynamic parameters, Troponin I (TnI) blood levels, weaning parameters, Delirium Detection Score (DDS) (6), weaning duration and ICU length of stay. The patients were evaluated preoperatively, on ICU admission, after 6 h and 30 minutes after the start of weaning protocol (7). RESULTS. The preoperative and operative variables were comparable between the two groups (p = NS for all measurements). The incidence of postoperative atrial fibrillation was lower in group 1 (p = 0.001). Following the weaning phase, Heart Rate, Central Venous Pressure, Mean Pulmonary Arterial Pressure and Pulmonary Arterial Occlusion Pressure were lower in group 1 (respectively p = 0.001, p = 0.001, p = 0.017 and p = 0.034). The TnI levels was lower in group 1 (p = 0.05). The ratio of respiratory rate and tidal volume (RR/ TV) and the product of RR and pressure support (RR 9 PS) were lower in group 1 (both p \ 0.001); the ratio of PaO2 and FIO2 (PA/FI) and PaCO2 blood levels were higher in the treatment group (respectively p = 0.004 and p \ 0.001). DDS was lower in group 1 (p = 0.003). Weaning duration and ICU length of stay were similar in the two groups (p = NS). CONCLUSION. The use of Clonidine in this setting seems to reduce the stress-response during the weaning phase, improving hemodynamic stability and myocardial protection. CONCLUSION. Post-intubation tracheal rupture is rare but potentially life-threatening complication. The early diagnosis and treatment are influential in prognosis. Emergency intubation is a risk factor which increases fivefold the mortality risk. The training of physicians who manage the air way may decreased the risk of post-intubation tracheal rupture. B. Zawadzki*, S. Gelbvaks, D. Paoli, B. Subsky, F. E. Nacul CME, Centro de Treinamento Berkeley, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Endotracheal intubation and ventilation can be life saving for a patient in respiratory distress. Airways management is among the key requirements of appropriate therapy in emergency and critically ill patients. Medical simulation used in combination with traditional training methods can provide a comprehensive learning opportunity that allows the clinician to safely learn, practice, and repeat the procedure until proficiency is achieved. Our objective was to address the use of medical simulation as a way for medical learners to acquire and maintain skills needed to manage difficult airways; to evaluate the students satisfaction with the course. RESULTS. Performance improved significantly after simulator training (48.5% vs. 72.7%, p \ 0.001); 75% of participants scored less than 60% in the baseline evaluation while 25% scored less than 65% in the retest; the course was considered excellent by 70% of the participants and good by 29%. CONCLUSION. The positive response to simulation-based training on airways management found in this pilot study suggests that this training modality may be valuable in the training of medical students and physicians. Most students considered the course excellent. Simulationbased training is expected to become routine in many health care settings in the coming decade.  Hospital acquired pneumonia are a common and severe complications of Guillain Barre Syndrome, mainly related to aspiration and probably a delayed beginning of mechanical ventilation. We reasoned that a strategy of early mechanical ventilation may prevent pneumonia in these patients. Monocentre, randomised and controlled study. Inclusion criteria were: vital capacity (VC) \ 60 % of predicted values, impossibility to lift the head, onset of symptoms \7 days. The exclusion criteria were: Presence of signs of respiratory distress, age \18years, coma, haemodynamic instability, pneumonia, pregnancy. Patients were randomised to early ventilation (EV) or to ''classic ventilation'' (CV). Early ventilation strategy consisted in proposing non invasive ventilation (NIV) if no swallowing impairment were identified or invasive (IV) if swallowing impairments were present at inclusion. If non invasive ventilation was used first, secondary apparition of swallowing trouble indicated intubation. In classic ventilation group, indication for intubation was let to physician's judgement. . 39 patients were included, 22 in the EV group (11 NIV/11IV) and 17 in the CV group (10IV/7 Not ventilated). Neurological presentation was similar in the two groups. Global percentage of pneumonia was 48 % (54 % in the EV group and 42 % in the CV group). No significant difference was identified between the group EV and the ventilated patients in the CV group (54 % vs. 70 %, p = 0.8). The percentage of early pneumonia was 32% in the EV group and 29 % in the CV group. There was no difference between the groups, CV and EV, concerning the durations of invasive and no invasive ventilation, also for the duration of hospitalisation in ICU and mortality. CONCLUSION. At this stage the EV strategy is not associated to an increase of the frequency of pneumonia. There remains possible that it allows decreasing them. The study will thus be pursued until 50 patients are included as previously calculated. INTRODUCTION. Because swallowing impairment may worse respiratory weakness and conduct to respiratory complications as aspiration pneumonia in Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), we prospectively evaluate how tongue weakness could be an early indicator of bulbar dysfunction and respiratory failure in severe GBS patients. METHODS. Tongue protrusion strength (using a force transducer), dysphagia and respiratory parameters (vital capacity, maximal inspiratory and expiratory pressures) were prospectively measured in 16 GBS patients at ICU admission and discharge and in 7 controls. Tongue strength was decreased in the GBS patients (279 ± 226 versus 745 ± 147 g, P = 0.0006). At admission, patients with dysphagia (199 ± 165 versus 537 ± 166 g, P = 0.021) and those requiring MV (198 ± 185 versus 414 ± 202 g, P = 0.0393) had greater tongue weakness. All the patients with initial tongue strength less than 150 g both had dysphagia and required MV during ICU stay. Tongue strength also correlated significantly with respiratory parameters: Vital capacity (r 2 = 0.505, P = 0.0001), Pemax (r 2 = 0.366, P = 0.0017) and strongly with Pimax (r 2 = 0.597, P \ 0.0001). CONCLUSION. This study confirm that monitoring bulbar dysfunction is a major challenge in respiratory evaluation in GBS. Tongue weakness is present early in severe GBS. Tongue strength lower than 150 g may indicate higher respiratory risk. Tongue strength measurement may help to identify bulbar dysfunction and patients at high risk for respiratory complications. INTRODUCTION. Emergency physicians are frequently called on to provide quick airway interventions for extremely severe patients, with acute respiratory failure or unclear airway from different causes. Direct laryngoscopy remains the mean way for securing the airway patency in emergency. Standard tracheal intubation, however, may not provide a definitive airway in every patient with a difficult airway. We evaluated the feasibility of the Bonfils fiberscope intubation for emergency airway management. METHODS. The Bonfils intubation fiberscope (Karl Storz GmbH,Tuttlingen, Germany) is a reusable, rigid, straight fiberoptic device with a 40°curved tip, 40 cm long and 5 mm in diameter. A flexible eyepiece is mounted on the handle of the scope. The fiberscope has a connector that fits onto the 15-mm tracheal tube adapter and thereby allows oxygen insufflation. A cold light source or a small battery handle can be attached to the stylet handle. The tip of the Bonfils intubation fiberscope is positioned just proximal to the tip of the attached endotracheal tube, thereby preventing the lens to be soiled with some amount of blood and/or secretions. We report our experience of use of the Bonfils intubation fiberscope in emergency department (ED) in patients with difficult airway. During one year, 10 adult patients underwent endotracheal intubation (cardiac arrest n = 2, multiple injuries n = 2, acute respiratory failure n = 6) with the Bonfils intubation fiberscope. At the first attempt all intubations were successfully completed, even in two patients (1 cardiac arrest and 1 with multiple injuries) with difficult airway (Cormack-Lehane grade 4 under direct laryngoscopy). In trauma patients, with cervical immobilization, collar did not need to be unfastened or removed for endotracheal intubation. In all cases we administered a flow of 6 liter/min of oxygen throught the appropriate channel to decrease the fogging of the view. The procedure time ranged from 20 to 35 seconds. CONCLUSION. Despite these promising series, physicians should be trained with Bonfils device in elective situations (for example in OR) before the use in emergency. The learning time seems to be short and the presence of a supervisor instructor is sufficient to achieve adequate skillness. The Bonfils intubation fiberscope confirms to be an additional airway management device in emergency setting too. Purpose of the study. To identify how nurses, in neurosurgical intensive care units, define the state of the unconscious patient and what are their attitudes and coping strategies in caring for these patients. A questionnaire was constructed, based on Van Gennep theory, literature review and the clinical experience of the researchers and was distributed to nurses, working in neurosurgical intensive care units in 4 medical centers . RESULTS. Main RESULTS. 56 responded to the questionnaire (50% response rate). 62% of nurses have academic degree, 43% work over 10 years in neurosurgery ICU and 70% non religious. The majority of the nurses (66%) define the unconscious patient as being alive, 2% as dead and 32% as ''not dead and not alive'' meaning ''liminal state''. In spite of considering the unconscious patient as being alive, nurses have negative attitudes and feelings towards the patient. Positive statistical correlations (p \ 0.01) were found between negative feelings and attitudes and coping strategies of the nurses, such as avoidance. Coping strategies are learned between the nurses in the unit and seniority is a major factor. Nurses have complex feelings towards the unconscious patient and in spite of knowledge and experience, they have a great need to develop coping strategies and behavioral norms, in order to continue to deal with theses patients and to maintain the unit cultural structure. IMPACT INTRODUCTION. Inefficient pain control is a major issue after burns. Side effects of opioids are often reported. The present study aimed at measuring the impact in burns of a protocol driven prescription of opioids including hypnosis on the intensity of pain, and the patients' anticipation of the painful treatments. The study also aimed at quantifying the various parts of the process through standardization of pain assessment, opioid drugs and doses. METHODS. Before and after trial design, including paired cases, matched for sex, age, burned %BSA and inhalation. Inclusion criteria: age [ 18 years, ICU stay [ 24 h, and to accept hypnosis. Pain treatment: standardized opioid prescription with a pain control objective based on multiple daily visual analog scale (VAS) assessments. Opioids were converted to morphine equivalents: procedural and basal opioids were recorded separately. Clinical outcome variables as well as economical data were recorded. . 46 patients aged 36 ± 14 years and burned 27 ± 15 %BSA were included-the groups were well matched. The first hypnosis session was carried out as a median after 9 days: as a mean 3.6 preparation sessions per patient were required before a painful procedure could be carried out. Pain and opioid treatment could be quantified: the protocol resulted in the delivery of higher early opioid doses during the first 10 days in the ICU, and a latter reduction of the requirements. It was associated with a significant reduction of pain scores in the intervention group. Hypnosis resulted in significant reduction of number of procedures under anaesthesia, of mean daily VAS, and of procedural related anxiety with trends to shorter stay in ICU and hospital. Total grafting requirements were significantly reduced (p = 0.014), as were hospital costs per patient. CONCLUSION. The pain protocol improved pain treatment in burned patients, reduced anxiety, and was associated with better wound healing, trends to shorter ICU and hospital stay and reduced costs. The systematic assessment and structured prescription of opioids improved patient care without side effects. INTRODUCTION. Long-term airway management is a complex problem, and the subject of unresolved controversy. The literature suggests that translaryngeal intubation, considered the standard initial airway support may be associated with a higher incidence of infectious complications, longer weaning times from the ventilator and with damage to the trachea and laryngeal structures. The cricothyrotomy is indicated in emergency airway in situations when translaryngeal intubation can 0 t be achieved. A 20 years old man with personality disorders was envolved in a motor vehicle collision. Because of severe craniofacial injury the pre hospital medical team performed a translaryngeal intubation and was transported to hospital. He had a Traumatic brain injury, C7 spinal fracture, multiple face bone fractures, and open fracture of the left femur. Was admitted in ICU, staying entubated and ventilated for 10 days. Was transferred on the 12th day to the orthopedics department extubated and in spontaneous ventilation. At the 57th day he began respiratory and stridor that did not respond to pharmacologic therapy. He developed severe respiratory acidosis and progressive confusion. Facing this problem we have decided to proceed to an orotracheal intubation. Despite presenting a grade 1 laryngoscopy the orotracheal tube didn 0 t progress below the vocal cords. Several attempts were made with smaller size orotracheal tubes (including TTn 3), but none of them passed the cords. Progressively the patient became difficult to ventilate. Suddenly he had a cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA), with pulseless electrical activity (PEA); advanced life support (ALS) maneuvers were started and cricothyotomy was performed. After 30 min of ALS algorithm, he regained pulse with sinus rhythm and was transferred to the O.R to perform tracheostomy. During this procedure the patient has new CPA that reversed after 5 cycles of ALS. Transferred to ICU being discharged after 48H with good evolution. He was conscious cooperative oriented in space and time, without focal neurological deficits. The endoscopic examination revealed a subglottic stenosis (degree V). CONCLUSION. Early experience revealed that prolonged translaryngeal intubation is associated with irreversible damage to laryngeal and vocal cord structures. The most common cause of the trachea stenosis in adults is by iatrogenic injury after intubation. The stridor appears when the lumen of the trachea is less than 5 mm. INTRODUCTION. Neurogenic pulmonary edema (NPE) is a well recognised complication of subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) and severe traumatic brain injuries. The incidence of NPE was reported to be 6% in a serie of 457 patients with SAH [1] . NPE is characterized as an acute, protein-rich lung edema occuring shortly after cerebral injury. NPE may compromise hemodynamic, decrease cerebral blood flow and increase cerebral vasospasm witch increase the morbidity of SAH. Yet, the precise pathogenetic mechanisms remain unclear, but the role of sympathic storm may be the most important cause. We report two patients with neurogenic pulmonary edema and cardiac failure after subarachnoid hemorrhage treated with intra-aortic balloon pump counterpulsation (IABP) therapy. . Her medical past history included diabetes, hypertension, coronaropathy (EF 50%)and she was treated with clopidogrel and acetyl salicilyc acid. Ten hours after admission, she developed arterial hypotension and pulmonary edema (cardiogenic and neurogenic). PaO2/ FIO2 ratio was 150. At day two, despite conventional therapy (mechanical ventilation and high dose of dobutamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine), EF was less than 20%. IABP was inserted to optimize hemodynamic function. Three hours after the insertion of the IABP, infusion of dobutamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine was stopped. Than the IABP was removed after four days. The patient was extubated at day 13, and was discharged of the ICU at day 18 with EF 45% and a good cardiac and neurologic outcome. CONCLUSION. These two cases illustrate the potential usefulness of the intra-aortic balloon pump counterpulsation as an adjunctive therapy in neurogenic pulmonary edema and cardiac failure after subarachnoid hemorrhage. (1, 2) . The present study was aimed at examining whether hyperglycemia would augment bacterial translocation through abnormal alterations of intestinal microflora by using a quantitative real-time RT-PCR method in endotoxemic rats. METHODS. Twenty-one male Wister rats (200-250 g), intravenously infused of lipopolysaccharide (4 mg/kg) after preparatory surgery, were randomly assigned to three groups: saline group (Group S: n = 6) receiving saline solution, hyperglycemia group (Group G: n = 7) receiving 40% glucose solution, and glucose-insulin group (Group GI: n = 8) receiving 10% glucose solution with insulin (0.5 IU/kg/h). All solution was infused at 10 ml/kg/hr for 3 hrs. After laparotomy was performed under sterile condition, mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) and cecal contents were collected and RNA was extracted for quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis (3). . Total counts of bacteria in MLNs were significantly higher in Group G versus Group S (Figure) . Those in Group GI appeared to be reduced versus Group G, but did not reach to statistical significance. No significant differences in total cell counts of intestinal microflora (log 10 counts/g-contents) were found among three groups (Group S 10.3 ± 0.6, Group G 10.2 ± 0.3, Group GI 10.8 ± 0.1). Each component of microflora including Clostridium, Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Enterobacteriacae, Enterococcus, Staphylococcus and Pseudomonas was not significantly different between the study groups. CONCLUSION. Hyperglycemia is a major contributor to the augmentation of bacterial translocation not via modulating intestinal microflora in endotoxemia. (1,2) with a RMSE of 24.5. The effect of insulin dose on plasmatic glycemia was best measured using a regression model with autocorrelation with one previous measurement (b = -0.94; p \ 0.0001). When looking to the effect of the different diets, Glu-TPN group needed lesser insulin than the S-TPN group (b S-TPN minus b Glu-TPN = -0.54; p \ 0.0001), that means a 54% reduction of the amount of insulin for the same levels of plasmatic glycemia. We were unable to find circadian differences between the dose of insulin in both groups. CONCLUSION. Glutamine dipeptide supplemented parenteral nutrition for more than 3 days significantly reduces the needs of insulin (54%) to obtain a tight glycemic control in critically ill patients.  Intensive insulin therapy (IIT) has been shown to decrease the morbidity and mortality in patients in the intensive care unit (ICU). However, application of IIT is associated with an increased risk of severe hypoglycemia. Therefore adequate and precise assessment of glucose levels is a prerequisite when implementing IIT. The aim of the present study was to assess the effect of time between sampling and the measurement of blood glucose levels. METHODS. In a prospective study, 15 consecutive patients were included. From every patient blood was simultaneously collected in three different containers: 2 ml sodium fluoride/potassium oxalate, (GreinerÒ); 4 ml lithium heparin, (Greiner Ò ); and 3 ml arterial blood sampler with balanced heparin (70 IU), (Bayer Ò ). Blood glucose levels were measured immediately after sampling and 10, 20, 30, 45 and 60 minutes thereafter. Changes in glucose levels on several time points per container type and differences of glucose levels between the three containers were analyzed using Friedman's and Mann Whitney U tests. A p-value \ 0.05 was considered statistically significant. The median blood glucose level of all 15 patients at baseline was 5.8 mmol/L. Subsequently it decreased to 5.7, 5.6, 5.6, 5.4, and 5.2 mmol/L at T = 10, 20, 30, 45 and 60 minutes, respectively (p \ 0.01). This significant decrease in time was observed in all three container types (p \ 0.01). There were no significant differences between the three different container types at the different time points. CONCLUSION. The level of blood glucose decreases significantly with increase in time between sampling and assessment of samples. This finding is of major importance in the ICU when applying IIT. We therefore recommend that only point of care glucose measurements should be used. INTRODUCTION. Acute hyperglycaemia associated with insulin resistance is common in critically ill patients. Tight control of blood glucose is considered important, although difficult to perform in routine care. Moreover, concerns remain about the risk for severe hypoglycaemia, with reported rates up to 20% and the increased nurse workload due to frequent check of the blood glucose level imposed by usual protocols for achieving tight glycaemic control with hourly measurements when the blood glucose target is not reached. We demonstrated elsewhere that the software CGAO was more effective for achieving tight glycemic control than a conventional method based on daily medical prescriptions. The software CGAO does not only recommend an insulin rate but also the time for the next control of the blood glucose level with an interval between 30 min to 4 h. The aim of the study was to evaluate the use of the software CGAO during routine care in terms of efficacy, safety and nurse workload. Since May 2006, we used routinely the software CGAO, a preliminary version based on a PID (Proportional Integral Derivative) controller (LK2, Saint-Avertin, France). All the blood glucose levels with the date and time of the measurement, the insuline rates actually applied by the nurse, and all the quantitative changes of the nutritional intake were automatically stored in a database permitting to calculate numerous parameters for each stay in the ICU, such as the mean and the standard deviation of the blood glucose level, the hyperglycaemic index calculated above 6.1 mmoles/l, the fraction of time with hyperglycaemia [ 6.1 mmoles/l, and the mean daily insulin requirement during the whole stay. The nurse workload was quantitatively evaluated by the mean sampling interval for the blood glucose control. The results are presented as mean ± standard deviation and/or median and interquartile range. (1) but is difficult to achieve safely with current insulin administration algorithms. A software enhanced model predictive control algorithm (eMPC) that provides advice on insulin infusion rate and time to next glucose measurement (running on a bedside computer) has been shown to be safe and effective over 72 h in critically ill patients (2) . This study investigated the effectiveness over 24 h of a decision support system (CLINICIP CS-2) that comprises the eMPC algorithm integrated into a device that includes infusion pumps for enteral and parenteral feeding and insulin (B Braun Space system). The decision support system provides automatic transfer of data concerning carbohydrate and insulin administration from the infusion pumps to the algorithm and is controlled via a graphical user interface that includes a display of glucose concentration history and reminder alarms. METHODS. 10 adult patients admitted to ICU at RBH after elective cardiac surgery (mean age 64.5 yrs, weight 80.5 kg, APACHE II med 13) with hyperglycaemia (glucose [ 6.7 mmol/L), were treated with intravenous insulin infusion as advised by the decision support system. The decision support system requires input of bodyweight, carbohydrate input, current insulin requirements and BG concentration. The system advises time to next BG measurement, (maximum 4 h) and insulin infusion rate targeted to maintain BG at 4.4-6.1 mmol/L. INTRODUCTION. Tight glucose control by Intensive Insulin Therapy (IIT) failed to improve survival in two large multi-centre randomized controlled trials (1, 2) . Nevertheless, the lack of efficacy of IIT on the global population does not exclude possible benefits on subgroups with a given severity at admission. In the prospective randomized Glucontrol controlled trial, patients older than 18 years admitted in one of the 21 European participating intensive care units (ICU) were randomized into two groups: IIT (glucose target 80-110 mg/dl) or conventional group (CIT, glucose target: 140-180 mg/dl). The patients were stratified according to the APACHE II score at admission into 6 strata, score \ 11 (n = 165), 11-15 (n = 269), 16-20 (n = 171), 21-25 (n = 123), 26-30 (n = 62), score [ 30 (n = 39)). ICU, hospital and day 28 mortality have been compared by treatment group stratified by APACHE II score (Mantel-Haentzel test) and within each stratum (chi square). The comparative analysis of the data from 829 patients (mean age 61.6 ± 16.6 years, men 63.5%, median APACHE II: 15 (6-43), ICU and hospital length of stay (10.5 ± 12.6 and 24.7 ± 26.8 days)) showed an higher hospital and 28-day mortality in the IIT patients than in the CIT patients of the APACHE II 11-15 stratum ( METHODS. It is a prospective study performed during 2 years (2006-2007) . The inclusion criterions were diabetic patients hospitalized in MICU who had dehydration, GCS \ 13 with glycemia [ 2,5 g/L, pH \ 7,35, massive glucosuria and qualitative ketonuria. The clinic, biologic, therapeutic and evolutive data have been collected. We identified two groups: survivors and dead patients. The quantitative variables are expressed on average ± standard derivation, and the qualitative variables by percentage. The univariate analysis was based on Chi-square test for the qualitative variables and Student test for the quantitative variables. A multivariate analysis using the models of logistic regression has been also realized. The statistic analysis has been based on SPSS 11.0. During the period of study, 100 patients have been hospitalized for diabetic ketoacidosis. The mean age was 42 ± 17,6 with a sex-ratio ( CONCLUSION. The factors that we conclude from our study as being the factors of bad prognosis permit a better understanding of the causes of death and so, a better management of the patients.  In cardiac-surgery patients intensive insulin therapy and maintaining blood glucose (BG) levels within normoglycaemia markedly reduces mortality. We compared the effectiveness of three published insulin protocols: absolute glucose value based approach (Mathias Protocol; MP), relative glucose change approach in combination with four glucose ranges (Bath Protocol; BP) and the new fully automated model predictive controller (eMPC2) algorithm with variable sampling interval. METHODS. 120 consecutive post-cardiac surgery patients were investigated for 48 h on admission to ICU. Forty patients were randomized to each of the three protocols. The target BG range for all three protocols was 4.4-6.1 mmol/L. Arterial BG samplings were taken according to each protocol. The algorithms showed the differences in the effectiveness of BG control. While there was no difference between MP and BP in entire study mean BG (6,7 ± 0,8 resp. 6,5 ± 1,0 mmol/l), eMPC2 algorithm performed significantly better (5,9 ± 0,8 mmol/l; p \ 0,05). Also time to normoglycaemia was significantly shorter for eMPC2 (10,9 ± 6,1 vs. 12,3 ± 9,2 vs. 8,8 ± 5,4 h; p \ 0,5). In normoglycaemia maintaining after reaching target range both BP and eMPC2 protocols performed equally (5,8 ± 0,7 vs. 5,2 ± 0,8 mmol/l) compare to MP (6,2 ± 0,7 mmol/l), there were no significant difference in sampling interval (2,1 ± 0,3 vs. 1,8 ± 0,6 vs. 2,3 ± 0,3 h), in clinically important hypoglycemic events (1 vs. 2 vs. 0 event), but in % of time under target range (10,9 ± 8,8 vs. 13,1 ± 7,9 vs. 22,2 ± 4,6 % of time; p \ 0,05). CONCLUSION. First, all evaluated insulin protocols were safe with respect to hypoglycaemia. Secondly, both absolute glucose value based approach and relative glucose change approach were comparably effective in BG management, while significantly more effective control of BG showed predictive eMPC2 algorithm. The higher % of time under target range in eMPC2 group did not show any clinical importance in our study, but further studies in larger cohorts of patients are needed to determine whether such hypoglycaemia is out of any clinical importance. INTRODUCTION. The presence of hyperglycaemia in hospitalised patients indicates an increased risk for mortality and morbidity. Single-center trials have demonstrated that tight blood glucose improves prognosis for ICU patients. However, normoglycaemia is not easy to establish in this environment and multicenter trials were stopped due to the increased rate of hypoglycaemia. The objective of the present trial was to investigate the performance of a newly developed decision support system for the establishment of tight glycaemic control in medical ICU patients for a period of 72 h. The study was conducted as a single-center, open, non-controlled clinical investigation in ten mechanically ventilated patients. After admittance to the ICU blood glucose values were monitored and the CS-1 Decision Support System (interacting infusion pumps with integrated algorithm eMPC controlled via a graphical user interface) was used to adjust the infusion rate of intravenously administered human soluble insulin to normalize arterial blood glucose (4.4-6.1 mM). RESULTS. Percentage of time in target and mean blood glucose under treatment with the CS-1 System were 47.04% (± 13.05) and 6.08 mM (± 0.73), respectively. The average hourly insulin need was 4.2 IU (± 2.78) and the carbohydrate content of enteral and parenteral nutrition 7.47 g/h (± 1.98). No single hypoglycaemic episode (\2.2 mM) occurred. Eleven times (1.5% of all given advice) the nurses did not follow and, thus, overruled the advice of the CS1 system. According the results of a conducted survey the majority of nurses (19 vs. 2) stated that glucose control was more efficient to handle as using the regular protocol. Several technical malfunctions of the device (repetitive error messages and missing data in the data log) owing to communication problems between the new hardware components were shortcomings of the present version of the device. CONCLUSION. The performance of this prototype CS-1 Decision Support System was from a clinical point of view already effective in maintaining tight glycaemic control and well accepted by the ICU nursing staff. With improvement of technical stability the CS1 system has the capacity to serve as a reliable tool for routine establishment of glycaemic control for critical ill patients  It has been shown that tight glycemic control (TGC) results in reduced morbidity and mortality in intensive care in selected patient groups. Concern about the associated increase in hypoglycemia limits the implementation of TGC and was one of the reasons to discontinue 2 multi-centre trials to the effects of TGC. We wonder if the effects of incidental hypoglycemia in ICU-patients justify us to be anxious to implement TGC. To solve this question, we review the literature for observed consequences of hypoglycemic episodes in critically ill patients. We performed a search of the PubMed and Embase databases for full text papers of clinical trials to glycemic control in ICU-setting mentioning possible consequences of hypoglycemia. In case one or more eligible studies used the data of the same study-group, only the most relevant paper was selected. RESULTS. 23 full text papers, concerning 12,023 patients, were judged to be appropriate for our systematic review. Though hypoglycemia is common, the episodes were often reported to be short. Possible severe adverse effects were described in 17 of 609 (2.8%) patients experiencing hypoglycemia in 16 studies -a certain relation between the hypoglycemia and the event could not be ascertained. Seven other studies stated over 726 hypoglycemic episodes in 6,359 patients and did not result in any complications. Hypoglycemia coincided with a higher mortality; nevertheless, we did not find sound evidence that conclude TGC-induced hypoglycemia was directly responsible for the higher mortality. CONCLUSION. We found little evidence in the literature of severe adverse effects of hypoglycemia associated with TGC in ICU-patients that might offset the benefits of TGC. A high quality and safe TGC-protocol is always needed to limit the number and duration of hypoglycemic episodes. Fear of possible severe consequences of hypoglycemia should not keep us from further studying TGC. INTRODUCTION. Increased blood glucose levels are frequently observed in patients undergoing cardiac surgery procedures, with or without diabetes. Intensive insulin therapy decreases mortality, length of hospitalization and number of complications as it has been shown in recently published studies. Many protocols have been developed to implement tight glycaemic control. The aim of this study was to compare blood glucose control by the automated model predictive algorithm with variable sampling interval (eMPC2) with a routine glucose management protocol (RP) in the peri-and postoperative period in cardiac surgery patients. Sixty patients were included in this study (41 men, 19 women, mean age 69 ± 7, BMI 27.9 ± 2.6 kg/m 2 ). Duration of the study was 72 h. All patients underwent an elective cardiac surgery procedure and were treated from the beginning of the surgery with a continuous insulin infusion to maintain glycaemia in a target range of 4.4-6.1 mmol/l. 30 patients were randomized for treatment using the eMPC algorithm and 30 patients for routine protocol management. Blood glucose was measured in 1-to 4-h intervals as requested by each algorithm during surgery and postoperatively. Statistical analysis -the patients from different groups were compared using ANOVA followed by Holm-Sidak test, Student t-test or Mann-Whitney U-test as appropriate. The significance level was set at p = 0.05. CONCLUSION. eMPC algorithm is comparably safe as compared to a routine glucose management protocol with respect to hypoglycaemia. The results of our study suggest that eMPC algorithm is more effective in maintaining euglycaemia in peri-and postoperative periods in patients undergoing cardiac surgery procedure. CONCLUSION. The vast majority of UK ICUs have a written policy in place for implementing strict glucose control, and for most the upper limit of the blood glucose target range is B7 mmol/L. Arterial blood glucose is monitored by almost all ICUs, most commonly using bedside glucometers though blood gas analysers are also used. Wide variation exists in the methods used to determine insulin dose, with most units using simple sliding scales.  Patients undergoing cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass (CBP) may develop a systematic inflammatory response syndrome in the post-operative period, considered to be the result of a complex immunologic reaction consisting of humoral, cellular and hemostatic factors, caused by an imbalance of pro and anti inflammatory mechanisms. Vascular endothelial cells perform a pivotal role in mediating the response to this systemic inflammation and the cross talk between coagulation and inflammation. The effect of this inflammatory response on the peripheral microcirculation per se has yet to be thoroughly investigated. The purpose of our study was to assess the potential effects of CBP on the microcirculation of cardiac surgery patients, as assessed non-invasively by Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS). We compared parameters of the microcirculation as obtained with the help of In Spectra Model 325 Near-Infrared Spectrometer (NIRS) in 12 cardiac surgery patients (Standard Euroscore 6 ± 4, Logistic Euroscore 9.1 ± 11.5), before the surgical procedure and 6 h post-operatively. Tissue oxygen saturation (StO2%) values of the thenar, deltoid and masseter muscles were noted and the brachial vascular occlusion technique was utilized to better assess the endothelial function, with the calculation of the oxygen consumption rate (CR), the reperfusion rate (RR) and the vascular reactivity (VR). Haemodynamic parameters were obtained with the use of a Swan-Ganz catheter. RESULTS. The patients' baseline haemodynamic values post-operatively were MAP 82 ± 10 mmHg, CVP 8 ± 4 mmHg, PCWP 11 ± 4 mmHg, MPAP 23 ± 6 mmHg, CI 2.5 ± 1.2 L/min/m2, SVR 1427 ± 535 dyne x s/cm5, PVR 247 ± 134 dyne 9 s/cm5, HR 93 ± 18 bpm, Hb 11.9 ± 1.4 g/dl, lactate 2.6 ± 2 mg/dl, ScvO2 75 ± 8 %, SvO2 70 ± 4 %. The microcirculation parameters at baseline post-operatively were CR 19 ± 10%/sec, RR 246 ± 188%/s, VR 38 ± 21%*sec, thenar StO2 80 ± 9%, deltoid StO2 64 ± 27%, masseter StO2 65 ± 26%. We found a statistically significant decrease in the CR values post-operatively (CR 19 ± 10%/s versus 32 ± 16 %/s pre-operatively, P = 0.005). As the h after surgery progressed, the CR improved and six h post-operatively did not differ significantly from preoperative values. A similar difference was noted in RR (246 ± 188%/sec versus 640 ± 263 preoperatively, P = 0.004), with the value at 6 h not differing statistically from preoperative values. CONCLUSION. The microcirculation of patients having undergone cardiac surgery with CBP, as assessed by NIRS, is affected, and tends to return to the preoperative state as time from surgery progresses. As the inflammatory process occurring during CBP has been associated with a serious increase in morbidity and mortality, the potential introduction of a non-invasive monitoring technique of the microcirculation to perioperative monitoring could possibly aid in the better understanding and management of this condition. INTRODUCTION. Platelet count decline occurs frequently after on-pump cardiac surgery (1) . Decline in platelet count in intensive care unit (ICU) patients provides prognostic information (2) . The aim of our study is to investigate the platelet count decline post cardiac surgery and the correlation with the perioperative risk scores. (1). Therefore, the aim of present study was to investigate the incidence of overt DIC after CPB using ISTH scoring system. And another aim of the study was to examine whether the overt DIC after CPB was related to the post CPB excessive blood loss and morbidity. To estimate the ISTH score FDP, fibrinogen, prothrombin time, and platelet count were measured in (a) Time 1; before initiation of CPB, (b) Time 2; on admission to ICU, and (c) Time 3; 1st postoperative day. The occurrence of over DIC was determined when the ISTH score was 5. The 24-h postoperative blood loss and transfusion requirement were documented. The definition of excessive blood loss (EB) in ICU was greater than 1L blood loss for 24 h. The D-dimer levels before and after the CPB, postoperative oxygen index, intubation time, ICU stay were also documented. INTRODUCTION. Development of Acute Renal Failure (ARF) during perioperative period is associated with increases in morbidity and mortality. Our aim was to evaluate incidence, determinants and outcome in patients with previous normal renal function who developed ARF in the immediate postoperative period. Observational, prospective study conducted in a post-anesthesia care unit (PACU) with 5 intensive care beds from March to August 2006. Patients were followed for the development of ARF defined as creatinine blood levels higher than 20mg L -1 during the first 24 h after PACU admission. Patients' demographics, intra-and postoperative data were collected. We also recorded PACU and hospital length of stay (LOS) and mortality. INTRODUCTION. The state-of-the-art prothrombin complex concentrate Octaplex Ò has been used safely and successfully for the prophylaxis and treatment of acquired deficiency of factors of the prothrombin complex. Storage of the product at room temperature (RT) is desirable, promoting increased transport and storage convenience. Therefore, formal stability studies and extended biochemical characterisations were performed to demonstrate product integrity. Octaplex Ò stability studies for 36 months at RT were conducted according to ICH guidelines. Octaplex Ò (containers, freeze-dried product) stored at RT was compared with product containers kept cold (+2 to 8°C). Beyond investigation of prothrombin factors and the proteins C and S, physicochemical parameters and markers of activation were performed. In addition, the rabbit Wessler stasis model, an assay for the assessment of thrombogenic properties was used to demonstrate the absence of elevated thrombogenic activity. RESULTS. Throughout the entire study period all parameters assessed revealed excellent stability complying with the product specifications. Samples stored at RT were indistinguishable from samples stored at +2 to 8°C. At a dose of 400 IU/kg body mass no signs of thrombotic activity were found in the Wessler model. METHODS. 128 Patients undergoing surgery for abdominal cancer we examined the efficacy of a variety of coagulation tests. A complete coagulation screening, thromboelasthgraphy (TEG) and haemoviscoelastography (HVG) were performed before and at the end of surgery. We calculated the elastic shear modulus of standard MA (Gt) and HVG MA (Gh), which reflect total clot strength and procoagulatory protein component, respectively. The difference was an estimate of the platelet component (Gp). There was a 14% perioperative increase of standard MA, corresponding to a 48% increase of Gt (P \ 0.05) and an 80-86% contribution of the calculated Gp to Gt. We conclude that serial standard thromboelastography and HVG viscoelastic test may reveal the independent contribution of platelets and procoagulatory proteins to clot strength. Using multiple linear regression, all coagulation, TEG and HVG variabities were used to model postoperative hypercoagulation. Results showed that some components of the TEG failed to identify hypercoagulation (r \ 0.2, P [ 0.75). All components of the HVG test reflect postoperative coagulopaties. CONCLUSION. Hypercoagulability is not reflected completely by standard coagulation monitoring and TEG and seems to be predominantly caused by increased platelet reactivity. HVG provides a fast and easy to perform bedside test to quantify in vitro coagulation, may be usefull in determining the coagulation status of cancer patients perioperatively. INTRODUCTION. Thrombocytopenia is a common complication of hematologic malignancies, but it also accompanies other conditions, e.g. major blood loss. The clinical effects of platelet transfusions has been debated and several efforts to evaluate the effects of such transfusions. Previous evaluations have frequently focussed on the increase in platelet count and on the viability of the transfused platelets after transfusions, while studies evaluating the coagulation system after platelet transfusions are lacking. We have used ROTEM to evaluate the effects of platelet transfusions given to thrombocytopenic patients. METHODS. Ten patients suffering from leukemia and thrombocytopenia with a platelet count below 50x10 9 /l scheduled for insertion of a central venous catheter (CVC) were included in the study. The patients were planned to recieve one unit of platelets prior to insertion according to hospital guidelines. Hb, platelet count, PT, aPTT and ROTEM analyses were performed before and after transfusion of one unit of platelets. ROTEM analysis was performed according to the INTEM procedure using the contact activator ellagic acid for initiation of the coagulation process. Maximum Clor Firmness (MCF), Clot Formation Time (CFT and Clotting Time (CT) were analysed. RESULTS. Platelet count increased from a median value of 31,5 to 43 9 10 9 /l. The ROTEM parameter MCF was increased from 42 to 51.5 mm after transfusion (p = 0.005) and CFT was decreased from 181.5 to 123 s (p = 0.005) while CT was unchanged. PT and aPTT were unchanged. CONCLUSION. MCF is primarily a measure of platelet activity so this study indicates a positive effect of platelets when given to patients with a low platelet count. CFT reflects in part platelet activity, but is is affected also by humoral coagulation factors. As PT and aPTT together with the ROTEM parameter CT are unaffected it is likely that the effect on CFT is also an effect of the increased platelet count. INTRODUCTION. During treatment of bleedings, related with different hemostasis abnormalities, the average recommended dose of the rFVIIa (NovoSeven) medication (90 mg/kg) may be inadequate or excessive. In the published papers it is possible to find the recommended doses from 60 up to 300 mg/kg. Serious adverse events (thrombosis) associated with rFVIIa use occure than 1%. Nevertheless we need the objective method for the efficacy and safety control of this medication. In this study tromboelastography was used during the therapy of bleedings by rFVIIa in the patients with different hemostasis abnormalities (thrombocytopenia, hemophilia A with inhibitor to factor VIII, warfarin's coagulopathy, hepatic coagulopathy, factor VII or factor 9 deficiency) or without them. Blood samples of 47 patients were measured before, 15 min and 2 h after injection of the rFVIIa at average dose 90 mg/kg (60-160 mg/kg). The dynamic of several TEG properties were measured: time to clot initiation (R), clot propagation (K and a angle), clot tracings -maximum amplitude (MA) and the 30 minutes fibrinolysis. At the same time the platelet count, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), prothrombin time (PT), thrombin time (TT) and fibrinogen were controlled. RESULTS. The improvement of the TEG indices was registered in 30 patients (64%), the effect's absence in 4 patients (8,5%), decreasing in 13 patients (27,5%). Two patients (4%) have showed the excessive superfluous effect -signs of hypercoagulation. Fibrinolysis activation was registered in 2 patients (4%). The maximal improvement of the TEG indices was showen in hemophilic patients with inhibitor to factor VIII, in patients with factor VII deficiency and coagulopathy associated with oral anticoagulants intake or liver disease. Significant effect was obtained in patients with moderate thrombocytopenia (PLT [ 209109/ l). Absence or minimal effect was occurred in cases with severe thrombocytopenia (PLT \ 209109/l), hypofibrinogenemia (fibrinogen \ 1,5 g/l) and particularly in cases of combination of these conditions. In this cases transfusion of platelets and fibrinogen-containing medications, in addition to injections of rFVIIa, considerably improved the TEG indices. The absence of the effect in 3 patients was due to acidosis and hypothermia. The clinical effect did not always coincide with the TEG data: in 6 patients (13%) the break or decrease of bleeding's pace was noted while the laboratorial dates were not improve. CONCLUSION. The effect of injection of the standard doses of rFVIIa is not always predictable as it correlates with several factors. TEG can be used as the complementary method for the efficacy estimation and for dose selection of rFVIIa, for the choice of optimal combination with other means of hemostasis correction and to reveal undesirable effects as hypercoagulation, hemostasis depletion, fibrinolysis, their correction and prophylaxis. INTRODUCTION. Platelet dysfunction during cardiac surgery leads to increased blood loss and transfusion requirements and may result in reopening of patients. Dysfunction may be due to many causes including the effect of anti platelet medication (aspirin and clopidogrel). Point of care monitoring of platelet function may help to identify those patients at risk and guide appropriate therapy. We assessed platelet function in the operating theatre in ten patients having off pump coronary artery bypass grafting using two methods-the plateletMapping TEG TM (Haemoscope, IL) and the Multiplate analyzer (Dynabyte, Munich). The multiplate analyser is a multiple electrode whole blood aggregometer which uses a single test cell with 2 separate impedance sensors per test. Aggregation was triggered with ADP (6.4 mcmol, ADP test) and Arachidonic Acid (0.5 mM, ASPI test). Platelet function was quantified by the Area Under the aggregation Curve (AUC).The plateletMapping TEG TM is a modification of the TEG TM which allows the calculation of the percentage of platelets inhibited by ADP receptor antagonists or aspirin. It uses factor XIIIa and reptilase to form a clot without thrombin generation in heparinised blood. The resulting maximum amplitude of the clot is dependant on platelet agonists (either ADP or Arachidonic Acid) added to the blood. These agonists attempt to stimulate platelet aggregation and clot formation. If the platelets are inhibited aggregation will not occur. Platelet function was quantified by the percentage of platelets inhibited. RESULTS. The instruments gave results which correlated well with each other particularly when looking at the dysfunction due to aspirin. As expected those who had stopped aspirin for 5 days had near normal function, whilst those who had only stopped it for a day had almost completely inhibited platelets. The ADP results were less conclusive-2 patients had stopped clopidogrel 5 days before but were shown on both tests to have inhibition of platelet function. INTRODUCTION. Inflammation impacts the initiation, propagation and the inhibitory phases of blood coagulation. In this respect, the analgesic agents which inhibit inflammatory response may have impact on the coagulation status in postoperative patients. Dexmedetomidine and morphine are frequently used for postoperative analgesia and their antiinflammatory effects were shown in animal models. The aim of this study is to evaluate the impact of dexmedetomidine and morphine on coagulation in postoperative patients admitted to ICU. Twenty patients who underwent orthopedic, reconstructive or abdominal surgery using a standardized anesthesia protocol were included in to the study after admission to the ICU. The criteria for exclusion were hemodynamical instability, acidosis, hypothermia and bleeding requiring transfusion of blood products. Morphine (n = 10) or dexmedetomidine (n = 10) were used for 8 h postoperatively with the infusion rates of 60 mic.gram/kg/h and 0.5 mic.gram/kg/hour, respectively. Blood coagulation analysis was performed with venous bloods which were taken before the initiation of analgesic regimen and after 8 h of infusion. Thromboelastography (ROTEG analyzer-Pentapharm GMBH, Munich, Germany) and coagulation screening tests like prothrombin time (PT)/partial thromboplastin time (PTT)/ international normalized ratio (INR) were performed to evaluate blood coagulation. Tromboelastography analyses revealed a decrease at clotting time (CT) after 8 h in morphine (168 ± 52 sec vs. 153 ± 26 sec) and dexmedetomidine (219 ± 82 s vs. 177 ± 36 s) groups but the differences were not significant (p [ 0.05). Cloth Formation Time (CFT), Maximum Clot Firmness (MCF) and Alpha-angle (AA) values were not changed after 8 h of morphine or dexmedetomidine infusion. There was no difference in terms of tromboelastography parameters and coagulation screening tests between morphine and dexmedetomidine groups performed after 8 h of infusion. CONCLUSION. The coagulation profile of the postoperative patients was not changed after 8 h of morphine or dexmedetomidine infusion. INTRODUCTION. Intra-and post-operative haemorrhage is a frequent and difficult to treat complication during and after prolonged and traumatic operations. The off-license administration of activated Recombinant Factor VII (rFVIIa) to treat haemorrhage in surgical patients without haemophilia has been investigated, but understanding over potential profit or adverse events hasn't been achieved [1, 2] . This report describes some mistakes during rFVIIa's administration. ETHODS: 7 patients with massive intraoperative blood loss (mediana 80 ml/kg, min 69 ml/kg, max 126 ml/kg), postoperative bleeding above 10 ml/min (mediana 12 ml/min, min 10 ml/min, max 14 ml/min) and clotting time above 30 min were included in study group. All patients received rFVIIa (mediana 119 mkg/kg, min 103 mkg/kg, max 129 mkg/kg) after fresh frozen plasma (FFP) administration and RBC to maintain Hct above 27. We investigated speed of active bleeding and clotting time after rFVIIa administration, early outcome and FFP volume. RESULTS. a. Active bleeding has been stop and clotting time decreased after rFVIIa administration in four cases. The FFP volume was above 40% for blood loss in this patients. All of them discharged from ICU. b. Active bleeding increased in spite of clotting time decreased in one case. Bleeding was stopped by surgery. The FFP volume was above 41% for blood loss in this case. Patient discharged from ICU. c. Active bleeding and clotting time increased in spite of rFVIIa administration in the other two cases with FFP volume under 35% for blood loss. Bleeding stopped after FFP administration in one case. And one patient died from disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). CONCLUSION. RFVIIa may stop hypocoagulation bleeding inducing by massive intraoperative blood loss only after plasma volume compensation more than 40% for blood loss. The rFVIIa maybe initiate DIC syndrom during clotting factor deficit (especially platelets) induced by massive intraoperative blood loss. RFVIIa can not stop surgical bleeding of course. Figure. CONCLUSION. The following data has shown patients that received oral and enteral nutrition has had a better mortality rate than expected. Patients that received parenteral nutrition showed a worse mortality rate. INTRODUCTION. Infectious complications in critically ill patients determine high morbidity and mortality. Glycemic control with disease-specific diets, insulin therapy and immunonutrients (glutamine) may reduce these complications. We aimed to:1) Evaluate if the administration of a disease-specific enteral formula supplemented with glutamine reduces infectious complications compared to a disease-specific high-protein formula and to a conventional high-protein enteral formula.2) Determine metabolic control with the three diets. METHODS. Prospective, randomized, single-blind and independent samples study. 150 patients were estimated to detect, with a power of 90%, a 15% reduction in infectious complications. Three groups were established: A: conventional high-protein formula, B: disease-specific high-protein formula, C: disease-specific formula supplemented with glutamine (0.5gr/Kg/day). Eligibility criteria: age C 18 years, enteral nutrition C 5 days. INTRODUCTION. Blood loss, leading to iron loss, plays an important role in ICU anemia; but iron is rarely proposed, because of his supposed toxicity (1) . We recently demonstrated that spleen iron is mobilizable at day 5, in a mouse model of ICU anemia, based on Zymosan (Z) peritonitis (2) . The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of iron on inflammation and oxydative stress, in mice with Z peritonitis. We compared the effect of high dose (3 mg) and low dose (0.3 mg) intravenous (iv) iron in control (C) mice and of low dose in Z mice at day 5. Mice were killed at 1, 2 and 24 h post iv. We measured blood levels of iron, IL-6 (by ELISA) and AOPP (Advanced Oxidation Protein Product). Data are expressed as mean ± sd, and compared with a Kruskall-Wallis test. There is a positive correlation between iron and AOPP levels (r2 = 0,27, p = 0,01). High iron doses are associated with high iron levels, till H24 (H1 381 ± 181, H2 273 ± 179, H24 47 ± 10 lmol/l) compared with C (25,6 ± 3 lmol/l, p \ 0,05). Iv iron is associated with an early IL-6 induction for the low dose and with a late induction for high dose; but surprisingly not in Z mice. AOPP are increased in high dose only (table) . INTRODUCTION. The role of early enteral immuno-nutrition in critically ill patients and especially in the sub-group of severe traumatic brain injury (TBI) is highly disputed. Optimal nutrients constitution, dose scheme, starting point and duration still remain subjects of debate. Recent data from microdialysis studies argue for a role of NO metabolism (closely related to arginin's). The goal of this study was to compare the effects of an early immuno-enhancing enteral diet in TBI patients VS standard feeding formula in terms of clinical indices/outcome and parameters of nutritional and immunological status. METHODS. Prospective, randomized, controlled trial, with consecutive patients. Two groups: A = standard enteral feeding 1 kcal/ml (Nutrison STD) and B = immuno-enhancing feeding, 13 g/L Arginine (Impact, Novartis, oral/enteral). 30 days follow up, clinical/nutritional assessment (1-7 days,30th day), immunological profile-cytokines, pre-albumin, NO derivatives (admission, 1st, 4th, 7th day), DNA analysis (sample on admission), std labs (every day), hormone profile-cortisol (admission, 1st, 4th, 7th day) severity scores (Apache-II, GCS, GOS)and mortality to 30 days. Results analysed with SPSS. RESULTS. From Sep.2007 to Apr.2008, 33 patients enrolled (A = 16, B = 17, M/F = 25/8, Age 34 ± 12, GCS 9 ± 4, Apache II score 18 ± 5), enrollment continues. We had 1 death by the 30th day. 52% of patients started enteral feeding before the 2nd day and 83% by the 3rd day post-admission, 75% met their theoretical nutritional needs (Harris Beneddict). The two groups were comparable regarding demographics and severity of TBI (both scores). Primary end points of this study : infections percentage and timing, length of mechanical ventilation (7 ± 6 VS 8 ± 7 days) and laboratory profile were not different between the two groups (A, B) with the exheption of pre-albumin levels at the 7th day (in favor of immuno, 13.8 ± 2 VS 17.8 ± 9.2, p \ 0.05). ANOVA (separate for the 2 groups) did not reveal any significant variance over time (1st, 3rd, 7th day) in WBC and pre-albumin level. Results from cytokines and NO metabolism are pending. CONCLUSION. It seems that early enteral immunonutrition (based mainly on high Arginine content) is not clearly beneficial in a small group of critically ill ventilated patients with TBI. Awaited results will further enlight us concerning the immunological/biochmeical/hormonal mechanisms involved. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. Their optimal recovery depends on an adequate nutritional state. To prevent and treat malnutrition is fundamental to provide good patient care, yet providing nutritional support (NS) to the critically ill elderly is a major challenge. The goal of this study was to compare NS between elderly (C 65 years old) and non-elderly (\ 65 years old) critically ill patients. METHODS. Prospective analysis of consecutively admitted patients in two mixed ICU. Exclusion criteria were: NS for \ 2 days, age \ 16 years and length-of-stay (LOS) \ 3 days. Patients were followed for the first 7 days of NS. Data collection included: demographic data, NS (route, target volume (TV) and delivered volume), reasons for suspension and reduction of NS. Chi-square, Mann-Whitney U and T-test were used in statistical analysis. . Forty of the one hundred and two patients studied were C 65 years old mainly male (60%) with a mean SAPS II score 54,8 ± 16,1. Most of the elderly were medical patients (60%) followed by surgical (22,5%) and trauma (17,5%). Although not statistically significant (p = 0,088) NS was started earlier in the elder 30,2 ± 17,1 h after ICU admission, mostly by enteral route (82,5% vs. 93,5%; p = 0,105). TV achievement was similar in both groups (47,5% vs. 38,7%; p = 0,380). We analyzed 687 nutrition days (ND) with statistical difference (p \ 0,001) between the two studied populations (Table 1 ). In elderly patients NS was suspended in 22,6% of the days (22,6% vs. 24,0%; p = 0,675) due to gastrointestinal dysfunction (GI) (42,6%), diagnostic and therapeutic procedures (29,5%), airway management (8,2%) and lack of route delivery (4,9%). GI dysfunction was less frequently responsible for enteral nutrition reduction in elderly than in non-elderly patients (7.4% vs. 9.4%; p = 0.374). More than 90% of prescribed NS was delivered in a significantly higher number of ND in the elderly group (64,1% vs. 52,7%; p = 0,003). Median ICU LOS was 20 days with a higher ICU mortality in the elderly (45,0% vs. 12,9%: p \ 0,001). CONCLUSION. In this study we observed that NS in elderly critically ill patients does not seem to be a problem. In this group of patients NS was started earlier, PN was more frequently used and C 90% of the NS prescribed was delivered in a higher number of ND. No differences were found regarding NS suspension or reduction between the two groups. L. Trindade* 1 , J. Pereira 2 , L. Aguiar 2 , A. Taveira Gomes 3 1 Nutrição Clínica, Hospital Privado dos Clérigos, 2 Serviço de Cuidados Intensivos, 3 Serviço Cirurgia, Hospital S João, Porto, Portugal When selecting an appropriate enteral formulation both formula characteristics and patient-specific factors should be considered in nutrition support (NS). Recent data suggest that whole protein formula should be used. The goal of our study was to determine if the specificity of the enteral formulation (standard vs. non-standard) has impact on critically ill patients enteral feeding. METHODS. Prospective analysis of consecutively admitted patients in two mixed intensive care units (ICUs). Exclusion criteria were: NS for \ 2 days, age \ 16 years and length-ofstay (LOS) \ 3 days. Patients were followed for the first 7 days of NS. Data collection included: demographic data, NS (route, target volume (TV) and delivered volume), reasons for suspension and reduction of NS. Chi-square, Mann-Whitney U and T-test were used in statistical analysis. One hundred and two patients (687 nutrition days (ND): enteral (EN) 84,9%, parenteral (PN) 10% and mixed (MN) 3,2%) were studied: mainly male (69,6%) with a mean age 57,9 ± 17,8 and a mean SAPS II score 49,6 ± 14,4. The most frequent reason for ICU admission was medical (52%) followed by trauma (26,5%) and surgical (21,6%). NS was started 34 ± 18,3 h after ICU admission most times by enteral route (89,2%). TV was achieved in 42,2% of the cases. EN was started in 81,3% of the patients with a polymeric standard formulation. We analyzed 605 enteral feeding days (EN 583 and MN 22) : 464 were with a polymeric standard formulation (SF) and 141with a non standard formulation (NSF). EN was suspended in 23,6% of the days with no differences between SF and NSF concerning the incidence (22,2% vs. 28,4%; p = 0,131) and the motives (p = 0,486). However, the incidence of EN reduction was significantly lower in SF days (7,8% vs. 16,3%; p = 0,003). Gastrointestinal intolerance (GI) was higher in NSF but the difference did not reach statistical significance (20,6% vs. 14,4%; p = 0,081). No differences were found between the two groups regarding the NS percentage delivered to the patients (SF 91,5% vs. NSF 93,84%; p = 0,919) and ICU length of stay (SF 19,5 days vs. NSF 18 days; p = 0,068). The use of a NSF was associated with a significantly higher ICU (36,2% vs. 17,7%; p \ 0,001) and hospital mortality (47,5% vs. 33%; p = 0,002). In this study, the use of a polymeric non standard formulation was associated with a higher enteral feeding reduction, a higher GI intolerance and a significantly higher ICU and hospital mortality. No correlation was found between the type of formulation used and the incidence of EN suspension as well as the NS percentage delivered to the patients. O. G. Malkova*, I. N. Leiderman, A. L. Levit, S. P. Nitenko ICU and anesthesiology, Regional Clinical Hospital N 1, Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation METHODS. After the resolution of local Ethical Committee in 2005-07 yy we investigated serum levels of triglycerides (TG), IL-6, IL-8, NO, arterial lactate, glucose on 1,3,5,7,10 day by « Immulite » DPC in 56 septic patients, including bacterial peritonitis (20 pts), endometritis (20 pts), skin infections (4 pts), endocarditis (3 pts), urological sepsis (2 pts), meningoencephalitis (2 pts). Mean age of patients was 37,9 ± 2,05. Mean APACHE-II score after admission was 17,5 ± 0,83 and SOFA score -6,6 ± 0,58, MURREY score -1,8 ± 0,16 balls. All patients demonstrated 3 and more signs of SIRS. LOS in ICU was 11,6 ± 0,98 days and in the hospital-27,9 ± 2,67.28 days. Total 28 days mortality was 26,8%. We used descriptive statistics and estimate the p by t-student for continue variables. . Normal serum levels of TG 1,3 ± 0,1 mmol/l) corresponded with lower concentrations of IL-8-68,3 ng/ml (p \ 0,05). In the group with high TG (2,9 ± 0,2 mmol/l) we found out increased IL-8 concentrations (613 ng/ml) . On day 7 in high TG group IL-8 levels decreased. In normal TG group IL-6 concentrations also decreased on day 10, and in high TG group IL-6 levels increased on day 5 and decreased on day 7 (p \ 0,05).High TG levels were closely connected with hyperglycemia, high serum concentrations of NO and lactate. It is important to emphasize that 28 days mortality was 50% in high TG group in comparison with normal TG group -23,5% (p \ 0.01). CONCLUSION. Increased serum TG concentrations in severe sepsis are closely connected with negative clinical outcome. Clarification of relationship between pro and anti-inflammatory mediators synthesis and lipid metabolic alterations in severe sepsis may become one the most perspective issues of future investigations. RESULTS. Standards were calculated according to the score and the outcome as follows: INTRODUCTION. The hospital malnutrition is a universal problem that currently can be detected routinely and consequently combat effectively. It is observed both in developed countries and in the so called third world, unfortunally in ICU there is nothing universally accepted to do nutritional diagnosis, therefore, the aim of our study has been applying a nutritional score risk to mortality in critically ill patients. We did a prospective observational research study from April 2004 to December 2006. Two hundred and twenty eight admitted patients were included, the surveys were filled by the near relative who lived with the patient, at that moment that the relative showed non-coexistence with the patient and/or ignorance of its pattern of food ingestion during the newspaper the survey was discarded. Critically ill patients were selected at random with pathologies (neurocritical, Sepsis, trauma, patients, obstetrics critics, etc.) in 2 units of adult intensive cares. Patients were evaluated according to Nutritional Risk Score *NSR): Has food intake declined due to los of appetity, digest problems 2 points, How many full meals does the patient eat daily, less than two 3 points, At least one serving of dairy products, one serving of fruits and vegetables 2 points, takes more than 3 prescription drugs per day 1 point, how much alcohol per week 2 points, mode of feeding unable to eat without assistance 2 points, weigh loss or increase in the last 6 months 2 points, Economical level for eating 4 points Statistical analysis: A validation of the data was used to assess the ability to the new Nutritional Risk Score to predict mortality in ITU based receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. The statistical analysis was carried out with the SPSS 10 package, and p \ 0,05 was considered statistically significant. INTRODUCTION. Insulin is regularly applied to lower elevated serum potassium levels. This action of insulin is effected by increasing the cellular uptake of potassium. Whether the potassium lowering effect of insulin is also effected by changes in renal potassium secretion is unclear. Since the therapeutic goal in hyperkalemia is to remove potassium from the body, it is of relevance if insulin inhibits renal potassium excretion. Most studies in human volunteers have suggested that insulin has an antikaliuretic effect [1] . These studies are however hampered by insufficient control of decreased serum potassium levels. In our ICUs we have a computer supported system called GRIP-II (Glucose and potassium Regulation Intensive care Patients) that strictly regulates potassium levels with periodic adjustments of continuous potassium infusion. Such a form of regulation approaches potassium clamping. In this setting we studied the effect of insulin and potassium on renal potassium excretion. In a 12-bed surgical ICU unit in a tertiary teaching hospital we routinely collected 24-h urine samples that were analyzed for potassium concentration. Calculated 24 h renal potassium excretion was compared with the total daily amounts of potassium and insulin that were administered by syringe pump, both of which were determined by GRIP-II. The time-averaged daily mean blood potassium and glucose levels were also determined. Multivariate regression analysis with potassium excretion as the dependent variable was performed with the amount of insulin administered, mean blood glucose, mean serum potassium, mean glucose administration, mean potassium administration and ICU day as independent variables. RESULTS. 297 patients with 2,078 24 h urinary samples were analyzed. Mean ± sd serum potassium was 4.2 ± 0.4 mmol/L, mean blood glucose 6.8 ± 0.9 mmol/L with a mean amount of potassium administered of 69 ± 48 mmol/d and mean insulin dose of 41 ± 39 U/ d. The mean potassium excretion was 105 ± 58 mmol/d. Upon multivariate analysis the plasma potassium, potassium administration, insulin administration and ICU days were independent predictors of potassium excretion with a correlation coefficient of 0.57 (R 2 0.331; p \ 0.001). CONCLUSION. In contrast with previous reports that were only performed in healthy subjects under partially controlled circumstances, under conditions with strict potassium and glucose control, the administration of insulin was associated with increased renal excretion of potassium in critically ill patients. (1); a recommendation supported by ASPEN (2) . The guidelines also support strategies to optimise feed delivery, such as feeding protocols and prokinetics. This review was carried out to assess to what extent current practice on critical care complies with these recommendations. METHODS. Data was collected over a 4-week period for patients (level III) entering critical care fed via a nasogastric tube(NG). Exclusions included patients requiring parenteral nutrition, where nasojejunal tube or jejunostomy tubes were placed prior to admission, or where length of stay was less than 48 h. The 20 patients recorded were admitted via A&E (10), theatre (5) or hospital ward/transfer (5), and presented from Neurosciences (9), Medicine (6) and Surgery (5)  We collected data from bedside paper and electronic patient records. We recorded if an element of care had been prescribed on the patients' bedside chart and if the element had been performed. Data was summarised as a % compliance, with a target of 100% for each element. The results were presented at a multi-disciplinary departmental meeting. RESULTS. 33 patient observations were made. Areas of poor performance were found in bed head elevation (30% compliance) and daily sedation holding (39% compliance). Gastric ulcer and deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis (85 and 79% compliance respectively) were provided in the majority of patients. The target of 100% compliance was not achieved for any elements. CONCLUSION. Lack of awareness and incomplete data recording for all elements by medical and nursing staff were highlighted as probable causes of the poor compliance observed. This audit has allowed our department to identify and focus upon areas for improvement in care provision. We have instigated a programme of education for all staff. New IT systems are being considered to allow improved documentation of patient observations. The departments' care bundle will be reviewed in light of recommendations to be published by the National Institute of Clinical Excellence in September, 2008. We will reaudit following implementation of these recommendations.  In total 26 patients were analyzed with sepsis with at least one organfailure. We compared series of procalcitonin with CRP and the course of disease together with positive microbiological cultures and the course of antibiotic therapy. In total 105 procalcitonin-samples has been performed in series, in 68.5% of the samples the procalcitonin-level (PCT) was [ 2 ng/mL, (PCT 2-5 ng/mL: 17,1%, PCT 5-10 ng/mL: 31.4%, PCT [ 10 ng/mL: 20%). Positive bloodcultures were found in 34.6% of the patients, 88.9% of these patients had a procalcitonin [ 2 ng/mL (PCT [ 10 ng/mL: 44.4%, PCT 5-10 ng/mL: 22.2%, PCT 2-5 ng/mL: 22.2%) . Only 1 patient with a positive bloodculture had a procalcitonin between 0.5 and 2 ng/mL. In general only 15.2% of the total amount of microbiological cultures (sputum, urine, woundfluids, cathetertips, etc.) was associated with a procalcitonin-level below 0.5 ng/mL, and most of these cultures were positive with candida-species (not bacterial). This means that 84.8% of the total amount of microbiological cultures was linked with a procalcitonin above 0.5 ng/mL. In total 10 patients died, 100% of them had a procalcitonin [ 2 ng/mL.The course of antibiotic therapy was in the beginning of the critically illness adapted on empirical grounds, later adapted based on the microbiological cultures in combination with the procalcitonin-level. CONCLUSION. It seems that a procalcitonin-level above the treshold can predict positive microbiological cultures in critically ill patients on the ICU. Positive bloodcultures seem to be associated with high procalcitonin-levels. A METHODS. At a given day, ICU surfaces (ventilator tube surfaces, bedrails, bedside monitors, cardiograms, dressing trolleys, sinks, telephones, wall oxygen humidifiers)were screened and cultured by using sterile cotton swabs inoculated into thioglucolate broth and incubated aerobically at 37°C for 48 h. At the same day, hand impressions were taken from all ICU staff and also blood, bronchial secretions and urine were cultured from all patients. Microorganism identification was performed by the VITEK-II method (Biomerieux-FRANCE) and susceptibility testing by the disk diffusion testing according CLSI. Some were further evaluated by E-test. Production of extended spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs) was determined by the double disk synergy test (DDST) and metallo-beta-lactamase (MBLs) production by the EDTA-synergy test. Colistin-resistant, MBL positive Klebsiella pneumoniae strains with an identical resistant phenotype were isolated from blood and ventilator tube surface of the same patient. Multiresistant K. pneumoniae strains with the same phenotype and production of ESBLs and MBLs were isolated from bedrails and bedside monitor of another patient. Multiresistant, carbapenem resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa of an identical phenotype were cultured from bronchial secretions and ventilator tube of a patient, ventilator tube of another and bronchial secretions of a third patient. Environmental sampling also revealed the presence of 11 Enterococcus strains 3 of which were Vancomycin resistant, a multiresistant Pseudomonas putida and also Candida parapsilosis from a dressing trolley shelf. A multiresistant Acinetobacter baumanii was also cultured from the hands of a healthcare worker. CONCLUSION. The bacteriological profile of the ICU revealed the presence of highly resistant microorganisms exhibiting multiple and complicated resistance mechanisms. The fact that identical phenotypes were observed, is an indication of a possible genetic relation among some of these strains. These isolates will further be analysed by PCR and PFGE methodology. Hand antisepsis and infection control measures were encouraged. Cooperation between intensivists and the laboratory is of vital importance for the prevention of nosocomial infections. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. METHODS. All patients, uninfected at admission, treated in our unit more than 48 h, between 1/1/2007 and 1/7/2007, were prospectively studied. ICU treatment prolongation relevant to BSI or VAP, attributable cost (estimated by the method bottom down) and patient outcome were assessed. RESULTS. 74 patients were screened for inclusion in our study. In 25 patients (33,8%) more than one infections occurred during their ICU stay and were excluded. 10 out of 74 (13,5%) suffered a single BSI episode (6 male, 4 female, age 59,6 ± 22,9 years, admission APACHE II score 12,8 ± 6,4) and 9 out of 74 (12,1%) suffered a single VAP episode (7 male, 2 female, age 53,1 ± 16,8 years, admission APACHE II score 13 ± 4). Finally, 30 patients (14 male, 16 female, age 52,1 ± 19,3 years, admission APACHE II score 12,6 ± 7,1) remained uninfected during their ICU stay. In patients with BSI, ICU LOS was 24,8 ± 9,37 days, prolongation of ICU LOS relevant to infection was 7,4 ± 3,1 days and attributable cost was 7178 € /patient (antibiotic use contributed to 16,6% of the total cost). In patients with VAP, ICU LOS was 21,6 ± 7 days, prolongation of ICU LOS relevant to infection was 6,4 ± 1,6 days and attributable cost was 6251 € /patient (antibiotic use contributed only to 15,7% of the total cost). Patients without infection had an ICU stay of 7,2 ± 3,6 days and a mortality rate of 13,3%, while in patients with BSI, mortality was as high as 40% and in patients with VAP 22,2%. CONCLUSION. Community-acquired acute bacterial meningitis in patients admitted in ICU present more severe clinical vs. patients attend in the rest of medical units. The antimicrobial treatment was earliest initiated in those cases admitted to UCI. However, this entity also remains a serious disease that carries high morbidity and mortality rates, specially in patients over 65 years old. METHODS. Between May 2006 and September 2007, we screened adult patients admitted to our academic 24-bed medico-surgical intensive care unit (ICU). Patients were enrolled, after informed consent was given, if they stayed more than ten days in ICU and were not immunocompromised. Patients receiving steroids were not excluded. Blood samples for CMV serology (House IgG and IgM ELISA) and serum CMV Polymerase Chain reaction (PCR, Cobas Amplicor CMV Monitor TM, Roche) were collected at study entry (on day 10 of ICU admission) and weekly thereafter until the patient was discharged to the ward or after one month of ICU stay. Predetermined demographic, physiological and laboratory data were collected and descriptive statistics were computed. Data are presented as Mean ± standard deviation. RESULTS. During the study period, 50 consecutive patients were enrolled: 36 men and 14 women with a mean age of 46.2 ± 22.9 years. The length of stay was 23 ± 11 days, APACHE II score was 20 ± 6 and the overall mortality was 14%. 50% were trauma patients, and the others were medical (25%) and surgery (25%) patients. Most patients (92%) received antibiotics for a mean duration of 18 ± 12 days, 22% received antifungal drugs and only 1 patient received acyclovir. Corticosteroids were used in 36% of patients. 96% of patients were on mechanical ventilation for a mean duration of 19.2 ± 12.7 days. Serology for CMV (IgG) was positive in 44% of the patients. A total of 169 samples for CMV-PCR were collected. Of the 144 PCR results available at this time, only 4(2.8) were positive in two different patients ( Table 1 ). One of them had three consecutive positive results over a 3 weeks period. CONCLUSION. In our non-immunocompromised ICU population with prolonged LOS, prevalence of CMV viremia remains low. Accordingly, our data does not support empiric screening of non-immunocompromised intensive care patients in the absence of clinical suspicion for CMV infection. Further studies in more specific subgroups such as sicker septic patients should be considered. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. The CMV-PCR kits were provided by Roche. INTRODUCTION. Well known parameters for diagnostic and valuation the degree of inflammation and for stress are: high sensitive C reactive protein (hs-CRP), prokalcitonin, lactate, fibrinogen, D-dimmer, and number of leukocytes, but they are not always available for valuation of sepses, septic shock, and for anticipation of the risk from unexpected development after spacious cardio surgical interventions. Prevention, diagnostic and early antibiotic treatment is highly significant. The aim of this study was to show that the level of Interleukin 6 (IL6) in serum can be used for an early valuation of bacterium infection in patients. METHODS. 57 patients were evaluated in the Unit of intensive care, after cardio surgical intervention. We measured the level of IL6 in serum and we chose and statistically evaluated 20 patients: I group 10 patients with clinical and laboratory signs of infection, II group 10 patients without clinical and laboratory signs of infection. We measured the level of IL6 before, 4 h, 24 h, and 72 h after the intervention. The patients serums were kept on -70 C degree before testing. The level of IL6 was measured by hemiluminiscence immunity test on immunochemical analyzer ''Access'' (Immunoassay Systems Access), Beckman Coulter, in the immunology laboratory at the Institute for cardiovascular diseases. The parameters for statistical analysis were: arithmetic center, linear trend and Fishers test of reliability. RESULTS. The level of IL6 starts to increase 4 h after the tissue damage. The highest level of IL6 was after 24 h (the middle value IL6 for I group of patients with infection was 54, 16 pg/ml, and the highest value in the II group of patients without infection was 25, 70 pg/ ml). The increase of the level of IL6 in I group was for 79, 31% higher than in the II group. CONCLUSION. In 72 h the value of IL6 in the II group became normal, and in I group they were still high. As a result of preliminary analysis on a small number of patients, and due to literature information's, changes of the level IL6 in serum and his increase can be one of the early signs of infection and it makes possible to start with appropriate antibiotic treatment and to valuate the result of cardio surgical interventions. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. Institute of immunology and mycrobiology, Institute for biochemical analyzing. (2) Education is an effective tool to improve infection control in ICU. (3) No published Indian data is available regarding nurses' awareness of infection control measures or effect of educational intervention thereof. Awareness of infection control measures amongst critical care nurses of Fortis Escorts Hospital and Research Center, Faridabad, India was assessed using a multiple choice questionnaire (MCQ). Education levels and length of total and ICU experience was also recorded. The nurses were subjected to a month long focused education initiative regarding the infection control measures using both didactic lectures and bedside hands on training. Thereafter changes in awareness levels were reassessed using the same MCQ. The results were statistically analyzed. RESULTS. Sixty eight nurses were evaluated initially with the MCQ. Only mean ±-SD 41.8 ± 14.13 % questions were answered correctly. After a month long education initiative only 53 of these nurses could be reevaluated. A mean of 57.0 ± 14.9% questions were answered correctly as compared to a base line of 42.1 ± 15.2 % (p = 0.78) in this subset of 53 nurses. Only 8 out of these 53 nurses were nursing degree (BSc.) holder while the rest had a diploma (GNM). The number of former was too small for meaningful subset analysis based on qualification. Theses nurses had 33.26 ± 17.27 (range 4-103) months of total post qualification experience and 16.43 ± 15.31 (range 1-60) months of ICU experience. No significant correlation was observed with quantum of either total or ICU nursing experience with awareness levels at either the baseline (0.07 (p = 0.61) and 0.18 (p = 0.21) respectively) or post education initiative period (0.22 (p = 0.10) and 0.06 (p = 0.64) respectively). CONCLUSION. Despite no specialized training in intensive care nursing and low average total and ICU experience, the nurses could answer a mean of 41.8 ± 14.13 % (42.1 % in the subset of 53 subsequently followed up) questions correctly. There was a trend towards improvement after only a month long focused education initiative although this did not reach significance. This study highlights the need for intensive nurse educational initiative, perhaps for longer duration, to improve awareness regarding infection control measures in the ICU. INTRODUCTION. Acute cholecystitis can be seen in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) patients with the two distinct forms the calculous and acaclculous. Acalculous cholecystitis accounts for approximately 4-8% of all cases of acute cholecystitis and is typically seen in critically ill patients and can results in significant morbidity and mortality. The aim of this study was to evaluate the cases of the acute cholecystitis in the ICU patients. METHODS. During 2-year period we examined retrospectively the ICU patients who developed acute cholecystitis during their treatment. We examined the epidemiologic characteristics of the patients, the form of acute cholecystitis, the diagnostic criteria, the management and finally the outcome. From 153 consecutive patients, 15 of them developed acute cholecystitis during their treatment in the ICU. 7 patients presented calculous cholecystitis, while the rest of them acalculous. The diagnosis performed with ultrasound. High index of suspicion warranted in all cases where the main symptom was the unexplained fever. The ultrasound findings were thickening of the gallbladder wall, subserosal oedema, and fragmentation of gallbladder wall. Surgical treatment was required in 4 cases. The rest of them responded well to antibiotic therapy. There was no mortality as a result of cholecystitis. Half of the cases of acute cholecystitis in ICU patients represent the acalculous form. In cases of fever of unknown origin acute cholecystitis with the two distinct forms must be in mind. Aggressive management may be required if did not respond to antibiotic therapy. RESULTS. Two hundred and ninety-seven adult patients diagnosed by ca-ABM were included and, 163 (54.8%) were attend to the ICU. The median age ± IQR of ICU patients was 54.38 ± 33 years old. The principal etiological agents were: S. pneumoniae 81 patients (48%), N. meningitidis 47 (28%), Listeria monocytogenes 15 (9%), Streptococcus agalactiae 4 (2%); Escherichia coli 2 (1%), Haemophilus influenzae 2 (1%), others 8 (5%), and without isolate 10 (6%). Predisposing conditions were: oto-mastoiditis or sinusitis in 37 patients (22%), previous immunosuppression 21 (12%), diabetes 22 (13%), CSF leak 15 (9%) and alcoholism 15 (9%). The clinical symptoms most frequent were: fever 146 (87%), Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) B 14 137 (81%), neck stiffness 128 (77%), cephalea 124 (75%). The classic triad (fever, altered mental status and meningeal sings) was present in 94 patients (55%). The most frequent cause which these patients were admitted to the ICU was altered mental status (the median value of GCS was 11). Seventy patients (41%) received empirical antimicrobial monotherapy with third-generation cephalosporins, the rest of the cases combination of 2 or more antibiotics. Dexamethasone was used in 144 cases (85%), 79 patients (47%) receiving phenytoin and 45 patients (27%) mannitol. Seventy-eight patients requiring (50%) mechanical ventilation. The median length of stay in ICU was 4 days (1-88). The mortality rate was 20% (33 of 163 patients) and 27 (16%) developed adverse clinical outcome (neurological and/or auditory sequels). In the multivariate model risk factors for unfavorable outcome were: alcoholism (OR 6.98; CI 95%: 1.19-40.8; p = 0.031); age C 65 years old (OR 3.24; 95%IC:1. 28-8.19 ; p = 0.013); mechanical ventilation (OR 11.0; 95%IC:4.38-27.9;p \ 0.001); and therapy with mannitol (OR 0.36; 95%IC: 0.13-0.95; p = 0.042). CONCLUSION. S pneumoniae was the most common pathogen in patients with ca-ABM admitted to the ICU. Altered mental status was the principal cause at admission. Age, alcoholism, mechanical ventilation and therapy with mannitol were risk factors associated with unfavorable outcome in these critical patients. INTRODUCTION. Provision of nutritional support is seen as a therapeutic tool to attenuate disease severity and to modulate the immune response. Heat sterilisation of glucose-containing fluids promotes the formation of compounds termed glucose degradation products (GDPs). Many of the GDPs have been identified and their biological toxicity has been characterized. Several clinical studies demonstrate that the removal of GDPs from the peritoneal dialysis fluids leads to a preserved peritoneal function, decreased inflammation, decreased peritonitis incidence, and preserved residual renal function and a significant survival advantage. In order to investigate whether infusion fluids contain toxic GDPs and if these GDPs are found in patients, we included 11 patients undergoing surgery (55% women). All patients received a standard fluid therapy consisting of 1.7 L glucose containing infusion fluids. Blood samples and urine were collected and analyzed for GDP content. The influence of infusion fluids on cell viability and secretion of cytokines was investigated on human neutrophils. The effect of these fluids on cell growth was investigated on murine L929 fibroblasts. The results demonstrate that all investigated infusion fluids contained high concentrations of GDPs. 3-DG increased rapidly in the serum in the patients after receiving fluid therapy (Figure 1 ), and several of the GDPs were not recovered in the urine. The concentration of GDPs in most of the tested fluids was lethal to neutrophils and impaired their immunomodulatory function. Furthermore, several of the fluids exhibit a negative impact on cell growth. CONCLUSION. These findings indicate that normal preoperative fluid treatment involves infusion of potentially dangerous fluids into the patients. A reduction of GDPs in the infusion fluids, which may be easily obtained through altered manufacturing processes, could improve patient outcome within ICU. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. Gambro Lundia AB.  Prospective, open, non-randomised study where 15 hypothermic (33-34C) patients treated with therapeutic hypothermia following cardiac arrest were compared to 6 normothermic (36-38C) critically ill controls. All patients were sedated to a MAAS-score of 0-1. At least 8 h after their start, continuous infusions of morphine and midazolam were replaced with equivalent doses of fentanyl and propofol. A series of 13-15 blood-samples for validated quantitative analysis of morphine and midazolam were drawn 0-8 h after the switch. The groups were compared using a two-tailed t-test for two independent samples with unequal variances (Table 1) . Values are given as mean (± SD). ''n.s.'' = non-significant (p [ 0.05) . The terminal half-lives for morphine were 177 and 250 minutes for the normoand hypothermic groups (p = 0.001), respectively. The corresponding values for midazolam were 530 and 392 minutes (p = 0.296). CONCLUSION. Elimination of morphine but not midazolam was decreased in patients treated with therapeutic hypothermia. The lack of difference in terminal half-life for midazolam may be explained by the known inhibitory effect of fentanyl and propofol on midazolam metabolism. Compared to critically ill controls, the increased half-life by 40% in the hypothermic group may indicate that the infusion rate of morphine during hypothermia should be reduced. INTRODUCTION. The association between amino-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro-BNP) levels, organ function and mortality in a general ICU population has not been well characterized. To investigate this issue a total of 233 consecutive critically ill patients (109 men) having a median age of 60 years, with a wide range in admitting diagnoses were studied. Blood samples were drawn on admission in the ICU to determine NT-pro-BNP levels. Severity of critical illness and organ function were assessed by APACHE II and SOFA scores respectively. Receiver Operator characteristics (ROC) curves were constructed to determine diagnostic performances. Multiple logistic regression analysis was performed to identify variables that independently predicted ICU mortality. The following possible prognostic factors were entered: age, APACHE II and SOFA scores on admission in the ICU, the presence of sepsis, and two categories in admission NT-pro-BNP (based on the best cutoff point). NT-pro-BNP levels were compared with regard to PaO2/FIO2, platelet count, creatinine, total bilirubin, and the use of inotropic agents. For this purpose, patients were divided in two groups according to the SOFA subscores: those with a subscore of 1 to 2 and those with a subscore of 3 to 4. RESULTS. Nonsurvivors (n = 98) had significantly higher NT-pro-BNP levels than survivors (n = 135) on admission in the ICU (2074 vs. 283 pg/ml, p \ 0.001). ROC analysis showed that the area under the ROC curve in predicting ICU mortality was 0.70 for APACHE II and 0.77 for admission NT-pro-BNP (p = 0.08). The cutoff in admission NT-pro-BNP that best predicted outcome was 941 pg/ml. Multiple logistic regression analysis revealed that APACHE II score (O.R. = 1.06, p = 0.007), and the best cutoff point in admission NT-pro-BNP (O.R. = 7.74, p \ 0.001) predicted independently ICU mortality. Elevated NT-pro-BNP was associated with thrombocytopenia (platelet count lower than 50x103/microl), renal failure (creatinine [ 3.5 mg/dl) and cardiac dysfunction as reflected by the requirement in inotropic agents (p \ 0.02 to 0.03). Furthermore, admission NT-pro-BNP levels were predictive for renal failure (Cr [ 3.5 mg/dl). In a large diverse cohort of ICU patients elevated NT-pro-BNP concentrations are associated with increased morbidity and mortality. In particular, patients with admission NT-pro-BNP plasma levels [ 941 pg/ml are 7 times more likely to die in the ICU than patients with lower values. METHODS. We prospectively studied all adult patients admitted to our ICU who received prophylatic treatment for AGML and were under mechanical ventilation for at least seven days since admission. Preventive treatment for AGML was 40 mg pantoprazole i.v. once daily or 50 mg ranitidine i.v. every eight h. Treatment was decided by the physician in charge. After obtaining informed consent we performed a fibrogastroscopy between days 7 and 9 in the ICU to determine the presence or absence of AGML. Gastric pH, hemoglobin and hematocrit were determined daily. Data concerning blood transfusion requirements, SAPS II, APACHE II, sex, age, reason for admission, number of days in ICU, number of days on mechanical ventilation and outcome were also recorded. . From a total of 695 patients admitted to our ICU between June 2006 and January 2008, we screened 225 patients under mechanical ventilation for at least 7 days. Six patients were excluded due to previous gastric haemorrhage. Forty-seven patients needing mechanical ventilation for over seven days completed the study. We excluded patients with gastrointestinal bleeding or ulcer history, extubated patients, those who died before seven days and cases without informed consent. Mean age was 65 ± 12 years, 10 (21.3%) were males and 37 (78.7%) females. APACHE II was 20.0 ± 7.1 and SAPS II was 49.6 ± 14.5 at ICU admission. Thirty-three patients received pantoprazole and 14 ranitidine. Eighteen (54.5%) patients receiving pantoprazole and 8 (57.1%) on ranitidine had AGML at fibrogastroscopy (P = NS). Three patients on ranitidine and 1 on pantoprazole had gastric ulcer. None of the 47 patients presented active gastric bleeding during ICU admission. The study was stopped due to lack of patients included in the ranitidine group. CONCLUSION. The incidence of AGML was similar in critically ill patients treated with pantoprazole or ranitidine and was high despite this prophylactic treatment. Pantoprazole could be a valid alternative to ranitidine for prophylaxis of ALGM. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. We would like to thank Carolyn Newey for editorial assistance and all nurses in our ICU for their help.  We aimed at clarifying the prognostic value of cortisol response to ACTH in a broad population of septic shock. Relation between cortisol response to ACTH and mortality was tested with nonlinear models in 487 CORTICUS1 pts. In logistic regression, basal cortisol (p = 0.0005) and delta cortisol (p = 0.01) were independent predictors of death. Nonlinear modelling showed increased mortality with increasing cortisol or decreasing delta cortisol. CONCLUSION. Septic shock mortality may vary positively with basal cortisol and negatively with delta cortisol. INTRODUCTION. In intensive care (ICU) patient's anemia is frequently associated with serum iron status disturbance. It may be due to two major phenomenons: inflammatory response and red blood cell loss. However, few studies described the serum iron status evolution in these patients and particularly those in shock state. We therefore explored the serum iron status of patients admitted in ICU for septic shock (SS) or in trauma patients (TR) [ 16) or SS (Bones criteria) were prospectively included. Blood samples were obtained on admission (day 1), day 3 and day 5 after admission. Serum iron (Fe), transferrin (Tf), ferritin, and soluble transferrin receptor (rTf) were measured. Usual clinical and biological parameters were assessed. Statistical analysis consisted in ANOVA for repeated measurements and Mann-Whytney test. RESULTS. Twenty five patients were included (13 SS, 12 TR). Mean age was 57 ± 13, mean SAPS II was 51 ± 18 and mean ISS was 33 ± 15 for TR. Serum iron status parameters were corrected with protidemia. Serum iron was significantly lower in SS and TR compared to laboratory usual range. This diminution was observed at day 1 for SS whereas it occured at day 3 for TR. (p = 0.0425). Ferritin rates rised significantly in both groups (SS p = 0,0025; TR p = 0.0098) compared to laboratory usual range. Tf rate are significantly more elevated in TR (p = 0.0073). No differences were observed in rTf rates. CONCLUSION. There is an acute decrease of serum iron during SS and TR. Difference between TR an SS may be explained by the delay between the beginning of the pathology (SS or TR) and sample. A. Protti* 1 , R. Russo 1 , P. Tagliabue INTRODUCTION. Lactic acidosis during animal biguanide intoxication may be due to mitochondrial damage 1 . Mitochondria account for [ 90% of human body oxygen consumption (VO 2 ). Aim of the study was to verify if VO 2 is impaired in patients suffering from biguanide-associated lactic acidosis. We retrospectively studied 10 ICU-admitted patients with biguanide-associated lactic acidosis, undergoing renal replacement therapy. VO 2 was estimated as arterio-central venous difference in oxygen content (AVDO 2 ; normal value: 3.0-5.0 ml/dl). In 5 patients having their cardiac index monitored, VO 2 was also calculated (normal value: 110-160 ml/ min/m 2 ). Data collected during the first 5 days were analyzed using a one-way repeated measures ANOVA. Main results are presented as mean ± sd in table. INTRODUCTION. Nicotine Replacement Therapy (NRT) has been advocated to prevent withdrawal in hospitalised smokers; however data from the ICU population are sparse. [1] We undertook a retrospective case control study to assess the effect of NRT on ICU and hospital mortality. METHODS. Cases were identified from a 30 bed general ICU as all those who had been prescribed NRT over 18 months (n = 73,); controls included adult smokers admitted during the same period who were not prescribed NRT, matched for age and weight (n = 86). The probability of receiving NRT was calculated via a propensity score (including APACHE2 mortality risk, sex, alcohol use and number of sedatives required), which was then used as an adjustment variable in two further logistic regression models examining ICU and hospital death as the outcomes. RESULTS. The NRT group had both lower unadjusted ICU (8.2 vs. 22.1%) and hospital mortality (15.1 vs. 31.4%).The propensity score discriminated well (AUC 0.768), identifying that patients who received NRT were more likely to have a lower APACHE mortality risk, a history of alcohol use, be female, and require more sedatives. After adjustment for both propensity score and mortality risk, NRT therapy was no longer associated with ICU mortality (OR 0.41, 95% CI 0.13 -1.25, p = 0.12); however there was a borderline association between NRT and lower hospital mortality (OR 0.40, 95% CI 0.16 -1.00, p = 0.05). Both models discriminated adequately (AUC 0.74 and 0.72) and were well calibrated (X2 = 2.13 and 5.62). CONCLUSION. Contrary to a previous report [1] , NRT therapy may be associated with a reduction in hospital, but not ICU mortality. This requires confirmation in a larger dataset. INTRODUCTION. The adverse impact of cachexia and muscle wasting on patient outcome has long been acknowledged. In this context several physical and laboratory parameters of muscle mass have been evaluated in different patient groups. Creatinine is the irreversible and stable product of muscle degradation and dietary meat intake. Since creatinine is excreted into the urine, measurement of urinary creatinine excretion in 24 h urine samples (UCE) has been a widely accepted method for muscle mass estimation. Although UCE was studied in outpatients, no studies have been performed in critically ill patients. We evaluated if UCE at ICU admission, as a marker of muscle mass, is associated with patient outcome. METHODS. In this observational study in a 12-bed surgical ICU in a tertiary teaching hospital, we used our hospital database to analyse 24-h urine and serum samples of all patients admitted from 2000-2006. Samples were collected on the first 3 days after ICU admission. UCE and creatinine clearance were calculated. Since muscle mass is sex and age dependent, these factors were also recorded. Patients who were discharged within 24 h of admission, had a diuresis \ 400 ml/day or serum creatinine levels [ 250 umol/L, or had received renal replacement therapy (RRT) were excluded. Hospital mortality and length of stay were used as outcome measures. RESULTS. Of a total of 3505 patients admitted during the study period, 1514 patients with 3757 samples were analyzed. There were 63% male and 37% female patients. 432 Patients were excluded due to severe oliguria, serum creatinine levels above cut-off level or RRT. Mean creatinine excretion in 24 h-urine samples was 13.5 ± 5.3 and 8.6 ± 3.8 mmol/day for males and females respectively (p \ 0.001). Hospital mortality was 18%. After univariate analysis UCE was strongly correlated with hospital mortality, with different relations for males and females. After multivariate logistic regression analysis with UCE, baseline serum creatinine, sex, and age, UCE and age were independently associated with mortality (p \ 0.001). When UCE was expressed in equal quintiles, patients in the lowest UCE quintile had a 4-fold increased mortality risk compared to patients with the highest UCE quintile. Likewise, ICU and hospital length of stay for patients patients in the lowest UCE quintile were 2-fold increased compared to patients with the highest UCE quintile. CONCLUSION. Urinary creatinine excretion after ICU admission is approximately 50% higher in critically ill male patients compared to female patients. For both sexes urinary creatinine excretion as a measure of muscle mass is strongly associated with patient mortality. INTRODUCTION. Central pontine and extrapontine myelinolysis is an osmotic demyelinisation disorder precipitated by an agressive correction of a dysosmolar state. It is often caused by a rapid correction of hyponatremia. Clinical manifestations usually develop 2-7 days after the electrolyte disturbance had occured, the severity of symptoms differs with the most severe being quadriplegia and coma. Once the symptoms have developed, the neurological prognosis is unfavourable. Several modes of therapy have been reported as effective once the neurological symptoms had occured (plasmapheresis, corticosteroids, immunoglobulins and thyreotropin releasing hormone -TRH), all were reported only as individual case reports. Through a search of literature we found 3 case reports of succesfull treatment with TRH followed by a prompt neurological recovery. A case report and a literature review. A 61-year old man was admitted with a severe hyponatremia, which was too rapidly corrected. Six days later he developed a progressively worsening neurological symptomatology (quadruparesis, dysartria, bulbar symptomatology). Central pontine and extrapontine myelinolysis was confirmed on MRI. The patient remained virtually unresponsive with a severe quadruparesis and a severe bulbar symptomatology for 4 weeks. The only sign of his consciousness was a tiny movement of his fingers on verbal comand. Therapy with TRH was started 4 weeks since the onset of symptoms in a daily dose of 2 mg i.v. for 30 days. A dramatic neurological improvement began within a few days and continued through the full course of therapy. He was discharged 6 weeks after the end of therapy with TRH. The patient made a practically complete recovery with only a slight residual neurological symptomatology. He returned to his work as manager 6 months later. Thyroid function tests were repeatedly within normal limits and no side effects were observed. CONCLUSION. Our case is, according to literature, a fourth reported treatment with TRH followed by a neurological improvement. TRH appears to be a safe and beneficial treatment of central pontine and extrapontine myelinolysis. Compared to other therapies, which are all immunosupresive, it appears to have no apparent side effects. INTRODUCTION. Critically ill patients have a reduced secretion of melatonin (M), both in nocturnal peaks and in baseline daily levels. The oral M supplementation has been hypothesized useful for its sedative, anti-oxidant and oncostatic properties. This study is designed to define both the enteral absorption and the daily pharmacokinetic of M in critically ill patients. METHODS. 9 high-risk patients (2 cardiac arrest, 4 polmonitis, 3 septic shock, 1 pulmonary edema) were enrolled in this prospective trial: mean age was 73.1 ± 4.9, mean SAPSIII 69.8 ± 5.3. During their third and fourth days of ICU, they undergo in two series of repeated blood samples at these times: 20:00 (t0), 20:05 (t1), 20:10 (t2), 20:20 (t3), 20:30 (t4), 20:45 (t5), 21:30 (t6), 24:00 (t7), 03:00 (t8), 06:00 (t9), 14:00 (t10), to detect serum M levels by radio-immuno-essay. One tablet containing M 3 mg (manufactured by Procemsa -Torino, Italia -with the pure M produced by Helsinn -Biasca, Switzerland) was gave at 20:00 of the fourth day, immediately after t0 sampling, by pounding the tablet in a pestle and administering it by a naso-gastric tube. To build the pharmacokinetic curve were used the serum M values of the fourth (exogenous) minus the third (endogenous) day. All basal values of serum M were found below the normal level, frequently under the lower detection limit of 3 pg/ml. The key role in this ,,fight-or-flight'' reaction is based in activation of the axis of cerebral cortex-hypothalamus-adrenal medulla, and resulting secretion of adrenaline. One of many actions of adrenaline includes glycolysis escalation and hence elevated blood lactate levels. Hyperlacticaemia may not necessarily only mirror tissue hypoxia. The aim of our study was to: 1) determine potential relationship between blood lactic acid levels and urinary adrenaline levels at the time of admission to the ICU; 2) utilize lactate plasma levels and urinary adrenaline levels as a marker to measure stress severity. We have ran the assay in 57 patients -45 males and 12 females, median age 51 years (17-80), out of them 33 trauma patients and 24 non-trauma patients, median APACHE II score -20 points (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) . The investigation was performed from the first urine sample taken at admission, in average 45 minutes (25 -70 minutes) after the insult. At the same time we assayed lactate levels in the arterial blood. Excluded were those patients who had been administered dopamine, adrenaline and/or noradrenaline in the pre-hospital setting, and patients with preexisting kidney disease. Adrenaline was assayed using a validated highperformance liquid chromatography method with electrochemical detection (HPLC-ECD). Thus determined adrenaline levels were recalculated relative to urinary creatinine levels. This concentration ratio compensates for the influence of variable urine output and corresponds with blood catecholamine levels at the moment of urine production. RESULTS. 1. Urinary adrenaline/creatinine ratio was significantly elevated in non-surviving vs. surviving patients, 64 vs. 24 nmol/mmol of creatinine (Z = -3.38, DF = 1, p = 0.0007). 2. Lactate plasma levels were significantly elevated in non-surviving vs. surviving patients, 4.3 vs. 2.8 mmol/l (Z = -2.93, DF = 1, p = 0.0034). 3. There was significant correlation between lactate plasma levels and urinary adrenaline levels (r = O.31, t = 2.43, p = 0.018). CONCLUSION. Association between plasma lactate levels and urinary adrenaline levels may suggest non-hypoxic cause of hyperlactataemia in the initial stage of stress response. The efforts to reach normal plasma lactate levels may thus be not the most appropriate therapeutic strategy. Elevated urinary adrenaline and plasma lactate levels in the non-surviving group may suggest higher stress burden of this group. Cori CF, The influence of insulin and epinephrine on the lactic acid content of blood and tissues, 1929. INTRODUCTION. Burn patients often receive far more resuscitation fluid than predicted by usual formula. Even few of them need support with vasopressor agents to achieve classic resuscitation end points (urinary output, mean arterial pressure). These variations are related with negative consequences described in the literature such as abdominal compartmental syndrome and progression of burn necrosis. Some of the factors related with the increased requirements of fluids are known (electrical buns, inhalational injury). In cases where these circumstances do not concur other factors are unknown. Adrenal failure is common in critically ill conditions. The diagnosis of relative adrenal failure (RAF), and its treatment with low doses of corticosteroids, showed reduction of vasopressor support, shock reversal and improved survival in septic shock. Our main objective is to know the prevalence of relative adrenal failure in the resuscitation phase of major burns. Secondly we study its implication as a possible factor of increased requirements in burn resuscitation Descriptive study of the prevalence of RAF in major burns carried on in Hospital Virgen del Rocío, a tertiary hospital regional reference centre for major burns. From March 2007, major burns accomplishing criteria were included. After written consent, 250 micrograms of Tetracosactrin (synthetic corticotrophin) was IV administered within the first 48 h of resuscitation. Measures of cortisol were obtained before and 60 minutes after administration. Every patient included received resuscitation following Parkland formula. Resuscitation volume (predicted and real), 24 h diuresis, use of vassopresors and demographic data were collected. We defined RAF as an increase in post-administration cortisol RESULTS. 14 subjects were included. The mean burn surface area was 52%. CONCLUSION. Prevalence of RAF in resuscitation phase of major burns is relevant. Its association with increased resuscitation volume, use of vassopresors and BSA, however not being statistically significant, shows a marked trend that a major sample size probably would strengthen.  A national educational effort based on the Surviving Sepsis Campaign (SSC) guidelines in Spain to promote bundles of care for severe sepsis and septic shock in adults (Edusepsis study) resulted in improved guideline compliance and lower hospital mortality (1) . The objective of the study was to analyze the impact of baseline care on the effectiveness of this intervention. Measurement of baseline compliance with the recommendations of the SSC guidelines in a pre-intervention cohort (2 month period: November-December 2005) and remeasurement in a post-intervention cohort (4 month period: March-June 2006). Intervention: The educational program consisted of training physicians and nursing staff from the ED, medical and surgical wards, and ICU in the definitions of severe sepsis and sepsis shock, their early recognition, and the treatments included in the guidelines. Setting: 59 medical-surgical adult ICUs located throughout Spain. ICUs were classified in 3 categories by percentiles depending on the process-of-care at baseline, measured by the number of tasks included in the bundles completed. Main Outcome Measure: Hospital mortality. Secondary outcome measures: Differences in adherence to process-of-care variables (sepsis care bundles). Patients: All admissions to the ICU from the emergency department (ED) or from wards and all ICU patients were actively screened daily for the presence of severe sepsis or septic shock. Statistic analysis: To compare continuous variables during study periods, we used Student's t test and to analyze categorical variables v2 analysis was employed. Baseline care of patients treated in Category 1 ICUs (20 ICUs) complied with less than 4 tasks; baseline care in Category 2 ICUs (19 ICUs) complied with 4 to 5 tasks; and baseline care in Category 3 ICUs (20 ICUs) complied with more than 5 tasks. No differences in APACHE II between pre-intervention cohort and post-intervention cohort were observed in any category. The educational program improved the process-of-care in all 3 categories of ICUs (relative improvement of tasks completed of 36.0% en ICUs Category 1, 12.2% in Category 2 and 9.3% in Category 3) but only reduced mortality in Category 1 ICUs (48.0 vs. 39.3%; p = .046). There is a possible relationship between baseline compliance with the guidelines and the effect of the educational program, suggesting that educational efforts are most effective when applied in ICUs with low baseline compliance with the guidelines. INTRODUCTION. While detailed analyses of the post-mortem findings of various critically ill patient groups were published, no such study has been performed in patients with sepsis. Detailed knowledge of post-mortem findings in these patients could not only improve our understanding and treatment of sepsis, but also direct at future research strategies. This retrospective cohort study reviews the post-mortem examinations of surgical intensive care unit (ICU) patients who died from sepsis or septic shock. Between 1997 and 2006 the ICU database and autopsy register of a tertiary university teaching hospital were reviewed for patients who were admitted to a twelve bed surgical ICU because of sepsis/septic shock or who developed sepsis/septic shock at a later stage during their ICU stay and subsequently died because of sepsis/septic shock. Clinical data and post-mortem findings were documented in all patients. Descriptive statistical methods were applied to evaluate the frequency of single organ pathologies. Chi 2 -test was used to compare the frequency of organ pathologies between the two most frequent clinical causes of death or during the observation period. Post-mortem results of 243 patients (87.7%) were available for statistical analysis. The main causes of death were refractory multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (50.6%) and uncontrollable cardiovascular failure (36.6%). Pathologies of the lungs, kidneys/urinary tract, cardiovascular system, gastrointestinal tract, liver, spleen, central nervous system, and pancreas were detected in 89.7, 59.7, 53.9, 53.1, 47.3, 32.1, 18.5, and 9%, 11, 4% occlusive) was the most frequent cardiac pathology. In 182 patients (74.9%) the autopsy revealed an ongoing septic focus. The most frequent ongoing foci were pneumonia (39.9%), tracheobronchitis (28.8%), peritonitis (22.6%), uterine/ovarial necrosis (9.2% of female patients), intra-abdominal abscesses (9.1%) and pyelonephritis (6.2%). Of the seventy-one patients who were admitted to the ICU because of sepsis/septic shock and treated for longer than seven days an ongoing septic focus was observed in 63 cases (88.7%). CONCLUSION. Relevant post-mortem findings explaining death in surgical ICU patients who died because of sepsis/septic shock were an ongoing septic focus in 80% and cardiac pathologies in 50%. The most frequently affected organs were the lungs, the abdomen, and the urogenitary tract. More diagnostic, therapeutic and scientific efforts should be launched to identify and control the infectious focus in patients with sepsis and septic shock. RESULTS. Among 122 patients with a mean APACHE II score of 27.6 ± 7.6 (IIT) and 28.6 ± 7.5 (CIT), P-value = 0.48 There was no difference between the two group in ICU mortality 32.7% (IIT) and 22.4% (CIT) Adjusted Hazard Ratio (AHR) = 1.6, P = 0.2. Among non-diabetics, mortality was higher in the (IIT) group 42% than the (CIT) group 31%, AHR = 4.0, P = 0.01; similar finding was observed in patients with inclusion blood sugar B 10 mmol/L. Hypoglycemia occurred more frequently with IIT (46 events/100 treatment days vs. 3 events/100 treatment days, P \ 0.0001).There was no difference between the IIT and CIT in any of the other secondary endpoints. CONCLUSION. In septic medical surgical ICU patients, IIT had no mortality difference from those on CIT. However, IIT was associated with higher mortality in non-diabetics and in patients with inclusion blood sugar B 10 mmol/L. Also, IIT increased the occurrence of hypoglycemia. Further studies are needed to explore the benefit of this intervention in this category of patients. Prevention and early detection of hypoglycemia is major concern when implementing this therapy. METHODS. This was a single-center prospective observational study of patients admitted to the medical-surgical ICU of an urban tertiary care teaching hospital fulfilling criteria for the international sepsis definitions. After a widespread 2 months educational program, implementation of SSC Resuscitation Bundles (RB) and Management Bundles (MB) were accomplished. Patients were recruited from September 2005 to February 2008. We determined the rate of compliance and the prognostic value of the RB, the MB and of each bundle element. We analyzed 295 consecutive episodes of septic shock. The main sources of infection were: abdomen 34.8%, lung 34.8%, and UTI 12.6%. The mean age was 64 ± 15, APACHE II 23 ± 7, SOFA 9.5 ± 3, and global hospital mortality 40.3%. The rate of compliance with the RB was 32%. There were significant differences in mortality between compliant (C) and non compliant (NC) groups despite the similar characteristics and the severity of septic shock. Mortality rate was 46.7% in the NC group and 27.7% in the C group. Compliance rate with MB was only 16%, there were not differences in mortality between C and NC groups (48.4 vs. 55.50%). When the influence of age, severity, emergency department origin, and ICU admission delay was controlled by multivariate analysis, compliance with RB was independently associated with survival (OR = 0.49, 95% CI 0.26-0.94, p = 0.03). We only found differences in mortality between C and NC groups in three bundle elements: serum lactate measured before 6 h (35.2 vs. 54.2%; p \ 0.01), early broad-spectrum antibiotics use (34% vs. 47.3%; p = 0.02), and treatment with activated protein C when indicated (25 vs. 55.5%; p = 0.04). In the multivariate analysis, compliance with the three early goal-directed therapy endpoints, age, SOFA score, and mechanical ventilation were independently associated to mortality. CONCLUSION. Implementation of resuscitation bundle was associated with decreased mortality in patients with septic shock. Among all sepsis bundle elements, compliance with the three early goal-directed therapy endpoints was the only independent predictor of survival. Compliance rate with management bundles was poor and had no impact on survival. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. Supported by IFIMAV and Instituto de Salud Carlos III. Expte. PI070723. The surviving sepsis campaign aims to achieve globally a 25% reduction in mortality due to severe sepsis. The campaign is in its third phase, and aims to inform, implement and check the compliance, improvement and outcomes of the resuscitation bundles. In UK, patient with severe sepsis are identified usually by the Registrars and referred to Intensive therapy unit team. Therefore for compliance with the Resuscitation Bundle, it is essential to identify sepsis, severity of sepsis and initiate resuscitation measures. A questionnaire was designed for online access. Questions tried to elicit knowledge about awareness of the campaign, its aims and practise. Recent experience in Intensive therapy unit was elicited. The e mail links were sent to Registrars across UK. . (1) The common diagnosis at admission was septic shock 13.3%, Aortic aneurism 8.5%, Community Pneumonia 4.6%, post-operative brain trauma resection 4.2% and hypovolemic shock 3.7%. From the total of patients mortality was 30.9%. Statistics analysis showed no significant correlation between three kinds of sepsis classifications and mortality in our critically ill patients independent of significant differences between mortality in each group (Table) . METHODS. Participants were critically ill patients in two large university-affiliated teaching hospital intensive care units in the United States. Prior to the installation of PW, implementation of the SSC was done using a paper-based system of standing orders. Base line data on compliance with the SSC guidelines were collected. Protocol Watch, which offers an electronic version of the guidelines and is resident on the bedside patient monitor, was then installed in all critical care beds. The post PW installation data collection is currently being collected. Preliminary results show improvements in compliance with the resuscitation bundle, and a decreased time for completion of both the resuscitation and management bundles. In addition, the feedback from the clinical users has been extremely positive. (1, 32) p \ 0,00001); trombocythopenia (HR:2,32 (1, 31) p \ 0,0015); hypoglucemia (HR:2,94 (1, 2) p \ 0,04) and leucopenia (HR:1,86 (1, 3) p \ 0,04). Global survival at 28 days was 58,8%. CONCLUSION. Sepsis incidence in our ICU enviroment is high (45%). We identified four major unfavourable outcome independent factors: lactate [ 3 mmol/L, trombocythopenia, hypoglucemia and leucopenia. Our 28 day survival rate was 59%. INTRODUCTION. Since the publication of the guidelines for the management of septic patients, many efforts have been done to systemize the treatment, specially the hemodynamic resuscitation within the first 6 h. The acomplishment of these guidelines in the hospital enviroment is increasing but it is necessary to study the final impact on mortality. Our goal was to analyze the impact on mortality in a third level hospital of the educational campaign based on different bundles of resuscitation within the first 6 and 24 h. RESULTS. Only two predictor goals reached the statistic signification when we compared the outcomes of the different fases: glucemia control during the first and second fase (p = 0,023) and during the second and third fase (p = 0,01), and the protective ventilation durind the second and third fase (p = 0,01). Survival rate after 28 day was: Fase I 55%. Fase II 63%. Fase III 46%. These differences between fases as the location of presentation did not achieve statistic signification. (1), it has now evolved to be the method of choice. While the quantitative approach and the traditional Henderson-Hasselbalch method do not mathematically exclude one another, the Stewart approach may provide better mechanistic insight in complex acid-base disturbances. However, the approach may be cumbersome in daily practice because of its preceived complexity and required calculations. This is why we developed an online tool which may facilitate its use. We used a comination of HTML-, JavaScript-and PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor programming languages to create the software. In consists of several scripts that interact with a MySQL database. Both are hosted on a Linux server and are accessed via an Apache web server. The software is based on the Figge-Fencl modification of the Stewart approach (2). Users may reach the application at www.acidbase.org with any modern web browser. Users must enter acid-base, case description and chemical data. Cases can be saved anonymously for later review by the submitter and others. A tool is provided to run hypothetical scenarios by changing different physiological parameters. The application was tested using historical data from the authors hospital. For additional testing, the sites address was given to members of the CCM-L (critical care) and GASnet (anesthesiology) mailing lists. RESULTS. The acidbase.org website now features the tool. Initial testing using historical and new clinical data lead to technical improvements in the scripts. Anesthesiologists and critical care physicians from the CCM-L and GASnet mailing lists that accessed the application using real patient data (n [ 10) generally found it helpful, especially the simulation tool. The application has been online since January 2008. Without advertising, over 200 doctors worldwide have used the software generating a total of 8000 pageviews as of March 2008. Feedback by users is voluntary but already yielded over 10 very positive responses indicating a change in diagnostic and/or therapeutic strategies. We have shown that is feasible to build an online software application that aids in the interpretation of complex acidbase disorders using the Stewart approach. In addition this tool enables the clinician to judge the impact of possible intervention by using simulation based on the entered case data. Initial experience seems positive. We will next set out to investigate the impact of exposure to this decision support tool on clinical patient management. INTRODUCTION. Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis (HMA) is a frequent occurrence in the critically ill. There is evidence to suggest that HMA impairs splanchnic perfusion (1) and has a detrimental effect on renal function (2) . We hypothesised that the presence of HMA at ICU admission would predict the subsequent renal outcomes. We conducted a single centre, retrospective analysis of 718 patients with a length of stay of at least 3 days in a mixed medical and surgical ICU over a period of 2 years. The relationship between HMA and subsequent renal outcome was studied. RESULTS. 81 patients (11.3%) had HMA at admission defined by Cl C 110 and base deficit of \ -5. There was no significant correlation between admission HMA and day 3 or day 5 glomerular filtration rate (GRF) or between admission HMA and change in GFR over the first 5 days of ICU stay. Admission HMA was not a predictor of day 3 or day 5 RIFLE score, of progression of RIFLE score over days 1-5, or of the requirement for renal replacement therapy at any time during ICU stay. Serum chloride alone was similarly not a predictor of the above measures. CONCLUSION. Alhough HMA is suggested to have detrimental renal effects we could find no such association in a study involving over 700 patients. METHODS. Prospective observational study, in the critical care unit of a university hospital, during three months, including single measurements admission data of the patients (arterial blood samples for gases, Na + , K+ , Ca2+ , Mg2+ , inorganic phosphate, albumin, lactate) . Bicarbonate, base excess (BE), anion gap(AG), anion gap adjusted for albumin(AGa), Cl corrected for water excess/deficit, apparent and effective strong ion difference (SIDa and SIDe) and strong ion gap (SIG) were calculated.Respiratory disturbances were not analysed. RESULTS. 121 patients were included. 114 patients present a metabolic acidosis, according with traditional analysis (bicarbonate, BE and AGa) . Stewart's approach identified a metabolic acidosis in 117 patients (including 2 of the 3 patients having a normal bicarbonate, BE and AGa), a metabolic alkalosis in 2 patients and a normal status in 2 patients. Hypoalbuminemia was present in 98 patients, hyperchloremia in 62patients and hyperlactatemia in 63 patients. Among these 63 cases of hyperlactatemia, 60 patients had a high SIG and 62 patients a high AGa. The traditional approach failed to identify 4 cases of metabolic acidosis (2 patients are considered normal and 2 having an alkalosis). For these four patients, the short term evolution was toward acidosis (2), alkalosis(1) and unchanged (1) . One of the 2 normal patients in Stewart's approach had a metabolic acidosis in the traditional approach. CONCLUSION. Stewart's approach is close to traditional method associating the AGa in identifying the acid-base disorders but allows the detection of different and opposite participating mechanisms. INTRODUCTION. Disorders of acid-base equilibrium are common in critically ill patients. The Stewart methodology has been found to be useful in explaining these disorders, where conventional analysis was deficient. However, much uncertainty remains about the usefulness and clinical meaning of this new approach. The objectives of our study are to verify whether the identification of unmeasured anions using the Stewart methodology is related to the mortality in intensive care unit (ICU) and compare its prognostic value to the traditional acidbase variables such as lactate, standard base excess (SBE) and anion gap (AG). METHODS. This is a prospective study with all the patients admitted in the ICU of Hospital  Metformin is an oral hypoglycaemic with proven benefit in diabetic patients. It is relatively safe. However, a potential complication is its rare association with lactic acidosis, a condition that has approximately 50 percent mortality rate from overseas data. Oriental data concerning this complication is limited. The objective of this study is to review the initial presentation, disease severity and outcomes of oriental patients, who were suffering from metformin-associated lactic acidosis (MALA)and required intensive care. METHODS. This study was conducted as a single-arm observational case series review in a regional hospital in Hong Kong. It had been approved by the Hong Kong Hospital Authority -Research Ethics Committee. The clinical data of patients who were admitted to the Adult Intensive Care Unit of United Christian Hospital between 1-12-2004 and 1-12-2006 with diagnosis of metformin-associated lactic acidosis (blood pH \ 7.35;HCO3 \ 22 mmol/ L;anion gap [ 14mmo/L;serum lactate [ 5 mmol/L and renal failure without other contributing causes of lactic acidosis)were retrieved from the Clinical Data and Reporting System and the Clinical Management System of the Hospital Authority. Clinical information will be analysed and presented by using descriptive statistics. RESULTS. Nine cases were identified (3 males and 6 females) with mean age 67 ± 6 years old. Two patients had past medical history of renal impairment. All patients had been taken metformin for more than 6 months with mean dose 2.25 g ± 0.93 g per day. None had recent metformin dosage change. Majority had non-specific gastrointestinal symptoms (89%) and precipitating factors (78%). Sepsis was not uncommon (44%). Patients were seriously ill on admission to ICU (worst Cr 986umol/L, urea 51.5 mmol/L, K 7.7 mmol/L, lactate 23.7 mmol/L within first 24-h ICU admission). All patients received renal replacement therapy by continuous veno-venous haemofiltration. Seven out of 9 patients (78%) were given sodium bicarbonate infusion. But no significant changes of blood pH (P = 0.055) was noted after NaHCO3 infusion. Despite high APACHEII score (Mean 29.9 ± 5.7) and expected mortality rate (mean 67.5 ± 13.9), the observed 30-day mortality rate was 11%. No survivors required long-term dialysis. CONCLUSION. Patients suffered from MALA usually presented with non-specific complaint and often had precipitating event. Sepsis should not be overlooked. The observed outcome seemed better than the outcome predicted by the severity score and non-oriental data. Management includes cessation of offending drug, fluid resuscitation, identify and treat the precipitating event, organ support when necessary. The role of sodium bicarbonate infusion is still debatable. Further large-scale study to understand underlying pathophysiology and optimize management is fruitful. Regional citrate anticoagulation has been established as a safe alternative to heparin anticoagulation for continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT). Since the metabolism of citrate is impaired in patients with liver failure it is unclear whether this therapeutic approach can be safely applied in this patient group as it may result in citrate intoxication with metabolic acidosis, decreased ionized calcium and increased total calcium. The study was designed as a prospective observational study. 24 critically ill patients (13 male, 11 female) with acute renal failure undergoing CRRT with regional citrate anticoagulation were included and assigned to two groups according to their bilirubin levels either above or below 3 mg/dl. All patients were treated with continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF) with a CRRT device that is designed for citrate anticoagulation (Multi Filtrate, Fresenius Medical Care, Bad Homburg, Germany) using a high flux filter and a CVVHDF dose of 2 l/h. The filters were routinely changed after 72 h. 4% trisodium citrate solution was infused proximal to the extracorporeal circuit to obtain ionized calcium levels of 0.25 to 0.35 mmol/l for anticoagulation. Systemic calcium (1.7 mmol/l) infusion was targeted to maintain systemic ionized calcium from 1.12 to 1.20 mmol/l. The calcium levels and blood gases were measured every 4 h. Citrate therapy was discontinued when set goals in calcium levels and acid base metabolism could not be met or total calcium exceeded 3 mmol/l. We compared the ionized systemic calcium, the ionized calcium in the extracorporeal circuit (postfilter) and the demand of citrate and calcium between the two groups. Statistical analysis was performed using the Mann Whitney test. RESULTS. The group with liver failure consisted of 8 patients with a mean bilirubin level of 8.8 mg/dl, the other group of 17 patients with a mean bilirubin level of 0.7 mg/dl. 98 filters were used in 60 episodes of therapy. In the group with liver failure, total calcium exceeded 3 mmol/l in one patient and in the group without liver failure, severe alkalosis with HCO3 levels over 40 mmol/l occurred in one patient requiring the termination of citrate therapy. No significant differences between the two groups were found in the levels of ionized systemic calcium and the calcium and citrate demands. Although the ionized postfilter calcium levels differed significantly, the respective 95% confidence interval was well within the targeted range of 0.25 to 0.35 mg/dl meaning the difference was not relevant. CONCLUSION. With appropriate monitoring, regional citrate anticoagulation for CRRT is a safe therapy even in patients with liver failure. INTRODUCTION. Renal dysfunction in critical ill patients remains an important and independent marker of mortality. In the last few years a new dialysis method has emerged to substitute kidney function: Slow Extended Dialysis (SLED). This therapy combines the advantages of intermitent Hemodialysis (IHD) and Continuous Renal Replacement Treatment (CRRT). We show the experience with SLED in the last 17 months in our University Hospital Intensive Care Unit. We performed a retrospective study in patients who initiated SLED between October 2006 and March 2008 (17 months) . We registered the following data for each patient: age, sex, severity of disease using the SAPS II score, mortality rate, co-morbidities, diagnostic group, causal factors, RIFLE classification, length of stay in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and renal outcome. SLED therapy consisted in a minimum of 6 h per treatment at least 6 times per week sessions, with dialyzed flows of 300 ml/min. . 72 patients initiated SLED in this period. 654 SLED treatments were done, representing an average of 9,08 treatments per patient. Mean patient age was 62 years, 62,5% were male. Surgical patients represented 29,2% (n = 21) of the group. Sepsis was the major cause of kidney injury (58,3%; n = 42 patients). The most prevalent co-morbid disease was hypertension; 44,4% (n = 32) had chronic kidney disease and 25% (n = 18) had end-stage renal disease (ESRD). All patients without previous ESRD started SLED in the failure stage of RIFLE classification. The ICU length of stay was 19,7 days (2-240 days) . The initial SAPS II score was 57 with a predicted mortality of 61,9%. Twelve patients (16,67%) developed ESRD. The mortality rate was 40% (n = 29). CONCLUSION. These results show that SLED constitute a safe renal replacement therapy despite its short duration and its lower intervention by ICU staff compared to CRRT. Its safety, effectiveness and low cost constitute a good alternative to ''classic'' dialysis strategies in ICU. The mortality rate in this study seems lower than predicted by SAPS II score. Prospective studies comparing different renal replacement modalities are needed and will be very helpful in the future to tailor renal replacement therapies in the Intensive Care Unit. INTRODUCTION. Alcohol intoxication (methanol, ethanol and ethylene glycol) may result in metabolic acidosis with increased anion gap, increased serum osmolal gap, and neurologic abnormalities ranging from drunkenness to coma, and death. The mortality and morbidity rates remain very high despite intensive care therapy. The toxicity of methanol and ethylene glycol is clearly correlated to the degree of metabolic acidosis. The established treatment of severe methanol and ethylene glycol intoxication is ethanol administration and hemodialysis (HD). By inhibiting the main metabolic pathway of methanol and ethylene glycol (alcohol dehydrogenase), ethanol prevents the formation of major toxic metabolites (formic acid, glycolic acid and oxalic acid). Conventional HD can reduce serum methanol, ethanol and ethylene glycol and its metabolites rapidly, but high-flux membranes should be capable of removing more toxic per hour of HD. In this report, we describe 14 cases of life-threatening alcohol intoxication (11 methanol, 1 ethanol, and 2 ethylene glycol) who were treated successfully with supportive care, ethanol infusion (methanol and ethylene glycol), and early HD with a high-flux dialyser. RESULTS. The median pH was 7.04 ± 0.06 (range 6.60-7.33), median bicarbonate 9.9 ± 1.9 mmol/l (range 1.4-25) , and median base deficit 18.4 ± 2.6 mmol/l (range 2-33). The median anion gap was 29.1 ± 2.3 mmol/l (range 16-45) and the median osmolal gap was 119 ± 47 mOsm/l (range 16-402). On admission there was an excellent linear correlation between the serum toxic alcohol concentrations and the osmolal gaps (R 2 = 0.98, p = 0.0006). In all cases early HD corrected metabolic acidosis and osmolal abnormalities. The mortality was 7 % (1 from 14). CONCLUSION. We conclude that pre-emptive HD should be performed in severe intoxications to remove both the parent compound and its metabolites. The HD prescription should include a large surface area dialyser with high-flux membrane, a blood flow rate in excess of 250 ml/min, a modified bicarbonate bath enriched with phosphorus and potassium, and a long time session. The phosphorus and potassium-enriched bicarbonate-based dialysis solution used in patients with normal phosphorus and potassium serum levels avoided HD-induced hypophosphatemia and hypopotassemia. HD as implemented in these cases is a safe and very effective approach to the management of alcohol poisoning. Advantages of PD over other RRT include better haemodinamic stability and no vascular access requirement. The aim of this study was to describe our experience in the treatment of AKI using PD following cardiac surgery and to investigate factors associated with poor survival. We retrospectively analysed 23 patients from January 2000 to March 2008 and collected demographic, renal function and intensive care course data. RESULTS. The incidence of AKI treated with PD was 2,3% (23/998). Thirteen patients were male, mean age 29 ± 48,4 months (7 days to 165 months) and mean weight 9,1 ± 8,1 kg. Mean PRISM II score 19,3 ± 6 and 22% with RACHS score C 4. The indications for PD initiation were oliguria (13 patients), anuria (9 patients) and acidosis (1 patient CONCLUSION. In our study patients populations were similar but mortality rate were lower with SLED. In spite the small amount of patients enrolled we do not found any reason to choose CRRT in our patients when we can perform SLED with the same or even higher quality and with significantly lower cost. INTRODUCTION. Whether acute renal failure (ARF) is associated with increased mortality in intensive care unit (ICU) remains unclear. Results of available studies are confounded by the lack of a standard definition for ARF and clear indications for renal replacement therapy (RRT), and the many differences in baseline characteristics and in-ICU events (organ failures, sepsis) between patients with and those without ARF. Our aim was to accurately investigate the impact of ARF on ICU mortality by using recent consensus definition criteria and controlling for confounding factors. Particularly, we assessed the role of RRT.  A 53 year old lady with a history of depression presented to the psychiatric outpatient unit of a tertiary hospital with worsening apathy and significant weight loss (6 kg) within the last 3 month. Her major complaints included bone and abdominal pain. Initial investigations revealed drastically elevated total serum calcium (6,08 mmol/l) and the patient was immediately admitted to the medical ward. During the following 48 h serum calcium increased despite volume expansion and treatment with diuretics, calcitonin, zoledronic acid and the patient developed an acute kidney injury. Because of the development of severe sepsis associated with pancreatitis and a deteriorating mental state the patient had to be intubated and transferred to the medical intensive care unit of the university hospital of Innsbruck. The CT-scan showed an adenoma of 3.3 9 3.5 x 6.1 cm next to right lobe of the thyroid gland, an enlarged liver and bilateral pulmonary infiltrates. Together with a highly elevate PTH (2217 ng/l) these results confirmed the diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism. At that time the patient was anuric. To enable resection of the adenoma under safe conditions normalization of serum calcium was required before surgery. First intermittent hemodialysis was initiated which reduced serum calcium during each treatment session but a rebound occurred within a few h. Consequently, we switched the patient to CVVHD using citrate anticoagulation with the intention to normalise serum calcium by constant chelation and elimination of calcium. Regional citrate anticoagulation was performed by infusing 4,0% tri-sodium citrate into the extracorporeal circuit using a calcium free dialysate solution with reduced sodium (133 mmol/l) and bicarbonate content (20 mmol/l) applying a dialysate flow of 2000 ml/h. Calcium substitution was reduced to fifty percent of the usually applied dose. RESULTS. With this method we were able to normalize elevated serum calcium within 48 h. Surgery had to be deferred until pneumonia and sepsis resolved. Serum calcium was kept stable between 2.3 and 2.5 mmol/l with CVVHD over the entire period. On day 14 after admission to the ICU the adenoma could be successfully removed. One month later the patient could be transferred back to the referring hospital already mobilized but still requiring intermittent hemodialysis, however, already gaining urine output. CONCLUSION. This case demonstrates the ability of CVVHD with regional citrate anticoagulation to easily control severe hypercalcaemia without adverse events. (1). The aim of this study was to further investigate whether endothelin-1 (ET-1), as a potential mediator of vasoconstrictive responses to INO, is involved in the pulmonary blood flow redistribution induced by INO. We hypothesized that a dual endothelin antagonist may blunt the blood flow redistribution induced by INO. In an animal model of endotoxin induced lung injury, we exposed 8 piglets (27 ± 1.9 kg) to 40 ppm INO and, subsequently infused the dual endothelin antagonist Tezosentan. Pulmonary blood flow distribution was assessed by single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) in supine position in 5 of the 8 animals, (a) after lung injury was established, (b) with INO and (c) after Tezosentan infusion has been added to INO for 45 min. Oxygenation was assessed using PaO2/FiO2 ratio. ANOVA was used for hemodynamic comparisons and paired t-tests to compare between SPECT perfusion profiles. INTRODUCTION. Acid aspiration, a common cause of ALI/ARDS, is associated with a severe deterioration of gas exchange and lung mechanics as well as with endogenous surfactant impairment. We evaluated the effects of surfactant replacement in a previously characterized (1) murine model of unilateral acid-induced lung injury, with a spontaneous fibrotic evolution, after the acute essudative phase, of the injured lung region. METHODS. We instilled 1.5 ml/kg BW of 0.1 M HCl in the right bronchus of anesthetized mice. Six h after injury, mice were randomised to receive in the injured lung, a single bolus of porcine surfactant (80 mg/kg; CurosurfÒ; Chiesi Farmaceutici, Parma, Italy) or sterile saline (0.9% NaCl, control group). After the injury-and the treatment-procedures, mice were mechanically ventilated (Vt 8-10 ml kg-1 BW, RR 130 min-1, and PEEP of 2.5 cmH2O) for 10 min, then kept in an oxygenated chamber until full awakening. Specific compliance of the respiratory system and blood gas analysis were assessed both in acute (24 hrs from injury) and in late (2 weeks) phase, whereas Broncho-Alveolar Lavage (BAL) was performed only at 24 hrs. In acute phase, surfactant instillation decreased neutrophilic influx in BAL, since the differential white blood cell count showed a significantly reduced percentage of PMN in surfactant treated group compared to control (45% vs. 68%) (p \ 0.05). Moreover oxygenation was significantly better (PaO2 78 ± 11 mmHg) in surfactant treated group than in the control group (64 ± 14 mmHg) (p \ 0,05); no effect was present in late phase (respectively,127 ± 24 mmHg and 137 ± 22 mmHg). The surfactant treated group showed a significantly better respiratory system compliance at both at 24 h and at 2 weeks, when compared to control groups (p \ 0.05). INTRODUCTION. Despite advances in mechanical ventilation, treatment of severe refractory hypoxemia has remained one of the greatest challenges in intensive care. Inhaled nitric oxide (NO) is commonly used for the treatment of refractory hypoxemia in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). However, it has never been shown to decrease mortality, has substantial cost and has potential side effects. Prostacyclin analogues have also been used in small trials. The phosphodiesterase inhibitor milrinone is a potent pulmonary vasodilator that has been used with success as an inhaled therapy for pulmonary hypertension and therefore is a potential alternative to actual treatment. We designed a prospective pilot study in ARDS patients, comparing inhaled nitric oxide with epoprostenol and inhaled milrinone. METHODS. In our academic 24-bed medico-surgical intensive care unit, patients were screened for the study from March 2006 to January 2008. Adult patients were enrolled after informed consent was obtained if they had refractory hypoxemic failure meeting standard ARDS criteria and had a Swan-Ganz catheter. We randomly and sequentially nebulized NO (at 20 ppm) and eproprostenol (10ug/ml) and thereafter nebulized milrinone (1 mg/ml) alone and in association with NO. After 20 minutes of nebulisation for each drugs, a 30 minutes pause was allowed. The following parameters were measured after each step: systemic and pulmonary pressures, cardiac output, blood gaz. The following parameters were calculated: peripheral and pulmonary vascular resistances (SVR et PVR), PVR/SVR Ratio, transpulmonary gradient, PaO2/FiO2, shunt and oxygenation Index. All results are express in median(IQR). During the study period, 14 patients were enrolled: 12 men and 2 women with a mean age of 56.0 ± 17.4 years. Their APACHE II score was 22 ± 5. All ARDS were from pulmonary cause and pneumonia (n = 9) was the leading diagnosis. The mean baseline PaO2/ FiO2 ratio was 138 ± 40. We observed a PaO2 increase of 6.9(15.6), 6.0(17.1), 6.0(14.3) and 6.4(18.6) mmHg respectively using NO, epoprostenol, milrinone and combination of NO and milrinone. We also observed an improvement in the iPVR in the four groups: -29. 5  To analize the clearance profile of pulmonary edema provoked by saline solution instillation after induction of a lung injury by oleic acid infussion. Experimental study in which three groups of pigs (weight 31 ± 3 kg) where assigned to different methods of experimental pulmonary edema (PE). Group A (n = 8): lesional-PE produced by oleic acid iv infussion (0.1 ml/kg). Group B (n = 10): PE by saline solution tracheal instillation (4 ml/kg). Group C (n = 7): oleic acid iv infussion (0.1 ml/kg) followed by saline solution tracheal instillation (4 ml/kg). Anesthetized and under mechanical ventilation for 4 h. PE clearance profile registered by measurement of extravascular lung water by thermodilution (PiCCOÒ, Pulsion, Germany) every 30 minutes. Mann-Whitney test for cuantitative variables was used and a p \ 0.05 was considered significative. RESULTS. PE clearance profile in group A differs from that observed in groups B and C, showing increase in the last 2 h. In group B, a continuous clearence was noted with 24 ml/h rate in the first 2 h, and 6 ml/h in the second part of the experiment. In group C, althoug the clearance rate was stable (12-16 ml/h), total clearance was similar as observed in group B. There were not found significative differences between groups B and C in any measurement. CONCLUSION. Clearance profile of PE produced by saline solution instillation over a lung injury model is similar than the one due only to saline solution. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. ) , which is an integrated pump/oxygenator that functions at low blood flow rates (300-500 mL/min) equivalent to those used in renal dialysis. The small priming volume (190 ml), reduced membrane surface area (0.5 m2), and use of a percutaneously inserted dual lumen venous catheter (15 Fr) to provide blood inflow and outflow make the entire system suitable for repetitive use in patients with hypercapnic acute respiratory failure. We report here 7-day animal data stressing the hemocompatibility and gas exchange capabilities of the device. METHODS. The venous catheter was inserted into the right exterior jugular vein of 7 adult sheep and connected to the saline-primed Hemolung circuit. Hollow fiber membranes were coated with siloxane and heparin to prevent plasma wetting and to increase biocompatibility. Animals were minimally anticoagulated with heparin (ACT 150). Blood flow, CO2 exchange, blood gases and key hematological parameters were measured over 7 days. Necropsy was performed on termination. RESULTS. Removal of CO2 (normalized to a pCO2 of 45 mmHg) remained steady over 7 days averaging 66 ± 13 mL/min at blood flows of 350-400 mL/min. As venous PCO2 rose or fell so did the level of CO2 removal. One animal was terminated after 3 days due to accidental disconnection of a blood tube. No plasma wetting was noted over the 7 days. Two devices were replaced after 4 days due to bearing malfunction, however, the animals suffered no permanent side effects from this intervention. Hematocrit remained stable in all animals and no blood products were required. Initial platelet counts dropped to 241,000/uL ± 84,000 by the second day, but recovered to baseline values on day 4 and remained stable. Necropsy showed no signs of thromboembolism or organ damage.  Patients with spinal cord injuries can develop alterations of respiratory mechanics responsible of infective complications, which represents the most important cause of increased mortality and morbidity. The most relevant alteration of respiratory mechanics is the reduction of functional residual capacity (FRC). The latter can be responsible of a reduction of the expiratory flow able to provoke the development of expiratory flow limitation (EFL). The clinical consequences are the inability to cough and the cyclic opening/closure of the peripheral airways responsible of a chronic lung inflammation. Aim of our study was to evaluate whether the FRC reduction could lead to EFL. METHODS. 31 consecutive patients with spinal cord injury at C4-C5 level were studied (age: 38 ± 18y; weight: 70 ± 13Kg; days from trauma: 66 ± 46). The following data were recorded, both seated and supine: 1) parameters from pulmonary function test, such as inspiratory capacity (IC), FEV1, FEV1/FVC 2) EFL by the NEP test, which is based on the application at the airways opening of a negative pressure of 3 cmH2O 4) difference between the expiratory flow during tidal ventilation and the expiratory flow of the ensuing breath (NEP test) at 50% of the expired volume (DELTA V'). The main result of our study is that 32% of the patients developed EFL in supine position, while this percentage is only 7% in seated position. Moreover, the presence of EFL was statistically related to the age of the patients (32 ± 16 years without EFL VS 60 ± 12 years with EFL). Interestingly, the DELTA V' was markedly reduced in supine (0.16 ± 0.12 l/s) than in seated position (0.28 ± 0.16 l/s). Both values were much lower than those of normal subjects ([ 0.7 l/s, personal observation). On the contrary, patients in supine position showed better spirometric parameters. CONCLUSION. The clinical implications of the reduction of the expiratory flow are a) the inefficacy of the cough to clean the secretions and b) a chronic lung inflammation due to the presence of EFL. Indeed the FEV1/FVC ratio was 0.60 ± 17 in seated position, value that implies the presence of obstructive lung disease even in very young patients. Hence, although the patients with spinal cord injuries exhibited a better spirometric parameters in supine position, the need of avoiding the pro-inflammatory mechanisms due to reduction of expiratory flow, implies the maintenance of these patients in semirecumbent position. METHODS. During a 4 year-period, all ARDS patients (PaO2/FiO2 \ 150) prospectively turned prone for 24 h based on clinical and lung ultrasound criteria of lower lobes consolidation or atelectasis. The ventilatory settings for all patients included plateau pressures less than 30 cm H2O and PEEP of 5-20 cmH2O. Gas exchange data and lung mechanics were evaluated in the supine position and after turned prone, every hour for the first 3 h, every 6 h for the remaining 24 h and after turning in the supine position. The time course response of the gas exchange improvement was correlated with the time of the onset of ARDS. The cause of death (pulmonary or non-pulmonary) was noted. ANOVA was used for statistical analysis (p \ 0,05). . 42 patients (30 M and 12 F) with ARDS (14 of extrapulmonary and 28 of pulmonary etiology), with a mean age of 41 years (min 17, max 74) included in the study. The onset of the ARDS was 3,7 days (min 1 day, max 14 days) and their initial PaO2/FiO2 and PaCO2 in the supine position were 85 ± 41 and 45 ± 11 mmHg, respectively. All patients increased substantially their PaO2/FiO2 and decreased their PaCO2 after 24 h in the prone position [to 220 ± 90 and 39 ± 6 mmHg (p \ 0.01)], compared to the supine position. Lung compliance did not change significantly from the supine to prone position (from 33 ± 12 to 36 ± 11 ml/cmH2O) but significantly improved when turned supine again (from 33 ± 12 to 37 ± 12). No relationship was found between the onset of ARDS or the etiology (pulmonary or extrapulmonary) and the time course improvement of PaO2/FiO2. Oxygenation continued to improve overtime in prone position and in some patients recruitment of lung units was observed after 16 h after they had turned prone. Mortality of the entire group of patients was 32%, but the mortality attributed to the ARDS was 20%. CONCLUSION. Lung ultrasound may identify ARDS patients susceptible to improve their gas exchange by prone position. Response to prone position may be delayed as much as 16 h. Prone position may improve survival in patients with severe ARDS. INTRODUCTION. In order to minimize dead space ventilation, adjustment of breathing frequency and tidal volume may be necessary. Also reduction of anatomical dead space, by means of reducing ventilatory tube length, is favourable for the artificial ventilation of ICU patients. Not yet investigated is the possibility of improvement of blood flow to unperfused alveoli. In this way physiological dead space could be reduced. We investigated the effect of a continuous lateral rotation bed on dead space ventilation compared to routine manual turning. METHODS. 21 consecutive patients were investigated. 9 patients were treated with continuous lateral rotation therapy (CLRT) and 12 patients received standard care. In the standard care group the patients were turned in the lateral position each 4 h manually on a TOTAL CARE Ò bed (Hillrom Ò ). Lateral rotation was performed as lateral as possible. In the CLRT group the patients were turned every 20 minutes automatically as lateral as possible on a SpO2-RT bed (Hillrom Ò ). PaCO2, PeCO2, minute volume were recorded before start of treatment (t = 0) and after 24 h (t = 24). Dead space ventilation was calculated as: Vd/ Vt = (PaCO2 -PeCO2)/PaCO2. The difference of Vd/Vt of the two time points was used for calculation. A nonparametric Mann-Whitney U test was used for analysing differences between the two groups. A significance level of \ 0.05 was considered significant. RESULTS. Dead space ventilation on t = 0 in the control group was 0.17 ± 0.11 vs. 0.29 ± 0.28 in the CLRT group; not statistically different. However after 24 h the Vd/Vt was 0.11 ± 0.08 in the standard treated group and 0.28 ± 0.14 in the CLRT group (p \ 0.005). The differences between t = 24 and t = 0 in the both groups did not differ significantly, control group -0.07 ± 0.14, CLRT group 0.01 ±0.14. CONCLUSION. Dead space was not significantly reduced after CLRT treatment when compared to standard rotation every four h. When 24 h after treatment, dead space in both groups were studied, dead space was significantly higher in the CLRT group. CLRT seemed to have a worse effect on dead space. The number of patients studied was small. Further study is warranted. A. J. A. Verhoeven*, P. Bijlstra, B. Speelberg 1 Intensive Care, St.Elisabeth Hospital Tilburg, Tilburg, Netherlands Positional therapy is of particular importance in the treatment of ICU patients. Not only for the prevention of decubitus, but also for the prevention of ventilator associated pneumonia and atelectatic lung disease. We investigated the role of a new continuous lateral rotation treatment (CLRT) bed, on static lung compliance. After approval of the study protocol by the ethical committee, 21 patients were examined. Patients were randomised for standard therapy (n = 12) or CLRT (n = 9) by means of a SpO2-RTTM bed (Hillrom Ò). In the standard therapy group, patients were manually rotated every 4 h as lateral as possible. In the CLRT group, patients were rotated automatically with the use of a self-inflating mattress, every 20 minutes. All patients suffered from ARDS and were pressure controlled ventilated with the use of a Servo 300(A) Ò and Servo-i Ò ventilator (Maquet  Ventilating patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in the prone position has been shown to improved arterial oxygenation, but various studies showed the debatable results regarding on the predictor of outcome according to gas exchange patterns after the prone position in ARDS. Moreover, there has been few clinical data on the early gas exchange and clinical outcome in ARDS patients with the prolonged prone position. We evaluated the early gas exchange and clinical outcome in severe ARDS patients, who underwent prolonged prone positioning. METHODS. This retrospective study was performed from 1 January 2000 to 31 July 2006. We studied adult patients who were diagnosed as severe ARDS and placed in prone positioning for C 12 h in the medical intensive care unit (ICU) until the positioning change from prone to supine because of the improved (PaO2/FiO2 C 200 or FiO2 \ 0.5, and improved chest radiographic finding) or worsen (with no improvement of gas exchange by the prone positioning) patients' clinical status. All clinical data and gas exchange variables before and after the prone position were collected. Severe ARDS was defined as PaO2/FiO2 B 150 with a positive end-expiratory pressure of at least 8 cm H2O, bilateral chest radiograph infiltrate, and the absence of clinical evidence of cardiac failure. The ''PaO2 responders'' and ''PaCO2 responders'' were those patients who increased the PaO2/FiO2 more than 20 mmHg and decreased the PaCO2 C 1 mmHg at first 8-12 h after the prone position, respectively. Primary end-point was 28-day mortality.  Spinal cord injury is still a big medical challenge. It is well known that patients with partial or complete transection at or below the fourth cervical cord segment exhibit weakness and spastic paralysis below the level of the lesion. This impairs the respiratory muscle function so that the ability to cough and to clear the airways from bronchial secretions is reduced. The stasis of bronchial secretions may predispose to the development of pulmonary infections which are the primary cause of death in those patients. Aim of this study is to investigate inspiratory and expiratory muscles function in patients with injury level at C4-C5. METHODS. 31 consecutive patients with spinal cord injury at C4-C5 level were studied (age 38 ± 18y; weight: 70 ± 13Kg; days from trauma: 66 ± 46). The following data were recorded, both seated and supine: (1) maximum inspiratory pressure (MIP) as the maximal force developed against an occluded airway (2) maximum expiratory pressure (MEP), (3) P0.1 as index of neuromuscular respiratory drive 4) inspiratory resistance. The main result of our study was that MIP and MEP are markedly reduced in both positions. MIP was reduced of about 60% (% normal value) in supine position (44 ± 15 cmH2O) and this value was even lower in seated position (37 ± 15 cmH2O); the reduction of MEP is quite constant both in supine (24 ± 11 cmH2O) and in seated position (22 ± 12 cmH2O) and proportionally bigger than the reduction of MIP (85% of the normal value). Furthermore P0.1 and inspiratory resistance exhibited a huge increase compared to normal (316 and 236%, respectively). CONCLUSION. The huge reduction of MEP indicates an important impairment of expiratory muscle function which can be associated with a reduction of the efficacy of the cough. The stasis of secretions in the airways not only implies a predisposition to pulmonary infection, but can further increases flow airway resistances, that are higher in tetraplegic patients owing to the reduction of functional residual capacity (FRC). To the increased inspiratory resistance corresponds an increased work for the inspiratory muscles that could not always be performed because of the reduction of MIP. The latter is better in supine position due to diaphragm muscle fibers which operates on a more favorable portion of their length-tension curve. However, the higher decrease of FRC in this position implies a reduction of expiratory flow and a cyclic opening/closure of the peripheral airways which are responsible of a chronic lung inflammation. The latter could be avoided by keeping these patients in semirecumbent position. INTRODUCTION. Acute kidney injury (AKI) has been shown to be associated with a worse outcome in critically ill patients and patients with severe sepsis. (2)). This definition uses a fixed time interval (48 h) in which AKI may develop. Aim of our study was to investigate the new definition and the impact of AKI according to this definition on outcome in a large cohort of patients with severe sepsis and septic shock. METHODS. Data from the multicentric VISEP trial (Brunkhorst et al. NEJM 2008; 358: 125-39) were analyzed for the first 48 hrs after enrolment of patients. Complete data on the new AKI definitions were available in 521/537 of patients. AKI was defined as an increase in serum creatinine from baseline of more than or equal to 0.3 mg/dl, a percentage increase in serum creatinine of more than or equal to 50%, or a reduction in urine output of less than 0.5 ml/kg per hour for more than six h. Patients were divided into the AKI group and the non-AKI group. RESULTS. 227/521 (44%) patients were classified as AKI and 294/521 (56%) as non-AKI. Patients with AKI were older, had a higher APACHE II score, higher lactate levels and a lower platelet count. Mean arterial pressure (MAP) and CrP levels were not different (Table 1) . 28-and 90-day mortality and mean SOFA scores were significantly higher in patients with AKI. Length of stay (LOS) in the ICU was not different ( INTRODUCTION. Patients in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) with sepsis are at risk of Acute Kidney Injury (AKI). A proportion of these patients will receive Renal Replacement Therapy (RRT). We sought to describe the risk of receiving RRT in sepsis, and identify those factors (present at admission to intensive care) associated with that risk. We analysed data from the Intensive Care National Audit & Research Centre Case Mix Programme (Version 3.0). All patients with a diagnosis of sepsis or severe sepsis but without a history of chronic renal failure were included. Patients were classified as receiving RRT if they haemodialysed/haemofiltered on one or more days. Regression analysis was performed on acute physiology, chronic health, and demographic characteristics. . 6695 patients were identified with sepsis of which 3354 (50.1%) met the criteria for AKI 1 , and 1152 (17.2%) patients received RRT. The odds for receiving RRT are increased for males , and Black or Asian ethnicity (P = 0.030), but fall as age increases above 40 years (P \ 0.001). Admission type (emergency surgery or medical) was not associated with RRT (P = 0.21). Acute physiology parameters are described in Table  (below) . RESULTS. Ninety cases (83 patients, mean aged: 57 ± 14 years, SAPS II: 41 ± 15), at 55 ± 71 months after renal transplantation, were analyzed. From 2004 to 2007, the incidence of ICU admissions increased from 14% to 54% (p \ 0.05). A high prevalence of co-morbidities was observed: hypertension (83%), diabetes (37%) and coronary artery disease (27%). The four main reasons for ICU admission were: acute respiratory failure (42 %), acute circulatory failure (29%), coma (9%) and acute renal failure (8%). Sepsis was present at admission in 76% and associated with pulmonary infection in 48 % and with urinary infection in 28%. The three main causes of acute respiratory failure were: bacterial pneumonia (34%), pneumocystis pneumonia (32%) and cardiogenic pulmonary oedema (24%). Fifty percent of the micro-organisms isolated in bacterial pneumonias were resistant to empirical antibiotherapy. Seventy three percent of the patients suffering from respiratory failure required mechanical ventilation. Non invasive ventilation (NIV) was used initially in 46% of the patients (n = 13). In 7/13 patients NIV failed and patients required intubation. Eighty eight percent of the patients admitted for acute circulatory failure (n = 26) suffered from septic shock. Pyelonephritis and intra-abdominal sepsis were diagnosed respectively in 43 and 26%. Acute renal failure was present at admission and/or during ICU stay in 67% of the cases. Acute renal failure needed renal replacement therapy in 70% of them. Median ICU and hospital length of stay were respectively 5 and 20 days. ICU and hospital mortality was 19 and 24%. Acute respiratory failure was associated with a 34% hospital mortality rate and pneumocystis pneumonia with a 58% hospital mortality. CONCLUSION. From 2004 to 2007 an increased incidence of medical ICU admission of RTR was observed in our institution. Acute respiratory failure was the leading cause of admission and was associated with a poor prognosis. Due to the high incidence of pneumocystis pneumonia and resistant micro-organisms in pulmonary infections a microbiological pulmonary analysis was always required. The high incidence of pneumocystis pneumonia pleads for prophylaxis. The high incidence of NIV failure raises concerns about its use in RTR presented for respiratory failure. INTRODUCTION. Contrast Induced Nepropathy (CIN) is a potentially avoidable morbidity in critically ill patients who require Computerised Tomography (CT) scanning. Kidney injury is a common problem in critically ill patients and carries a significant cost burden and increases length of stay. Our aim was to identify the incidence and consequences of CIN in our Intensive Care Unit (ICU)over a one year period. All 312 ICU patients admitted between 1/6/06 and 31/5/07 were included for a retrospective analysis. We identified those had undergone CT scans and noted if they had received contrast for the procedure, analysed any change in renal function over 96 h following CT, and identified those who met the definition for CIN, and any patients who subsequently required dialysis. Of the 312 admissions 87 (28%)underwent CT. A total of 135 CTs were performed: 79 contrast-enhanced scans,44 plain scans,12 missing data. The incidence of Acute Kidney Failure requiring dialysis over for all the 312 admissions was 17%. CONCLUSION. We identified an incidence of CIN of 14%, however there is no difference between the incidence of deterioration in renal function to the accepted criteria of CIN in patients undergoing CT in our unit whether they received contrast or not. Some of the patients who develop CIN required ongoing renal support following their ICU admission. We identified a group of patients who may benefit from therapeutic manoevers to prevent CIN. Hospital mortality among general ICU patients appears to be associated with increasing severity of AKI. 3 We have examined the relationship between AKI and Hospital Mortality among patients with sepsis. We analysed data from the Intensive Care National Audit & Research Centre (ICNARC) Case Mix Programme (Version 3.0). All patients with a diagnosis of sepsis or severe sepsis but without a history of chronic renal failure were included. Baseline creatinine was not available and hence was estimated by the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) equation as recommended. 1 INTRODUCTION. The outcome of patients with acute kidney injury (AKI) depends on several factors, including associated organ failure. The aim of our study was to evaluate whether the specific types of failed organ systems also affected prognosis. METHODS. Retrospective analysis of The Riyadh Intensive Care Program database which contains demographic and daily physiologic and treatment data of 41,972 adult patients admitted to 22 ICUs in United Kingdom and Germany between 1989-1999. AKI was defined according to the AKI classification as proposed by the AKI network which distinguishes between 3 different grades of AKI. RESULTS. 39.5% of patients had AKI (AKI I 19.3%, AKI II 6.7%, AKI III 13.5%). Associated organ failure (OF) was more common in patients with more severe AKI (Table 1) . ICU mortality was higher in patients with more associated organ failure ( Table 2) . Associated respiratory failure, alone or in combination, was the most common associated organ failure in patients with AKI (incidence 65%, ICU mortality 39.5%), followed by cardiovascular failure (incidence 43.2%, ICU mortality 48.6%). Associated liver failure occurred in only 4.3% patients with AKI but the associated ICU mortality was 73%. Associated neurological failure occurred in 13.6% of patients with an ICU mortality of 60.9%.  In industrialized countries out-of-hospital sudden cardiac death (SCD) is a frequent cause of death and occurs in 375,000-500,000 citizens per year in Europe. Survival rates remain low, despite increasing efforts in intensive care. Clinical and experimental investigations have demonstrated improved neurological outcome following the treatment with therapeutic mild hypothermia after successful resuscitation. Following the publication of controlled studies, therapeutic hypothermia moved into the topical international guidelines. Time course, duration to achieve target temperature and control of temperature are important factors that influence patient's outcome. Recent investigations in animal models showed improved neurological short-term outcome after an accelerated cooling time. In the prehospital setting, immediate cooling is difficult to realize. For immediate induction of therapeutic hypothermia we tested a new trans-nasal cooling device after cardiac arrest and compared this new method with our standard cooling procedures. A total of 66 patients were examined after successful resuscitation. In 15 patients a new trans-nasal cooling device to induce therapeutic hypothermia was used. Retrospective data of 51 patients served as historic control group. After admission in the cath lab of the university hospital of Freiburg, initial temperature, course of temperature reduction and duration of cooling to achieve target temperature were documented. After admission to the ICU, both groups were immediately connected to an endovascular cooling device and were cooled to a target temperature of 33°C (bladder or rectal temperature). The average temperature at admission did not differ in the historic control group compared to the trans-nasal cooling group (35.7 ± 0.8°C vs. 35.4 ± 1°C, p = n.s.). In the control group 41 patients (80%) were cooled in a combined method with an initial 4°C cold saline infusion followed by endovascular cooling. In 10 patients (20%) only endovascular cooling was performed. In patients first treated with cold saline be, target temperature could be reached significantly faster (-38%) than with endovascular cooling alone (125 ± 85 vs. 203 ± 84 min; p = 0.03). Pre-treatment with the trans-nasal device showed a cosimilar decrease of systemic temperature after the start of endovascular cooling (-32%) compared to the combined method (138 ± 96 vs. 125 ± 85 min; p = n.s.). In the group treated with transnasal cooling, target temperature in the brain, measured via tympanic temperature, was reached in 74 ± 44 min without any documented severe device-related adverse events. CONCLUSION. Pre-treatment with trans-nasal cooling or cold saline infusion for the induction of therapeutic hypothermia in patients with cardiac arrest leads to a significantly faster achievement of target temperature during systemic cooling. The combined methods are feasible and offer the possibility for immediate introduction and realization of mild hypothermia in the field. Pre-hospital cooling could be beneficial for these critical ill patients, but definitive studies have not yet been completed. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. Industry sponsored trail.  We enrolled 18 patients (10 F and 8 M), mean age 64 ± 10 years, ASA II/III, undergoing unilateral adrenalectomy by laparoscopic. The patients were divided in a random into two groups : SNP GROUP (n = 9) and FNP GROUP (n = 9). SNP GROUP has raised intraoperative blood pressure and received a Sodium Nitroprusside infusion at 3 mcg/kg/min in increments of 0,15 mcg/kg/min as needed. The intraoperative rise of blood pressure in FNP GROUP was controlled by intravenous infusion of Fenoldopam at 0,2 mcg/kg/min. The Fenoldopam dose was rapidly increased to 0,4 mcg/kg/min and was stopped just before tumor excision. Monitoring consisted of a radial artery cannula for blood pressure control just before general anesthesia, at induction, at intubation, during tumor manipulation, after infusion of one of two therapeutic options and at the end of surgery. Side effects and perioperative urine output were evaluated. Renal blood flow, creatinine clearance and sodium excretion were measured postoperatively. In both groups we observed maximum increase of MAP during surgical manipulation (+25% of baseline) . Reducing MAP after drug infusion was more fast in SNP GROUP. The SNP GROUP has shown metabolic acidosis and abnormal ventilation related thiocyanide toxicity . The FNP GROUP resulted devoid of side effects . Also diuresis was higher in FNP GROUP than SNP GROUP (100 ml/h vs. 80 ml/h in SNP GROUP). In the postoperative period renal blood flow and creatinine clearance were lower in SNP GROUP and were higher in FNP GROUP. The FNP GROUP has shown an increase in natriuresis. CONCLUSION. The two antihypertensive agents are equivalent in controlling and maintaining intraoperative blood pressure. Sodium Nitroprusside is somewhat quicker, but Fenoldopam is much easier to titrate, has limited side effects (and no thiocyanide toxicity) and offers a very favourable renal protection in patients undergoing surgical excision of the pheochromocytoma. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. Università degli Studi di Napoli ''Federico II''. INTRODUCTION. Calcium sensitizer levosimendan enhances myocardial contractility which could be advantageous in patients with myocardial ischemia requiring inotropic support. During three years 3852 patients with high risk acute coronary syndrome (ACS) underwent percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) in our department. In 106 cases ACS was complicated with cardiogenic shock (mean age: 68.6 ± 1.2), moreover in 26 cases patients had to be resuscitated (CPR). Short and long term effects of levosimendan on cardiac functions and on survival of cardiogenic shock and post CPR patients were analyzed. METHODS. Levosimendan was administrated in 39 of 106 cases as add-on therapy for patients with impaired left ventricular function, by extensive wall motion abnormality and by high blood cardiac enzyme concentration. Levosimendan therapy was started in most cases on the second or third day and applied 6 h long as continuous infusion (0.1 microg/kg/min). The mean time spent in the primary cardiac care center (in hospital time) was 6.0 ± 0.4 days, and the whole follow-up was 204.6 ± 29.9 days long. In the post CPR patient group there was no significant difference in survival according to levosimendan treatment during short term (36.5% vs. 40.0%, p = 0.790) and during long term follow-up (15.6% vs. 15.0%, p = 0.754). On the other hand, by not resuscitated patients survival rates were significantly higher in the levosimendan treated patient group during short term (84.4% vs. 57.9%, p \ 0.001) and during long term (47.3% vs. 23.0%, p \ 0.001) follow-up. Time interval between the onset of myocardial infarction and PCI did not influence the effect of levosimendan on short and long term mortality. CONCLUSION. In summary, levosimendan may improve cardiac function and decrease short term and even long term mortality in cardiogenic shock patients independently of time interval of myocardial infarction. This positive effect of levosimendan may be abolished by post CPR patients.  A large degree of evidence suggests that a 300 mg loading dose of Clopidogrel may not be sufficient to inhibit platelet reactivity leading to a significant proportion of morbidity and mortality in patients with acute coronary syndrome. The aim of our study is to determine the effect of high dose clopidogrel(900 mg) on platelets ADP receptors compared to the conventional 300 mg dose. METHODS. Thirty patients admitted with acute coronary syndrome were included in this study. Fifteen patients received 300 mg and 15 received 900 mg after admission. Routine clinical and laboratory evaluation was done. The degree of inhibition of ADP receptors was mwasured by platelet aggregometry after giving the loading dose by 12h, 24 h, 48 h, 3 days, 5 days and one week. The 900 mg loading dose caused a greater inhibition of platelets ADP receptors at all time intervals as compared to the 300 mg dose (P \ 0.005). It was associated as well with a lower incidence of cardiac complications and a better 30 day outcome than the 300 mg dose (P \ 0.005). Patients who received the high loading dose showed a higher percent of ECG normalization compared with the lower dose group (76.6% vs. 33.3%) (P \ 0.005).The high dose clopidogrel was associated with higher incidence of bleeding events; however they were minor and had no effect on the mortality and morbidity (P \ 0.005). CONCLUSION. The high loading dose of 900 mg clopidogrel causes a more significant inhibition of platelet aggregation than the conventional 300 mg dose. It is associated as well with lower cardiac complications and a better 30 day motality and morbidity in patients with acute coronary syndrome. J. López*, M. Huguet, E. Santafosta, X. Pérez, J. Sabater, X. Labad, J. Bruna, T. Casanovas, R. Albertos, E. Jubert Intensive Care Medicine, Hospital universitari de Bellvitge, L 0 Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain INTRODUCTION. Pulmonary embolism (PE) is the most serious complication of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and presents a broad clinical spectrum which difficults diagnosis. In the last decade the aplication of new diagnostic tools, like computed tomography (CT), and the use of new therapies such as thrombolytic therapy (TT), have both changed the clinical management. The objective of our study was to analyse factors related with the severity of PE and identify those patients with PE who would benefit from TT. In a prospective and observational study from 2000 to 2008, we studied 78 patients (n = 78) with PE who were admitted in our general intensive care unit(ICU)(third level universitary hospital). Mean age was 55,6 ± 17 years; 44 were men; APACHEII 15 ± 2. Only 13% were surgery patients and 8% were trauma patients. At admission they had presented: 95% dispnea, 47% chest pain, 42% deep venous thrombosis signs and 34% syncope. 54% presented shock. Mean heart rate 108 ± 25 bpm, mean PaO2/FiO2 215 ± 9, mean pCO2 29 ± 15 mmHg, mean lactate 3,76 ± 3,3 mmol/L; D-dimer test [ 1000 ug/L in 71%, positive troponin I ([ 0,2 ug/L) 51%. EKG and torax X-ray showed classical PE signs in 60% and 30% respectively. Ecocardiography was practiced in 53% of patients with evidence of right ventricle failure in 70% of patients. CT was practiced in 70% of our patients (59% were reported as massive). Anticoagulation was initiated in 97% of our patients. 61,8% were on standard heparin and 38,2% were on low molecular heparin. TT was practiced on 43%. Sistemic TT 60% and 40% local TT. 42% required mecanical ventilation, 61% were on inotropic-vasopressor drugs. DVT was diagnosed in 52% and 16% of our patients required venous cava filter. RESULTS. 28 day mortality rate was 27%. The most common complication was bleeding (17 episodies: 6 digestive, 4 lung, 2 brain, 1 hemorragic shock, and 4 others) but not statiscally significant relationship was found between bleeding and TT. Statistical analysis showed that the mortality predictor factors were metabolic acidosis pH \ 7,31 (p \ 0,04), leucocitosis [ 15000x10.9/L (p \ 0,023), renal dysfunction with creatinine [ 160 umol/L (p \ 0,037), and hypotension with mean arterial pressure \ 65 mmHg (p \ 0,02). TT improved outcome in massive PE (PE with hemodynamic inestability) but statiscal significance in mortality rate with TT (p \ 0,029) was only found in patients with both clinical massive PE and massive radiologic PE confirmed by CT. CONCLUSION. Patients with both massive clinical PE and massive radiologic PE (confirmed by CT) benefit from TT with statiscally significant higher survival rate. CT could play an important role on TT indication but further studies are needed to confirm our findings. INTRODUCTION. Today mitral valve surgery (MVS) is considered a valid alternative surgical treatment for patients with ischemic or non-ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy because of shortage of donors which strongly limited heart transplantation. In this particular field, preoperative echocardiography plays an important role both in the scheduling of candidate and in the prognosis assessment. Our study was aimed to better depict this role. From January 1990 to October 2004 patients were submitted to MVS by a single surgeon (AMC); 130 out of them were ischemic and 65 were non-ischemic. Average NYHA class at the admission was 3.3 ± 0.6. Left ventricle ejection fraction (EF), enddiastolic (EDV) and end-systolic volume (ESV), MR grade were 29 ± 5%, 135 ± 42 ml/m2, 88 ± 34 ml/m2 and 3.3 ± 0.7, respectively. Right ventricular function was assessed by means of tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE): 15.2 ± 5.1 mm. The outcome was defined as 5-year survival (1st month included). The follow up ended on February 2007 and was 100% completed. . MV repair was achieved in 154 (79%) cases whereas MV replacement in 41 (21%). Early Median follow up of survivors was 51 months (29-216). Forty-eight patients died during the follow up with a median follow up of 7.5 months; 12 out of them within the first postoperative period Five-year actuarial survival was 77.5 ± 4.5%. Cox analysis is reported in the table. INTRODUCTION. Pulmonary endarterectomy (PEA) is an effective treatment for chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH). The perioperative course is frequently complicated by profound systemic vasodilatation that is sometimes resistant to vasopressor therapy. The present study tested the hypothesis that systemic inflammatory response, as determined by circulating cytokine levels, may contribute to the difficulty of controlling arterial blood pressure after PEA. METHODS. The prospective cohort study on 36 patients with CTEPH (22 males and 14 females, mean age being 56.5 ± 11.9 year.). Their mean pulmonary artery pressure was 58 mm Hg. All the tested patients underwent PEA using cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) and deep hypothermic circulatory arrest (DHCA). Plasma concentrations of tumor necrosis factor-\alpha (TNF\alpha), interleukin (IL)-1\beta, IL-6 and IL-8 were measured repeatedly in arterial blood samples drawn before operation, after sternotomy, after the last DHCA, after separation from CPB, and 12, 18, 24, 36 and 48 h after the end of surgery. Inflammatory parameters were compared with the vasopressor support and hemodynamic parameters -mean pulmonary arterial pressure (mPAP), mean pressure in the main pulmonary artery, cardiac index (CI), ejection fraction, and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR). RESULTS. TNF\alpha, IL-1\beta, IL-6 and IL-8 increased after PEA and reached a maximum within 0-12 h after the end of surgery. After PEA operation, there was a considerable improvement of hemodynamic parameters including mPAP, CI and PVR. There was a significant correlation between norepinephrine support and IL-6 plasma concentrations at the end of surgery (k = 0.742) and 12 h after the end of surgery (k = 0,801) as well as between norepinephrine support and IL-8 concentrations 12 h after the end of surgery (k = 0,782). Patients requiring dobutamine support postoperatively considering the low CI revealed significantly higher maximum arterial levels of IL-6 and IL-8. CONCLUSION. Hemodynamic instability after PEA has been associated with higher postoperative plasma concentrations of IL-6 and IL-8. Positive correlation between inflammatory cytokines and vasopressor support is in conformity with a thesis that cytokine activation may be among neurohumoral factors responsible for the systemic vasoplegia in CTEPH patients after undergoing PEA. GRANT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. This study was supported with a grant MSM0021620819 of the Ministry of Education, Czech Republic.  We conducted a prospective study in 38 patients admitted to our hospital with the suspicion of IE. IE was confirmed in 18 pts based on the Duke criteria. 20pts with bacteremia (non-IE) and 20 healthy controls were studied PCT levels were measured on the day of admission. RESULTS. Procalcitonin was significantly higher in pts with IE (7,62 ng/ml) than in those with other final diagnoses (0,62 ng/ml) p \ 0,001. The median values of PCT were higher in cases with IE and non-IE related to gram negative bacteria than those related to gram positive (P \ 0,04). Using ROC curve the optimum concentration of PCT for the calculation of positive and negative predictive accuracy was 3 ng/ml. With this cut off, the sensitivity of PCT was 78%. Its specificity 92%. Its negative predictive value 95% Its positive predictive value 75% The sensitivity of PCT in comparison to C-Reactive Protein was found to be lower (78% vs. 88%) but its specificity was determined to be higher (92% vs. 72%. CONCLUSION. Procalcitonin may be a valuable diagnostic marker for infective endocarditis, in addition to the major criteria for its high specificity and negative predictive value. When it comes to critical patients, at least 25% acquire one or more of these infections. There is a substancial evidence that hand-washing reduces the incidence of health care-associated infections and hygiene is a basic action for ensuring patient safety, is the best method to prevent the transference of microorganisms between staff and patients, and also between patients to patients in hospitals. This effectiviness of reducing the dispersion of microorganisms depends on three fundamental factors: 1. The occasion,2. The product used,3. The hand-washing tecknique. The main problem of hand hygiene does not depend on obtaining good products. During 2006, we formed a multidisciplinary team composed of a doctor, a nurse and an intensive care auxiliary nurse. We reviewed bibliography and CDC recommendations. After that, we elaborated a guideline for hand hygiene, in which we described different types of hand-washing, different handrubs, glove use and the presentation of alcohol-based handrubs to improve hand disinfection.During this period we observed that personnel didn 0 t comply with the guidelines. Before training personnel, we did an observational, prospective and descriptive study during two months at the intensive care unit. We evaluated handwashing in all staff in contact with patients. Afterwards we compared it to results after theoretic and practical training. We first trained our intensive care unit and then the other departaments. The theoretic training consisted of a video recorded by ourselves at the intensive care unit, which contained concepts about hand hygiene, handrubs and glove use. After that we divided the class into groups and practiced with them the different types of hand hygiene and use of alcohol-based handrubs, correct procedures were evaluated by use of an ultraviolet lamp. All participants received written guidelines and tip sheet, after training, we installed dispensers for hand hygiene and we continuously remind the staff to wash their hands in hospital and health centers in our area. We did a second evaluation in our unit six months after the training. Results showed a 35% hand hygiene adherence, if there was a big improvement immediately after the training, it slowly disappeared.Due to this, we have decide to do frequent refreshment training. CONCLUSION. If we want to improve, it is necesary frequent refreshment training. Our situation is similar to other hospitals. INTRODUCTION. Although a number of studies have reported elevated level of eicosanoids in acute lung injury with sepsis, the possibility that eicosanoids may act as risk and prognostic factors for sepsis patients who develop acute respiratory distress syndrome(ARDS) remains poorly studied. To clarify this aspect, we measured the levels of eicosanoids and used logistic regression analyses and receiver operating characteristic(ROC) curves to investigate whether eicosanoids could act as risk and prognostic factors for sepsis patients who develop ARDS. We conducted a case-control study comparing 13 sepsis patients with ARDS and 23 sepsis patients without ARDS. The plasma levels of leukotriene B4 (LTB4), 6-ketoprostaglandin F1a(6-keto-PGF1a) and thromboxane B2(TXB2) were measured by radioimmunoassays as substitutes for the plasma levels of PGI2 and TXA2, which are unstable. RESULTS. The levels of eicosanoids in sepsis patients with ARDS were significantly higher than those in sepsis patients without ARDS. Logistic regression analyses revealed that LTB4 was the only risk factor for sepsis patients with ARDS (odds ratio, 1.10; P = 0.02). The area under the ROC curve values for all eicosanoids were significantly greater than 0.5 (P \ 0.001), and the likelihood value for the TXB2 levels was higher than those of the other eicosanoids. CONCLUSION. We conclude that LTB4 may be an important risk factor for sepsis patients with ARDS, while TXA2 may be an important prognostic factor for sepsis patients with ARDS. INTRODUCTION. Burn injury, whether limited or widespread, frequently leads to longlasting physical, aesthetic, functional, psychological, and social consequences. One of these is the problem of post burn itch. This would have been as old as the burn itself however it was first focused in 1988 when, Gordon wrote ''Burn-related pruritus is a serious problem that often receives little attention, even though it continues to aggravate burn patients during their rehabilitation1. At the same time; Bell, et al., added, ''No succinctly defined method of treatment for post burn itch is found in the literature2. Still we know very little about the exact mechanism of post burn itch that can be attributed to the complex nature of the injured skin and the nerves of the skin3-,9, but it must also be emphasized that very little research have so far been done on this subject. A total of 80 patients were included in the study, and equally divided into 2 groups. Group A received oral antihistamines with topical Ibuprofen while Group B received olive oil massage followed by wearing of compressive garments. The demographic data and initial assessment of the severity of itch on linear descriptive scale was made by the research team; while subsequent data for the entire study period was obtained by the attending burn clinician who was blind to the allocated regimen. Results were analyzed using computer statistical software SPSSÒ. RESULTS. Group A included 40 patients with 23 males and 17 females having mean age of 28.13 (SD ± 13.03) and mean body surface area affected 15.387% (SD ± 5.408) and mean itch scale of 5.500 (SD ± 2.219). Group B comprised of 40 patients with 21 males & 19 females with a mean age of 29.38 (SD ± 14.35) with mean affected body surface area of 16.150% (SD ± 5.555) and mean itch scale of 5.350 (SD ± 1.762). The main outcome measure was the improvement in burn itch. The results after 12 weeks of treatment for both groups showed a remarkable improvement in Group B when compared to Group A (p-value 0.000 and 0.365, respectively). CONCLUSION. The non-pharmacological measures are superior to the pharmacologic measure with respect to their clinical efficacy and their improvement shows highly significant after 4 weeks of treatment. CONCLUSION. Acinteobacter is a common nosocomial cause of infection in critically ill patients admitted to Intensive Care Unit of our hospital. The main underlying risk factor is immuno-suppression due to various causes as well as prolonged ventilation. If not promptly recognized and adequately treatment, mortality remains high. Pneumonia is an important cause of ITU morbidity and mortality, mainly after TBI. Recognized patients with TBI and pneumonia makes possible premature interventions at ITU. Aim: To determine factors that influence mortality in patients who are affected by TBI and pneumonia. We did a retrospective research study and thirty critical ill patients admitted to the ITU with severe TBI diagnosis. Investigated risk factors included age, APACHE II score, SOFA score, antibiotic used, adequate antimicrobial therapy (defined based on bacterial susceptibility from microbiologic information), CPIS [ 6 after 72 days of treatment, PaO2/FIO2, microorganisms isolated from throat swabs at admission (Any aerobic Gram-negative bacilli concentration, E coli, and MRSA. MSSA and C albicans [ 10(5) cfu/ ml), and microorganisms grew from endotracheal aspirates when pneumonia was suspected on clinical grounds (new chest X-ray infiltrate, together with at less two of the following: fever; leukocytosis and purulent tracheal secretion). Microbiological confirmation of pneumonia was defined by in endotracheal aspirates [ 10(5) cfu/ml. Statistics analysis of data (mean and standard deviation, ± 2) were performed, chi2 and independent t test were used. SPSS 10 was used and p \ 0,05 was statistically significant. Death was the outcome variable that was studied. Of 30 patients, Their average age was 43 ± 17.2 y. APACHE II score 17.6 ± 6.7, SOFA score 8.7 ± 1.9, ITU days stay 10.4 + 7.4, days on mechanical ventilation 8.4 ± 6.3, Glasgow score 6.27 ± 1.5, PaO2/FIO2 268 + 60, initial CPIS 5.92 ± 1.9. The overall mortality rate was 40%. S. Viridans were isolated on 30%, Klebsiella P 13.3% and MSSA 13.3% on the group of samples taken from throat. Moreover, S. Viridans were isolated on 16.6%, Klebsiella P 16.6% and MSSA 40%. On samples taken from endotracheal aspirates (EA). Patients were empirically treated with Ceftriaxone-Clindamicin 50%, and without any antibiotic 50%. Statistics analysis showed that APACHE II score, Glasgow score, and ITU stay were significantly different on the group of death.  We have recently shown that a proactive bowel management with aid of the Zassi/Hollister Bowel Management System (BMS) represents an economical and clinically advantageous practice for the fecal management of burn patients unable to effectively defecate independently or with assistance (1) . A question that has been queried often, but not definitely answered is whether or not patients with bleeding complications, including platelet and coagulation abnormalities, could have bleeding diathesis potentially associated with a proactive BMS on insertion and while it remains in place? We undertook a retrospective subanalysis of complicated burn/wound intensive care (ICU) patients who had a proactive BMS in place. Based on anecdotal evidence from our larger study population and ongoing data bases, we believed that the incidence would be predictably low (Null Hypothesis). A retrospective analysis of our previous population of patients evaluated with a proactive BMS, all with complicated burns/wounds, were included in the initial evaluation. Sixty-nine patients met the criteria to be included in the study. Their records were queried for coagulation and thrombocytopenia abnormalities at BMS insertion and all subsequent events while the apparatus was in place, until removal. If gastrointestinal (GI) complications were documented, they were reviewed extensively for association with the proactive BMS. Sixty-nine patients, 48 males, 21 females, mean age 50.8 years (range 19-87), with a mean TBSA of 30.5% (range 0-80) and a mean length of stay of 47.5 days (7-208) were evaluated. Thrombocytopenia was documented either at insertion or while the BMS was in place a mean of 10.7d (range 0-46d). Prothrombin (PT), Partial Thromboplastin (PTT) and/ or Fibrinogen was abnormal during insertion or while the BMS was dwelling for a mean of 13.7d (range 0-113). Sixty-three patients (92.7%) at high risk for bleeding problems did not experience any bleeding or GI complications. Five patients (7.3%) had documented GI abnormalities; however, only one (1.4%) could be directly related to the BMS. This patient had a simple rectal ulceration, topically treated, with rapid resolution. CONCLUSION. The Zassi/Hollister proactive bowel management system has previously been proven to be cost-effective and provide overall reduction in infectious complications and breakdown in complicated burns. The current findings reveal that the placement of this proactive BMS in complicated ICU patients is safe, even in the setting of continued risks of bleeding due to coagulation and/or thrombocytopenia abnormalities. The implications of this data are farreaching and would suggest that other patient populations at risk for multi-organ dysfunction could safely undergo proactive BMS placement. Future research should include these and other groups of patients in larger, multicenter evaluations, in the hope that we can continue to improve the already monumental task of nursing care for burns and other critically ill patients. INTRODUCTION. Tissue hypoperfusion, defined as elevated lactate and/or low central venous oxygen saturation (ScvO2), is associated with increased mortality in septic patients, also in those patients presenting without hypotension. Inclusion of these markers of tissue oxygenation in resuscitation algorithms has improved patients outcome (1) . These measurements require repeated blood withdrawal and/or central venous catheter placement. A rapid and non-invasive measure of tissue oxygenation would be useful. Near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) allows the measurement of tissue oxygen saturation (StO2) at skeletal muscle. In a previous study, our group demonstrated a good correlation between StO2 and ScvO2 in patients with severe sepsis and septic shock with normalized blood pressure (BP), and found that StO2 values below 75% predict low ScvO2 with high specificity (2) . The objective of the present study was to analyze whether StO2 below 75% is useful as mortality predictor in patients with severe sepsis or septic shock with normalized BP. METHODS. Prospective observational study. Patients admitted to the ICU in the early phase of severe sepsis and septic shock, after normalization of blood pressure with fluids and/or vasoactive drugs. We recorded demographic data, severity score (SAPS III), hemodynamic data, hemoglobin (Hb), blood lactate, as well as ScvO2 and StO2 measured simultaneously on inclusion. Mann-Whitney test was used to compare groups on categorical variables, and Fisher's exact test for continuous variables. RESULTS. 41 patients were included. No differences in age, SAPS III, Hb, mean arterial pressure and lactate were found between survivors and non-survivors. Non-survivors showed lower StO2 and ScvO2 values than survivors, but they did not reach statistical significance (p 0.06). When analyzing a StO2 cut-off value of 75%, there were statistical differences between survivors and non-survivors (p 0.013; Table 1 ). A StO2 value below 75% predicts mortality with a sensitivity of 0.53, and a specificity of 0.93. CONCLUSION. In patients with severe sepsis and septic shock with restored BP values, StO2 \ 75% is associated with increased mortality. Thus, StO2 can be used as a rapid, noninvasive measure of severity in septic patients. Future studies may clarify the role of StO2 as an endpoint for resuscitation in severe sepsis and septic shock. INTRODUCTION. Red blood cell (RBC) transfusions are commonly used in critically ill patients. A number of factors that can determine oxygen availability to the cells may not be reliably assessed from global hemodynamic measures. Near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) has been proposed to assess tissue metabolism and oxygenation. We proposed to study the effect of RBC transfusion on muscle tissue metabolism and oxygenation using the NIRS in hemodynamically stable critically ill patients. Hemodynamically stable ICU patients with anemia requiring RBC transfusions were included. Thenar muscle oxygenation (StO2) and tissue hemoglobin index (THI) were continuously measured using NIRS (InSpectraTM Model 325, Hutchinson Technology Inc, Hutchinson, MN) before, during and after upper limb ischemia induced by a rapid pneumatic cuff inflation around the upper arm. The rate of StO2 desaturation during the arterial occlusion (desaturation rate; %/min) and the StO2 reperfusion rate immediately after the arterial occlusion (reperfusion rate; %/sec) were calculated. These different NIRS variables were collected before and after RBC transfusion. We studied 11 septic (3 with and 8 without shock) and 20 non-septic (12 patients after major surgery and 8 medical patients). RBC transfusion increased hemoglobin concentrations in both groups. The NIRS variables were comparable in both groups before and after transfusions. -23 ± 14 -28 ± 25 -19 ± 9,4 -22 ± 8 Reperfusion rate (%/sec) 3,5 ± 2,1 3,0 ± 2,6 3,0 ± 1,6 3,4 ± 1,6 Hemoglobin (g/dl) 7,3 ± 0,9 8,1 ± 1,5 7,2 ± 0,6 8,2 ± 0,7 CONCLUSION. RBC transfusion does not influence muscle metabolism and oxygenation in hemodynamically stable anemic critically ill patients. INTRODUCTION. High flow, high concentration oxygen therapy is given ubiquitously as part of the standard ABC resuscitation strategy in shocked patients. However, we recently reported that hyperoxia during uncontrolled haemorrhage was detrimental compared with normoxia, causing reduced blood flow and increased hyperlactataemia (1) . We sought to determine haemodynamics and tissue oxygen tension (an index of the local O 2 supply/demand balance) in various organ beds in a rodent model of controlled haemorrhage followed by resuscitation in either room air (21% O 2 ) or 100% O 2 . METHODS. Under isoflurane anaesthesia, male Wistar rats underwent left common carotid and right jugular venous cannulation for blood sampling/BP monitoring and fluid/blood administration, respectively. Ultrasonic flow probes measured blood flow in the descending aorta. Tissue PO 2 (tPO 2 ) was determined using Oxylite probes (Oxford Optronix, UK) placed in thigh muscle, liver, renal cortex and within the bladder lumen. After 30 mins stabilisation, rats were subjected to a 30 ml/kg haemorrhage (40% estimated circulatory volume). After a 30 minute period of shock, shed blood was re-infused ± hyperoxia (100% O 2 ). RESULTS. Data shown as mean (± SE). n = 4/group, * p \ 0.05 comparing normoxia and hyperoxia, # p \ 0.05 compared to baseline. B = baseline, S = shock, R = resuscitation. Statistics were performed using a RM two-way ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey's test. 3) # 2.9 (0.1)) # 6.5 (1.8) 0.0 (0.0) # 0.9 (0.3) 7.5 (0.5) # 100% O2:R 121 (6) *# 3.7 (0.4) *# 14.9 (1.7) *# 26.7 (0.0) *# 6.9 (0.9) *# 11.5 (3.9) *# 2.2 (0. 5) CONCLUSION. Controlled haemorrhage caused variable decreases in tPO 2 responses across the organ beds measured, with liver the most severely affected. Resuscitation with 100% O 2 had a profound vasoconstrictor effect resulting in decreased global oxygen delivery. While this did not appear to compromise tissue oxygenation or lactate levels in this short-term model, the utility of high flow, high concentration O 2 as a beneficial therapeutic intervention during haemorrhagic shock is questionable.  
