81598dceb28d26aadda3f8936c1f3624f74f3ad6
A B C D E F G Scientific Programme -Abstracts Postgraduate Educational Programme Scientific Sessions Scientific and Educational Exhibits Satellite Symposia Authors' Index List of Authors and Co-authors List of Moderators



Daily overviews display all sessions' basic details and indicate the page on which the related abstracts can be found. Sessions and abstracts are listed by days. Presentations for which the author(s) have submitted additional material and images to EPOS™ are marked with the icon. Session numbers are prefixed by SS Daily overviews display all sessions' basic details and indicate the page on which the related abstracts can be found. Sessions and abstracts are listed by days. Presentations for which the author(s) have submitted additional material and images to EPOS™ are marked with the icon. Abstracts are grouped by topics. This part lists all first authors (including co-authors) and presentation titles, followed by the session number/topic header/identifyer in brackets and the presentation number. This part lists all authors and co-authors followed by the presentation number in italic letters. This part lists all moderators followed by the session number in italic letters. 3 137 337 535 547 603 637 The ECR 2008 Book of Abstracts is an issue of European Radiology Supplements. Continuous progress is being made in the development of 3 T-scanners for clinical application, especially for neuro, cardiac and extremities and MR angiography. Nevertheless, 1.5 T remains the workhorse for clinical MR. A key development is the design of smaller and more open magnets with movement of the patient bed under scanner control, such that the scanning volume can be defined to cover the area of interest up to and including examinations from head to toe. This development is facilitated by progress in RF coil design. Coil arrays with 20-100 and smaller elements allow unprecedented flexibility in optimizing spatial and temporal resolution and volume coverage for any given indication. More robust scanning is facilitated by further developments in computer aided procedures (CAP). Autoalignment of the head and spine allows operator-independent definition of the scanning volume with particular advantages in follow-up examinations. Although the number of clinically used generic measurement sequences (spin echoes, gradient echoes, TSE, EPI, etc.) is modest, there is an ongoing rapidly proliferating zoo of acronyms for sequence modifications, adaptations and optimizations for specific applications. In order to ensure robust and reproducible scanning quality, much effort is placed toward the development of an automated workflow of examination protocols for any specific task. Standardized scanning with well-tested protocols is required to ensure robust diagnostic examinations. On the other hand, ongoing innovation is continuously improving scanning quality. Finding strategies to establish the right balance between these poles is a key challenge for defining the optimized use of MR in clinical diagnosis. CT is presently the most rapidly developing technology in radiology: for the past decade, scanner performance has been doubling every 2 years. The choice of scanner therefore becomes a strategically important decision. This course discusses the differences between the various multidetector CT scanner generations and how these influence their clinical performance. The physical limits of CT scanning will be explored with respect to where we can expect future improvements and where not. Spatial resolution remains a limiting factor for CT: Improvements in resolution require massive increases in patient dose. Patient dose can now be adapted individually but differences between programs can be substantial. Scan duration was a limiting factor for 4-row scanners but has now been reduced to less than 5s for 64-row scanners. Temporal resolution is the main limiting factor for cardiac imaging. Techniques like adaptive multisector reconstruction and dual source scanning will be discussed. The technical requirements for being able to comfortably perform various types of clinical indications will be discussed. Special emphasis will be put on cardiac and perfusion CT applications, for which the choice of scanner becomes most important. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the basic differences between the various scanner generations and how these influence their clinical performance. The capability of using short scan times (i.e. within a single breath hold) has contributed fundamentally to the success of CT and CT angiography (CTA). With the introduction of even faster 64-channel CT scanners it became apparent, however, that short scan times also have significant disadvantages: Short contrast medium (CM) injections generally result in lower arterial enhancement and in scan timing becomes less forgiving; one may also tend to outrun the bolus in situations of altered vascular flow dynamics such as in large aneurysms or in patients with peripheral arterial occlusive disease. The ‚key-rules' of early arterial CM dynamics explain the relationship between intravenous CM injection and arterial enhancement: (1) arterial enhancement is proportional to the iodine flux: hence, increasing the injection flow rate and/or increasing the iodine concentration of the CM translates into a proportionally greater arterial opacification; (2) arterial enhancement also increases with increasing the injection duration: hence, arterial opacification can also be improved by prolonging the injecting duration relative to scan time, and by increasing the scanning delay accordingly. Modern CM injection strategies for 64channel CTA take advantage of both the above rules. For example, in abdominal CTA we use the same, fixed scan time (10 s) and the same fixed injection duration (18 s) for all patients. The scanning delay is set to 8 s after CM arrival in the aorta, as determined by automated bolus triggering. Injection flow rates are individualized to a patient's body weight and range from 3.5 to 6 mL/s using high-concentration ( 350 mgI/mL) CM. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with the basic principles of early arterial contrast medium dynamics for CTA. 2. To understand the physiologic constraints of arterial enhancement which become apparent with fast CT scanners. 3. To learn strategies for achieving reliable arterial enhancement and image quality with 64-channel CT.  Diffusion weighted imaging in the assessment of lymph node metastases A. Herneth; Vienna/AT (andreas.herneth@meduniwien.ac.at) The assessment of possible lymph node metastases is mandatory for accurate tumour staging. Criteria used to differentiate malignant from benign nodes are size and morphology. These macroscopic criteria are unspecific, because inflammatory processes may cause similar transformations and in early metastases size and morphology may still be unchanged. Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) evaluates microstructural changes of a tissue on a molecular basis. Lymph node metastases present with increased cell density and an increased amounts of intracellular obstacles due to the high energy turnover. These microstructural changes result in a restricted diffusion capacity of water protons, which in turn produce a specific contrast on DWI. T2 shine through and perfusion effects may also contribute to the signals on DWI, which can mimic restricted diffusion and malignancy. These confounding signals can be eliminated by utilizing appropriate diffusion parameters and by quantification of diffusion effects, which can be achieved by calculating the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC). At our institution, a lymph node with an ADC of less than 1,100 mm²/s is considered to be malignant. In patients with head and neck cancer or lymphoma, DWI yielded similar accuracy in the assessment of lymph node metastases compared to PET. Current results indicate that microstructural tissue changes following chemotherapy can be quantified with the ADC, which may therefore be used for therapy monitoring. Limitations of DWI are the size of the lesion and artefacts. Lesions smaller than 1 cm in diameter cannot be accurately quantified, and susceptibility and motion artefacts restrict the use of DWI to certain anatomical regions. Learning Objectives: 1. To introduce the principle of measuring DTI outside the brain. 2. To explain how changes in perfusion may change the DTI data. 3 . To learn how to differentiate between malignant and benign LN using DTI data. Perfusion imaging in the assessment of response to anticancer therapy F. Berger; Munich/DE (Frank.Berger@med.uni-muenchen.de) At initiation, tumors in a pre-vascular phase are supplied by oxygen and nutrients that diffuse from pre-existing normal vessels. When the tumor reaches a critical size of approximately 1-4 mm diameter, the resultant ischemia leads to the secretion of angiogenic factors. These factors, such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), recruit and maintain tumor vessels. Both in vitro and in vivo, 'new' vessels (neovasculature) exhibit increased blood volume and permeability compared with normal vessels. Of newer magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) modalities, perfusion MRI has emerged as a unique marker of tumor-induced blood vessels and their function. MRI-based perfusion measures the vascularity within a tumor, as well as its component heterogeneous parts. Of the parameters, which can be measured to date, blood volume and permeability are commonly applied in patient studies. Blood volume measures the aggregate size of the vascular space within designated areas, while the permeability function informs about the integrity of vessels and their 'leakiness' to contrast agents. Various new specific therapies in oncology target tumor vasculature or tumor neoangiogenesis. We will describe the use of MR perfusion to monitor such new therapies. Alternative strategies for treatment The ankle is the most commonly injured joint. Radiographs of the ankle account for more than 10% of all emergency room radiography and approximately 20% demonstrate a fracture. Plain film imaging should be performed in the initial assessment of ankle disorders to rule out a fracture or calcified loose bodies. In adults, the majority of common ankle sprains are inversion injuries of the lateral ligaments; approximately 10% are syndesmotic injuries. The anterior talofibular ligament (ATF) is most commonly affected. Approximately 20% of ATF ligamentous injuries are associated with a tear of the calcaneofibular ligament. Comparative stress views (inversion and anterior drawer) using a biomechanical device could help to confirm ligamentous injuries when the clinical diagnosis is uncertain. CT (with two-and three-dimensional reconstructions) is needed for preoperative assessment of complex and dislocated ankle fractures. CT (or MR) arthrography is a valuable option for cartilage assessment in the tibiotalar and subtalar joints. MR imaging is not indicated in acute ankle trauma. It is helpful in patients with persistent pain following trauma. It allows direct visualization of the stretched or torn ligaments and offers the advantage of detecting injuries associated with or mimicking ankle instability such as (osteo)chondral lesions, tenosynovitis or tendon injuries. It helps to rule out other painful conditions, such as sinus tarsi syndrome, and posttraumatic complications, such as ankle impingement syndromes or early osteoarthrosis. Learning Objectives: 1. To review the role of imaging in management and surgical planning of traumatic lesions of the ankle. 2. To describe MR imaging findings associated with specific ligamentous injuries. 3. To provide an overview of posttraumatic complications, including impingement syndromes. Over the last 10 years, much has been written about the technical aspects, safety and efficacy of UAE for symptomatic fibroids. Health-care providers have previously been bemused by the plethora of small and sometimes not so small case series, which often have conflicting results and messages. The publication in 2006 and 2007 of good scientific studies, driven by interventional radiologists, such as REST, EMMY and HOPEFUL, along with the publication of earlier registry data from the USA, has provided realistic evidence-based data on UAE, allowing HCPs to make informed decisions about cost effectiveness. Gynaecologists and interventional radiologists have evidence-based data to inform their patients. Patients can now make informed decisions about their treatment when conservative treatment or medical therapy had failed This should be what this debate is about, not personal views or prejudices, just the evidence and how patients can take advantage of it.  Clinical aspects and treatment options in uterine fibroids W.M. Ankum; Amsterdam/NL (w.m.ankum@amc.uva.nl) The majority of women with uterine fibroids are asymptomatic and need no treatment at all. The driving force in women seeking medical help for uterine fibroids are predominantly menstrual disorders, mechanical symptoms or both. Gynaecologists use a stepwise approach when managing these women. First of all, uterine and ovarian malignancies should be ruled out, especially when irregular vaginal bleeding or a pelvic mass is present. Secondly, the presence of intra-cavitary fibroids amenable to hysteroscopic surgery should be assessed by transvaginal sonography. If present, hysteroscopic resection provides instant cure at low morbidity and costs. Thirdly, when malignancies and submucous fibroid amenable to hysteroscopic resection have been ruled out, symptomatic relief may be reached by a variety of medical treatment options.Lastly, when conservative measures have failed or are denied by the patient, more rigorous options are available. In women desiring pregnancy, myomectomy is the obvious choice. In those women not desiring future pregnancy, hysterectomy provides a definite solution for fibroid-related menorrhagia or bulkrelated symptoms. Uterine artery embolisation (UAE) may be offered as a less invasive alternative to surgery, but may fail in up to 20-25% of patients. UAE should be restricted to women without a desire for pregnancy, since UAE will compromise both uterine and ovarian vasculature. In these women, further studies are needed before UAE can be offered without concern. Learning Objectives: 1. To recognise how and when to use medical therapy for fibroids. 2. To understand the indications and contraindications of surgery for fibroids. 3 . To appreciate which patients require treatment and which don't. 4. To review how all these options compare, medically and economically. Technique and results J.-P. Pelage; Boulogne/FR (jean-pierre.pelage@apr.ap-hop-paris.fr) Radiologists performing uterine fibroid embolisation should also be familiar with the different techniques available. Recent technical improvements may influence the outcome from therapy and reduce complication rates. The method of uterine fibroid embolisation has been extensively described in the literature. In essence it involves the placement of a catheter into the uterine arteries and injection of embolisation particles into the uterine arteries to obtain fibroid infarction. Non spherical Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) particles were the first embolization agents used for uterine fibroid embolisation. Spherical embolisation particles, such as tris-acryl microspheres and PVA spheres have been developed to address some of the disadvantages of non-spherical particles such as the unpredictable level of arterial occlusion and clumping. In most of the recent studies, a limited uterine artery embolization technique has been used. Calibrated microspheres larger than 500 or 700 μm in diameter injected using microcatheters are currently recommended. With an appropriate patient selection and optimized technique, good clinical outcomes can be achieved. The clinical success rate ranges between 80 and 95% for both control of menorrhagia and bulk-related symptoms at 3-6 months. In the long-term, the clinical recurrence rate seems higher than initially expected with up to 20% of patients becoming symptomatic after 2-5 years. Recurrence seems to be related to either insufficient fibroid infarction after embolization or to growth of new fibroids. MRI with contrast administration may play a role in evaluating the subgroup of patients with recurrent symptoms. It is really surprising that some women want to preserve their genital organs in the face of benign disease. Even the German Highest Social Court has ruled "preservation of the uterus is an understandable concern". However, overuse of hysterectomy is an undeniable fact. The German Federal Office for Quality published that 130,000 hysterectomies were performed for benign disease in 2005, conditions for which there are other treatments such as UFE. Further motivations for wanting UFE are bad experiences with gynaecological surgery, a fear of general anaesthetic, ease in the transition of being childless ("I still have my uterus, I could if I really wanted "), desire to resume activities quickly without restrictions on lifting! How can a mother of a 3-year old avoid heavy lifting? Prior to UFE, however, women need to understand that the goal is to relieve symptoms and not the degree of fibroid shrinkage. Women also need to realise that it may take a few months for the treatment to become effective. They will need understanding and support during this time. UFE is successful in 80-90% of cases. However, it may fail to relieve symptoms that have unrecognised causes such as adenomyosis, endometriosis, adhesions, von Willebrand disease or hormone imbalances. Treatment failures often get little under-gray matter structures, hyperattenuating arteries, and mass effect. Loss of gray-white interface definition or insular ribbon sign reflects cytotoxic edema and relates to specificity of arterial anatomy. Disappearing basal ganglia sign is caused by MCA occlusion proximally to lenticulostriate arteries. Early mass effect includes narrowing of sylvian fissure or loss of cortical sulci. Hyperdense artery sign represents stasis of flow due to arterial thrombus; most frequently seen in MCA. Hyperattenuating artery sign correlates positively with angiographic finding of occlusion. CTA is essential for evaluating intra-and extracranial vessels, intravascular thrombi, and trombolytic therapy guiding. Visibility of infarcts can be improved by setting of variable window width and center levels to accent the gray-white matter contrast. CTA source images are more sensitive, compared with nonenhanced-CT, in early detection zones of ischemia and prediction of final infarct volume. Conventional MRI include T1 SE, T2 FSE, FLAIR, T2* GE, and contrast-enhanced T1 SE. Findings in acute stroke are hyperintense zones on T2 FSE and FLAIR; sulcal effacement, mass effect; loss of arterial flow voids on T2 FSE; intravascular hyperintensity on FLAIR, stasis of contrast media within vessels in affected territories; abnormal blooming and parenchymal black dots due to hemorrhage on T2* GE. DWI is the most sensitive tool for detection of hyperacute stroke in the first 6 hours. DWI signal alone cannot be used for a correct estimate of the infarct age; it is important to examine DWI in comparison with ADC maps. Learning Objectives: 1. To describe the early signs of cerebral infarction on CT. 2. To describe the early signs of brain infarction on conventional MRI. 3 . To learn the importance of diffusion-weighted imaging in the early detection of stroke. Even though the spatial resolution of CTA has improved, its diagnostic capability is restricted by artifacts related to cone beam hardening, blooming from calcium and stents, and rotational derived distortions. There are also problems with dose reduction and optimization of scanning. MRA is contraindicated in patients with pacemakers. Blooming artifacts can distort the region surrounding a ferromagnetic metal, while non-ferromagnetic metals (nitinol) may create signal voids, which also affect the image quality. Catheter-based angiography remains the gold standard in several emergency cases, as it offers the advantage of concurrent endovascular treatment. Among those are acute severe limb ischemia with neuromotoric symptoms requiring rapid catheter-directed thrombolysis or thrombectomy to minimize the risk of limb loss, and visceral bleeding requiring urgent embolization. Carbon dioxide represents an alternative contrast medium in catheter-based angiography. Indications for CO 2 include iodinated contrast allergy, renal insufficiency, arterial bleeding, TIPS, central venous evaluation and procedures requiring a high volume of contrast. Precautions should be taken to avoid contamination, explosive delivery and gas trapping in vessels. Arterial injections above the diaphragm should be avoided and CO 2 should never been administered with the patient's head in an elevated position. Gadolinium chelates are also indicated in patients considered to be at increased risk of nephropathy. The major limitation of gadolinium-based angiography is poor radiographic density, which can be significantly improved by the addition of small quantities of iodinated contrast to gadolinium. The basic components of speech recognition systems (SRS) are the acoustic and the language model. The first provides statistical information on speaker-dependent variability of phoneme pronunciation, the latter contains empirically gathered probabilities of triplet word combinations. Requirements for sufficient performance of SRS within a multiuser PACS/RIS environment are a client-server architecture, a robust institution network and a high-end PACS/RIS hardware infrastructure. The client workstation is linked to the SR server and employs individual, continuously updated voice profiles and the radiological context vocabulary. Department-wide integration of the SR application is important for correct attribution and timely and continuous generation of reports. Two operation modes of SRS can be used in a clinical setting: 1. Offline (batch) SR with transfer of the dictation to the SR server for subsequent processing. The preliminary report is corrected by a transcriptionist and finally proofread and authorized by the radiologist. 2. Online SR with realtime processing of the dictation and instant report correction, proofreading and authorization by the radiologist in one step. Offline SR can only be implemented given a preexisting transcription service and is comparable to conventional tape dictation regarding the radiologist´s time effort. Online SR can decrease the report turnaround times significantly, but also reduces the radiologist's productivity due to the correction effort, and lead to clinically relevant homonym and non-sense errors. State-of-the-art continuous SRS are characterized by recognition rates between 90 and 97% and extensive context vocabularies. Depending on the product, frequent update of the individual or common context vocabulary is critical for maintaining recognition accuracy. Learning Objectives: 1. To be familiar with the principles of the computer basics behind the application. 2. To understand and be able to critically appraise the potential clinical applications. Combined transabdominal and transvaginal US is the study of choice for the initial evaluation of the female pelvis. MRI typically follows US as a problem-solving modality. It helps differentiate benign processes that necessitate specific therapy from those that can be managed expectantly. MR is the imaging modality of choice for staging and treatment follow-up of uterine malignancies. CT has no role in the detection and characterization of pelvic tumours; however, it is the modality of choice for staging ovarian cancer. CT is also very useful in the detection of post-operative complications, and both CT and US are excellent for image-guided interventions. PET/CT is particularly useful in the detection of lymph node metastases and in assessing patient suitability for salvage therapy, as it can provide precise re-staging information. It is crucial to be familiar with normal anatomical and physiological imaging appearances of the uterus and ovaries in order to avoid potential pitfalls and maximize the accuracy. Endometrial thickness and appearances of the endometrium, myometrium and ovaries change with the phase of menstrual cycle, menopausal state and use of oral contraceptives (OC) or hormone replacement therapy. For example, in patients on OC, the endometrium may become atrophic and the myometrium may appear swollen and globular on both US and MRI. Uterine cervix appears of lower attenuation than uterine corpus on early contrastenhanced CT and should not be confused with cervical pathology. On PET/CT, premenopausal endometrial FDG uptake changes cyclically, increasing during ovulatory and menstrual phases. Similarly, premenopausal ovarian FDG uptake may be functional due to the presence of corpus luteum cysts. Infertility is defined as the inability to conceive after 1 year of intercourse without contraception. However, in women age 35 and older, the work-up for infertility can begin 6 months after an inability to conceive. Infertility may be secondary to male and/or female factors. This lecture will focus on those imaging examinations that assess the uterus and fallopian tube. The classic imaging test is hysterosalpingography (HSG), but ultrasound, sonohysterography, and MR may all play a role in the imaging assessment. HSG is used to assess uterine contour abnormalities, appearance of the fallopian tube and free spill. HSG should be performed during the period between the cessation of menses and ovulation. Tubal flushing during HSG increases the likelihood of pregnancy compared to no intervention. Abnormalities of the uterine contour associated with infertility include uterine leiomyomata, Müllerian anomalies (in particular septate uterus) and endometrial abnormalities such as polyps and synechiae. Sonohysterography can be used for diagnosis and hysteroscopic resection for treatment. Structural defects in the fallopian tubes that cause obstruction or disrupt motility are the cause of infertility in 25-40% of women. The major cause of tubal infertility is pelvic inflammatory disease. In women with proximal tubal obstruction on HSG, selective salpingography with tubal catheterization can be offered. Patients with distal tubal obstruction may develop hydrosalpinges, which decrease the success rate of in vitro fertilization (IVF). Removal of the hydrosalpinges increases the success of IVF. Distal tubal disease caused by pelvic adhesions is diagnosed by visualizing loculated spill on HSG and surgical treatment improves fertility. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the roles of HSG, US, and MR imaging techniques in the evaluation of uterine anomalies and tubal pathology. Ultrasound is the imaging modality of choice for the initial evaluation of benign uterine disease. However, in patients whose sonographic findings are indeterminate or inconclusive, MR imaging can play an important role as a problem-solving modality. Benign endometrial pathology such as polyps, hyperplasia and the pre-menstrual endometrium have a specific appearance on dynamic contrast-enhanced MR imaging sequences. MR imaging can help to differente the cause of abnormal uterine bleeding in patients where sonography cannot distinguish between leiomyomas and uterine adenomyosis. This is particulary important since leiomyomas can be treated medically or by a number of uterine sparing therapies, while deep adenomyosis is treated by hysterectomy. In addition, MR imaging helps in precise delineation of leiomyomas and their position with respect to the endometrial cavity, thus allowing optimal preoperative planning (open procedure myomectomy versus hysteroscopic removal). Dynamic MR imaging allows confident distinction between junctional zone thickening due to adenomyosis versus transient thickening caused by uterine peristaltism. MR imaging is useful in the pre-and post-procedural evaluations of patients undergoing uterine artery embolization (UAE) for symptomatic uterine leiomyomas. Relative contraindications to this procedure include pelvic malignancy, desired future fertility, adenomyosis and pedunculated leiomyomas. Although adenomyosis is considered a relative contraindication, most advocate treatment if adenomyosis and leiomyomas co-exist. Fibroids with hemorrhagic degeneration have loss of vascular supply and therefore show poor response to UAE. Molecular Imaging (MI) is a diversifying research discipline that focusses on establishing imaging tools to non-invasively visualize key targets in disease processes. While traditional imaging research is primarily driven by engineering and physics, MI is additionaly highly influenced by molecular biology and chemistry. Experimentally a wide variety of imaging tools have been developed over the past years. Some of these techniques are increasingly becoming standard research tools for basic scientists. Moreover, MI has become a mainstay for pre-clincal drug development. However, clincal translation of MI technologies is another important goal of the MI community and finally first imaging techniques are entering the clinical arena mainly driven by the recent advances in PET imaging. A major motivation of pushing MI tools into patient care is the prospect of an early, sensitive and specific diagnosis of disease and precise monitoring of treatment response. Molecular imaging is a relatively young field that is rapidly changing our approach towards understanding and solving problems in in vivo diagnoses with innovative solutions. The development of high sensitive, targeting and responsive agents is a major challenge to enhance the role of MRI in the field of Molecular Imaging applications. Understanding the relationships between structure/dynamics and paramagnetic relaxation processes has been fundamental for the development of high sensitive Gd (III) based agents. The need of targeting molecules that are present at very low concentration requires the development of novel classes of contrast agents characterized by higher contrasting ability and improved targeting capabilities. Efficient targeting procedures for cellular labeling and recognition of epitopes characterizing important pathologies have been set up. As far as the delivery of a large number of Gd-complexes at the targeting sites is concerned, several systems are currently under intense scrutiny, including dendrimers, liposomes and other form of lipophilic aggregates. Finally, much attention is currently devoted to CEST agents that represent an emerging class of MRI contrast media of huge potential. They act as negative agents by reducing the signal intensity of water protons through saturation transfer mediated by chemical exchange. The great potential of CEST agents lies on the possibility of switching on and off the contrast at will, making possible the detection of more agents, each uniquely characterized by the specific frequency of their mobile protons. Marked sensitivity improvements have been obtained by using as source of mobile protons the water molecules contained in the inner cavity of liposomes, properly shifted by the addition of a shift reagent. New stem cell based therapies require the assessment of cell homing and engraftment in the host organ. MR imaging is well suited to track transplanted stem cells in vivo, after the cells have been labeled with MR contrast agents. Basic principles, capabilities and limitations of various labeling techniques will be presented in this lecture. Virtually any cell type can be labeled with MR contrast agents. Labeling techniques comprise simple incubation, receptor-mediated uptake, transfection and electroporation. Cells can be labeled with positive or negative MR contrast agents and can be subsequently depicted with clinical MR scanners. Each labeling procedure has to be tailored to the investigated cell type, target organ and application. Adanvatages and disadvantages of MR-based cell tracking techniques will be compared with alternative optical or radiotracer-based techniques. More recent research concentrates on functional aspects of the transplanted cells, such as their viability, differentiation capacity and long-term residence in the target organ. These functional aspects are essential for a successful stem cell-based tissue regeneration. Capabilities and limitations of MR to depict these functional properties of the cells will be reviewed. In conclusion, MR contrast agents can be used for labeling and in vivo tracking of various cell types with clinical MR scanners. The ability to trace the in vivo cell distribution with non-invasive imaging techniques may improve our understanding of how stem cells mediate recovery of injured organs and may be ultimately applied clinically for safety assessments of transplantation procedures. The diagnosis of airway disease is challenging to the clinician as it has no specific clinical or functional features. Chest radiography shows highly variable radiographic abnormalities and considerable interobserver and intraobserver variability. HRCT has become the best imaging modality for the assessment of the airways and is nowadays the radiological method of choice for investigating a patient suspected of airway disease. Volumetric HRCT of the entire lung combining end inspiratory, end expiratory, and dynamic expiratory acquisitions demonstrates localized functional information. The addition of postprocessing techniques such as maximum intensity projection, minimum intensity projection, and multiplanar reformations enhances the diagnostic capabilities of CT in showing characteristic findings of airway diseases. Moreover, volumetric HRCT assesses the extent and severity of disease. It may be repeated for assessing the response to therapy and often avoid the need for histological evaluations. Learning Objectives: 1. To review the advantages of VHRCT for the diagnosis and characterisation of bronchial abnormalities. Although there are differences in the prevalence of specific histopathological patterns, the spectrum of lung pathology seen in the CVDs is relatively limited and, to a certain extent, mirrors that seen in the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias. Thus, the patterns of usual interstitial pneumonia (most commonly encountered in RhA), non-specific interstitial pneumonia (now known to be the most prevalent histopathological pattern of lung disease in SSc and PM/DM), organizing pneumonia (typically associated with PM/DM, but also RhA) and lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia (a feature of lung disease in SS and RhA) all occur in CVDs. The histopathological evaluation of CTD-related lung disease can be difficult and is compounded by the different patterns of interstitial lung disease, which may coexist. To complicate matters further, airway disease (which has been reported in RhA and SS) is also reasonably common and might occur simultaneoulsy with fibrotic lung disease. Plain chest radiography, pulmonary function tests and high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) are the standard non-invasive tests used to evaluate these patients. In this presentation, the imaging features of the CVDs will be discussed. Where relevant, the relationships between the histopathological changes and imaging features will be emphasized. The liver provides excellent soil in which metastases can establish, thus it is the second most commonly involved organ of metastatic disease from virtually any primary malignant neoplasm. Hepatic involvement of metastatic tumor and the duration of survival are considered to be inversely related; nevertheless, the available therapeutic arsenal becomes more and more effective, and thus information regarding the presence, number and localization of liver metastases may greatly influence therapeutic decisions and outcome of the disease. However effective the clinical and laboratory tests may be, the final diagnosis of hepatic involvement is based on results of imaging procedures. The list of modalities available for this purpose includes transabdominal and intraoperative ultrasound (US), computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), angiography, image-guided biopsy and different methods of nuclear medicine. Detectability, appearance and characterization of liver metastases depend on the site of origin, tumor characteristics, and size and localization of lesions. The usual diagnostic algorithm is based on routine ultrasound and multiphase CT examination, but the clinical situation may require more accurate evaluation by contrast-enhanced US, CT arterio-portography or cell-specific contrast-enhanced MRI examination. Proper knowledge of the efficiency of these methods is indispensable for finding the most effective diagnostic algorithm for each individual patient. Learning Objectives: 1. To emphasise significance of liver metastasis detection in staging and therapy planning of malignancies. 2. To define examination technique, role and accuracy of different imaging modalities. 3 . To evaluate the place of different cell-specific MR contrast materials in the diagnostic process. A-040 09:00 B. Primary malignancies in the non-cirrhotic liver T.K. Helmberger; Munich/DE (thomas.helmberger@kh-bogenhausen. de) In comparison to metastases and hepatocellular carcinomas in cirrhotic livers, primary malignant hepatic tumours without cirrhosis are less common. About 10-40 % of all HCC may occur in the non-cirrhotic liver, whereas the imaging features compare HCC in the cirrhotic liver (hypervascularization, necrosis/heterogeneity in large tumours, fibrous capsule, fatty metamorphosis, calcifications). Fibrolamellar HCC, a tumour in young adults, distinct from HCC regarding origin, differentiation and prognosis, is characterized by lamellar fibrous strands, a fibrous central scar, calcifications and heterogenous enhancement. Less common tumours arising from the cholangiocellular cell line are represented by the intrahepatic (peripheral) and the extrahepatic (ductal) cholangiocarcinoma (Klatskin tumour). Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas (CC), accounting for about 10% of all primary hepatic malignancies, arise from the biliary ductal epithelium in the hepatic periphery often mimicking metastases with respect to imaging findings. Unlike intrahepatic CC, extrahepatic CC often cause biliary obstruction, while the tumour itself is frequently not displayed. In contrast, biliary cystadenocarcinomas appear as uni-or multilocular cystic masses, whereas peripheral nodular and septal enhancement may represent malignant components of these tumours. Angiosarcoma, a rare tumour deriving from endothelial cells, has a strong association with the exposure to toxic agents. In these solitary or diffuse occurring tumours, imaging is unspecific with heterogenous appearance pre-and post-contrast on CT and MRI. Other rare tumours are epithelioid haemangioendothelioma and lymphoma of the liver, which present in most cases no specific features, whereas the differential is more triggered by the clinical context. Learning Objectives: 1. To present demographic and pathologic background of primary malignant lesions in the non-cirrhotic liver. 2. To describe typical imaging findings in radiological imaging modalities of this lesions. 3. To define clinically focused, diagnostic strategies or the assessment of these lesions. C. Primary malignancies in the cirrhotic liver G. Brancatelli; Palermo/IT (gbranca@yahoo.com) Hepatocarcinogenesis represents a progressive process in which regenerative hepatocytes give rise to hyperplastic hepatocyte nodules, and these progress to dysplastic nodules, which are thought to be the direct precursor of hepatocellular carcinoma. Distinction among regenerative nodules, dysplastic nodules, and hepatocellular carcinoma with varying degrees of differentiation requires an assessment of the hemodynamic nature of the mass. As with regenerative nodules, dysplastic nodules receive predominantly portal venous flow and do not usually demonstrate bright enhancement on arterial phase after rapid bolus injection of intravenous contrast at cross-sectional imaging. As the degree of (de-differentiation) malignancy increases, portal blood supply decreases, whereas nontriadal arteries (i.e., unaccompanied by portal venules and biliary ducts) and aberrant capillaries (a process known as "capillarization") develop to feed the nodules. When trying to characterise nodules developing in cirrhosis at cross-sectional imaging, marked arterial phase enhancement with rapid washout during the portal venous and delayed phase should be regarded as highly suspicious for the presence of hepatocellular carcinoma, but there is much overlap in imaging features among regenerative nodules, dysplastic nodules and well-differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma. Ophthalmologists accept ocular MRI if the radiologist is 1) aware of diagnostic problems and 2) knows about the advantages and limits of ocular ultrasound. The presentation will explain the use of surface coils to obtain high-resolution MR images of the eye. Techniques like DW-MRI are demonstrated. MR and clinical images will exemplify differential diagnosis and staging of ocular melanoma, retinoblastoma, metastasis, hemangioma and foreign bodies. Melanoma is the entity found most often; correlation between melanin content and signal on T1-WI is demonstrated, as well as enhancement and signs of retrobulbar extension. Leukokoria is the clinical sign of retinoblastoma. Retinoblastoma may be exophytic or endophytic. As both eyes and the brain have to be imaged, MR is usually performed with general anesthesia. Calcification is the defining feature seen on ocular CT. Coats disease is a differential diagnosis and may be differentiated by missing mass. Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous is characterized by micophthalmos, an enhancing mass and layered hemorrhage. Hemangioma is an important differential diagnosis of ocular metastases. It is characterized by high signal on T2-WI. Foreign bodies may lead to hard-to-control inflammation and every attempt to verify their location is usually deemed justified. A brief excurs treats ocular findings not to be missed on standard head CT. These include hemorrhage in trauma CT, ocular prostheses and foreign bodies. The extraocular orbit can be affected by pathological conditions derived not only from the globe. Orbital compartment anatomy and extraorbital anatomy should be considered to establish the origin of pathology and for a correct diagnosis. Imaging of the orbital structures is performed with CT and/or MRI, either with or without iv contrast material. CT should be used in cases of foreign bodies and MRI should not be performed. The orbital spaces contain the lacrimal glands, the extraconal, conal and intraconal region, the bulb and the retrobulbar area with the optic nerve. The bony walls of the orbit are those of the paranasal sinuses and the anterior skull base. The posterior part is in close proximity to the parasellar regions. The pathology affecting the orbit may originate from intraorbital regions or may use vascular or neural structures as a "road" to infiltrate the orbit. The pathologic entities may range from benign to malignant structures. Especially, inflammatory extraocular pathology can reach the orbit and its components by direct invasion through the walls or by the vessels and then yield to intraorbital inflammatory processes with potential thrombosis of the orbital vein and cavernous sinus. Malignant processes may originate from the intraorbital structures or infiltrate the orbit directly by destructing the bony walls or by nerval or vascular structures. In this course, the anatomic situation, the different benign and malignant pathologies, and the traumatic entities affecting the extraocular orbit will be demonstrated. Of the six external ocular muscles, the superior oblique muscle is supplied by the trochlear nerve (N IV), the lateral rectus by the abducent nerve (N VI), and all other external muscles by the oculomotor nerve (N III). All of these cranial nerves have their nuclei situated in the brainstem, have an interpeduncular or prepontine cisternal course, and run through the cavernous sinus and the superior orbital fissure. The abducent nerve has a long cisternal course making it extra vulnerable. In its cisternal course, the oculomotor nerve runs very close to the circle of Willis, making it vulnerable to aneurysmal disease. When a patient with diplopia undergoes an MRI examination, an extended study is recommended to visualize the brain, brainstem, and the central skull base. A wide variety of lesions can be seen at different locations, such as the brain (demyelinating disease, ischemia, etc.), the brainstem (ischemia, etc.), cisterns (meningioma, infectious disease, carcinomatous meningitis, neurogenic tumor, etc.), cavernous sinus and superior orbital fissure (neoplastic disease, neurogenic tumor, vascular disease, etc.). Besides specific sequences used in younger (FLAIR) and older patients (DWI), such an examination always consists of T2WI of the brain and brainstem, and T1WI covering the course of the III, IV, and VI cranial nerves. After gadolinium injection, the T1WI are repeated. In case of oculomotor nerve disease, performing an MRA of the circle of Willis is mandatory. Shunt stenosis is frequently detected in native fistulas, which should undergo balloon angioplatsy as first-line treatment in order to keep the shunt running. In implant shunts, stenosis frequently leads to complete thrombosis if not deteteced early by careful watching of either dialysis parameters, ultrasound or recirculation measurements. In-time intervention in grafts prevents deterioration into complte occlusion, which is more difficult to treat as also in upper arm fistulas. Shunt thrombosis is less common in native fistulas. Both may undergo mechanical recanalization without thrombolysis. While in native fistulas, simple balloon angioplasty is a very useful tool for short segment thrombosis, extensive thrombosis in native veins or grafts requires use of different mechanical devices or aspiration catheters. In venous access thrombosis, thrombolysis and fibrinous sheath stripping are the percutanous options. Congenital vascular malformations (CVM) are infrequently encountered in everyday practice and, to date, numerous misconceptions and a confusing nomenclature in relation to them remain. Vascular malformations, as opposed to hemangiomas, are not neoplastic, always present at birth and show neither endothelial proliferation nor growth on tissue cultures. Approximately, two-thirds of the malformations are of venous predominance, either isolated or sometimes associated with complex congenital syndromes. The pathogenesis of CVM remains incompletely understood. Most often, isolated anomalies exist and they are rarely genetically transmitted. Venous malformations usually manifest in childhood or early adulthood, growing commensurately with the individual and, unlike hemangiomas, do not regress. They can expand in response to trauma or altered hormonal states, or following incomplete surgical resection, thrombosis or sepsis. Their clinical presentation is variable depending on their size, location and secondary complications, such as haemorrhage and ulceration. Most of the venous malformations are asymptomatic and should be managed conservatively. Surgical resection is often contraindicated as complete excision is difficult or impossible, particularly when the malformation is diffuse, shows deep involvement or is located in the head, neck and extremities. Laser therapy has a minimal role for very small superficial lesions. The mainstay of treatment is sclerotherapy, which does not suffer from any of these limitations and has become particularly safe and effective with the use of foam sclerosants. New approaches to therapy will develop as more knowledge in connection with the pathogenesis and angiogenesis drugs is gathered. Colorectal cancer is an important health problem. Nearly one million new cases of colorectal cancer have been diagnosed worldwide each year and there have been half-a-million deaths. Metallic stent placement is a reasonable alternative that can provide an effective, non-surgical decompression of the obstructed left-sided colon to avoid an emergency colostomy. Main indications for endoluminal metallic stent placement in the colon and rectum are: 1. for temporary colonic decompression in patients with acute malignancy obstruction as a "bridge to elective surgery"; 2. for long-term colonic decompression in patients with large-bowel obstruction due an unresectable colonic carcinoma; 3. for long-term colonic decompression in patients with large-bowel benign strictures due a fibrosis post surgery or post radiotherapy; 4. as palliative treatment for close coloenteric or colovesical fistulae. Stent deployment in colon can be achieved under fluoroscopy guidance alone, under colonoscopy guidance alone and combined (fluoroscopy and colonoscopy). Lesser complications of stent placement are common to many reports. More severe, life-threatening complications are described, however, including death. The technical success in deploying stents with fluoroscopic, endoscopic or combined guidance has ranged from 88 to 100%. Clinical or medical success, improvement of obstructive symptoms, has been reported in 80-92%. Radiation exposure is a very important problem for the patient and for the operator when the procedure its carried out with fluoroscopic guidance. Saving of up to 20% for presurgery stent placement versus surgical management has been reported. The decreases in the cost were attributed mainly to the shorter hospital stay. Endoscopy is the first-line invasive treatment for GI tract bleeding, but interventional radiology is indicated in 5-10% of patients whenever endoscopy fails. Embolization has always been the preferred interventional radiological treatment for upper gastrointestinal (UGI) tract bleeding, while vasopressin infusion was in the past indicated for lower gastrointestinal (LGI) tract bleeding. However, since the early 90s, embolization has been favored for LGI tract hemorrhage also. Findings of angiography include contrast extravasation, pseudoaneurysm, arteriovenous malformation, angiodysplasias or hyperemia. Embolization should be performed as selectively as possible, especially for LGI bleeding, with microcatheter technique; the materials include microcoils, polyvinyl alcohol particles and glue. Control of hemorrhage is achieved in 90-100% of LGI bleeding, and in 70-92% of UGI bleeding (richer collateral supply in the UGI tract). Rebleeding occurs in 20-30%. Intestinal ischemia is reported in 0-70% of patients for LGI embolization, although it is usually asymptomatic. Ischemic complications after UGI embolization are less frequent. CT is currently the most important emerging non-invasive modality for the assessment of the heart and coronary arteries. Most of the requirements for a proper Cardiac CT examination concern the adequate design of the protocol and a good knowledge of normal and abnormal cardiac and coronary anatomy. The implementation of newer technologies every year requires constant update and optimization of Cardiac CT protocols. Also, the differences between different vendors' equipments require some adjustments in protocols. Parameters such as slice thickness, pitch, mAs, kV, reconstruction increment, temporal window of reconstruction play complementary roles in achieving adequate image quality. Contrast material administration is a key part of the Cardiac CT scan. In this phase of the examination, patients' preparation is a very important issue. The use of negative cronotropic drugs is delicate but very important and effective in improving image quality and in reducing evaluation and post-processing time. Cardiac anatomy is also very important since normal, variants, and anomalies are extremely frequent in different configurations. Many cardiac conditions are associated with typical anatomical landmarks. These features should be part of the basic knowledge of cardiac radiologists. The advent of multi-detector row CT scanners with subsecond gantry rotation time and high isotropic spatial resolution, together with acquisition of data synchronized to the ECG has allowed the visualization of coronary arteries with a high diagnostic quality. The same date set, however, also contains huge amounts of information regarding the myocardium, atrial and ventricular size and function, as well as cardiac valves. In the past years, evidence has accumulated to indicate that CT allows the assessment of ventricular size and function with a similar accuracy as compared to the current standard of reference magnetic resonance imaging. Moreover, a number of recent studies have indicated that multi-detector row CT allows not only the morphological but also the functional evaluation of cardiac valves with comparable results as compared to the current clinical reference modality echocardiography. Finally, recent evidence has accumulated to indicate that viability assessment of myocardium with CT has become feasible with a similar accuracy as compared to MRI. When ECG-gated imaging protocols are modified to cover the whole thoracic cavity and aim at a simultaneous opacification of coronary arteries, thoracic aorta, and pulmonary arteries, CT enables in evaluating patients with acute chest pain by diagnosing or excluding aortic dissection or rupture, significant coronary stenoses, and pulmonary embolism. Particularly, most recently introduced dual-source CT scanners with a high and heart rate-independent temporal resolution have opened the field for routine application of such CT protocols to the emergency patient, because heart rate control prior to cardiac CT is no longer necessary. It is known for years that radiotherapy is useful in the treatment of hepatic neoplasms. The problem, however, is that if therapeutic doses were applied, there would be major damage of the non-tumoral liver tissue. Research with new materials has produced spherical embolic particles, of any size, that may provoke a wide variety of interactions (even none) with the embolized vessel wall and the surrounding tissue. They can be safely loaded with many substances. The anatomical basis for performing endovascular treatments to liver tumors is the well-known fact that they are, almost exclusively, fed by arterial vessels. With the new developments in microcatheters and guidewires, a superselective placement of particles in the afferent arteries can be technically done in most cases. Taking advantage of the three points mentioned above (radiotherapy, particles and catheters), it has been possible to perform a novel method to treat liver tumors, which consists of intra-arterial, selective application of therapeutic dossages of radiation. This procedure, defined as "liver radioembolization (RE)", is based on the deployment of small (30 μ), inert particles loaded with Yttrium 90. Y90 is a pure -emisor with a half-life of 64 h and a maximun tissue penetration of 11 mm (mean 2.5 mm). Clinical implantation of RE requires a multidisciplinary approach among different specialties, and radiologists are in a relevant position, not only for the diagnosis, staging and follow-up of the tumors, but also because interventionalists play a major role in the therapeutic planning and deployment of the treatment. With the widespread acceptance of uterine fibroid embolization offered in most European countries, new issues and questions have been recently raised. The published experience demonstrates that embolization is very effective in treating menorrhagia (success rate 80-95%), bulk-related symptoms (success rate 85-90%) and pelvic pain. Uterine volume reduction and fibroid shrinkage range between 30-50% and 40-60%, respectively. The patient's satisfaction is high and the hospital stay very short compared to surgery. Recent randomized studies comparing mainly embolization to hysterectomy have demonstrated that embolization compares favourably to abdominal hysterectomy in terms of quality of life, length of recovery and cost. Conversely, minor complications and rates of re-interventions are higher in women treated with embolization. Training of interventional radiologists and optimized patient selection with both gynecologists and radiologists involved may help reduce these side-effects of embolization. In the long-term, the clinical recurrence rate after embolization (i.e. need for additional procedures such as repeat embolization, myomectomy or hysterectomy) seems higher than initially expected with up to 20% of patients becoming symptomatic after 2-5 years. Recurrence seems to be related to either insufficient fibroid infarction after embolization or to growth of new fibroids. MRI with contrast administration may play a role in evaluating the subgroup of patients with recurrent symptoms. Similarly, little data regarding fertility after embolization or embolization in infertile patients is available to date. Large multicenter studies should therefore be conducted to confirm that embolization is a valuable alternative to myomectomy. Learning Objectives: 1. To describe the main anatomical and technical considerations relevant to uterine fibroid embolisation. 2. To be familiar with indications and contraindications of uterine fibroid embolisation with special emphasis on fertility. 3. To recognise complications associated with uterine fibroid embolisation and apply prevention and management options. 4. To understand respective indications for medical treatment, hysterectomy, myomectomy and uterine fibroid embolisation in women with symptomatic uterine fibroids. early cross-sectional imaging, their classic appearance and hence their specificity might be obscured or even lost on modern cross-sectional images. In this interactive lecture, several neuro-radiological imaging signs, illustrated with cases, will be discussed not only with respect to their classic appearance, but also with respect to their reliability and significance in modern cross-sectional imaging, inherent pitfalls and differential diagnoses. The signs presented will be relevant, easy to recognize and reasonably frequent. The face and neck offer some of the most complicated anatomies with which the radiologist has to deal, and also a particularly wide range of pathology, making cervicofacial imaging one of the most complex areas of clinical practice. Further, imaging signs in the face and neck can frequently be difficult to elicit. Many general radiologists therefore prefer to avoid practising in this area if possible, but a basic knowledge of the face and neck is fundamental to general radiology practice. A simple approach to the complexity of this area may be made on the basis of anatomical compartments. These are also the key to differential cervicofacial diagnosis and provide the radiologist with a useful guide to establish the pathological basis of imaging signs. In this area, it is also important to correlate imaging with clinical examination, as lesions may have identical imaging signs but radically different pathophysiologies. In radiology generally, knowledge of the clinical treatment options is fundamental to providing a meaningful radiological report. This is particularly true of cervicofacial disease where therapeutic options are generally not well understood by radiologists, and clinicoradiological liaison becomes paramount. Excellent image quality at an acceptable dose is a basic requirement for digital mammography. In many European countries, evaluations are guided by the European Guidelines for Quality Assurance in breast imaging. This document includes limiting values of contrast thresholds for objects of various diameters. In practice, the CDMAM phantom is used. The purpose of this lecture is to explain and illustrate the contrast detail analysis, to compare this approach to other measures of image quality assessment and to provide the reader with reference values of both DR and CR modalities The lecture will be based on literature data and personal measurements using the European protocol. We have extended the contrast detail evaluation using the computer read-out by the CDCOM software (www.euref.org). For each condition, 16 input images were used. All 16 matrices obtained with CDCOM were averaged, Gaussian smoothing or a smoothing procedure based on the statistical decision theory was used and all rows were then curve fited with a psychometric curve to retrieve contrast thresholds. The CDMAM approach is compared to other methods such as MTF and noise power spectra and lesion detection experiments using data sets with well-known (simulated) lesions. A critical evaluation and a good understanding of the European guidelines is needed. Human readings of the contrast detail phantom will soon be replaced by a computerized analysis from which predicted human threshold values will be estimated. Physicists and radiologists have to cooperate to ensure optimal quality of clinical mammograms. Computer-aided detection (CAD) has been proposed as an adjunct to single reading with the aim of increasing cancer detection rates. CAD systems have three stages. The initial stage is digitising films, which has associated time and cost implications, or direct application to digital mammograms. Secondly, the digital information is analysed. There are regular improvements in the analytical features, particularly to reduce the number of false prompts. Finally, calcium and mass markers are displayed on a screen. When the information is displayed, there is user ability to set a threshold level for marker display, thus choosing sensitivity and true-to-false prompt ratio, as well as to manipulate the CAD images. The initial clinical studies were retrospective reviews of selected batches of films. CAD was found to be very sensitive for malignancy and it was postulated that cancer detection rates would increase, if all CAD prompts on cancers were actioned. Prospective studies in the screening setting have had widely variable outcomes with some demonstrating improvements in cancer detection rate. Some, however, have shown either no change or reduced accuracy of interpretation. The impact of other factors, such as radiologist experience and breast or lesion characteristics, is also discussed. In the future, increasing use of digital mammography will facilitate CAD use. Several other applications include merging CAD information from prior views and clinical data correlation. Full field digital mammography is superior to analogue in image quality and is fast becoming the system of choice for new purchases where finances allow. Studies in the US (ACRIN/DMIST) and Europe (Oslo, London, etc.) show that at worst it is equivalent to analogue in terms of cancer detection screening, and at best outperforms analogue substantially, particularly in pre-and peri-menopausal women, and in those with dense breasts. FFDM has additional significant advantages of image archiving and display, with on-screen image manipulation and in-line CAD if required.The ability to report soft-copy images at a routinely larger optical size than analogue films is likely also to aid visual recognition of abnormalities.Immediate on-screen display of prior studies for comparison purposes is also helpful. Personal service screening experiences of 9 FFDM units having carried out approximately 75,000 mammographic studies are described. Training for experienced mammographers should be minimal once manufacturer's induction has taken place and a short learning curve overcome. Acclimatisation to high-contrast levels is a common early requirement. Soft-copy reading requires more meticulous attention to incident light than hard copy due to lower light output from monitors.This applies to the radiographic monitoring of current examinations as well as image reporting. Incorporation of FFDM into a department requires attention to PACS and connectivity issues, environmental issues such as air-conditioning, and also reading and prior image display protocols, particularly in a screening setting. Attention to detail and forward planning will result in a popular and favourable transition. The technical details and the performance characteristics of the dual-source CT (DSCT) concept and apparatus, and the possibilities for very fast acquisition at 83 ms effective scan time and dual-energy acquisition will be explained. Dual-energy CT (DECT) will be the focus of this presentation; clinical applications are the topic of the following two. DECT relies on the principle that the attenuation data necessary for the reconstruction of an image are acquired at two different energies. To do so, several technical realizations have been used and are still available today: (1) Successive scans of a given slice or volume at two different voltage settings; (2) acquisition with rapid kV switching; (3) acquisition at one voltage level but with a split "sandwich-like" detector which absorbs predominantly lower energy photons in the front and higher energy photons in the back portion; (4) dual-source CT (DSCT) with the two sources being operated at different energies. Although the acquisition schemes may differ, the processing and interpretation of DECT data are always based on the same principle: The energy-dependent differences in attenuation for a given region or a given tissue of interest allow conclusions on the effective atomic number. The physics behind it will be explained in detail by illustrations and examples. DECT is not material specific like spectroscopy. DECT nevertheless allows separating materials of sufficiently different atomic numbers such as soft tissue, calcium and iodine and has already proved specific advantages for clinical applications. Dual-source CT was developed to achieve a higher temporal resolution for cardiac imaging. The clinical indications of dual-source CT with both X-ray sources operating at the same potential are ECG-gated examinations. The high temporal resolution is not only beneficial to ensure a robust diagnostic image quality for coronary CT angiography but also to obtain diagnostic examinations at high heart rates. Also, dynamic images can be reconstructed to assess non-coronary structures including heart valves and myocardial wall motion. A specific protocol for the evaluation of acute chest pain offers the possibility to switch the second tube only on for the area of the heart. For dual-energy CT, the two X-ray sources run at different tube potentials (i.e., 140 and 80 kVp), and the tube currents are adjusted to obtain a similar photon output. The patient dose roughly equals that of a normal CT scan. Average images are immediately available for diagnostic evaluation. Additionally, a variety of postprocessing algorithms can be applied to exploit the spectral information. One algorithm removes the bones from angiography data sets. Another option is to color-code iodine uptake in parenchymatous organs or to subtract the iodinerelated density to obtain virtually unenhanced images. In pulmonary angiography data sets, perfusion of the lung parenchyma can be mapped by its iodine content. Different types of renal calculi can also be differentiated by their spectral properties and tendons and ligaments can be differentiated from other structures with a specific algorithm. Initial studies elucidate the clinical value of these applications. The advent of dual-source CT has re-invigorated the evaluation and development of dual-energy CT (DECT) that for technical reasons was largely abandoned in the early days of CT. Although this technique's renaissance has already resulted in currently available clinical applications, these are highly likely to merely be a starting point in the evolution of this modality. This presentation will focus on the potential future applications of DECT and its potential to shape the future of CT imaging. The future impact of DECT can broadly be categorized into three different areas: the dual availability of simultaneously acquired low and high kVp images, the potential for dual-energy calculated images to differentiate elements and finally the performance of advanced post-processing reconstructions, a composite group of images resulting from subtraction/fusion of images generated from other dualenergy data sets. Thus, DECT has the capacity to transform CT into a series of "sequences" simultaneously generated from the same volume to enhance visualization of anatomy and pathology. This presentation will concentrate on the most promising of these future applications and attempt to demonstrate how these may impact patient clinical evaluation. DECT utilization may result in significant modification of CT practice with the potential to reduce radiation exposure and alter current contrast media administration protocols. However, the advent of DECT may also introduce some confusion to some of the established quantitative CT techniques such as pulmonary nodule enhancement. The presentation will highlight these potential issues and address areas where future investigation is warranted. Stroke is one of the leading causes of death in industrialized countries. Although there are many causes of anterior circulation stroke, emboli from carotid occlusive disease account for a significant percentage. The primary endpoint is the determination of the degree of stenosis, although there is an increasing interest in plaque morphology. The US criteria used for diagnosis are variable among laboratories and each laboratory needs to establish its own criteria. The noninvasive nature of ultrasound makes this testing modality more attractive than the angiography "gold technique with morbidity about 4% and risk of stroke 1.2% (ACAS). In addition, angiography provides little information on plaque structure. The development and continuing technological evolution of vascular US, the ability to post-process images accessing almost all imaging parameters enabled us to study the presence, rate of progression (or regression) and most importantly the consistency of plaques. The identification of a high-risk group of patients based on, other than stenosis, ultrasonographic features should lead to a better selection of patients for carotid endarterectomy or stenting. The user's subjectivity and the artifacts are the major limitations of ultrasound. Improvements of the ulstrasonographic image quality and our ability to normalize images may provide more detailed information on plaque morphology. B-flow, 3D, 4D and SRI imaging promise big changes in the way we evaluate the stenosis and structure of the plaque. Novel applications like new algorithms and software identifying patients at high risk of stroke are expected to become available on ultrasound devices in the near future. In the last 15 years, both MRA and CTA have contributed to the progressive reduction in the number of DSA examinations performed in vascular patients. Even though Doppler ultrasound has played a major role in the screening of carotid stenosis, the number of MRA and CTA exams to rule out or better define the grade of stenosis has grown considerably. MRA has the advantage of being performed without injection of contrast, even though data from comparison studies reported a slightly better sensitivity to CEMRA in comparison to TOF MRA in stenosis grading. Recently, the possible implication of Gd chelates in NSF in severe renal failure, has led to considering again unenhanced techniques in these patients. Nevertheless, the possibility of reducing contrast dosage when using high relaxivity GD compounds contributes to reduced risk. MRA and CTA have reported similar sensitivity and specificity in comparison to DSA in grading carotid stenosis, and their choice really depends on the experience of the center. MRA still remains, in general, easier and faster to be reconstructed, but on the other side, CTA, though more challenging, due to the necessary bone extraction and sometimes superimposition of jugular veins, has the great advantage of axial view of vessel wall and evidence of calcifications. Different considerations can be made for other pathological conditions, i.e. carotid dissections, where MRA with unenhanced techniques allows depiction of mural hematoma also within the petrous bone. Technical and clinical considerations for the two different modalities will be addressed in the lecture. Endometrial carcinoma is the most common uterine malignancy, occurring in a primarily postmenopausal population. Uterine sarcomas, lymphoma, small cell carcinoma and metastatic disease involving the uterus are rare. Treatment and prognosis of uterine cancer is influenced by tumor morphologic factors including depth of myometrial invasion, cervical extension and lymph node metastasis. Ultrasound (US) remains the study of choice for initial evaluation. However, it is less accurate than magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for delineating the extent of disease within the uterus. MRI is the gold standard in the assessment and staging of uterine cancer providing excellent soft tissue contrast, allowing for direct tumor visualization and assessment of tumor volume, depth of myometrial invasion and extension to adjacent tissues. Assessment of these parameters is crucial in deciding on the choice of therapy, whether surgery, radiation, chemotherapy or their combination. MRI is also an essential tool in monitoring treatment response and in assessing disease recurrence in these patients. CT can provide useful information about the extent of disease, lymph node involvement, metastatic disease and in patient follow-up. PET/CT is an accurate method for detecting recurrence early, evaluating therapeutic response, assessing lymph node status and prognosis. Lymph node involvement in uterine cancer is mainly assessed with CT. However with the use of USPIO as specific lymph node contrast media, MRI might play a major role in the future. A multidisciplinary approach is mandatory for the final management plan based on a combination of clinical assessment, imaging and histology. MR imaging is the method of choice for primary staging of cervical cancer. The backbone of staging cervical cancer is T2-weighted imaging with a high spatial resolution performed in two imaging planes. Invasion of the parametrium can thus be assessed with a high degree of accuracy. Especially in staging cervical cancer, MR imaging can replace numerous other diagnostic tests and thus improves pretherapeutic staging while at the same time reducing costs. Imaging is not routinely used for follow-up after surgery and/or radiotherapy. In patients with suspected tumor recurrence, MRI provides the best information. However, MRI should not be performed within the first 6 months after the end of radiotherapy in order not to mistake tumor necrosis or inflammatory processes for recurrent tumor. In patients with suspected recurrence of cervical cancer after surgery, the MR protocol should include a dynamic contrast-enhanced study to distinguish recurrence from scars. In patients with ovarian neoplasms, imaging plays a crucial role in tumor detection and characterization, preoperative staging and treatment planning, monitoring of treatment response, and detection of recurrence. Ultrasound is the primary modality for detecting and characterizing adnexal masses. MRI is a problem-solving modality for indeterminate masses and the best modality to assess pelvic sidewall invasion. Abdominal and pelvic multi-detector contrast-enhanced CT is the modality of choice for preoperative staging and prediction of tumor resectability, extension into the upper abdomen and related complications (e.g., hydronephrosis, bowel obstruction). It is also the primary modality for treatment follow-up. PET-CT is valuable for imaging recurrent disease, especially in detecting tumor deposits of normal-sized nodes, mesentery and bowel serosa, and distant sites. In tumor detection and characterization, the most important role of imaging is the identification of cancer and, thus, patient referral to oncologists. Imaging is gaining acceptance in patient triage between surgery and neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by surgery. The value of imaging in surgical planning has been underestimated. In a recent prospective study, intraoperative reporting of optimal primary cytoreduction (residual disease 1 cm) correlated with postoperative CT findings in only 52% of patients. Presurgical planning using CT may improve these results. Furthermore, imaging detection of the size and site of recurrence may obviate a second-look laparotomy, since secondary cytoreduction is only justified if complete resection is possible. Thus, while progress in early detection and survival of ovarian cancer has been relatively slow, a clear role for imaging in improving patient outcome is emerging. Although spread beyond the linings of cervical lymph nodes or salivary glands, these may be detected; but ultrasound does not allow assessment of the deep extent of inflammatory processes towards the skull base, the spine, and the mediastinum. Contrast-enhanced MDCT, being not hindered by bone or air, is the technique of choice to detect spread along the neck with potential extent towards the skull base or mediastinum. Early inflammatory changes in the membranous labyrinth in the meninges and brain may be detected by MR, which is also sensitive in demonstrating bone marrow edema. In acute inflammatory conditions of the nasosinusal tract, the clinical findings may require contrast-enhanced CT to rule out or grade the extent of orbital and/or intracranial complications. Moreover, CT is indicated to detect and to assess fluid collections and abscesses arising from the salivary glands or the pharyngeal walls and spreading into the deep compartments of the neck. Involvement of the upper airways walls, the retro-pharyngeal, or the pre-vertebral space implies changes in the risk profile of the process. The purpose of this lecture is to familiarize the radiologist with the most common types of traumatic injuries seen in the head and neck. First, relevant practical aspects of CT and MR imaging in the emergency situation will be discussed, followed by a brief discussion of priorities when dealing with fractures and soft tissue injuries. A systematic review will include key radiologic features of : a) facial trauma and their effects on the skull base, maxilla, mandible and orbit; b) characteristic radiologic features of temporal bone trauma and its effects on the middle ear, inner ear, facial nerve and posterior base of the skull; c) laryngeal injuries involving both the laryngeal skeleton and soft tissues; d) vascular injuries and e) various other soft tissue injuries including the brachial plexus, major salivary glands and neck muscles. Major emphasis will be placed on what the clinician needs to know and how to report the findings in a comprehensive way. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with common types of craniocervical trauma and their effects on skull base and maxillofacial skeleton. 2. To be able to adapt the examination protocol depending on the type of injuries suspected. 3. To learn to describe the pertinent findings in fractures, and to identify the related soft tissue injuries. 4. To learn to report the pertinent findings to the clinician. A-080 17:00 C. Tumors R. Hermans; Leuven/BE (Robert.Hermans@uz.kuleuven.ac.be) The most common head and neck neoplasm, seen by radiologists, is squamous cell cancer (SCC), but numerous other tumour types may be encountered. SCC of the head and neck is a very heterogeneous disease. The symptoms, treatment and prognosis are influenced by the site of origin. This site determines, by its particular anatomy, the local extension pattern, the risk of lymphatic dissemination, as well as the localisation of metastatic adenopathies. The diagnosis of cancer is often made clinically. However, SCC shows the tendency to extend submucosally, following the paths of least resistance. These paths are along submucosal fatty planes, along nerves and vessels. Tumour extension is diverted by bone and cartilage, and to some extent also by fascial layers. Invasion of these structures usually occurs at a later stage. This deep tissue spread may be difficult to detect by clinical examination alone. The radiologist should describe as accurately as possible the structures that are involved and where the tumour borders are situated. Furthermore, subclinical neck adenopathies may be detected by imaging, and should be looked for in the positive neck signs of extranodal extension. This imaging-derived information affects staging and has prognostic importance. Tumour localisation and staging are important factors in treatment planning. Several imaging techniques are available to visualise head and neck cancer, each having particular advantages and disadvantages. CT is the workhorse of the head and neck radiologist, but in some tumour localisations, such as the sinonasal cavity, nasopharynx and skull base, MRI provides better overall results. This presentation will detail general principles related to the frontal and lateral view of the conventional chest radiograph. In a first part, technical aspects of conventional and digital acquisition methods, together with their drawbacks and advantages, will be presented. Special emphasis will be put on details related to display, storage, and transfer of data via PACS facilities. The second part of the presentation will include issues related to projection radiography as related to the anatomy of the thorax, and propose potential solutions to these issues. The final third part of the presentation will then present perceptual challenges occurring in the analysis of chest radiographs, and present tips and tricks aimed to improve the visual assessment of chest radiographic images. The chest radiograph can accurately detect diseases, which are frequently associated with significant morbidity such as infectious diseases, heart failure, chronic airway diseases and pulmonary neoplasms. Important diagnoses may be missed when the amount of time spent reading the chest film is limited. A systematic approach is essential to avoid overlooking a lesion or misinterpreting a normal variant. We have focused on creating a convenient, user-friendly teaching method, adapted to everyone interested in thoracic radiology. To improve the radiologist's perception and performance, a concentric step-by-step approach is presented, using computerized animations. Key areas of the chest radiogaph, including the apices, the hila and the lower lobes are reviewed with relevant pathologic and CT correlations. Memotechnical methods covering the crucial areas of the chest radiograph will be provided. Participants should learn to answer the following question with confidence: Does this radiograph provide information relevant to the patient's health? Case studies will demonstrate how a small improvement with a systematic approach can provide many benefits in terms of time, cost and health. A thorough understanding of the anatomy of peritoneal ligaments and spaces enables the correct interpretation of abdominal imaging studies and enhances the diagnostic workup. In this course, the attendee will learn how the ligaments and mesentries in the upper abdomen interconnect the upper abdominal viscera and serve as important pathways of disease. In addition, the peritoneal ligaments and mesentries define the peritoneal spaces, which they bind. By recognizing the location of an interperitoneal process, one may better predict its origin and likely route of spread. This would influence the therapeutical approach, especially in surgical cases. Detection of peritoneal carcinomatosis is a major challenge in onco-imaging, because of emerging and promising treatments for this condition. Reported sensitivity of imaging is low, inferior to 50%, even though it may be overestimated due to the lack of a gold standard, like surgery, in many series. Detection relies on peritoneal fluid and peritoneal nodules, especially the localization to the liver surface and to the greater omentum known as the "omental cake". These signs lack sensitivity and/or specificity. Nevertheless, modern imaging provides the tools to improve dramatically the detection rate, using a combination of technical improvements, anatomical knowledge and multimodality comparison: Technical tips are thin slices, multiplanar reconstruction and appropriate use of contrast media. Anatomical knowledge consists in the identification of peritoneal spaces and structures, as well as the most common, but overlooked, seeding sites. Radiologists should be trained to detect small peritoneal nodules confidently, because it is mandatory in the era of laparoscopic surgery. It also helps in tumor follow-up. Multiplanar imaging is especially useful. Multimodality approach combines the advantages of US (high-resolution images of superficial structures), MRI, MDCT (unique anatomical display) and PET-CT (detection of small active enhancing nodules) to improve both detection and characterization of detected lesions, avoiding the drawbacks of each single method. Finally, some benign conditions may mimic peritoneal carcinomatosis in oncologic patients and should be ruled out like radiation therapy scarring, postsurgical changes and infection. The major features of primary peritoneal tumors, which are rare conditions, will also be presented. The peritoneal cavity and its reflections are frequently involved by infectious and inflammatory processes. Before the introduction of cross-sectional imaging, the peritoneum and its reflections could only be imaged with difficulty, often requiring invasive techniques. Multidetector computed tomography and, to a lesser extent ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging, allow the accurate examination of the complex anatomy of the peritoneal cavity, which is the key to understanding the pathological processes affecting it. Differential diagnosis among different conditions however, is often difficult because of non-specific and overlapping clinical and imaging features. Peritoneal cavity infection may be localized (peritoneal abscess formation) or generalized (peritonitis). Peritoneal abscess formation most frequently follows surgery despite modern surgical techniques and antimicrobial therapy. It may also complicate appendicitis or Crohn's disease in younger patients, and diverticulitis in older patients. Inflammation can become more generalized within the peritoneum which is often the case with tuberculous peritonitis. Tuberculous peritonitis develops after rupture of a caseous abdominal lymph node or due to secondary spread to the intestinal tract. Sclerosing peritonitis can occur as a longterm complication of chronic ambulatory peritoneal dialysis. Inflammatory change in the mesentery can occur in any gut-associated pathology, particularly Crohn's disease and less common diseases affecting the mesentery including mesenteric panniculitis and epiploic appendicitis. It is important for an interventional radiologist to be able to recognise the signs and symptoms of aorto-iliac disease. At the interventional radiology clinic, a focussed history needs to be obtained with specific reference to claudication distance, the part of the leg that is affected by pain, presence of impotence, past surgical history, and symptoms of rest pain and ulcers. Examination should include peripheral pulses including brachial, ankle brachial pressure indices (ABPIs), any scarring in groins, degree of obesity, and stigmata of arterial insuffiency. Preoperative imaging should include a method of noninvasive imaging, at least colour Doppler ultrasound or either CT angiography or MR angiography. At the time of writing, the jury is out as to which is less potentially injurious (contrast nephrotoxicity, CTA versus nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, MRA). Neither is a substitute for a good history and examination. Ideally, one should have at least a Plan A and B in terms of initial puncture. Lesion traversal will be discussed with appropriate examples. Primary stent placement is generally the preferred option and the various types of stents will be discussed. Procedure endpoints, potential complications, and possible bailouts will also be discussed. The importance of further clinical follow-up and outpatient review cannot be overstressed. Stroke is a clinical diagnosis with a high prevalence. The underlying pathology is either cerebral ischemia or a hemorrhagic lesion, and for each category of stroke a host of pathological conditions can be responsible. The radiologist plays a crucial role in the diagnostic work-up of stroke patients. Apart from assessing whether the stroke is of an ischemic or hemorrhagic nature, radiological techniques can help assess the underlying pathology. In order to be effective for stroke patients, radiologists need to have a thorough understanding of the pathophysiological responses of the brain to the initial events and be familiar with the manifestations of these responses on radiological examinations. The current WHO classification divides brain neoplasms into primary and metastatic. This classification is mixed based on histogenesis as well as on anatomic location and includes a wide heterogeneous group of neoplasms with different phenotype, genotype, age prevalence, biology, response to therapy and clinical outcome. Gliomas, meningiomas and metastatic brain lesions make up more than 90% of all brain tumors. The prognosis is poor for most gliomas and metastatic lesions. Imaging plays a fundamental role in the initial diagnosis and surgical planning, but a minor role in planning specific therapy and predicting the clinical outcome. Current imaging modalities are: 1. Anatomic: MR is the modality of choice for localization and characterization of brain tumors and biopsy guiding. FLAIR T2W and post-contrast T1W sequences should be included in the protocol. Susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) allow easier detection of hemorragic foci. CT scan is complementary owing to its superior visualization of intratumoral calcifications and bony involvement. 2. Functional: a) Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI): ADC (apparent diffusion coefficient) parameters are helpful for correlation with architecture and grading of gliomas. b) Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI): DTI colour maps and tractography can delineate integrity of white matter tracts, i.e. dislocation vs infiltration in the vicinity of tumors, and they are useful for surgical planning. c) Proton MR spectroscopy: Increased Ch/Cr ratio is found in gliomas and correlates with tumor grade. Lipid peak is a predictor of poor outcome. d) Dynamic susceptibility-weighted (DSC) perfusion imaging: rCBV is utilized for tumor grading and differentiation of recurrent tumor vs radiation effects. Spiral computed tomography (CT) has surpassed ultrasound (US) in imaging of bowel emergencies in many situations. The combination of high spatial resolution, large field of view, vascular information and multiplanar reconstruction in a single breath hold have made CT an important part of the work-up of patients with bowel emergencies. The CT protocol includes the use of intravenous contrast medium, while oral contrast medium will not be routine in many institutions. A dedicated CT scanner in the emergency department facilitates the use of the technique. Important imaging findings include abnormal air and fluid configurations, fat infiltration and vas-A 33 B C D E F G cular abnormalities (e.g. thrombosis). CT has acceptable to excellent sensitivity and specificity for many diseases (e.g. appendicitis, diverticulitis, abscesses). However, the majority of studies concern appendicitis and the evidence for other conditions and bowel emergencies in general is limited. Apart from good test accuracy, the examination is fast, and communication with clinicians and comparison of repeat examinations are facilitated as compared with US. Reproducibility is considered favourable to US, although this is not a thoroughly studied topic. The role of CT in management will depend on several factors, such as disease presentation, disease spectrum, age groups and local situation. Modern cross-sectional imaging techniques allow accurate visualisation of a variety of abnormalities enabling their precise targeting with minimally invasive methods of treatment. This session will discuss very different techniques, which share imaging guidance as a key component. MR-guided focussed ultrasound therapy uses high doses of focussed ultrasound waves to destroy uterine fibroids and other soft tissue tumours without affecting any of the surrounding tissues. The procedure is conducted in a magnetic resonance imaging scanner, which enables the operator to pinpoint, guide and continuously monitor the treatment. Stereotactic radiosurgery utilises accurately targeted, large doses of radiation to destroy tissues. This minimally invasive treatment is an effective alternative to surgery or conventional radiation for treating many small tumours and some other selected medical disorders. The Cyberknife uses an advanced, lightweight linear accelerator, a robot which can point the accelerator from a wide variety of angles and several imaging devices that can track patient position. Cyberknife technology makes it possible to perform radiosurgery at almost any location within the body. Sophisticated methods of drug delivery, such as heat activation, enable the precise deposition of active agents within tumours to enable ablation or gene therapy. The above techniques illustrate the magnitude and speed of advances in imaging-guided therapy, which are set to revolutionise modern medicine, and emphasise the need for multidisciplinary collaboration in this field. MR-guided focussed ultraound (MRgFUS) therapy combines very high-power ultrasound with MR targeting and thermal manometry to create a destructive modality that can ablate discreet areas of tissues in a highly controllable manner. This ablation modality is entirely non-invasive and as long as there is a reasonable acoustic window into the target, then the whole process can be carried out completely safely. Currently, the process has been used in the treatment of uterine fibroids, very successfully, with more than 3,000 patients being treated worldwide. Other evolving applications are the palliation of painful bone secondaries, the treatment of breast malignancies and the destruction of areas of malignant soft tissue. Other emerging areas, which are still in the early stages of technology development include a method of treating any part of the liver, overcoming the obscuration of the rib cage, and respiratory problems, with this type of technology being also applied potentially to the kidney as well. In summary, therefore, this new modality offers completely non-invasive approaches to the controlled destruction of areas of soft tissue, with exquisite feedback control using MR thermal imaging and very precise targeting using MR for this aspect. Cyberknife technology, combining integrated image-guided and robotic technology, has led to a paradigm shift in radiosurgery. With Cyberknife technology, an invasive stereotactic head frame is no longer required to obtain the highest possible accuracy for brain treatments. This offers the patient a real non-invasive and pain-free radiosurgical treatment. Apart from standard neurosurgical indications (i.e. acoustic neurinomas, meningeomas, brain metastases), radiosurgical applications are currently evolving to extracranial indications. The newest development in Cyberknife radiosurgery is a breath-triggered real-time movement correction, which makes it possible to apply radiosurgical doses to body lesions. It is nowadays possible to treat tumors of the spine, pancreas, lung and the liver safely and effectively with radiosurgical techniques in cases where they are well delineated from the surrounding healthy tissue. In selected cases, this could replace a surgical procedure and enhance interdisciplinary oncological treatment concepts. Cyberknife treatment is designed for outpatient treatment and can mostly be applied in one treatment session. Well-selected and high-quality imaging is of utmost importance for successful radiosurgical applications. High field MRI studies, fast CT scanners, PET and PET-CT information are integrated in the planning phase for optimal target definition. The interaction with experienced academic radiologists for optimal selection of the desired imaging studies enhances the quality of the radiosurgical application significantly, making this non-invasive treatment a true interdisciplinary achievement for optimal clinical results. The Munich center reports about the first 1,000 patients treated in close cooperation with a variety of clinical and imaging experts. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn about the principles and clinical applications of image guided robotic radiosurgery. 2. To understand the importance and requirements of multimodal imaging for dedicated 3D computerised planning for radiosurgical applications. Soft tissue lesions account for approximately 80% of invasive cancers and 5% of non-invasive cancers detected in mammography screening. Challenges in detection and diagnosis are overcome by a systematic approach to viewing, a knowledge of the range of normal appearances, thorough analysis of abnormal features and application of the Triple Approach at assessment. Systematic viewing of high-quality mammograms is essential for perception of subtle signs. Although the most common sign of a cancer is a spiculate mass, small tumours detected by screening may appear as non-specific asymmetric soft tissue densities without classical signs of malignancy. Careful observation of the mammographic review areas will help in the detection of such lesions. At assessment, further mammographic views, including spot compression and fine focus magnification techniques are important in demonstrating the mammographic features of soft tissue lesions, which are then classified according to the predominant abnormal feature: spiculate mass, circumscribed mass, parenchymal distortion or asymmetric soft tissue density. The radiologist should understand the differential diagnosis and the risk of malignancy for each mammographic abnormality. High-frequency ultrasound is essential in the assessment of soft tissue abnormalities, features providing further important diagnostic information. The radiologist should not however be reassured by a normal ultrasound examination when abnormal mammographic features persist. The histological diagnosis for soft tissue lesions found on mammography is confirmed by image-guided needle biopsy. US-guided 14G core biopsy is most commonly used. A non-operative diagnosis can be achieved in more than 95% cases. Breast calcifications are very frequent findings, especially in elderly women. Not all calcifications represent malignancy, but a lot of attention has to be paid to them, because of their varying appearance. Artefacts may be present because of technical reasons, at analogue and digital mammography as well, and radiologists should be familiar with them. Macrocalcifications mostly represent benign lesions, while microcalcifications may indicate malignancy. Characterisation is mainly performed by targeted mammography examination, sometimes completed by ultrasound and MRI. Recognition of typically benign microcalcifications is quite easy and secure, but distinction among the rest of the microcalcifications is based on the reader's experience and statistical probability. These methods rarely fail to reveal malignant tumours of the breast. Very early cancers may be considered as benign lesions because of their small extension and atypical, benign-looking morphology. Following the BI-RADS lexicon, it is mandatory to categorize these lesions in order to standardize therapy planning, but biopsy is always recommended when the probability of cancer is over 2%. Stereotaxy is recommended as the targeting method while identification of calcifications by ultrasound is not secure. Vacuum core biopsy or traditional core biopsy are the sampling methods of choice. If multiple clusters are present, the two most distant groups are the subjects of biopsy. Percutaneous treatments of primary (HCC) and metastatic liver malignancies have progressively gained importance in recent years either as valid alternatives to surgical resection or as main therapeutic tools for unresectable tumors. In the Consensus Conferences on HCC held in Barcelona in 2000 and 2005, percutaneous treatments have been definitely inserted in the therapeutic flow-chart for "very early" HCC (within 2 cm in diameter) and their role is getting increasing importance, as only treatment or in combination with intra-arterial therapies, and also for "early" and "intermediate stage" HCC. The first prospective randomized clinical trials comparing radiofrequency ablation (RFA) and surgery for HCC smaller than 3 or 5 cm have been published too. The 3-and 5-year survival rates did not show significant differences between the two treatments, but had clear advantages with RFA in terms of lower rate of complications and markedly lower costs of treatment and hospital stay. As far as liver metastases are concerned, several clinical studies have reported the excellent results of RFA, which achieved local control and long-term survival rates almost comparable to those reported in literature for surgical resection of metastases from colorectal, breast and endocrine malignancies, but with lower complication rates and costs. However, essential requirement to achieve good results is the size of metastases, with a clear cut-off value of approximately 3 cm. The constant and progressive improvement of results achieved by percutaneous treatments is also due to the continuous technological improvement of imaging modalities, which allow to guide interventional procedures, such as contrast-enhanced sonography, contrast-enhanced and diffusion-weighted MRI and real-time image-fusion systems. All hepatic lesions, primary as well as metastatic, are mainly fed by arterial circulation and this is the rationale for every kind of intra-arterial treatment. There are two main groups of intra-arterial hepatic treatment, with different indications: liver embolization (which includes TACE, TAE and radioembolization) and hepatic arterial chemotherapy (HAC). If targeting is the main concern for embolization, to selectively deliver embolic material into the vessels feeding the lesion, the basis for HAC is totally opposed, the drug should be delivered as proximally as possible, with the aim of treating the whole liver parenchyma. A wide variation in vascular anatomy, which varies from the classical scheme in more then 45% of cases, represents the main limitation to reaching this target. Pre-intervention arterial phase MDCT helps in assessing the main vascular anatomical variations for an easier and faster endovascular procedure. The catheter tip for drug delivery should be located in the proximal section of the main feeding artery (ideally the proper hepatic artery) after all the other vessels feeding the liver have been proximally occluded with coils. In this way, only the whole liver will be fed by intra-parenchymal anastomotic vessels and the drug could be homogenously infused; otherwise "misperfusion" may occur. Coil embolization of visceral vessels should be also performed in order to avoid drug infusion outside the liver, which may lead to complications such as gastritis, ulcers and even bowel perforations. It is mandatory to have a high level of confidence with hepatic vascular anatomy, including possible variations, in order that the treatment is effective and safe. In the early twenty-first century, prostate imaging incorporates sophisticated and highly accurate anatomical imaging and physiological and biological imaging yielding an expanding volume of data on tumour extent and activity. The choice of the technique used depends on the clinical presentation and the intent to treat actively or otherwise. The interpretation of MRI findings and clinical information determines the feasibility of radical treatments, either surgery or radiotherapy, or palliative therapy. This lecture will define the patients, who should be evaluated with MRI in the context of lesion localisation and staging, for response assessment and when relapse is suspected. The relative contributions and limitations of morphological assessments and the added value of new techniques such as dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI, MR spectroscopy and diffusion weighted MRI will be outlined. The contribution of MR lymphography in patient care pathways will also be outlined. Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) is generally connected with exposure to Gd-containing contrast media. Findings of Gd in the skin of patients with NSF support this association. However, the precise trigger for NSF remains obscure. NSF develops mainly in patients with advanced renal failure, since Gd-containing contrast media are almost exclusively eliminated renally. Thus, renal failure dramatically delays Gd-clearance. Moreover, high EPO-levels may contribute to NSF, as often encountered in patients with renal failure under EPO substitution. Also circulating fibrocytes play a crucial role in NSF. Fibrocytes are aberrantly stimulated and synthesize collagen, resulting in skin thickening. This process has been correlated with thrombotic events or hypercoagulable states. Remarkably, persistent inflammation and endothelial lesions have also been suggested to facilitate NSF. However, why mainly the skin is targeted remains unknown. Renal dysfunction and tissue injury may inflict a proinflammatory milieu with release of cytokines. These recruit circulating fibrocytes from the bone marrow, which deposit in the skin and joints causing more cytokine release, growth and neoangiogenic factors, resulting in fibrosis. Due to various physicochemical properties, some Gd-containing contrast media are more susceptible to affect the release of free Gd. Omniscan® and Only 2 years ago, it was proposed that gadolinium-based contrast agents may trigger the development of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis. Within a short period of time it was shown in several centers that the incidence after exposure to gadodiamide varies between 3 and 7%, whereas we do not know yet the incidence after exposure to the other agents except that it is closer to 0. Also with regard to clusters of patients ( 10) gadodiamide deviates. Only one cluster where the patients had gadopentetate has yet been identified whereas there are more than ten after gadodiamide. As all patients do not develop nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, it is assumed that here must be a co-factor involved. There are two definitive factors: (1) end-stage renal failure including dialysis (CSK 4 and 5), and (2) exposure to gadolinium contrast agents in particular the non-ionic linear agents. As a third factor several have been proposed, but a single has been identified. It seems like that many factors may act as cofactors. Some factors may reflect the area where enhanced magnetic resonance imaging has been used. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with the incidence of NSF in the five renal function groups. 2. To become familiar with the incidence of NSF after exposure to the various gadolinium based agents. 3. To review the importance of the various risk factors other than end-stagerenal failure and gadolinium. How to avoid NSF in the future S.K. Morcos; Sheffield/UK (sameh.morcos@sth.nhs.uk) There are differences in the incidence of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) with the different Gd-CM, which appears to be related to differences in physico-chemical properties and stability. NSF has been reported so far only with the following Gd-CM: gadodiamide, gadoversetamide and gadopentetate dimeglumine. They are flexible, open chains linear chelates which have a weak binding to the gadolinium ion. No cases of NSF have been reported following the exclusive use of macrocyclic Gd-CM (gadoterate meglumine, gadobutrol and gadoteridol) which have high stability as they are preorganized rigid rings of almost optimal size to cage the gadolinium ion. Release of free gadolinium through transmetallation between Gd-CM and endogenous ions seems to be an important factor in the pathogenesis of NSF. Prevention of NSF starts by identifying patients with renal impairment, including those on dialysis. Measurement of serum creatinine before Gd-CM administration is not necessary in all patients but mandatory if considering the use of Gd-CM associated with NSF. In patients with renal impairment (eGFR 30 ml/min) or those on dialysis do not use gadodiamide, gadopentetate dimeglumine or gadoversetam. The most stable Gd-CM (macrocyclic agents) and the lowest dose possible should be used in these patients. At least 1 week should be allowed before giving more Gd-CM. During pregnancy, if the use of a Gd-CM is essential, whatever the maternal renal function, the most stable Gd-CM in the lowest possible dose should be used to protect the fetus. It is important not to deny at risk patients clinically important MR examinations. What counts as a high field now in the MRI world is 7 T and above. Tough commercial competition for the past 5 years at the 3 T level has established this field strength for clinical MRI, both for head and for body scanning. Doubled signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at 3 T, as compared with 1.5 T, combined with parallel imaging radically shortens scanning time and dramatically improves image quality. Will increasing the field strength to 7 T and beyond result in comparable gains for clinical scanning? This lecture outlines the hardware requirements, potential benefits and pitfalls, and the consequences for imaging strategy and sequence design. The five major physical facts regarding high-field MRI are that (a) the spin magnetization increases linearly with field, (b) transverse relaxation times T2 and T2* decrease, with T2* decreasing rapidly, (c) the longitudinal relaxation time T1 increases, more slowly than linearly, (d) the rf wavelength approaches the size of the imaged object, and (e) radiofrequency power deposition increases as the square of field. The first four of these facts enable improved or novel imaging strategies. All five of them constrain magnet, gradient, and pulse sequence design. Use of rf transmit and receive arrays, head gradient coils, parallel acquisition, and sequence optimization will be described. Fields of 7 T plus can provide impressive images, already promising for neuroscience research. The combination of novel tissue contrasts, high contrast to noise and very high resolution is possibly to have major clinical application. Learning Objectives: 1. To comprehend the importance of magnetic field strength in MR imaging of humans. 2. To understand the basic physical factors related to field strength that affect MR images. 3. To become familiar with the strategies that are currently employed to make the best use of these factors. Pre-clinical studies with high field and very high field MRI: What is available, what is needed? The main advantages of MRI at high field are: higher signal-to-noise ratio, higher contrast-to-noise ratio that result in the improvement of anatomical and/or temporal resolution. In general the shift to higher fields reduces scan time while preserving image quality. Image signal-to-noise ratio depends on B 0 7/4 in the intermediate field range but moves to a more linear dependence in the high field range. Any step towards higher fields implies relevant technological, physical and safety issues. In this lecture I'll tackle issues related to changes in relaxation kinetics, increased susceptibility effects and other changes in contrast mechanisms. The spin-lattice relaxation time, T 1 , increases with the magnetic field strength providing interesting new opportunities to enhance the contrast thanks to the relationships with the exchange rate of water across the biological membranes. T 2 shows some shortening going to higher fields. Very important is the shortening of T 2 *as the magnetic susceptibility gradients increase linearly with the field. Therefore T 2 *-susceptibility agents enhance their effect with the field. Also the newly reported class of contrast agents deemed CEST (Chemical Exchange Saturation Transfer) improves markedly their performance with the field. Finally, at high fields, Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy applications will obviously benefit (larger separation between absorptions of different species and increase in signal-to-noise).This will prompt new studies involving the detection of less sensitive nuclei of biological interest such as 31 P, 13 C, 23 Na and 19 F. There has been a rapid development of hybrid scanners combining both positron emission tomography (PET) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In this talk, the development of hybrid PET-MR scanners will be reviewed and the different approaches to solve the technical hurdles will be discussed. An overview of the PET detector technology and the impact of MRI on this technology will be included. The motivation for PET-MR in both preclinical and clinical imaging will be used to illustrate the need for a hybrid PET-MR scanner despite the technical challenges and developmental costs. Multi-detector row computed tomography (MDCT) has emerged as a new diagnostic tool for global assessment not only of the heart but also of the entire cardiovascular system. 64DCT and in particular the recent development of dual source CT allow the evaluation of cardiac morphology as well as coronary and by-pass graft anatomy. MDCT is also very promising for valve assessment. Cardiac MRI is seen as especially effective for the evaluation of complex anatomy, cardiac function, myocardial viability, valvular disease, myocardial perfusion and congenital heart disease. It is replacing echocardiography as gold standard for cardiac motility and volumetry. MRI as a "one-stop shop" procedure, however, has never been realized because of the difficulty in visualizing the coronary arteries. Session Objectives: 1. To show that cardiac imaging is recognised as an increasingly important area of radiology. 2. To become familiar with the essentials of cardiac pathophysiology and pathoanatomy when evaluating the heart with CT and/or MRI. 3. To present recent advances in cardiac CT and MR imaging. What does MDCT offer? The advent of multi-detector row CT scanners with subsecond gantry rotation time and high isotropic spatial resolution, together with acquisition of data synchronized to the ECG has allowed the visualization of coronary arteries with a high diagnostic quality. The same data set, however, also contains huge amounts of information regarding the myocardium, atrial and ventricular size and function, as well as cardiac valves. In the past few years, evidence has accumulated to indicate that CT allows the assessment of ventricular size and function with a similar accuracy as compared to the current standard of reference magnetic resonance imaging. Moreover, a number of recent studies have indicated that multi-detector row CT allows not only the morphological evaluation but also the functional evaluation of cardiac valves with comparable results as compared to the current clinical reference modality echocardiography. Finally, recent evidence has accumulated to indicate that viability assessment of myocardium with CT has become feasible with a similar accuracy as compared to MRI. When ECG-gated imaging protocols are modified to cover the whole thoracic cavity and aim at a simultaneous opacifica-tion of coronary arteries, thoracic aorta, and pulmonary arteries, CT enables to evaluate patients with acute chest pain by diagnosing or excluding aortic dissection or rupture, significant coronary stenoses, and pulmonary embolism. Particularly, most recently introduced dual-source CT scanners with a high and heart rateindependent temporal resolution have opened the field for routine application of such CT protocols to the emergency patient because heart rate control prior to cardiac CT is no longer necessary. Learning Objectives: 1. To provide an overview of the current knowledge about CT imaging of the heart. 2. To describe the latest technical developments in multi-detector row CT which impact on the performance of cardiac imaging. 3. To understand the role of cardiac CT for a comprehensive cardiac evaluation including coronary arteries, myocardium, and cardiac valves. What does MRI offer? The latest MRI technology provides high spatial resolution to evaluate cardiac anatomy without any radiation exposure. Besides the visualization of often very complex cardiac morphology, especially in congenital heart disease, in which echocardiography often fails due to a lack of acoustic window, MRI offers the additional possibility of a comprehensive functional evaluation of the heart. This includes not only volumetric and flow measurements but also more complex evaluations such as cardiac strain analyses and spectroscopy. Cardiac MRI's potential of tissue characterization in a variety of non-ischemic or ischemic cardiomyopathies or even in acute myocarditis is another strength of this imaging technology. Independent from the clinical indication, each cardiac MRI examination should include not only a morphologic evaluation but also a dedicated functional evaluation of the heart. One of the major drawbacks of cardiac MRI compared with the competitor MDCT is the still insufficient visualization of the coronary arteries. With the combination of higher field strength, parallel imaging techniques and new contrast agents, this may be solved within the next few years. Learning Objectives: To learn what MRI can offer for functional assessment of the heart (e.g. CINE-MRI, myocardial tagging, flow quantification). 2. To learn what MRI can offer for tissue characterisation of the myocardium in different ischemic or non-ischemic heart diseases (e.g. differentiation between edema, fibrosis, scar and inflammation). 3. To learn how all these techniques can be improved according to acquisition time and spatial resolution to better compete with MDCT in the morphological assessment of the heart. Integrating MDCT and MRI in the work-up of heart disease V.E. Sinitsyn; Moscow/RU (vsini@mail.ru) Progress of technology and accumulation of clinical data have resulted in a wide recognition of MDCT and MRI as powerful tools to diagnose cardiac diseases. Greatest advantages of cardiac MDCT are speed, sub-millimeter spatial resolution and robustness. MRI has excellent capabilities for studies of myocardial function, perfusion and viability, blood flow quantification. MDCT has clear advantages over MRI in coronary imaging. In some areas (e.g. valve studies, quantification of chamber volumes and function, and myocardial viability), MDCT already competes with MRI. Nevertheless, MRI has better tissue contrast and functionality. MRI has progressed into leading modality for performing myocardial viability and perfusion studies. The combination of cardiac MDCT and MRI gives possibility of getting holistic picture of cardiac and coronary anatomy, valve and myocardial function, myocardial perfusion and viability (e.g., in patients with coronary artery disease, complex congenital and valve diseases). Guidelines for practical use of cardiac MDCT and MRI have been developed and suggested by some radiological and cardiological societies. In brief, major indications of MDCT are noninvasive coronary angiography, detection of intracardiac thrombi and tumors, constrictive pericarditis, imaging of thoracic aorta, pulmonary arteries and veins. Most useful indications of cardiac MRI are myocardial viability and perfusion studies, imaging of myocardial diseases and cardiac tumors, assessment of heart function, quantification of blood flow in valve and shunt lesions, monitoring of cardiac remodeling in clinical trials. Further progress of technology, accumulation of scientific data and cost-effectiveness analysis will allow us further clarify relative role of these two modalities in cardiac imaging. With increased spatial resolution, contrast flexibility and new contrast strategies, MRI is viewed as a promising technique for characterization of atherosclerotic plaque. Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory vascular disease. As an inflammation process, many cellular and molecular events are involved at each step of the progression of atherosclerosis from the early fatty streak lesion to the highly dangerous rupture-proned plaque. The first part will focus on high-resolution MRI and optimal sequence combination in clinical and experimental protocols for characterization of plaque components with contrast agents. The second part will evaluate the diagnostic impact of currently available MR contrast agents to detect inflammatory processes and evolutive atherosclerotic lesions. The third part will briefly introduce the main cellular and molecular actors involved in atherosclerotic lesions at different stages and present some recent and ongoing MRI works for cellular and molecular imaging of atherosclerosis. The concept of stem cell therapy has been receiving increasing interest as a potentially valuable therapeutic entity in various medical disciplines. In cardiovascular medicine this led to a brief furor. A number of clinical trials were performed after only a few initial, successful preclinical studies. While some evidence of the benefit of stem cell therapy was obtained from these trials, the response rates and response duration were far from the expectations raised by earlier preclinical studies. The rather disappointing clinical results indicate that a better understanding of the fate and function of transplanted cells and of how stem cells cause therapeutic benefits is mandatory to mold stem cell therapy into an effective clinical treatment option for myocardial infarction. Through novel imaging techniques, including molecular imaging, we can now study these issues better and more efficiently. These new techniques include tools for: in vivo tracking of stem cells, assessment of cardiac function and clinical response, and assessment of biochemical pathways involved in myocyte degeneration. To review the needs for imaging of angiogenesis and outline the potential imaging targets. To review the established and new emerging tools for molecular imaging of angiogenesis: Targeted contrast agents, imaging markers for gene expression and enzymatic activity, and tracking recruitment of vascular cells. Angiogenesis, the growth of new blood vessels, requires coordinated participation of numerous cell types and signaling pathways. MRI facilitates the study of the basic biological mechanisms that execute angiogenesis, in addition to its role in preclinical drug development and clinical imaging of response to pro and antiangiogenic therapy. A key regulator of angiogenesis is vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which is also a popular target for antiangiogenic therapy. VEGFstimulated blood vessels show acute increase in permeability, and dissociation of perivascular pericytes and smooth muscle cells, resulting in reduced vasoreactivity. The plasticity of the vasculature during angiogenesis is accompanied by changes in cell surface markers. In addition, enzymes secreted into the interstitial space and plasma proteins extravasated from leaky blood vessels result in profound changes in the extracellular matrix. Functional imaging of blood volume, blood flow, perfusion and vasoreactivity depict the consequence of angiogenesis. Recent developments in molecular imaging of specific cell surface markers using targeted contrast agents, imaging markers for gene expression and enzymatic activity, and tracking recruitment of vascular cells further expanded the repertoire for MRI of angiogenesis. MRI provides a comprehensive multiparametric view of the entire angiogenic process. Since its introduction in 1992, CT angiography (CTA) of the pulmonary arteries has become the main diagnostic test for the evaluation of pulmonary embolism (PE). The introduction of multi-detector CT scanners a few years later has in many ways changed its diagnostic yield. With the advent of multi-detector scanning, CTA has gained substantially in image acquisition speed and spatial resolution. Shortening of image acquisition times not only reduces the breath hold and examination time for the patient, it also allows limitation of the required amount of contrast material dose to achieve high and consistent enhancement of the pulmonary arteries. Submillimeter image acquisition protocols increase the spatial resolution along the z-axis and generate nearly isotropic data sets that allow post-processing ranging from relatively simple multiplanar reconstructions to volume rendering techniques with the same high spatial resolutions as the original axial sections. However, with the development of these fast multi-detector scanning techniques, it is of outmost importance to pay close attention to radiation dose and optimizing the scanning technique and contrast injection in order to obtain studies of uniformly high quality. Furthermore, there are a few sources of misinterpretation that should be known. As compared to single-slice CTA, some of them are less frequent with multi-detector CTA whereas others are found more frequently. This lecture focuses on multi-detector CTA and discusses the imaging technique and interpretation. A 39 B C D E F G Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the effect of CT equipment (4-to 64-row scanners) on the choice of the optimal image acquisition and contrast medium injection protocols. 2. To learn how dose can be minimised without compromising image quality. 3 . To learn about the sources of misinterpretation with multi-detector CTA and to avoid pitfalls. 4. To become familiar with the different 3D-processing techniques that can be used to improve the interpretation of CTA for PE. A-122 09:00 B. The dyspnoeic patient: Which diagnostic strategy? Dyspnoea is a common symptom that can result from a range of conditions with various clinical presentations (acute, subacute and chronic) and with many possible associated signs and symptoms. The most common causes of acute or subacute dyspnoea are cardiogenic, such as congestive heart failure, acute myocardial infarction and arrhytmias, or pulmonary, such as exacerbations of COPD and asthma, pulmonary embolism, pneumothorax, pulmonary infections and upper airway obstruction.An integrated diagnostic strategy is mandatory to achieve a correct diagnosis, reducing delays that can lead patients even to death. Some of the causes can be identified by clinical examination, but other causes can be insidious, requiring further diagnostic exams that comprehend evaluation of some biomarkers and radiological tests, such as chest X-ray and multidector computed tomography pulmonary angiography (MDCT PA). MDCT is able to provide detailed information on pulmonary arteries, aorta, coronary arteries, heart and lung parenchyma at the same time, giving a comprehensive assessment of cardiac and noncardiac causes of dyspnoea in stable emergency department patients, with a good overall sensitivity and specificity. In this context, pulmonary embolism remains a diagnostic challenge and dyspnoea is a common presentation symptom; an accurate assessment of pre-test probability that involves clinical evaluation, laboratory tests and, in some cases, even chest X-ray has a key role in the diagnostic algorithm. When pre-test probability is intermediate or high, MDCT is the method of choice to achieve the definite diagnosis with a high sensitivity and negative predictive value, and with an high percentage of alternative diagnosis identification. Multidetector-row computed tomographic (CT) angiography of the pulmonary arteries is the first-line imaging technique in patients suspected of having pulmonary embolism (PE). Patient risk stratification is important because optimal management, monitoring and therapeutic strategies depend on the patient's prognosis. Acute right-sided heart failure is known to be responsible for circulatory collapse and death in patients with severe PE, and can be assessed on CT pulmonary angiography by measuring the dimensions of the right-sided heart cavities or systemic veins. The magnitude of PE can be calculated on CT pulmonary angiography by applying dedicated CT scores or adapted angiographic scores. This information can be combined with clinical data such as the Wells score. However, small pulmonary emboli may go undetected in patients who do not present typical clinical signs or whose symptoms are not attributed to PE. To date, there is limited knowledge about such incidental undetected cases of acute PE in patients who undergo multidetector row CT of the chest, and how the severity of PE in combination with other morbidity factors influences the natural course of the disease in patients treated for PE in comparison with those receiving no treatment. This refresher course reviews CT-based scoring methods for assessment of patients with acute PE. The various CT-based methods for risk stratification and their potential value for a combination with clinical scoring system such as the Wells score are discussed. A comprehensive review of imaging strategies for patients with incidental and minor subsegmental PE is given. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn about the frequency and prognostic significance of mild pulmonary embolism with one-year outcomes in high-risk patient cohorts. 2. To improve the diagnostic skills in detection and severity assessment of acute pulmonary embolism using CTA. 3. To stratify patients with acute PE according to high and low mortality risk using combined clinical and CT-based scoring techniques. Acute pancreatitis is a common disease with inflammatory and necrotic process of the pancreas and the peripancreatic field. This is one of the most complex and dramatic pathologies of the abdomen, which needs urgent therapy. The degree, stage and preferable therapy are based on the early evaluation of the first exacerbation. Diagnosis can be obtained from serum amylase and lipase levels. Chronic pancreatitis (CP) is characterized by inflammatory changes of the pancreas with fibrosis formation, resulting in irreversible morphological and functional damage of the gland. The predominant etiology is alcohol abuse, with drug-induced, hyperlipoproteinemic, hereditary and idiopathic forms being less common. Staging of chronic pancreatitis according to the Cambridge classification is based on imaging, which can demonstrate the ductal changes with strictures and duct stones. MRCP ist the modality of choice for noninvasive imaging of ductal changes to guide endosopic interventional therapy. The risk of developing pancreatic cancer is increased by the factor of 16 in patients with chronic pancreatitis. During imaging surveillance of patients with CP, early signs of pancreatic cancer should be noted. To make the differential diagnosis even more challenging, in approximately 20% patients with CP, a mass-forming type of pancreatitis is observed, which may be confused with cancer. Imaging features of CP without and with signs of cancer will be presented. The "duct penetrating sign" is most helpful in allowing a reliable diagnosis. Strategies to increase diagnostic confidence are shown. A rare segmental form of CP is groove pancreatitis, which is also known under the synonym of cystic dystrophy of the duodenum. It affects the "groove" between the pancreatic head and the duodenum, resulting in a mass with subsequent duodenal stenosis, often masquerading as pancreatic cancer. The CT and MRI features of groove pancreatitis will be presented. Awareness of this diagnosis may help to avoid unnecessary surgery. Learning Objectives: 1. To review the imaging findings of chronic pancreatitis. 2. To describe the role of imaging for differentiation between chronic pancreatitis and tumor. 3. To present the imaging features of unusual types of chronic pancreatitis (i.e., groove pancreatitis). The diagnosis of acute pancreatitis is generally based on clinical and laboratory findings. However, CT is the imaging technique of choice for detecting complications. Patients with complicated pancreatitis require multiple follow-up examinations. Substitution of US or MRI for CT in certain cases would reduce the radiation dose considerably. Complicated pseudocyst and other pancreatic collections may contain solid debris, which is best depicted by MRI. Necrosis may be also better identified on MRI than CT. Abscesses are suggested when gas is present in a pancreatic or peripancreatic collection. MRI can reveal air-fluid levels or large pockets of gas, but CT is more sensitive for small gas collections. Hemorrhage can occur in patients with severe necrotizing pancreatitis or as a result of the rupture of a pseudoaneurysm. Hemorrhagic fluid collections are more evident and remain visible longer on MRI than on CT. Pseudoaneurysms most frequently involve the splenic, gastroduodenal and pancreaticoduodenal arteries. Contrast-enhanced US, CT or MRI confirm the diagnosis. Venous thrombosis of the splenic, portal or superior mesenteric veins is also well visualized on contrast-enhanced images. Short gastric and gastroepiploic collaterals constitute useful complementary findings in chronic thrombosis. US or CT-guided percutaneous drainage of pancreatic pseudocysts or abscesses is a useful therapeutic approach in acute cases, while its use is complementary to surgery in the treatment of complicated chronic pancreatitis. EUS-guided transgastric stent placement is recommended if pseudocysts are in close proximity to the stomach. CT-guided thrombin injection into a splenic pseudoaneurysm lumen may also result in complete occlusion. Pelvic floor dysfunction (PFD) corresponds to a wide variety of clinical conditions including stress urinary incontinence (SUI), pelvic organ prolapse (POP), fecal incontinence, defecatory dysfunction, sexual dysfunction and several chronic pain syndromes. The first three conditions are the most common clinical conditions. Although, multiple factors predispose for PFD, the precise pathological mechanism is poorly understood, and treatment is often started irrespective of the specific anatomic lesion involved. Subsequently, postoperative recurrence rates of 30% in population-based studies, and more than 50% in females presenting to tertiary referral centers have been reported after successful surgical procedures possibly due to a lack of understanding of normal anatomy and physiology of the pelvic floor. Since MRI has evolved as an optimal method for evaluation of PFD, static MR imaging has delineated each component of the pelvic organ support system, including the anal sphincter complex, while dynamic (cine) MR imaging has been performed for functional evaluation to assess pelvic floor relaxation and pelvic organ descent. In this lecture, the MR imaging features of normal and abnormal pelvic organ support system will be reviewed. Based on detailed combined static and dynamic information and their correlation in the same patient, MRI can help to understand normal and abnormal pelvic floor function-structure relationship. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with normal anatomy of the pelvic floor supporting systems on MRI. 2. To identify the types of defects in each supporting system and how to classify them. 3. To understand how anatomical defects detected at static images can affect the type of functional abnormality of the pelvic floor supporting elements at dynamic images. 4. To discuss how the MR findings at static and dynamic images can be reported in an easy, systematic and comprehensive way. Pelvic floor dysfunction with genital descensus, incontinence or stool outlet obstruction are common problems, especially among elderly women. Main risk factors are vaginal delivery, age, obesity and constipation. Functional cine MRI allows an excellent imaging of all structures of the pelvic floor and their interaction during straining and evacuation. An enourmous advantage over conventional defecography or colpocystorectography is the excellent soft tissue contrast, which allows a direct visualization of all pelvic organs and structures. Moreover, as no iv contrast medium and no radiation exposure is needed, the examination can be repeated if necessary. This lecture reviews the correct indications for cine MRI of the pelvis and provides detailed instructions on how to perform the examination. We give explanations on how to interpret the images and how to evaluate the position and range of movement of the pelvic organs using reference lines (pubococcygeal reference line). Subsequently, we show examples of normal anatomical findings as well as of pathological findings. We will present typical diagnoses of pelvic floor dysfunction for all three pelvic compartments, e.g., cystocele, bladder neck fixation after surgery, uterine descent, enterocele, anterior and lateral rectoceles, rectal intussusception, signs of insufficiency of the levator ani muscle and paradox contraction. In summary, the lecture illustrates the usefulness and superiority of functional MRI of the pelvic floor to conventional X-ray procedures and gives clear instructions on when and how to perform it and how to interpret the images. Functional cine MRI should be the modality of choice in patients with pelvic floor dysfunction. Ultrasound offers major advantages over X-rays or MRI for imaging pelvic floor diseases. It provides good soft-tissue morphologic analysis of the urethrovesical junction and anal canal, in addition to a dynamic bladder neck imaging with quantified movements. Examinations are easy, relatively quick (10-15 min) and inexpensive. Evaluation is limited, however, to the lowest pelvic compartments and requires operators to have experience and knowledge of urodynamics. Three different approaches to ultrasound are available, namely external ultrasound (transabdominal, perineal, and introital); endosonography (transvaginal and transrectal); and endoluminal (intraurethral). Perineal and introital ultrasound seem to be the easiest techniques and use a common endoluminal probe. Evaluation is first performed at rest in the lateral decubitus with knee flexion and in the standing position. Dynamic studies are then carried out during pelvic floor contraction and maximum straining in each position. Posterior canal anal defects are well evaluated easily, especially all types of internal sphincter pattern and collections. An ultrasound assessment of bladder neck descent has good reproducibility using the perineal approach. ECR 2008 is an important date in the history of European-German radiology. With Prof. Maximilian Reiser as the President of Congress, Germany is one of the hosted countries in the "ESR meets-programme". It is an honour and privilege to present four German speakers in this session addressing the use of CAD in mammography, the lungs, the colon, and the liver. German academic radiology has always had its place at the forefront of European radiology. It is our aim to share with the audience the use of CAD as another field where German radiology contributes to the considerable advances in European radiology. In mammography, computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) can help to improve breast cancer detection by pointing out potential lesions to the radiologist, which otherwise would have been missed. Current commercial CAD systems achieve a sensitivity of more than 98% for microcalcifications and 80-90% for masses. The sensitivity of CAD schemes for the detection of microcalcifications is so high, that some groups have proposed the use of CAD as a preprocessing tool for microcalcifications in soft-copy reading, showing only those areas of the digital mammogram in full resolution, where potential microcalcifications were found by the computer. Several clinical studies have demonstrated that by using CAD more, and smaller, cancers can be detected, usually at the expense of a slightly higher recall rate. The usefulness of CAD will vary with the mammography experience of the reader, and thorough training in the use of the CAD system will improve results. One major problem of CAD is the still relatively high number of false-positive computer marks, on average between one and two per case, which means that in a screening situation often less than 1 in 100 computer prompts will actually represent cancer. Future applications of CAD include prescreening, where a radiologist would no longer need to look at all at a mammogram with no computer-detected abnormalities, and double reading with CAD, where one of the human readers in the double reading process would be replaced by the computer. Comprehensive imaging of smoking-associated diseases represents a major challenge to radiology. CT can be used as the workhorse in this field, potentially complemented by MRI. Smoking causes or at least substantially increases the risk for multiple diseases. Most of them are located within the chest, such as pulmonary nodules and lung cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and emphysema as well as arteriosclerosis affecting the coronaries, aorta and supraaortic vessels. Quantification of the extent and severity of these manifestations is crucial for management, decisions on further work-up and treatment as well as longitudinal monitoring. CAD tools for detection and volumetry of pulmonary nodules as well as calculation of doubling times during follow-up are well established. Although the range of error of these measurements is still broad and multiple effectors have been investigated, most tools are robust enough to support changes in management. However, CAD for pulmonary nodules has not yet been combined with CAD tools to assess COPD measuring airway disease (bronchial diameter, wall thickness, skeletonization) as well as parenchymal destruction (mean lung density, emphysema index). More sophisticated CAD tools even provide cluster analysis or texture classification. CAD analysis of air trapping as a sign of small airway disease and often encountered in smokers is still work in progress. Since vascular disease is another hallmark of smoking, CAD-based assessment of calcifications is required for a comprehensive work-up. Coronary calcifications are assessed by the Agatston score, whereas no score is available for calcifications of the aorta and supra-aortic vessels. Learning Objectives: 1. To consolidate knowledge of the benefit of software assistance to detect lung nodules. 2. To understand the rationale for CAD in airway disease and emphysema. 3 . To learn about the advantages of quantification of lung disease severity for staging and monitoring. 4. To become familiar with multi dimensional imaging for the analysis of perfusion and respiratory motion. Virtual colonography was first introduced in 1994 using CT data and advanced post processing after colon distensions to simulate an endoscopic fly through of the colon. Both CT and MRI have been shown to have potential for the detection of colon polyps and masses and are best referred to as CT or MR colonography (CTC, MRC). Although studies were able to show that CTC (and to a lesser extent MRC) is capable of detecting relevant polyps, open issues include the wide variability in reported sensitivities of different groups, the time-consuming evaluation combining 2D and 3D approaches and training issues including a known learning curve. Computer-aided detection (CAD) of polyps is intended to help reach constantly high sensitivities by reducing observational oversights and to flatten or shorten the learning curve for interpreting CTC or MRC cases. The principal method of CAD in colonography is the identification of polyp candidates according to characteristic features after colon extraction from the 3D data set followed by the differentiation of polyps or false positives. CAD can be used either in a "first reader" or "second reader" manner. CAD as first reader marks potential findings, and the radiologist evaluates these findings only, ignoring the rest of the data set. CAD used as second reader marks potential findings after the initial read and the radiologist re-evaluates each finding. Although this seems to be the way to go, some doubt whether it is realistic that readers will be able to resist turning on to CAD before their own evaluation. Learning Objectives: 1. To provide an overview over potential benefits of CAD in CT colonography and to understand how CAD may be used to improve diagnostic performance in the detection of polyps and masses. 2. To understand different CAD approaches in CTC and to learn about current detection performance for colorectal polyps. 3. To understand potential pitfalls in CAD. Computational medical imaging improves diagnostic accuracy as well as planning, monitoring, and assessment of liver tumor therapy. The lecture explores three different aspects of computer aided diagnosis and therapy: response evaluation in chemo therapy, surgery planning, and radio frequency ablation. Computer aided volumetry can cut the errors in evaluating the response to treatment of solid tumors. Automatic segmentation of liver metastases and volumetric measurement of tumor growth can improve the diagnostic accuracy and decrease the number of misclassifications dramatically in staging tumor response to chemo therapy. The lecture also covers the assessment of the remnant function in complex liver surgery based on computer aided risk evaluation and surgery planning. Computer aided analysis of preoperative CT o MR data, including the analysis of the vessel systems and the calculation of the tissue volumes supplied from different vessel branches, is crucial for the choice of resection strategies in liver tumor surgery. Computer aided methods have enormous potential in optimizing the results of CT/MR-guided radio frequency ablation of liver lesions. The precise planning of applicator positioning and a numerical, patient individual estimation of the coagulation area combined with image guided navigation leads to a more reliable destruction of tumor tissue. Trauma is the leading cause of death in young people in the Western world. National statistics, where available, suggest that many more people under 40 die from trauma than from common cancers at the same age. The cost to health-care systems is in billions of Euros and thousands are left disabled. Early and late deaths are almost always the result of haemorrhage. It has been estimated that 1:3 trauma deaths are avoidable. The ATLS manual is the "bible" of the trauma doctor. Like all bibles it has much that is good, but it can be dangerous in the hands of those that interpret it rigidly. It makes very little mention of radiology and even the latest version is sadly out of date. Much has happened in imaging and endovascular intervention over the last 10-30 years, which many trauma doctors are unwilling or too prejudiced to take advantage of. Radiologists have played their part in this by building radiology departments for themselves and not putting patients first. This lecture will focus on these issues and ask why radiologists are not leading the field and shouting loudly about innovations that could save many young lives. Learning Objectives: To be aware about the relevance of radiologists and radiographers as essential members of the trauma team. 2. To understand the importance of an accurate diagnosis since patients die from even the most innocuous vascular injuries because the principles of damage control are often ignored. 3. To be familiar with embolic agents in trauma and their methods of deployment which may depend on many factors including the patients clinical status, the amount of blood transfused and the collateral supply of the end organ that is bleeding. Vertebral compression fracture is an important cause of severe debilitating back pain, adversely affecting quality of life, physical function, psychosocial performance, mental health and survival. Its diverse etiology encompasses osteoporosis, neoplastic vertebral involvement (myeloma, metastasis, lymphoma, hemangioma) and osteonecrosis. Percutaneous vertebroplasty (PVP) is a therapeutic, image-guided procedure that involves injection of radio-opaque cement into a collapsed vertebral body, in an effort to relieve pain and provide stability. The ideal candidate for PVP is one who presents within 4 months. Ideally, patients should have at least 3 weeks of conservative treatment. Intervention within days of a painful VCF is considered in patients at high risk for decubitus complications. An experienced operator who has been adequately trained in the procedure should perform PVP. The procedure can be performed under local anesthesia and sedo-analgesia or general anesthesia. The classical transpedicular route is preferred in the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. This can be performed either by a unipedicular or bipedicular approach. An intercostovertebral route is useful in the thoracic spine when the pedicle is too small or destroyed. In the cervical vertebrae, the anterolateral approach is used. High-quality fluoroscopy should be available for adequate visualization of the cement during injection in the early detection of leaks. The complications of PVP are rare, but could be life threatening. How major complications could be to reduced or avoided will be described. The most critical elements for a successful vertebroplasty are proper patient selection, correct needle placement, good timing with injection of pasty cement, appropriate monitoring and operator training. A current trend in MRI is a move to higher magnetic field strengths to take advantage of the superior signal sensitivity. The purpose of this talk is to present some of the transient physiologic effects that have been associated with exposure to the various electromagnetic fields of MR imagers and to illustrate their practical impact on performing patient examinations at very high field (7 T). Current regulations regarding the operation of high field and very high field MRI scanners will be reviewed. Emphasis will be put on the differing regulations regarding patient exposure and occupational exposure of health care works and service personnel. Currently, magnetic field strengths above 4 T are not considered to be suitable for patient examinations except within the purview of the ethics committee approval. New legislation at the EU level might restrict worker activity in and around MR scanners even at fields below the 4 T level. Finally, the ethical implications of performing human studies at 7 T will be discussed. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn about the physiologic effects associated with the electromagnetic fields of MR imagers. 2. To review the current standards and regulations governing the exposure of patients and workers to these electromagnetic fields. 3. To become familiar with the ethical prerequisites for performing studies in humans at very high field (7 Tesla). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the human body has been widely introduced some 25 years ago and is still one of the fastest developing fields in clinical diagnostic, clinical research, and neuroscientific studies. While 1.5 T has been accepted as the best compromise for clinical imaging for many years, the introduction of 3-T clinical MRI over the past few years has shown to clearly improve image quality. Currently, 7-T whole-body MRI systems are being installed in a number of research laboratories. The main driving argument behind the quest for higher and higher field strength is the increased signal-to-noise ratio obtainable. In neuroscientific applications, the increased BOLD (blood oxygen level dependent) effect that allows the detection of brain activity is another driving force. However, a number of methodological obstacles have to be overcome to make ultra-high field MRI as a valuable tool for a wide range of applications. The main limitations are the RF-energy deposited in the subject and the RF-homogeneity across the object. To cope with these challenges, modifications to existing acquisition methods A 43 B C D E F G are necessary to exploit the potential of the ultra-high magnetic field. In addition, many practical points have to be taken into consideration for the installation of a human whole-body 7-T system. Among these are the size, weight and magnetic fringe field of the magnet. With current systems siting in a clinical environment is challenging and costs are significant. Learning Objectives: 1. To comprehend the physical implications of higher magnetic field strength and thus reduced RF wave length with regard to imaging of human subjects. 2. To understand method to compensate for high RF-power absorption (SAR) and inhomogeneous radio frequency excitation and reception. 3. To become familiar with the possibilities and limitations of very high field imaging. Future impact of the 7 Tesla MRI in the clinical applications R.W. Bowtell; Nottingham/UK (richard.bowtell@nottingham.ac.uk) The availability of magnetic resonance (MR) scanners operating at fields of 7 T and above has already been proved to be highly beneficial for MR imaging and spectroscopy of the human brain and promises similar benefits in the human body. These advantages result from the increases with the magnetic field of the intrinsic signal-to-noise ratio, blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) contrast, which forms the basis of the vast majority of functional MR imaging (fMRI) experiments, and chemical shift dispersion. These gains can be exploited in improving the spatial and/or temporal resolution of anatomical and functional MRI experiments and in increasing the spectral resolution in volume selective spectroscopy or chemical shift imaging. Operation at the increased magnetic field also offers easier access to T 2 * -contrast and improved implementation of susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI), in which the phase of gradient echo images provides information about local variation of magnetic susceptibility. In the brain, such variation appears to be dominated by heterogeneity of iron concentration so that high-field SWI may provide useful information about the progression of neurodegenerative disease. Current and potential future applications of high-field MRI in clinical and pre-clinical studies in a number of areas will be discussed in this presentation. Imaging speed in magnetic resonance (MR) is a compromise among spatial resolution, signal-to-noise ratio, volume coverage, image quality and image contrast. Pushing the speed limit is thus tightly linked to improvements in signal-to-noise ratio by more and better coils and/or higher fields and/or other means like hyperpolarization. Parallel imaging is already well established in 2D-imaging. Dramatic increases in imaging speed in 3D-examinations and/or in repetitive scans like cine imaging are just beginning and will lead to further progress significantly with further sophistication of coil design and reconstruction algorithms. As an extreme case of parallelization techniques like MR-encephalography have already shown to allow examination of physiological changes at 100 fps and more. Increasing imaging speed by acceleration of gradient switching has reached limits set by neuronal stimulation. New concepts based on non-linear, non-Cartesian gradients carry the potential to allow significant increase in gradient performance within physiological limits. An extremely intense field of current research is the developmental techniques to encode images with a dramatically reduced number of acquired data. Approaches like compressed sensing and HYPR can increase imaging speed by several orders of magnitude without loss in significant information. MR as we know it is reaching a status of high sophistication, nevertheless it can be expected that ongoing developments based on fundamental different approaches will lead to dramatic changes. In the bigger picture of optimizing patient care, one needs to be aware that good and reliable diagnosis leading to correct and curative therapy is the first priority in speeding up good patient care. Some radiological aspects seen on upper abdominal imaging studies are quite specific and/or suggestive of certain pathologies and, if correctly integrated in the clinical context, may provide important clues to the correct diagnosis. The central dot sign relates to the presence of vascular components adjacent to a cystic-like structure and should recall the diagnosis of Caroli's disease. Transient hepatic attenuation differences (THAD) are well-defined areas of parenchymal enhancement recognized in the arterial phase of the dynamic liver imaging. THAD reflects a local vascular disturbance and may be due to portal venous inflow obstruction, hepatic vein obstruction, intrahepatic vascular shunts, etc. Capsular retraction is a non-specific finding generally associated with malignant focal lesions. Although more frequently observed with intra-hepatic cholangiocarcinoma, epithelioid haemangioendothelioma or metastases with a fibrotic component, it may also be associated with benign liver entities. Spontaneous T1-weighted hyperintensity of a liver tumour is a useful sign that allows to straighten the differential diagnosis. The main causes for this peculiar finding will be addressed. The penetrating duct sign is a subtle finding favoring the diagnosis of chronic focal pancreatitis instead of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Although more easily depicted on MRCP images, this sign may also be observed in other cross-sectional techniques. Many diseases that affect the gastro-intestinal tract have, at first sight, similar signs in imaging: wall thickening, changes in perfusion, changes in the luminal diameter, and reactive changes of the neighbouring tissues. These signs may be present focally or in larger segments of the bowels, both the small and large intestines. In order to be able to differentiate the extent of disease, optimal distension of the intestinal lumen is important, together with tailored injection protocols for intravenous contrast administration. In search of the underlying reason for small bowel obstruction, detection of the transition zone and the faecal sign in the part of the small bowel proximal to the stenosis may give important clues for the differential diagnosis. Detection of ischaemic bowel disease can be the most difficult task in critically ill patients; thorough evaluation of the mesenteric vascular tree, identification of air bubbles attached or within the bowel wall, as well as the differentiation of venous or arterial disease based on the imaging signs can be essential. Finally, some neoplasms of the gastro-intestinal tract exhibit specific imaging features by which they can be identified and correctly staged. The imaging of a suspected musculoskeletal tumour requires a pragmatic approach commencing with detection and diagnosis. The majority of bone tumours are first identified on radiographs. Ultrasound may be used to detect and to some extent characterize soft tissue masses. The long recognized contrast resolution and multiplanar capability of MRI means that it is excellent in detecting both bony and soft tissue abnormalities. Radiographs remain pre-eminent in the diagnosis of bone tumours, but close attention to the MRI signal characteristics and morphological features will allow further characterization in some cases. MRI allows accurate diagnosis of approximately 50% of soft tissue masses. In the remaining cases, depending on the clinical picture, biopsy may be required. The main role of MRI in musculoskeletal tumours is in the surgical staging of the primary lesion. This should accurately identify the full extent of the tumour in bone and soft tissue, the relationship to the nearby joint and neurovascular bundle and confirm/exclude skip metastases. MRI may be used in the follow-up of these patients to detect local recurrence of the tumour and postoperative complications (seroma, etc. MR imaging is generally the most sensitive and specific imaging modality for inflammatory and infectious diseases of the musculoskeletal system, which makes it the modality of choice for these pathologies. Whole body MRI is of particular importance in the imaging of inflammatory diseases where frequently initially clinically silent areas of involvement are seen. The definition of the extent and distribution of lesions aids in narrowing the differential diagnosis. Especially in infection, imaging should normally be complemented by biopsy to establish a histological/microbiological diagnosis and to exclude other disease entities such as malignancies. The assessment of treatment response in inflammatory or infectious disease is often challenging. MR imaging plays an important role, but all other imaging modalities can contribute valuable information. Especially for the assessment of the response to disease-modifying drugs in inflammatory disorders, MRI is establishing itself as an important quantifiable imaging method. Contrast medium enhancement is often valuable, but not always necessary. Other parameters such as the extent of synovitis, size of bone erosions and bone marrow oedema are also important and often sufficient markers. Image detail is very important when focal and especially when diffuse lung disease is studied with CT. A high image detail is not only necessary to detect small pulmonary changes and to study their characteristics, but also for a good topographical visualisation of the lung anatomy. Diagnosis of lung diseases with CT is indeed not only based on the study of the characteristics of the abnormalities, but also on the study of their regional distribution and in determining their distribution in relation to the anatomical structures of the lung. Recognising the normal and abnormal elements of a secondary pulmonary lobule is for example very important in diagnosing diffuse lung disease. High-detail images can be made using the "classical" (discontinuous) HRCT acquisition technique, usually producing 1-1.5 mm thick sections every 1-2 cm. With modern 16-64 slice scanners, it is possible to acquire the whole chest in a high-resolution mode. Not only thin-HRCT sections can be reconstructed, but also thick 5 mm-and high-detail coronal sections can be made allowing, respectively, a better evaluation of nodular opacities and of the mediastinum and an additional, often better, view of the distribution of the disease within the chest and within the secondary pulmonary lobule. Both acquisition methods have advantages and limitations, but it can be expected that the MDCT volume acquisition method will become the major player even in the study of diffuse lung disease. Lung cancer screening utilizing low dose CT has been an active area of investigation for the past decade. Encouraging survival results have led proponents to the conclusion that CT screening is effective and should be used in patient care. However, others point out that there are no studies that show a mortality reduction with CT screening and, therefore, screening should be delayed until those benefits are proven. The pros and cons of CT screening for lung cancer will be reviewed. A side benefit of the data collected in the CT screening studies has been a better understanding of the management of small ( 5 mm) nodules. It has been shown that there is a very small ( 1%) risk that a nodule 5 mm will be a lung cancer. Utilization of this knowledge in the formation of new management algorithms will allow radiologists to better manage these small nodules and benefit patients by allowing longer intervals between scans and fewer overall scans. Another evolving area in the evaluation of solitary pulmonary nodules is volumetric scanning that can allow the determination of volume doubling time of a nodule on scans performed as little as 1 month apart. This data will be discussed along with additional imaging modalities and imaging findings that the radiologist can use to help differentiate benign from malignant pulmonary nodules. Pulmonary function tests do not reflect regional differences in disease severity nor pathological processes that tend to counteract each other (i.e. interstitial lung disease associated with small airway obstruction). Blood gases measure overall gas exchanges and oxygenation, but do not detect regional impairment of lung perfusion or ventilation that induces compensatory changes on oxymetric uptake. Forced expiratory volume per second (FEV1) is affected by size and elastic lung properties, bronchial calibre and collapsibility of airways. MDCT provides isotropic data sets that offer the advantage of allowing multiplanar reformations of high quality and accurate assessment of the airways and pulmonary vessels. New postprocessing techniques contribute to quantitative assessment of lung volumes, airway dimension and extent of lung disease. Dynamic MDCT during forced expiratory manoeuvre helps assess air trapping and tracheobronchomalacia. In COPD patients, CT helps separate patients having emphysema or airway remodelling as their predominant phenotype. Reliable and reproducible CT quantification of emphysema is currently available and easy to perform. Both extent and mapping of emphysema account in the assessment of functional severity. Bronchial wall thickening measured at CT may be used as a surrogate marker for the presence of remodelling in the small airways. In asthma, the ability to follow-up bronchial wall area, bronchial reactivity and lung attenuation at expiration over time in patients receiving different treatments can provide an independent tool to assess therapies. Bronchial wall area measured at CT is related to the duration and severity of the disease, and reflects the degree of airway wall remodelling. Learning Objectives: 1. To comprehend that pulmonary function test results do not reflect regional differences in disease severity, and, pathologic processes that tend to counteract each other are not reflected. 2. To understand how MDCT, providing accurate high resolution assessment of airway and lung disease at a regional level, may be a more sensitive input on clinical trials, and ultimately in a clinical management of individual asthmatic or COPD patients. 3. To become familiar with new post processing techniques permitting quantitative assessment of lung volumes, airway dimensions (airway reactivity, remodelling and collapsibility), and extent of lung disease (emphysema and small airway disease). The roles and competences of general practitioners in the field of radiology within Europe vary tremendously. The differences are due to different health care systems and their characteristics (referral system vs. direct access to specialists), the economic realities of the country and the development of the discipline. The policy of Wonca Europe is to stimulate cooperation between specialities within the health care system to enable better use of resources and better patient care. In this session, two speakers will present their point of view for the potential of the improvement of assessment of coronary arterial disease from a perspective of a general practitioner in a Mediterranean country and a radiologist from the Netherlands. Peripheral arterial obstructive disease (PAOD) is also a field of common interest of general practitioners and radiologists. The immense socioeconomic burden of this disease requires joint efforts of both disciplines in order to achieve adequate diagnosis and treatment. A stepwise, evidence based approach in primary care and radiological diagnosis and treatment will be addressed in this session. Session Objectives: 1. To compare points of view of general practitioners and radiologists in the assessment of coronary disease. 2. To discuss the relevance of guidelines. 3. To look at the potential use of coronary angiography in primary care in the future. Assessment of coronary artery disease (part I: General practitioner) C. Lionis; Iraklion/GR (lionis@galinos.med.uoc.gr) Coronary artery disease (CAD) is one of the most chronic disorders in the western world and a leading cause of morbidity and mortality. There is some evidence that general practitioners (GPs) could contribute substantially to the assessment of the risk for the development of cardiovascular disease and diagnosis of CAD. This presentation aims at reviewing the different approaches for the assessment of that risk and in particular the following: (a) The clinical individual-based traditional diagnostic approach that is based on the clinical recognition of risk factors, the usage of diagnostic tests of uncertain diagnostic quality, and the usual care. (b) The clinical individual-based modern approach that recognises the multifactorial nature of this disease and uses the SCORE model and risk charts. (c) The epidemiological approach at the GP's office that uses pretest and posterior probabilities based on estimations given by the office EPR system based on episode of care (ICPC-2R). (d) The population-based approach, which uses medical records or community-oriented health prevention programmes to assess the population risk using different multifactorial risk models. Diagnostic probabilities of symptoms and signs recognised at the GP's office that indicate CAD will be discussed. Guidelines to all GPs will be presented. These target (i) patients without CAD whose symptoms suggest chronic stable angina, (ii) patients with known stable angina, and (iii) asymptomatic patients with evidence from previous testing. Procedural skills and diagnostic algorithms for evaluating patients suspected for CAD, including a standard treadmill exercise test (ETT), an ETT imaging, and a coronary angiography, will be provided. Learning Objectives: 1. To be familiar with the approaches and methods used to asses the risk for development of cardiovascular disease. 2. To discuss procedural skills and diagnostic algorithms for evaluating patients at risk for coronary artery disease. 3. To discuss links on diagnostic approaches between general practitioners and radiologists. Computed tomography (CT) coronary angiography permits non-invasive evaluation of both the coronary lumen and the coronary vessel wall. Coronary plaques can be detected and classified into calcified, non-calcified, and mixed plaques, and their impact on the coronary lumen can be evaluated. Moreover, CT coronary angiography permits evaluation of the extent (e.g. number of disease coronary segments), size, and anatomical distribution of coronary plaques. Recent literature indicates that such comprehensive assessment may have prognostic value and may aid in the risk stratification of patients suspected of coronary artery disease. Current CT resolution does not allow detection of certain vulnerable plaque characteristics such as a thin fibrous cap, a large lipid pool, or inflammation. Several publications reported on the potential of CT to further classify non-calcified plaques into lipid-rich and fibrous plaques on the basis of CT density values. Scarce data are available on the accuracy of CT to detect remodeling of the coronary vessel wall. However, current literature indicates that CT is able to detect both negative (inward) and positive (outward) remodeling, of which the latter is considered to be a marker of plaque vulnerability. A recent study reported on the use of a nanoparticulate contrast agent in rabbits, which can be used to detect macrophages at the level of atherosclerotic plaques. Such contrast agent could be an important adjunct to the clinical evaluation of coronary arteries with CT. Learning Objective: 1. To discuss the potential of CT coronary angiography in the detection and classification of coronary plaques. Patients with peripheral arterial obstructive disease (PAOD) in primary care (part I: General practitioner) Patients with peripheral arterial occlusive disease (PAOD) are common in primary care, with an estimated prevalence of 4.5-7% among those aged 55-74. For their long-term care, the full spectrum of competencies of the general practitioner (GP), such as recognition of early symptoms, counselling for changes in life style, identification of acute potentially dangerous conditions, selection of appropriate additional investigations, informing about non-invasive and invasive forms of treatment, planning and provision of long-term care and follow-up management, selection of appropriate rehabilitative measures and motivation of the patient to comply with recommendations, is required. Of particular, relevance for the GP is the respect of the autonomy of the patient and his/her priorities. The skills to perform the physical examination and to identify individual risk factors are of prime importance in early diagnosis. Selection of the medically appropriate diagnostic procedure is required and consideration of costs and cost efficiency are mandatory in the public health sector for referral. Relevant co-morbidities have to be taken into account before non-invasive therapeutic options or invasive procedures are discussed with the patient. During follow-up and rehabilitation, the compliance of the patient and his/her functioning in daily life have to be addressed. Medical practice in a city or in a rural area causes different challenges to both the managing physician and the patient. Despite the technical developments of recent years, diagnostic workup of patients with PAOD at the primary care level follows a stepwise approach based on medical needs and consideration of cost efficiency. Long ago, vascular diseases have become the diagnostic challenge of the millennium since they are more prevalent and more deadly than many leading diseases. Their systemic character with a potential coincidence of peripheral, coronary, and cerebro-vascular manifestations causes the demand for an interdisciplinary diagnostic and therapeutic concept. The general practitioner plays a critical role within this concept since he will be regularly the first being confronted with typical symptoms, and furthermore will act as an interface between the different vascular specialists involved. Therefore, he inevitably needs to have detailed knowledge about state-of-the-art imaging modalities and endovascular and surgical treatment options. In the past decade, diagnostic imaging has evolved enormously and to date radiology can offer non-invasive highly sophisticated whole-body vessel imaging algorithms, either by computed tomography or by magnetic resonance imaging, and less capacious but more detailed invasive imaging by digital subtraction angiography with an option for immediate treatment. During the past decade diagnostic imaging and endovascular techniques both enormously have evolved. For that reason the endovascular approach meanwhile is considered as an important alternative to vascular surgery at least in some states of the disease and clinical conditions. This lecture gives an overview on state-of-the-art imaging modalities and endovascular treatment options for peripheral arterial disease, discusses their potentials and limitations, and tries to aid the general practitioner in the process of developing individual diagnostic and therapeutic concepts. Questions from the radiologist to the general practitioner as well as premises for the discussed imaging modalities and endovascular techniques as well as aftercare will be addressed. Osteoporosis is a healthcare-social problem of increasing relevance in developed countries, especially because of the rapid increase in the incidence of fragility fractures. The diagnosis of osteoporosis has been defined by WHO, on the basis of the assessment of bone mineral density (BMD), as a BMD -2.5 SD or more below the average value for premenopausal women. Severe osteoporosis denotes osteoporosis in the presence of one or more fragility fractures. Even if in the first years all measurable sites were equally considered valid for diagnosis, recently it was recognised that the most effective site for diagnosis is the proximal femur with dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA). Other skeletal sites (axial and appendicular) could also be evaluated by other validated densitometric techniques (QCT, QUS) for fracture prediction. Other clinical risk factors contribute to fracture risk independently of densitometric techniques. These include age, previous fragility fracture, premature menopause, a family history of hip fracture and the use of oral corticosteroids. Because of the many techniques for fracture risk assessment, the T-score approach to determine the risk of fracture appears to be lacking because of discrepancies among sites and techniques. The 10-year probability of fracture is the most effective approach to determine intervention thresholds. Many treatments can be provided cost-effectively to women on the basis of 10 years' probability of fracture. Up to now, the values of 10 years' probability of fracture have been published for DXA and for phalangeal QUS techniques in the European population. Insufficiency fractures are defined as stress fractures that occur due to normal biomechanical loading in abnormally weak bone. They are commonly observed in patients with osteoporosis, but may also be found after radiation therapy or chemotherapy. Typical locations are the pelvis, sacrum and the spine. At the spine, MRI is very sensitive to differentiate acute and old vertebral insufficiency fractures, also these fractures have typical morphologic features that frequently allows their differentiation from neoplastic fractures. At the pelvis, insufficiency fractures are often located in more than one location, which affects imaging protocols, and coverage of the whole pelvis is generally recommended. Given frequent concurrent osteopenia in the patients, fractures are very difficult to diagnose on radiographs, and more than 40% of pelvic insufficiency fractures, in particular sacral fractures, are negative on radiographs. It should also be noted that CT detects only approximately 70% of the insufficiency fractures diagnosed with MRI. Typical combinations of insufficiency fractures are found, for example, pubic insufficiency fractures are in approximately 90% associated with fractures in another location, in particular the sacrum. At the knee, it has been now generally accepted that lesions previously described as spontaneous osteonecrosis of the knee are actually insufficiency fractures occurring typically in elderly patients ( 60 years). In summary, insufficiency fractures are a frequent pathology that need to be correctly diagnosed, and MRI currently is the most accurate imaging test to arrive at this diagnosis. However, radiologists have to be familiar with the typical features of these fractures. In the day-to-day practice of radiology, we use radiological signs in order to describe some crucial imaging findings in a summarized and didactic way. Regarding retroperitoneal imaging, the following signs will be analyzed: 1. The bear paw sign represents the CT appearance of a kidney with xantogranolumatous pyelonephritis. Complications, related conditions and differential diagnosis will also be discussed. 2. The psoas sign is a well-known radiological finding depicting loss of visualization of the psoas border in an abdominal plain film, thus indicating a perirrenal process. Some cases evaluated with plain film with CT correlation will be shown in order to understand its significance. 3. The term horseshoe kidney refers to the appearance of fused kidneys, which results from fusion at the lower pole. The embryologic explanation and the potential complications will be discussed. Examples of tumor, lithiasis and trauma will be shown. 4. The string of pearls sign is an angiographic sign that is virtually pathognomonic of fibromuscular dysplasia of the renal arteries. The differential diagnosis of abnormalities of the renal arteries will be briefly discussed. 5. The beak sign, when present, is useful in determining the tumor's origin from the retroperitoneal organs. 6. The embedded organ sign is complementary to the beak sign, and allows differentiating a mass compressing a specific organ or if this mass actually arose from the organ itself. The genitourinary organs in the pelvis include the ureters, the bladder, the urethra, the prostate and the seminal vesicles in males, the uterus and the ovaries in females. Different pathologies, inflammatory, traumatic and neoplastic, may affect these organs. The pelvic genitourinary organs may be examined by means of different imaging modalities, including conventional plain X-ray film of the abdomen, intravenous urography, ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; with CT and MR urography). In spite of the introduction of US, CT and MRI, intravenous urography still has a role in the evaluation of the ureters, the bladder and the urethra. Nevertheless, CT-urography and MR-urography reproduce the same findings of intravenous urography in most instances, therefore most of the considerations made about intravenous urography can be applied also to CT-and MR-urography. This presentation will review the features that can be seen with the different imaging modalities, which may be helpful to characterise a disease or to make a differential diagnosis. A greater emphasis will be given to the more common diseases such as urinary tract stones and different causes of urinary obstruction, with an overview of the most common signs on plain X-ray film, intravenous urography, US and CT. A review of the useful signs in the differential diagnosis of the pathologies that may affect the bladder, the prostate, the uterus and the ovaries with special emphasis on neoplastic conditions will also be made. Percutaneous biopsy can be used to confirm the diagnosis of suspected malignancy, and infections, and there is increasing evidence to suggest that biopsy can be used to sub-type and grade many primary renal cancers. Just as important, biopsy is being used also to diagnose benign renal tumors that are being detected with greater frequency with the burgeoning use of cross-sectional imaging for abdominal disorders. Incidental renal masses are common and need to be managed appropriately. With advances in imaging technology (largely with use of thin-section images), many incidental, small renal masses are being diagnosed confidently as enhancing and, therefore, solid. Because a considerable fraction of small, solid renal masses are benign, it is important to diagnose them to prevent them from being treated unnecessarily. Performing a biopsy after a full imaging work-up can prevent unnecessary and potentially morbid surgical and ablation procedures in a substantial number of patients. Although more data are needed to understand the overall accuracy of percutaneous biopsy in diagnosing benign renal masses, biopsy is capable of diagnosing many of them. In our experience, biopsy has been shown to be particularly helpful in diagnosing causes of renal masses that are small, hyperdense, and homogeneously enhancing. Masses with these features may be renal cancers, but are found commonly to be benign angiomyolipomas with minimal fat. This lecture reviews the literature and our experience with percutaneous renal mass biopsy, and details eight specific clinical settings in which biopsy results affect patient care. to increase the accuracy of this method. This paper reviews the basic and new techniques for breast MR imaging. The required MR pulse sequences will be described. In addition, the technical elements to perform high-resolution, dynamic breast MRI as well as image post-processing and interpretation of time-enhancement curves will be described. The use of MR spectroscopy as well as diffusion and perfusion imaging will be introduced. Future directions for breast MR imaging at 3 Tesla, and the potential role of "functional imaging" will be discussed. In the field of oncologic surgery, an accurate local staging, i.e. the delineation of local disease extent, is considered to be of key importance in patients with operable cancers. Imaging studies are used to provide an accurate road map for the surgeon to help him or her obtain clear margins. It is well established that breast MRI is by far superior to mammography, with or without concomitant ultrasound, for the local staging of breast cancer. MRI allows the most accurate delineation of the size and the local extent of cancer, including the depiction of multifocal, multicentric or contralateral disease. MRI offers the highest sensitivity for demonstrating intraductal extensions around invasive cancers. For all these reasons, MRI should be considered an integral part of the workup of patients who undergo breast conserving treatment. And yet, the technique is only slowly adopted in clinical practice. Arguments against the use of breast MRI include costs, frequency of false positive diagnoses, lack of availability of minimally invasive biopsy capabilities, lack of evidence by randomized controlled clinical trials, and, last, fear of overtreatment. In this lecture, these concerns are explained, discussed and weighted against the advantages of MRI for breast cancer staging. The point is made that breast MRI is indeed essential for surgical planning, but that unnecessary mastectomy may result if old guidelines (established for mammographic staging) are used to guide management decisions regarding MR-detected lesions. Guidelines that require mastectomy for multicentric breast cancer were established before the advent of MRI. Using the same guidelines to manage MR-detected multicentric foci may be inappropriate because some of the small MRI-detected multicentric foci may be sufficiently treated by additional lumpectomy or even by radiation therapy alone. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NC) has become the standard treatment for patients with advanced breast cancers and is now a potential treatment for patients with earlier-stage operable disease. Pathological response of tumours to NC appears to correlate with the outcome. The advantage of NC is that it not only increases breast-conserving surgery, but also enables direct in vivo assessment of response. Breast imaging is used to evaluate the shrinkage of tumour under treatment and to try determine responders. Physical examination associated with mammography and ultrasound is a valuable noninvasive combination for assessing tumour response. At this time, this morphologic evaluation is the only one recognised by the international criteria. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most accurate imaging modality for the assessment of response in terms of tumour size and detection of residual tumour after treatment. Flattening of the contrast uptake time-intensity curve after the first chemotherapy cycle and complete absence of contrast uptake after the fourth cycle are observed in responders. Conversely, the detection of a persistent wash-out phenomenon in residual tumour allows prediction of nonresponders. Like other functional imaging modalities proposed for the assessment of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy, MRI is also restricted in the imaging of very small residual tumour foci. Studying the effect of NC will demonstrate the accuracy of these complementary functional imaging techniques. The signal intensities of normal structures and pathological findings on conventional T1-and T2-weighted MR images depend on many factors. The amount of water, proton density, chemical structure and or/binding, presence or absence of flow (of blood or CSF), calcification, fat, blood degradation products, melanin, mucine and even air are all factors that influence the signal characteristics. T1-and T2-lenghtening is the rule in most tumoral, vascular and infectious lesions and therefore is rather unspecific. T1-and T2-shortening can be due to the presence of fat (lipoma), melanin (melanoma and metastasis of melanoma), mucine (metastasis of sigmoid carcinoma), colloid material (colloid cyst, Rathke cleft cyst) and even calcification (falx!). T1-shortening with T2-lenghtening can be due to cholesterine (cholesterol granuloma, craniopharyngioma), high protein content (tumoral cysts) and methemoglobin (late hemorrhage, thrombus). T1-lenghtening and T2-shortening is almost exclusively due to deoxyhemoglobin. Acute hemorrhage and meningioma can be iso-intense on T1-weighted images, while some meningiomas and micrometastases can be iso-intense on T2-weighted images. Absence of signal can be due to high-velocity flowing blood (aneurysm, AVM, hypervascular tumours), high velocity flowing CSF (normal pressure hydrocephalus, cortical bone or extensive calcification, air and a large amount of iron (coils, clips). It is concluded that the simple use of a combination of T1-and T2-signal intensities on conventional MR images can be used to arrive at the diagnosis and differential diagnosis of brain lesions. The cortical anatomy is often perceived as a complicated, irregular arrangement of variable structures, which are difficult to differentiate and to identify. We will first review the overall subdivision of the brain into lobes and describe the boundaries of these lobes and their major gyri and sulci. We will then describe the location of specific functions such as the primary areas of sensorimotor function, speech, audition and vision. 1. Primary sensorimotor cortex: Motor is located in the precentral gyrus, sensory in the postcentral gyrus around the central sulcus (CS), hence the importance of always correctly identifying the CS. We will present four interlocked methods to identify the CS in the axial plane: a) knob, b) lateral axial, c) medial axial, d) gyral/cortical thickness and three to identify it in the sagittal plane: a) lateral sagittal, b) hook, c) medial sagittal. 2. Speech: Motor speech is located in the frontal operculum/anterior insula, whereas sensory is found around the sylvian fissure. 3. Primary auditory cortex (A1): Centered at the postero-medial part of Heschl's gyrus (HG), we will present simple landmarks to reliably identify the gyrus in each of the three planes: a) adhaesio interthalamica in the axial plane, b) the omega/heart shape of HG in the sagittal plane, c) the omega shape of HG in the coronal plane defined by the tent shape of the fornices. 4. Primary visual cortex (V1): Centered on the calcarine sulcus, we will discuss the characteristic shape that allows the identification of this structure in all three planes. The normal and variant anatomy will be briefly reviewed. Major physiological principles will also be discussed: venous resistance and peripheral venous pressure; the effect of changes in right atrial, intraabdominal and gravitational pressure on lower limb venous pressure; venous valves, calve muscle pump and respiratory pump (changes in thoracic and abdominal pressures during the respiratory cycle). Direct venous pressure measurements in standing position show approximately 80 mmHg ankle pressure; tiptoe dorsiflexion in normal subjects, operating the calf muscle pump, lowers the ankle pressure to 20-30 mmHg. In deep vein incompetence, the muscle compartment never fully empties and rapidly refills with refluxing blood. Ambulatory venous pressure measurements or pletysmography is an important indicator for considering operative or endovascular therapy in case of venous valve incompetence causing varicose veins. Recent studies using noninvasive assessment of human large vein diameter, distensibility and ellipticity in situ showed that femoral veins are highly distensible in the reclined position, but are rigid tubes in the standing position. Aging decreases the distensibility of the femoral vein in the reclined position. In situ distensibility of femoral veins on the side of previous thrombosis as well as the disease-free side is reduced in the young DVT patients, compared to veins of the age-matched, healthy controls. The pathophysiological mechanism of generalized venous wall changes in these young DVT patients remains unknown. Sonography of the venous system in the diagnosis of venous diseases is now considered as a reference method. Its main application is based on dynamic Bmode evaluation of the venous permeability to rule out venous thrombosis. The Doppler mode may help for examination of distal veins and to separate acute and chronic thrombosis. The examination must be bilateral and cover the deep venous axes, the superficial saphenous veins and some important intramuscular trunks such as circonflex, medial gastrocnemius and soleus veins. Considering that its performance is inadequate at the calf level, some prefer a limited examination from the groin to the knee, repeated a week later if negative. Others perform a complete examination from the groin to the ankle, with more recent results being reported as equivalent at both levels. Sonography is indicated when clinical suspicion of venous thrombosis is sufficiently high. It is also mandatory in pulmonary embolism to avoid false negatives of angio-CT and to obtain a venous status for prognosis. D-dimers (DD) can be measured, before sonography, to rule out thromboembolic disease in the absence of co-morbid factors. The second main indication of venous sonography is venous insufficiency, most often located on the saphenous veins, but sometimes on the perforator veins or on the main deep trunks. It is characterized by a venous reflux during dynamic manoeuvres lasting more than 1 s. Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and venous insufficiency are primarily investigated with ultrasound. However, there may be some indications for indirect CT venography (CTV) or MR venography (MRV). DVT and pulmonary embolism are the two aspects of venous thrombo-embolism. Therefore, combined CT pulmonary angiography (CTPA) and CTV (or MRPA and MRV) are single useful tests that accurately depict both PE and DVT and therefore avoid delayed diagnosis and limit cost. The incremental value of adding CTV to CTPA is in the range of 5-27%. The optimal use of sequential vs spiral acquisition for CTV remains debated. In opposition to ultrasound, CTV and MRV are not limited by leg cast or painful compression, dressing, edema, open wounds, severe burns, trophic changes of the lower limbs or obesity. They provide adequate visualization of veins that are difficult to image with other techniques, such as iliac veins and IVC, which is advantageous to guide further interventions, such as catheter placement for thrombolysis or IVC filter introduction. Combined CTPA-CTV (or MRPA-MRV) results in a complete evaluation of potential sources of clots by screening the veins of the lower limbs, IVC, SVC and the heart chambers. MRI may be preferred particularly at the level of abdomen and pelvis, as it is noninvasive, does not require contrast agent and carries no exposure to ionizing radiation. In venous insufficiency, MR demonstrates the gross and objective morphology of venous structures, but without dependence on the operator's technique, limited field of view and subjective interpretation that may be associated with other techniques. Looking at challenges and opportunities in general, we still see an increase in vascular interventions in Europe. Although some of these vascular interventions are now sometimes performed by other medical specialties like vascular surgery and cardiology, in general interventional radiologists are still the largest group in this field. Our biggest challenge for the near future is to keep interventional radiology in the house of radiology as a subspecialty of radiology. The first step to achieve this is to assure that IR gets a seat within the UEMS radiology section and because of this more profile and recognition. Creating an IR curriculum and finally an IR diploma and staying as the leading force in IR in Europe are challenges. There are good opportunities to achieve this. CIRSE as the European house for interventional radiology has almost 2,500 members and is still growing fast. CIRSE has the knowledge, vision and manpower to do this. Looking in more detail we see a growth in almost all types of vascular interventions. However, one of the most important clinical problems for the future is diabetes. There is a worldwide uncontrolled increase in diabetic patients and peripheral vascular disease. Vascular interventions are going to play a major role. Interventional radiologists should turn their focus in this direction. Finally, the last big challenge for interventional radiologists is to become a "real" doctor, a clinician with clinical responsibility not only to technically treat local disease but also to treat patients as a whole at our own ward in IR run beds. This talk will focus mainly on spinal trauma and will highlight some of the potential pitfalls and misunderstandings which may occur. The emphasis will be on plain radiographs although CT will be used to clarify some of the findings seen on the plain film. The teardrop fracture is a specific entity which is often misunderstood. This and other similar fractures will be shown and their nature and significance clarified. Thoracic fractures are often overlooked on chest radiographs in poly-traumatised patients and several examples will be shown. It is important that these signs are recognised. In the lumbar region, the Chance fracture is another fracture which can be misinterpreted and this will also be considered and existing knowledge consolidated. Obesity is a rapidly growing problem that is affecting most developed and many developing countries. It is estimated that obesity will continue to grow over the next decade, resulting in an increasing impact on the health of the general population. Many radiologists are already aware of some of the problems in trying to image the obese patient. In many cases, imaging is sub-optimal or impossible in such patients. It is however important that radiologists recognise the need to adapt their imaging for their obese patients. Imaging modality selection as well as optimising imaging parameters may enable a significant improvement in visualisation of the imaged obese patient. In addition, vendors have recognised the need to cater for such patients with wider CT and MRI gantries now available in the market. In this session, three expert speakers will discuss different aspects of imaging the obese patient. The panel will then discuss whether we are doing enough to optimise imaging for the obese patient. It is estimated that at least 20% of the population in Europe are obese. The implications of this for the health of the nation are huge, with obesity causing more deaths each year than road traffic accidents as a result of heart disease, peripheral vascular disease, diabetes, and cancer. The cost of obesity on the health budget of most countries is increasing exponentially with the indirect costs on the employer and the taxpayer remaining unquantified. The causes of obesity are multifactorial but in 99% of the cases environmental factors are responsible. The increasing consumption of high calorie, energy-rich food and a reduction in physical activity result in an individual becoming overweight. Primary causes of obesity include genetic causes, metabolic disorders and secondary to medications. Regardless of the aetiology, the impact of obesity on radiology and radiologic interventions is huge. Radiology can play a role in the evaluation of patients with obesity both in determining a primary cause and also in evaluating complications of obesity. Obesity can also hinder the radiologic evaluation or treatment of an affected patient. Radiologists are increasingly facing challenges in producing diagnostic quality studies in the growing obese patient population. This cohort stretches the current imaging technology to its limits; assuming that a patient is transferable to the department and onto the appropriate modality's table, there remains a lot of work to be done to optimise that patient's imaging. Thus, producing diagnostic quality images on obese patients with current technologies will be the basic thrust of this lecture. I will address these challenges from basic physics and practical management approaches and will suggest technique modifications and workarounds to obtain diagnostic quality studies with conventional radiography, computed tomography, ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging. These patients present particular challenges to the inerventionalist who depends on adequate on-the-fly image acquisition to guide procedures and I will discuss the ways of optimising the quality and safety of these cases. I will address the impact of invariably present co-morbidities on contrast usage and the prescription of sedo-analgesia in the intervention suite. I will also discuss the developments in machine design specifically introduced to overcome the limitations of current machines, namely, increasing the power of all the above, increasing the strength of the supporting tables and increasing the space available to fit the patient into the machine. I will briefly discuss the techniques used in the quantitative and qualitative analysis of obesity and the relevance of this research to clinical practice. Surgery for morbid obesity is rapidly growing with 13,000 procedures performed in 1998 and 200,000 in 2006. The demand for imaging primarily fluoroscopic studies and CT is, therefore, also growing. Since the jejunoileal bypass, first performed in the 1950s at the University of Minnesota, other less dangerous morbid obesity procedures have developed including the vertical-banded gastroplasty, Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch and adjustable laparoscopic gastric band. The normal and abnormal imaging of these procedures will be discussed. Emphasis will be placed on the Roux-en-y gastric bypass, which is the most common procedure in the United States and the adjustable laparoscopic gastric band, the most common procedure in Europe. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the surgical procedures used to treat morbid obesity which includes: vertical banded gastroplasty, gastric bypass, adjustable gastric band and duodenal switch. 2. To understand the fluoroscopic and CT techniques used to study patients after the above procedures. 3. To understand the normal and pathological post-operative appearance of these procedures. The imaging of patients treated for a neck malignancy is still challenging because besides postsurgical changes and distortion of anatomic landmarks, the signal intensities in MRI and densities in CT will change, and contrast uptake is frequently present and mostly unspecific. This part of the course will allude to the expected changes, such as changes of anatomical landmarks following surgical removal of neck masses and neck dissection, and changes of MRI and CT appearance following radiation, surgery and other forms of treatment. Typical follow-up patterns will be displayed and discussed and the role of new imaging modalities will also be discussed. Motor cranial nerve lesions are often accompanied by symptoms and signs of denervation. Patterns of denervation are used to locate a lesion along the course of a given cranial nerve(s). To recognize these patterns it is mandatory to know the course of the cranial nerves and the muscles they supply. Motor and mixed cranial nerves include all oculomotor nerves and cranial nerves V, VII, IX, X, XI and XII. In the acute stage, denervation manifests on imaging as oedema and enlargement of the affected muscle(s). These changes are best appreciated on MR through an increase in signal intensity on T2W images and abnormally intense enhancement after gadolinium administration. At this stage, changes should be interpreted with caution as they usually mimic a mass lesion on the affected side. In the chronic stage of denervation, there is loss of muscle fibres and fatty replacement of the muscle(s), depicted well both on CT and MR. A potential pitfall at this stage is to mistake the normal side for a mass lesion, a common occurrence when imaging patients with chronic denervation of the tongue. Whenever denervation is depicted, a thorough evaluation of the complete course of the cranial nerve(s) in question to its brainstem nuclei is mandatory to identify the offending lesion. Causes of denervation can be intrinsic or extrinsic to the affected cranial nerve. In patients with head and neck cancer, particular attention should be given to differentiate between iatrogenic denervation and that secondary to perineural spread of the primary tumour. Comprehensive cardiovascular assessment of the thorax is a reality since the introduction of 64-slice CT technology. The newest development concerns the evaluation of the heart and coronary arteries. CT seems to be already a reliable diagnostic modality for the assessment and especially for the exclusion of significant coronary artery disease. Previous literature extensively provided validation of this technique against conventional coronary angiography. Above all, most of the studies reported a high negative predictive value as a major strength of this technique. Contemporary literature is exploring many aspects regarding the clinical role of this modality. Several fields of application are emerging in the assessment of suspected or known coronary artery disease such as atypical chest pain, nondiagnostic provocative tests, acute coronary syndrome, plaque imaging and so forth. In addition, the multi-phasic nature of cardiac CT scan allows the assessment of left ventricular volumes and motion. These parameters are "part of the deal" while scanning the heart for the assessment of coronary arteries and are very profitable when associated with the clinical background and with the extent of coronary artery disease. A recent field of implementation is the so-called "triple rule-out", in which cardiovascular CT can play a major role by excluding/diagnosing coronary artery disease vs. pulmonary embolism vs. aortic dissection. Preliminary data are promising in this field. Radiologists are used to reporting on most body parts; however, the heart remains a territory that is not usually assessed. Therefore, an overview of cardiac language and parameters should be part of the knowledge of cardiovascular radiologists. The heart is no longer a difficult organ to study with magnetic resonance (MR). Instead, for a lot of cardiac diseases this technique has become the preferred imaging modality, offering substantially more accurate information than other techniques, such as echocardiography, nuclear medicine and cardiac catheterization. In this presentation, an overview will be given of how to approach the heart with MR, discussing the practical aspects (patient installation, monitoring issues) and specific sequence design, and a brief description of current applications. The follow-up with CT of children treated for heart disease is performed mainly to evaluate the post-operative status of the great arteries and extracardiac shunts. MRI of the heart is a very useful modality in children, as it demonstrates chamber morphology, cardiac connections, and relationships of great arteries without using ionizing radiation. However, it is somewhat limited by the frequent need of sedation and lack of cooperation in breath holding. Cine sequences provide important functional and flow information. MR angiography is replacing conventional angiography for many indications, as it exquisitely depicts the anatomy and abnormalities of the aorta, pulmonary arteries, and veins. The development of high temporal resolution acquisitions with an acquisition time of a few seconds is also a major advance. The quantification of stenosis and shunts is easily performed with phase-contrast techniques. It is very important for the radiologist performing these examinations to be familiar with the anatomy, surgical procedures performed, and relative strengths of each modality in order to suggest to the clinician the most appropriate modality to each particular clinical question. In most emergency centers, the diagnostic imaging work-up of patients admitted with acute abdominal pain is based on abdominal plain film (APF), sonography and MDCT. Because these are easily available, APF and, to a lesser extent, sonography, are often considered by the clinicians as the first line imaging tools to be systematically performed for the screening of these patients, while waiting for MDCT. In some limited situations, for example in patients admitted with acute pancreatitis, bowel occlusion or for detection of intra-abdominal foreign bodies, APF or sonography may add further information with regard to MDCT. However, in many other situations, the systematic use of APF and sonography, performed before MDCT, just constitutes a waste of medical and financial resources and can lead to inappropriate delays in patient care. For a rational use of radiological means, the decision of performing APF and/or US in patients with acute abdominal pain should be tailored to well-defined clinical situations, and based on pre-established appropriateness criteria. CT is more and more often used in the diagnosis and management of acute abdomen. It is now performed as the first-line examination in a patient with acute abdomen and not with argues given by abdominal plain film, ultrasound or laboratory investigations. The advantages and limitations of such an attitude will be discussed by illustrating important diagnoses that have been given quickly by CT and also by showing some CT pitfalls and the key to avoid these mistakes. The goals of radiological imaging procedures in the assessment of acute abdomen are: (1) to identify the cause of acute abdominal pain, (2) to aid in the optimal management of pain by designating the patient either for medical treatment or surgery and (3) to plan percutaneously image-guided aspiration and catheter-based drainage. In the assessment of acute abdominal pain, computed tomography (CT) has gained the status of the gold standard in the last years. In contrast to CT, the use of MR imaging to investigate abdominal emergencies has not been widespread despite technical advances. The main reason for the limited use of abdominal MR imaging is the long study time with the disadvantage of poor image quality due to motion artifacts and the limited monitoring options of severely ill patients. Because recent spiral CT-MR imaging comparisons on state-of-the-art systems have shown that MR imaging is superior to CT for the demonstration of many routine (non-emergency) abdominal diseases due to excellent tissue contrast, it is self-evident that MRI may be used for abdominal emergencies also. For an optimal assessment of the bowel wall and its pathologies as well as for an unambiguous delineation of para-enteral processes against the gastrointestinal tract, a bowel opacification is necessary. If possible, in our patients an oral bowel opacification using 1.000 ml of a 2.0 % sorbitol solution is performed achieving a so-called hydro-MRI. In this course, the possibilities of hydro-MRI in the acute abdomen will be demonstrated. Vertebral compression fractures (VCFs) occur frequently in elderly patients. These fragility fractures frequently result in both acute and chronic pain, being a source of increased morbidity and possibly mortality. Vertebral fractures may result in pain about the fracture site, loss of height caused by vertebral collapse, spinal instability and kyphotic deformity. Regardless of their etiology, the mainstay of management of VCFs is medical therapy, which includes analgesics, bed rest and external fixation. However, medical treatment is frequently only partially effective, and about one-third of patients present persistent pain and functional limitation. Vertebroplasty and balloon kyphoplasty are two minimally invasive procedures developed for the management of symptoms of vertebral compression fractures. Nowadays, both techniques have gained substantial popularity for the treatment of pain and in order to stabilize the spine, not only in those vertebral fractures related to osteoporosis, but also those caused by malignant involvement of the spine or in benign tumours such as hemangiomas. Vertebroplasty involves a percutaneous injection of polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) into the fractured vertebral body, usually through a transpedicular approach. In balloon kyphoplasty, injection of PMMA is done once a cavity has been created in the vertebral body by inflation of a percutaneously inserted balloon. The anatomic considerations, patient selection, technique, possible complications and post-procedure management of both procedures will be described and illustrated. Percutaneous vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty constitute an effective therapy in the management of patients with symptomatic osteoporotic vertebral fractures refractory to conventional medical therapy. The dilemma on how to treat acute herniated discs remains unresolved. This painful disease has a favorable spontaneous outcome requiring in most cases a conservative approach. However, for many patients intense pain makes conservative management difficult to accept. This may be the reason why operative discectomy is still highly popular, since the major advantage of discectomy is the possibility of achieving early pain reduction 1. Nevertheless, the major drawback of surgical discectomy is the risk for recurrent radicular pain known as "failed back surgery syndrome" which is a disabling condition, very difficult to manage 2. New minimally invasive percutaneous intradiscal techniques like nucleoplasty could play an important role in the management of herniated discs. The use of low temperature disc nucleus decompression with Coblation® technology 3. has some characteristics in common with chemonucleolysis, an effective but abandoned treatment. It is not clear whether pain relief is achieved by mechanical decrease in disc size or by an anti-inflammatory effect; however, nucleoplasty seems to be effective in the early stages of disc disease and might even induce disc regeneration 4. Pre-clinical and clinical studies focusing on the safety of the technique and its effects on disc biochemistry have been published, the majority with favorable outcome 5-7. However, no randomized controlled trials are available yet. We shall review the indications, limitations and complications of this technique as known to date in the present data and compare it to the well-established treatment of facet joint disease. The purpose of this course is to demonstrate the techniques used in bone biopsy and RFA. We will address patient selection, indication and possible approaches. Imaging techniques, including fluoroscopy, ultrasound, computed tomography and magnetic resonance, will be shown. Analgesia will be discussed, as well as mobilization and drugs. Anatomic and positional landmarks will be presented. Concerning bone biopsy techniques, the designs and use of needles will be addressed. Size, type and fixation of samples will be discussed; complications will be analyzed. Although radiofrequency ablation (RFA) has been widely used, it is yet to find its place among bone interventional techniques and conventional therapies, such as external beam radiation and narcotic analgesics. We will review the differences between lytic and blastic lesions and the characteristics of various ablation devices, as well as the role in size and number of lesions to be ablated. The attending physician will have an overview of the materials and methods available, such as monopolar, bipolar, and single and multitined electrodes. Complications are analyzed, as well as techniques to minimize potential permanent neurological damage. In conclusion, this presentation for bone biopsy and RFA will hopefully allow the interventional radiologist to perform these techniques in a safe and efficient way, minimizing the risk for his patient, while yielding all possible potential advantages. Knowing the limitations of the material at hand seems to be important for avoiding technical complications. This is the first time at ECR that a special focus session is linked to the IMAGINE exhibition. The IMAGINE, a high-tech specialty exhibition, which this year features 10 research institutes, university groups, and research departments of industrial companies. It presents novel and exciting technological developments in the field of diagnostic and interventional radiology. The IMAGINE exhibition is unique in that it provides a platform to discuss the potential of these techniques in radiology in the near future with the people who are creating them. This IMAGINE special focus session will be dedicated to recent technological developments in imaging biomarkers, image analysis, modelling, and image-guided interventions, which have great potential for improving both the diagnosis and therapy for cancer. The speakers of this session will, among others, discuss the possibilities of these technologies created for early diagnosis, individualized treatment planning and monitoring, and improved image-guided treatment. After introducing the audience to these new developments, the main aim of the session is to address the question whether these technologies will indeed advance cancer therapy, and reduce errors in cancer diagnosis and treatment. As functional imaging becomes increasingly important to modern drug development and for the personalized assessment of therapy response, it has become important to be aware of the practical steps that are needed for the qualification of imaging as a predictive biomarker. The process begins by a precise definition of the clinical issues with reference to the clinical question, followed by biomarker choice, making sure that there is a biological link to the underlying pathophysiological processes that are moderated by therapy (this requires preclinical validation also). Feasibility clinical studies demonstrate in principle the link with therapy response in humans. Prior to full evaluations, the biomarker optimization/adaptation for clinical environments are undertaken. Definitive studies documenting test performance and for estimating group predictive values follow to see whether the biomarker meets its objectives. Determining the level of change that predicts response to therapy on an individual basis via measurement error determinations is undertaken at the same time. Provided that these initial steps are successful, full qualification is performed by undertaking well-designed, randomized control studies with efficacy endpoints. This framework will be illustrated using dynamic MRI as an angiogenesis biomarker in the context of breast cancer response to chemotherapy. Assessment of therapy response on the basis of morphologic parameters is a well-established procedure. Despite the growing interest and great hopes based on advances in molecular and functional imaging, CT-based evaluation of tumor size provides the fundamental information to assess therapy response for the vast majority of patients and clinical studies. Attempts made by the WHO and the RE-CIST consortium to standardize tumor response classifications have led to partly incompatible procedures. These are based on manual diameter measurements in which multiple studies are shown to suffer from very poor reproducibility. Some studies found that as many as one-third of all pairs of measurements performed by different observers on identical images yielded nonstable RECIST classifications. Another study reported that in more than 5% of diameter measurements, difference of more than 3 mm was found with high-contrast lung lesions with a median size of 7 mm. By contrast volumetric morphological assessment using suitably designed software provides three to seven times better reproducible quantification. Volumetry is no longer restricted to the use on small lesions in lung cancer screening. Prototypical software systems are capable of segmenting metastases at all frequent sites of cancer spread (liver, lung, lymph nodes and brain) with high success rates. Recent results also show the superiority of volumetry even for high anisotropic and low-dose data. In conclusion, automatic segmentation of tumors and volumetric measurement of tumor growth can improve the diagnostic accuracy and decrease the number of misclassifications dramatically in staging tumor response to chemotherapy. Colorectal cancer affects approximately 11% of men and 11% women, and approximately 10% of cancer deaths. Liver and colorectal cancers are intrinsically related, since a majority of liver cancers metastasise from the colorectum. This lecture presents recent work on MRI image analysis: Estimation of the circumferential resection margin (CRM), a key parameter in determining resectability of a tumour; segmentation of the mesorectum; analysis of lymph nodes within the mesorectum; relation of pre-operative representations of a rectal tumour to post-resection histology; and in the liver, integration of information from multiple breath holds, and the use of MRI to assess HIFU ablation of a tumour. We also report recent work on fusing dynamic PET with DCE-MRI for assessing complete responders to neoadjuvant chemotherapy for colorectal cancer. Images have long been used to guide interventions and direct therapy. In interventional radiology, catheters or needles (the effector) can be guided using real-time imaging in which the target, access route and effector are all visible. In image directed radiotherapy planning scans are used to simulate treatment, specify target radiation dose and minimize dose to organs at risk. In image guided surgery preoperative images are used to plan a procedure and this plan is registered to the patient coordinates in the treatment room while a pointer tracked in 3D is used to provide surgical navigation. We are now seeing a convergence of the underpinning technologies in these three areas. The latter two methods are limited to situations in which the rigid body transformation is a good approximation to the motion of the patient's anatomy before and during the procedure, i.e. where there is minimal deformation of tissue. Recently there has been progress in using models of motion and the biomechanics of soft tissue to predict such deformation. These advances are, in turn, creating opportunities for more accurate pre-procedure planning in interventional radiology. This talk will summarise this progress with reference to lung radiotherapy and interventions in the liver, breast, prostate and colon. Degeneration of intervertebral disc is characterized by dehydration, fissures, bulging, and herniations. In the bulging disc, the contour of the outer annulus extends in the axial plane beyond the edges of the disc space over more than 50%. Disc herniation may take the form of protrusion or extrusion. Regression or reduction of symptoms occurs after 1 year in at least 71% of patients affected by disc pathology. MRI is useful in presuming spontaneous regression of disc herniations. After 6 months, free fragments involve in 100% of cases and T2-weighted hyperintense extrusions in 83, while protrusions are more stable and bulging disc usually does not undergo anatomic regression. Many symptomatic patients have normal or minimally abnormal findings on standard supine exams. It is known from dynamic myelography that thecal sac and nerve compression are often unmasked only in the erect position. Weight-bearing or upright MR imaging of the spine can help the diagnosis in all these cases. Moreover, dynamic scans, and mostly 3D reformatted myelograms performed in dynamic conditions, are useful to have correct definition of spinal stenosis. Finally, minimally invasive interventional procedures offer today a valid alternative to surgery, because at follow-up the success rate ranges from 70 to 80%. MRI is a valid instrument to select patients, who are candidate to these procedures. The acute onset of spinal cord symptoms, imaging and CSF abnormalities lead to a broad spectrum of diagnoses. Besides myelin-specific disorders like multiple sclerosis, Devic disease and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, other inflammatory (transverse myelitis), infectious, granulomatous, metabolic or toxic disorders should be recognized. MRI is the method of choice and must be performed within few hours in order to eliminate acute compression. From isolated location in the spinal cord to widespread involvement of the CNS, MRI of the spinal cord and/or the brain will help in making diagnosis and prognosis. The distribution of the lesion in the white and/or grey matter of the spinal cord and the size of the lesion may help in the differential diagnosis. Contribution of new techniques such as diffusion imaging with tractography or magnetization transfer is increasing especially to better characterize the degree of tissue involvement. The advent of multidectector CT (MDCT) marks a qualitative as well as quantitative advance in spine imaging. As compared with single-slice helical CT, visualization of bony abnormalities is strikingly improved on MDCT. CT of the cervical spine is now the standard of care at many trauma centers for evaluation of spinal fractures. For thoracic and lumbar fractures, post-processing of the chest and abdominal CT data is sufficient for detection and classification of these spinal fractures. In patients with spinal fractures, MR imaging is an adjunct to CT for evaluation of discoligamentous injuries. Although MR imaging is still the preferred imaging modality for evaluation of degenerative diseases of the spine, MDCT with a soft tissue algorithm has become an alternative in patients in whom MR is technically not possible. CT excels in the depiction of bony abnormality when compared with MRI. This can be useful in the evaluation of cervical neural foraminal stenosis. For tumor imaging, MDCT permits exquisite depiction of trabecular anatomy in the bone marrow. This capability of MDCT is particularly useful in evaluation of patients with multiple myeloma. However, in most cases the information provided by MR is more important to make the diagnosis in tumor patients. In the postoperative patient, MR with gadolinium enhancement remains standard for evaluation of disc abnormalities and postoperative scarring. However, CT is superior to radiographs and MRI in the depiction of body fusion. Finally, CT may be superior in patients with indwelling hardware. Imaging examinations in polytraumatized patients should be fast and highly accurate, require minimum patient cooperation, enable careful patient monitoring and observation, provide a maximum of information in a single examination, use techniques that minimize radiation exposure, be cost-effective and use imaging technologies that can be located conveniently in emergency departments. All are possible with MDCT. With newer 16 and 64-slice scanners, trauma patients benefit A 61 B C D E F G from greater anatomical coverage per rotation, faster speed to decrease motion artifact, rapid total body single-acquisition trauma scans and total body CTAs, a decrease in the required IV contrast material, high-resolution images, rapid multiplanar reformations and cardiac gating to decrease aortic and cardiac motion. In polytraumatized patients, routine coronal reformations are obtained on head CT scans and both routine coronal and sagittal reformations on face, cervical spine, chest, abdomen, pelvis and extremity CT scans. Curved plane, MIP, 3D and CTA reformations are obtained when indicated by clinical presentation or findings on axial slices. Multiplanar reformations of the chest and abdomen have eliminated the need for thoraco-lumbar spine clearance films after CT and have been useful in providing better display of sternal and pelvic fractures, as well as soft tissue injuries of the parenchymal organs, diaphragm, bowel, mesentery and urinary bladder. CTAs have provided superb displays of injuries of the aorta, brachiocephalic arteries and other vascular structures. By diagnosing injuries quickly and accurately, MDCT can decrease patient morbidity and mortality, decrease non-therapeutic surgery, prevent unnecessary hospital admissions and decrease the costs of trauma evaluation. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the optimum MDCT protocols for imaging the polytraumatised patient, including protocols for single acquisition "total body" trauma MDCT scans. Computed tomography (CT) has historically played a central role in musculoskeletal (MSK) imaging, by its ability to accurately evaluate bony pathology. In more recent years, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with its ability to produce multi-planar imaging and its characterisation of soft tissues has played an increasingly central role. However, CT has an important place in imaging peripheral bones and joints and in particular in the imaging of complex bony trauma. This role has increased further with the advent of multi-detector CT (MDCT) and the ability to produce near isotropic voxels allowing for multi-planar reformats and faster scan times. This presentation explores the current role of MDCT in the imaging of peripheral bones and joints with particular emphasis on imaging complex bony trauma, the evaluation of post-operative complications relating to joint prostheses and evaluating the knee following meniscal surgery utilizing arthrographic techniques. The current role of MDCT in guiding MSK intervention (biopsy and radiofrequency ablation) will also be discussed together with its role in problem solving where unexplained abnormalities have been found with MRI. A seven Tesla MR scanner is an expensive piece of equipment, but is it worth it? Will 7 T be the final frontier, a stepping stone to something greater or an expensive white elephant? In this session, we will attempt to answer these questions with the help of three distinguished speakers. Jürgen Hennig will take us through the technical challenges and pitfalls associated with the step up to 7 T. Dorothee Auer will give a neuroradiologist's perspective on 7 T imaging and finally Mark Ladd will report on imaging in the extremities and abdomen with 7 T. The session will conclude with a panel discussion in which you, the audience, will have your chance to question the speakers and chair. Some issues that I hope we can touch on are: 1. Safety: What are the extra safety precautions with 7 T. How can you move to sensible SAR limits? How does the RF power deposition really increase with field strength? 2. Sensitivity: Can we really attain the theoretical SNR gain? 3. Clinical practice: Will we ever be able to move to a high throughput situation, or will 7 T remain a niche application for some special diagnoses? 4. Are there real applications with nuclei other than protons that could be used clinically? These are just a few of my thoughts, but please raise any issue that you consider relevant. I look forward to a dynamic and informative session. Current development of ultrahigh field (UHF) human scanners with field strengths of 7 T and beyond is driven by the higher spin polarization, which promises to increase signal-to-noise that translates into better images and/or improved resolution and/or faster acquisition. Realization of UHF-MR needs, however, to overcome a number of challenges that affect all the parts of the system. Higher field leads to stronger mechanical forces of the magnetic field gradients and therefore to increased acoustic noise. Due to the increased resonance frequency, the wavelength approaches the dimensions of typical organs. This leads to severe image inhomogeneities and spatially variable image contrast. Higher frequency leads to increased specific absorption rate (SAR), which especially affects pulse sequences with many densely spaced pulses like TSE and trueFISP. Most physical parameters relevant to image contrast are field dependent, therefore image contrast will be different. Currently the problems related to the RF fields constitute the most severe challenges to UHF-MR. For SAR reduction, considerable progress has been made using specially designed flip angle-modulated sequences like HyperTSE. Different strategies to compensate for B1-inhomogeneities by spatially modulated transmission (B1shimming, transmit SENSE) are under intense research. Better understanding of the spatiotemporal distribution of the RF field has, however, also led to the insight that patient heating is strongly dependent on the individual anatomy with local ‚hot spots', which are difficult to predict. Therefore, considerable additional effort will be necessary before UHF-MR will become a reliable and safe tool for application studies or even clinical routine. Feasibility of human ultrahigh-field MRI has raised enthusiasm and scepticism regarding its potential clinical usefulness. Neuroimaging applications to date fulfil the expectations of image quality improvement, showing unprecedented delineation of intracerebral structures, such as intracortical lamination. There remain technical challenges and limitations especially for MRA. T1 contrast in the brain is however less impaired than expected. The biggest gain is seen for susceptibility-based applications with improved temporal and spatial resolution for fMRI studies and venography. The latter provides new ways to classify arterio-venous malformations and white matter lesions, and to delineate tumour neovascularisation. In MS lesions, this technique demonstrated small central veins within some plaques as in vivo confirmation of perivenous plaque evolution. High-resolution relaxometry can be performed in clinically acceptable acquisition times. This enables the systematic investigation of the putative pathogenetic role of iron in neurodegenerative diseases. First results in Parkinson's disease revealed that there is no increase of paramagnetic iron in the substantia nigra compared with age-matched controls, making it unlikely to be involved in the pathogenesis of the disease, but not excluding a potential modulatory role. Lastly, the specific gain in spectroscopic resolution will enable truly novel clinical applications by probing regional neurotransmitter profiles in diseases previously not amenable to MR diagnosis as well as assessing their pharmacological modulation. In summary, despite the vast technical challenges to 7 T, the progress achieved over the past few years highlights the potential diagnostic advance in clinical neurosciences that may ultimately translate into improved patient care. MRI at 7 Tesla has already been shown to hold great promise for applications in the head, including enhanced sensitivity for fMRI experiments and exquisite sensitivity to iron content. The general increase in SNR, the non-linear sensitivity increase to susceptibility effects, and the enhanced spectral separation suggest that 7 T would also be of great value in the remainder of the body; however, translating these benefits outside the brain has proven to be extremely challenging due in particular to inhomogeneity of the radiofrequency excitation field and SAR restrictions. Solutions to these issues are being pursued, including the introduction of transmit coils with multiple independent RF channels, which allow the RF field to be shaped to account for the anatomy of interest. First examples in the prostate, extremities, breast and heart will be shown, demonstrating the current technical hurdles and potential of 7 T outside the brain for both fundamental research and clinical diagnostics. The learning objectives are to give some background into clinical and surgical aspects of the main subtypes of femoroacetabular impingement, to illustrate the classic radiographic and MRI imaging appearances of femoroacetabular impingement, to discuss some imaging pitfalls and solutions and to present future scientific areas of research. Femoroacetabular impingement (FAI) is a major cause of early osteoarthritis of the hip, especially in the young and active patient population. There is early pathological contact during hip joint motion between bony prominences of the acetabulum and/or the femur, limiting the physiological hip range of motion, typically flexion and internal rotation. Two main types of impingement are distinguished: Pincer impingement is the acetabular cause of FAI and is characterized by focal or general overcoverage of the femoral head. Cam impingement is the femoral cause of FAI and is due to an aspherical portion of the femoral head-neck junction. Bone marrow edema is a generic term used to describe a common finding on MR imaging of the bone marrow. We will first define and illustrate the MR features that are characteristic of this syndrome as seen in the femoral head. We will also emphasize additional imaging findings on MR imaging or on conventional radiographs that can help to make a more specific diagnosis, because femoral head edema can be observed in a spectrum of diagnoses including hip osteoarthritis, femoral head osteonecrosis, transient osteoporosis, femoral head fracture (post-traumatic, insufficiency or stress related), and in the idiopathic bone marrow edema syndrome. We will stress on the value of features, helpful in clinical practice, which offer the patients and the referring physicians prognostic information. Learning Objectives: 1. To define the generic term of bone marrow edema of the femoral head as seen on MR imaging. 2. To remind the audience that bone marrow edema should be regarded as a sign of an ongoing abnormal process. 3. To emphasise the role of the radiologists in making a specific diagnosis, by focussing on ancillary MR findings. 4. To illustrate the importance of other imaging modalities. The hip joint is designed for stability, supports the body weight and shifts mechanical loads during ambulation and activity to the lower extremities. The surrounding structures can be classified into static and dynamic stabilizers. The hip capsule and ligaments, primarily the iliofemoral ligament, act as a static stabilizer. The surrounding muscles and tendinous attachments are the dynamic stabilizers. Sport injuries to the hip and pelvis generally account for 5-6% of athletic injuries in adults. Soccer players, runners and ballet dancers are particularly prone to such injuries. Hip or groin pain in athletes can originate from the femoral head, labrum, muscles or pubis. A systematic approach with different imaging modalities, especially MRI, provides a valuable tool and permits an accurate diagnosis. The most common hip injuries in athletes are: 1. Bone: a) stress fractures; b) avulsion fractures. 2. Labrum: a) labral tear; b) FAI, type CAM; c) cartilage-associated injuries. 3. Muscular and myotendinous junction (clockwise approach): a) anterior quadrant (rectus femoris, iliopsoas, adductor muscles and pubis); b) lateral (gluteus, abductor muscles and bursae); c) posterior (Hamstrings). 4. Others including hernias, vascular and nerve compression syndromes. BI-RADS classification is now universally recognized as a standard language for breast lesions. One of the advantages is the ability to classify lesions according to the diagnostic strategy, treatment options and follow-up. BI-RADS includes a standardized description of the imaging characteristics of the lesion: mass, calcifications and architectural distortion on mammography; internal structure, shape and limits on sonography; focal/non focal, shape, distribution and enhancement parameters on MRI. Considering all these criteria, the patient can be classified as BI-RADS 1 to 6. BI-RADS improves the average quality of patient workup. Therefore, the radiologist should be aware of the BI-RADS criteria in order to avoid interobserver variability. Nevertheless, not all patients can be classified easily. For instance, BI-RADS 4 proved to be a heterogeneous group and was split into 4 A, 4B and 4C according to the different probability for malignancy. In order to become familiar with BI-RADS, cases will be presented for interactive expertise; the audience will be presented with mammography, sonography and MRI images. Attendees will have the opportunity to better identify simple or tougher cases. At the end of the lecture, attendees will become familiar with the headlines of BI-RADS classification and be able to identify the traps of BI-RADS 3 and 4 categories. Crohn's disease is expressed with a multiplicity of features that reflect the chronic, segmental, transmural and interchangeable disease processes. The role of the radiologist, even in the era of detailed and capsule endoscopy, remains crucial and challenging. Identifying the disease subtypes and assessing the disease activity are new roles recently added to radiology, much more so as new pharmaceuticals are coming into use. Such tasks may now be accomplished due to the introduction of techniques such as enteroclysis, small bowel multislice CT, CT enteroclysis, MRI, MR enteroclysis, high resolution ultrasound (HRUS) and contrast enhanced ultrasound (CEUS). Conventional enteroclysis is ideal in effectively demonstrating endoluminal superficial disease. In addition, rapid technological improvements on cross-sectional imaging have offered outstanding resolution capabilities, thus making it possible to detect the full range of transmural, mesenteric and distant extent of inflammation and its complications. Multislice CT is the fastest growing technique with the best spatial resolution, capable of providing not only multiplanar reconstructions, but also volumetric (VRT), projectional (MIP) and virtual endoscopic images. MRI, a modality with no radiation exposure, offers multiple contrast mechanisms, direct multiplanar projectional and cross-sectional imaging capabilities and at the same time morphologic and dynamic/functional information. HRUS and CEUS are bedside techniques with the minimum harm and discomfort to the patient and a possibility of almost unlimited repetition of scans to assess the disease course, focused at the involved bowel loops. In this interactive teaching session, the attendees will have the opportunity of actively discussing, through selected clinical cases, the distinctive role, the advantages and the limitations of each of the above modalities in assessing the pathological and clinical manifestations of Crohn's disease. The complementary use of these modalities and the clinical criteria that affect modality selection decisions will be emphasized. The possibility of creating imaging based activity indices will be also addressed. Before the advent of the fast-scanning multidetector-row CT (MDCT) technology, thoracic CT studies were exclusively used for the morphological assessment of thoracic organs, but concurrent examination of the heart has traditionally been hampered by image degradation from cardiac motion artefact. The introduction of fast rotation speed and dedicated cardiac reconstruction algorithms exploiting the multislice acquisition scheme of the data has opened new possibilities for chest imaging, starting with the possibility of integrating cardiac functional information into a diagnostic CT scan of the chest. Initiated with 16-slice MDCT, this concept of integrating morphology and function has been further simplified with 64-slice and dual-source CT scanners, thus allowing the radiologists to provide vital information in the management of patients with a wide variety of acute or chronic respiratory disorders. Because this CT technology offers the possibility of generating highresolution and motion-free images of the coronary arteries, evaluation of the coronary arteries during CT examinations of the chest should further widen the clinical applications of CT for respiratory patients, keeping in mind that cigarette smoking is a shared risk factor for both impaired lung function and cardiovascular events. The purpose of this session is to review practical aspects of this new concept in thoracic imaging. Because of the combination of fast rotation time and multi-slice acquisition with a high spatial resolution, multislice-CT with 64 slices or even with two tubes (dualsource CT) is now able to provide detailed information on the complete cardiothoracic morphology. Recent technical developments open up a wide variety of possibilities in imaging the heart and the thoracic vasculature. For cardiac imaging, protocols include non-contrast-enhanced CT of the heart (i.e., calcium scoring) and CT angiography of the heart and coronary arteries. Using a larger cranio-caudal scan range, an ECG-gated CT angiography of the whole thorax is feasible, e.g., for bypass imaging or detailed imaging of the thoracic aorta. Recently, even more comprehensive CT angiography protocols offering a simultaneous evaluation of pulmonary embolism, coronary stenoses and aortic disease have been described, often referred to as 'triple rule out' protocols. Such protocols are used in the differential diagnosis of chest pain increasingly often, aiming to opacify pulmonary and coronary arteries as well as the aorta simultaneously and without motion artefacts. A B C D E F G Using ECG gating, the acquired images of the coronary arteries applying such a protocol have a similar diagnostic accuracy as a dedicated coronary CT angiography protocol. However, a number of issues have to be addressed, including minimization of radiation exposure, and limitation of the contrast volume applied to the patient. Therefore, in this talk, an overview of the various protocols for cardiothoracic CT imaging will be given, including technical considerations and detailed protocol parameters as well as clinical indications and correct patient selection. Multi-detector row computed tomography (MDCT) permits to include an evaluation of the heart in the course of chest CT examination. This makes sense for the investigation of disorders that may have an important underlying cardiac cause or association that is not clinically obvious. Idiopathic and acquired cardiomyopathies, ischemic heart disease and valvular dysfunction may present with respiratory symptoms such as dyspnea on exertion, chest pain or hemoptysis, leading to the request of thoracic CT. The detection of interstitial edema can lead to the discovery of previously unsuspected cardiomyopathies, affecting the left ventricle. In patients with thoracic malignancy, invasion of the pericardium, pulmonary veins of left atrium must be precisely described to influencing the surgical decision between extra-and intra-pericardial resection. Patient undergoing thoracic surgery may have unsuspected coronary artery disease that can be detected in the course of preoperative evaluation by CT. EGC-gated MDCT is superior to echocardiography in the assessment of cardiac structures in patients with extensive parenchymal lung abnormalities and can estimate right ventricle (RV) function and pulmonary artery pressure. In acute pulmonary embolism, the detection of RV dysfunction is an important prognostic factor. In chronic thromboembolic disease or in non-embolic pulmonary hypertension, changes in RV function can reflect the efficacy of medical treatment and influence surgical decision. In patients with severe COPD, emphysema may induce pulmonary tamponade effect that causes left ventricle dysfunction affecting diastole volume, and which may be cured by lung reduction surgery. On the other hand, lung reduction surgery is contraindicated in the case of pulmonary hypertension. Since the introduction of in-line PET-CT and later SPECT-CT systems, multimodality imaging has become the standard of management under various clinical conditions. To address the increasing expectations of clinicians in detecting more and more subtle changes and in characterising an always broader list of molecular features, more powerful imaging devices need to be developed. Today's hybrid imaging instruments are still juxtapositions of two different devices within one "wrapping". To make substantial improvements new concepts need to be created. Combining PET and MRI is one of those concepts where it will ultimately be possible not only to provide combined information about anatomy and radioactive tracer distribution/ kinetics but also to image various functional aspects (on the basis of radiotracer and magnetic resonance techniques) on the exquisite anatomic support of MRI. In the same spirit, it is important to favour intense research and development of new radionuclide and paramagnetic compounds for the study of a broad spectrum of molecular processes to better understand physiology and to characterise disease. This session is intended to present the current state of the art of hybrid imaging and open the discussion on future developments. The use of PET/CT for oncology is growing markedly due to the convincing diagnostic power. In oncology, the use of PET/CT is increasing for diagnosis, staging, relapse, treatment evaluation and radiation therapy planning. With the tracer FDG and new tracers as 18 F-choline for prostate cancer, the diagnostic universe of PET/CT for oncology is developing markedly. PET/CT with FDG is used as routine in our hospital for, e.g., staging in patients with cervical and ovarian cancer. For ovarian cancer staging the sensitivity and specificity of PET/CT is 95 and 91% (Loft et al. 2007). The 2007 JCO international guideline recommends use of PET as standardized response criteria for Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Multitracer principles with PET/CT and FDG combined with hypoxia scanning with, e.g. 64-Cu-ATSM can identify tumor areas with hypoxia for 3D radiation therapy planning with increased radiation to hypoxic tumor areas. Micro-PET/CT is "the tool" for translational research, with models for hypoxia, apoptosis and angiogenesis, evaluating new cancer drugs. PET/CT for dementia with FDG or PIB is under evaluation and if PET/CT can predict which patients will benefit from treatment with vaccine and anti-Alzheimer drugs, a marked rise in use of PET/CT is expected. A 64-slice CT for non-invasive coronary angiography combined with functional imaging with PET showing myocardial function and perfusion is also expected as future routine investigation. PET/CT hybrid imaging has developed into a powerful tool in oncology -and will probably develop further also for neurology and cardiology. Molecular imaging with radioactive tracers has the potential to deepen our knowledge on the chain of molecular events that accompany or even cause disease. Single-photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT) is the most frequently used nuclear medical computerized tomography. However, SPECT suffers from low anatomical resolution, thereby reducing its diagnostic accuracy. This shortcoming is overcome by registering SPECT images with those from X-ray computerized tomography (CT). The anatomically most accurate method of image registration is offered by hybrid cameras integrating detector systems from CT, on the one hand, and SPECT, on the other. This offers the potential to exactly relate foci of regionally disturbed metabolism to an anatomical region. Furthermore, CT may be used for attenuation correction of the SPECT images, thus improving their quality. Evidence suggests that SPECT/CT offers a gain in diagnostic accuracy of approximately 30% compared to stand-alone SPECT, in particular in orthopedics and oncology. Therefore, SPECT/CT hybrid imaging may substitute for conventional SPECT in the near future. Molecular imaging promises access to new functional parameters on a molecular level. This will help scientific discovery and medicine likewise. Both modalities are pursuing similar applications such as neurodegenerative disease, imaging of angiogenesis, apoptosis and cell proliferation, etc. Magnetic resonance (MR) benefits mostly from the huge variety of different functional parameters such as perfusion, diffusion, and susceptibility weighting that express tumour therapy response still on a macroscopic level. In addition, there is a potential to track disease-specific agents for inflammatory processes, tumour or hallmarks of Alzheimer. The lower sensitivity of MR compared to positron emission tomography (PET), however, increases the challenge significantly to detect smallest concentrations of biomarkers. Radiotracers also offer easier synthesis with the targeting ligands and smallest change to their pharmacokinetics. Thus, the integration of both modalities provides the most versatile tool for comprehensive diagnose. PET-CT is a well-established modality for many of today's clinical questions and it is unlikely that an MR-PET will fully take over. However, the future developments of technology, tracers and agents will allow new applications. The integration of MR and PET has just begun, and only a few demonstrators for rodents and human brain are available. More results from these systems are expected in the near future. It can be expected that the added functional and molecular information that MRI will provide allows unprecedented, comprehensive examinations. Especially for neurological applications, this will be a major step beyond the PET-CT capabilities. The need for more advanced and accurate methods for guiding and controlling minimally invasive procedures continues to grow as these procedures become increasingly important in medicine. MR imaging has many advantages that make it an exciting tool for guiding endoluminal and endovascular procedures. The rationale for using MRI as a guidance tool is not primarily to avoid radiation exposure, but to add therapeutically relevant information to an interventional procedure. MRI can provide functional and morphologic information in tumor-bearing bile ducts as well as in atherosclerotic arteries. It has the potential to visualize not only the vessel lumen, as does conventional angiography, but also the vessel wall, different plaque components and the surrounding tissues. In the past, MRI-guided catheter-based endoluminal and endovascular interventions were performed in animal models to test device visibility and procedure feasibility. More recently, complex procedures, such as endovascular repair of aortic aneurysm, arterial recanalization and stenting, embolization, transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt creation and septal occluder placements have been performed in pre-clinical settings. There are only a limited number of reports on patient applications. Most of these clinical applications are feasibility studies copying X-ray fluoroscopy-guided procedures that have not yet demonstrated the clear additional benefit of MRI guidance. Few studies showed that MRI is able to replace the combined utilization of other imaging modalities to guide devices during a procedure. Although MRI does not involve ionizing radiation exposure, there are some hazards that must be known before utilizing interventional MRI in a clinical setting. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) enables excellent visualization of the heart and the surrounding structures. It is not only possible to image the mechanical function of the heart, but also to accurately determine the size and location of the infarct using MRI. MRI can be used in cardiac intervention and therefore complex interventional procedures can utilize the high imaging power of MRI. Stem cell injection, electrophysiological measurements, cardiac ablation and valve placement are some of the many applications of MRI-guided procedures. The most common problems in these procedures are the accurate visualization of the devices and RF safety of the corresponding devices. In this presentation, after a brief overview of the devices used in the procedures, some applications will be demonstrated. Fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has evolved to a valuable adjunct to ultrasonography in prenatal diagnostics. In complex fetal pathologies, fetal MRI can help to confirm, correct, or complete ultrasonographic findings. This extra information may guide intrauterine treatment, determine route of delivery, the immediate postnatal care, predict functional outcome postnatally and may be used to counsell parents for future pregnancies. With the ongoing hardware and software development, multiple new sequences became available which give a wealth of anatomical and functional information. Initially, fetal central nervous system pathologies were the main indications. In the meanwhile, fetal MRI is progressively applied for thoracic, abdominal and muskuloskeletal pathologies. The radiologist should be familiar with the different sequences that can be applied, with the normal fetal anatomy during the different phases of development and with the different pathologies that can be encountered intrauterine. Part of these pathologies may be unfamiliar to the general radiologist because many pathologies are lethal intrauterine or the fetus dies within the first hours after delivery. In addition, the spatial resolution is still reduced compared to postnatal imaging because the fetus is small, the fetus may be moving within the uterus, the distance between imaging coil and fetus is large, and not all routinely used sequences of postnatal MRI are available intrauterine. Finally, no contrast media should be injected. The objective of our session is to present a comprehensive summary of the different MRI-sequences, normal fetal anatomy and an overview of indications of fetal MRI covering the fetus from the top to the bottom. The preparation of a pregnant woman includes exclusion of contraindications for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In the case of claustrophobia, sedation can be provided. MRI procedure, indication, and possible consequences of the results have to be explained. The woman should be positioned in the magnet comfortably and be accompanied by a psychological parent. For optimal image quality, the coil elements should lie as close to the region(s) of interest as possible. Repositioning of the coil during the examinations may become necessary. T2-weighted (w) contrast is still the mainstay of fetal MRI. Other sequences provide additional information about tissue-composition and/or function of organs.T1-w contrast is necessary to follow normal development of glands, bowels, body fat, cerebral cell-density and myelination, and to detect hemorrhages and calcifications. FLAIR-images are mainly used to further differentiate cystic structures. Steady-state-free-precession (SSFP) sequences may visualize vessels. Dynamic SSFP-sequences are the basis to study gross fetal movement and intrinsic movements. Diffusion-weighted sequences allow to study brain development, and to diagnose acute lesions, to identify kidneys, and to study placental impairment. On the basis of diffusion-weighted anisotropy, white matter trajectories in the fetal brain may be identified, giving a clue to early connectivity. Fetal MRI is always whole-body imaging, even if the clinical question is related to a certain anatomical region. As a consequence, correct interpretation requires a broad knowledge of early organ development, deviations thereof, and patterns of acquired pathology. Fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is exquisitely well suited to examine the normal and abnormal development of the fetal central nervous system. Fetal MRI allows to directly study multiple programmed and interacting processes of brain development. Compared to ultrasonography, fetal MRI directly visualizes (a) the migration of neurons from the germinal matrix to the cortical ribbon, (b) the infolding of the cerebral cortex (sulcation) and (c) the progressing myelination of the cerebral white matter. The general radiologist should be familiar with the normal brain development to identify and differentiate errors of development from acquired intrauterine brain injuries. He should also understand that an "insult" during an early phase of development may induce a cascade of errors in development and result in an erroneous continuation of brain development. In addition, the radiologist should always correlate pathologies of the fetal central nervous system with possible additional pathologies of the thorax, abdomen or musculoskeletal system. Frequently, malformations of the central nervous system are part of a multilevel, multiorgan syndrome. Finally, follow-up examinations may be necessary to identify or confirm a developing fetal malformation or pathology. Initial imaging may show only discrete findings while on follow-up the malformation or pathology may be much more extensive or obvious. An exact and complete identification of the total extent of central nervous system pathology is essential to predict neurofunctional outcome. This information will be essential in counselling the parents and in optimizing pre-and postnatal care. The rapid development of fetal magnetic resonance (MR) imaging techniques has led to improved assessment of all organ systems of the fetus. By applying organ-specific examination techniques, the imaging of the normal and pathologic fetal lung has become more sophisticated and progressed from research into daily clinical practice for privileged tertiary centres. With the currently available image resolution, detailed evaluation of even mediastinal structures of the fetus, such as the trachea, oesophagus, and the heart, are feasible. Especially in compromised and extremely premature fetuses (24-30 weeks of gestation), survival is strongly dependent on lung maturity, which is assessed by volumetric measurements and characteristics of signal intensities of the lungs. This information is important in predicting the survival of newborns with congenital diaphragmatic hernia. When planning neonatal ventilation management of premature newborns increasing emphasis is laid on the determination of the expected lung maturity by fetal MR imaging. The most commonly used sequences for the evaluation of the lungs are T2-and fast-T2-weighted images, diffusion-weighted images and T1-weighted images adapted to the MR-unit and coils used. Dynamic sequences have to be obtained to enable the assessment of oesophageal function and heart movements. This talk gives an overview of the normal fetal lung development and a summary of the most relevant congenital lung lesions. Special focus will be made on the embryology and nosology of pulmonary parenchymal lesions as described by the new histological classification. The potential of MR imaging of the mediastinum and the heart will also be explored. During this presentation, we will illustrate the applications of fetal magnetic resonance (MR) imaging in the field of the abdomen that started later than its use for the fetal CNS or chest. Among the potential abdominal applications, some appear obvious such as the characterisation and evaluation of large and complex masses. The technique also proved useful in the case of bilateral uro-nephropathies to precise the type of uropathy or the degree of renal parenchyma anomalies. In both indications, compared to obstetrical ultrasound, fetal MR imaging provides additional information and helps to optimize the pregnancy management and parental counselling. A third interesting indication is the evaluation of the fetal digestive tract and particularly intestinal obstruction. This can be based on the differences in signal between the small and large bowel on T1 and T2 sequences. Some diagnoses have become easier, i.e. esophageal atresia. For others, more experience is needed to fully understand the changes in signal during intestinal obstruction. Further directions of the technique will also be described. Magnetic resonance imaging has proven to be especially valuable for the diagnosis of disorders of the central nervous system and of the brain in particular. The continuous improvement of the technical capabilities of the scanners has allowed not only the improvement of the standard imaging sequences, but also the successful implementation of more sophisticated techniques such as magnetic resonance spectroscopy, functional MRI and diffusion tensor imaging. MRS is a method, which takes advantage of the difference in the resonance frequency of the hydrogen nuclei that are bound in various macromolecules. Its implementation in vivo allows detection and evaluation of the changes in the chemical composition of the brain that may occur in various diseases. fMRI is based on the detection of the BOLD effect that indicates increased perfusion of the areas of the brain that are activated during specific stimulations. In this way, it detects the exact location of the activation areas of the brain. DTI uses the diffusion-weighted images acquired with appropriate gradients applied in many directions to calculate the direction of the water diffusion through the white matter of the brain and enables the estimation of the pathways of the white matter fibers. All these methods can give important information both for diagnosis and for accurate planning of the treatment, and their role alongside with the standard techniques is already established but also constantly expanding. Their successful implementation, however, demands appropriate planning, technically correct acquisition and careful postprocessing and analysis of the acquired data. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the physical and physiological principles applied in functional magnetic resonance imaging, magnetic resonance spectroscopy and diffusion tensor imaging. 2. To become familiar with the implementation methods, the responsibilities of the technologist and the possible pitfalls. 3. To understand the areas of application and the additional clinical information that these techniques can provide for the detection and assessment of disorders of the central nervous system. Magnetic resonance imaging is now the modality of choice in the evaluation of an increasing number of pathology in the brain, spine, chest, abdomen and musculoskeletal pathology. Despite the recent association with gadolinium and nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF), the requests for noninvasive vascular imaging is still on the rise. Faster sequences combined with high-tech coil design have reduced imaging time, but have also shown that MR imaging is still perhaps the most susceptible to a variety of artifacts than other modalities. In addition, the shortage of radiologists resulted in the opportunity for radiographer-led MR units, as is the case in Malta. As a result, radiographers must be knowledgeable in every aspect of MRI including artifacts. These artifacts can potentially affect the quality of MR images and may simulate pathologic conditions or produce pitfalls in interpretation. Recognition and, if possible, minimizing their effect is an important role of MR radiographers. My goal is to display in an interactive way some of these common artifacts that occur in MRI. These have been classified into 1) human and 2) machine artifacts. The artifacts in the human category include those caused by improper patient positioning, ferromagnetic objects in the patient and motion by the patient or within the patient. The machine artifacts are inherent to the process of MR image acquisition, including aliasing, truncation, chemical shift, RF interference and crosstalk. A major application of molecular MR imaging to neurological disease studies is cell tracking. We will discuss the fundamentally different strategies of cell labeling with various MR contrast agents: i) systemic or ii) localized (stereotactic) contrast agent application, and iii) in vitro labeling followed by stereotactic implantation of the prelabeled cells. The influence of this label incorporation on the native function and viability of the treated cells must be assessed before such cells can safely be applied. Basic protocols necessary to validate the usefulness of the chosen procedure will be presented. Major applications of in vivo cell tracking will be presented and their potential and challenges will be discussed for the safe localization A B C D E F G of cells in the host organ over time. Here, the major focus will be on experimental stroke, which most of the investigations dealt with. Other applications will also be presented. New strategies to observe not only localization but also function of the cells in vivo using innovative approaches with smart contrast agents and/or molecular biological imaging reporters in transfected cells will be presented for potential future applications. Cellular therapies are being developed in humans with the goal of repairing damaged tissues (myocardial infarction, Parkinson disease, etc.), synthetising a deficient hormone or molecule (diabetes, liver congenital diseases) or for gene or anticancer therapy (dendritic cells). Cellular imaging, a technique aimed at visualising magnetically labelled cells by MRI, has several objectives when monitoring these innovative therapies: It should answer several questions: Do the therapeutic cells reach the organ? Are they functional? Can they proliferate? Can they differentiate? Can they move and relocate? The goals of this presentation are to highlight the technical requirements, imaging protocols and preliminary results of cellular imaging in animals and humans. Since the introduction of multislice CT in 1999 there has been a tremendous technical improvement that allows for a plaque imaging. Initially the main focus of cardiac CT was to rule out the presence of a significant stenosis in the coronary tree. The initially available scanners where challenged with heart related motion artifacts and non-assessable coronary segments due to severe calcifications. However the ability even of the early generation scanners to differentiate between different plaque compositions intrigued the medical community with the hope to either identify vulnerable plaque prone to rupture or at least to determine whether medical intervention such as lipid lowering drugs could be monitored. With the advent of currently clinically available scanner generation with up to 64 slices and dual source configuration provide for a temporal resolution up to 83 ms and thus allowing for minimized motion artifacts and improved images quality even at low heart rates. Early results indicate that monitoring lipid lowering therapy is feasible, but larger trails are missing to confirm these findings. To date no tools are available to quantify plaque mass in clinical routine, but technical development may provide these tools in the near future. Detection of the vulnerable plaque, however, will not be feasible in the near future. Spatial resolution and low contrast resolution will prevent direct visualization of the thin fibrous cap with the underlying fatty core. Novel developments in contrast media research may trigger the advent of specific contrast media such as targeting macrophages in plaques. Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease, where the degree of inflammation, not the plaque size, determines risk of rupture and therefore likelihood of a clinical event. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can image atherosclerotic plaque with high resolution, and several MRI parameters of disease extent in the carotid arteries and aorta have been shown to correlate with atherosclerotic risk factors. Dynamic-contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) is a new technique for the study of plaque composition. In this study, the extent of plaque inflammation, determined by FDG uptake, was correlated with DCE-MRI. By providing a metabolic image of macrophage activity, F18-fluorodeoxuglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) can image atherosclerotic plaque inflammation in patients and in animal models of disease, with a strong correlation between FDG uptake and plaque macrophage content. In addition, autoradiography has confirmed that the FDG signal originates from activated macrophages within the lipid core and fibrous cap of the plaque. This has led to the suggestion that FDG-PET might have a role in identifying 'high risk' plaques and monitoring their response to therapy. Computed tomography (CT) can be used in conjunction with PET to help co-register the PET images and for attenuation corrections. Moreover, CT with its exquisite coronary imaging has the potential to address atherosclerosis in the vessel wall of the coronary arteries. We review in this talk the use of multimodality imaging (MR, PET and CT) for the study of inflammation of vessel wall, which may be useful in the assessment of plaque vulnerability. Coronary artery calcium (CAC) scoring by computed tomography (CT) is an effective tool for coronary risk stratification and prediction. Numerous prospective trials using electron-beam CT have shown that the severity of CAC is associated with the risk of suffering a heart attack and predicts plaque burden, which is potentially useful in patients at an "intermediate risk". Thus, the CAC score provides valuable information to the cardiologist on how to manage a patient with an intermediate likelihood of coronary artery disease. CT allows an accurate and quick quantification of coronary calcium based on the CT densities (HU). Three different CAC scores can be measured. Most well known is the "Agatston score" (AU; calculated based on HU + area of calcium), besides the mass and volume score, which show different reproducibilities. Several CAC "cut-off" points have been defined to determine the individual patient´s risk, which will be addressed in this course. For example, an AU 300 indicates an increased 10-year risk of a cardiac event. CAC is influenced by various factors such as gender, age, ethnicity (MESA-trial) or the amount of intima versus media calcification. These issues will be discussed, because of their importance for reporting and risk prediction. Besides, the possible role of aortic valve calcium scoring will be debated. Coronary CT angiography has emerged over the past few years revealing that non-calcifying plaques can be detected beyond calcifying. Non-calcifying plaques represent early stage of atherosclerosis and might be linked with plaque vulnerability, thus raising the question whether the calcium score has become redundant. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the shortcomings of coronary risk assessment based on cardiovascular risk factors. 2. To discuss the current evidence on the predictive value of coronary events when calcium scoring is added to risk factor assessment. 3. To discuss the possible role of calcium scoring in cardiovascular risk assessment, its limitations and its role before coronary CT angiography. 4. To discuss the value of aortic valve calcium scoring as a risk factor and its potential in clinical practice. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the sixth most frequent tumor, with a heterogeneous geographical incidence. According to epidemiological studies, HCC is increasing in developed counties, probably related to hepatitis C virus diffusion. HCC appears in liver cirrhosis (LC) of any etiology, more frequently in advanced disease, and is the main cause of death by LC. Curative therapies (resection, transplant, ablation) are mostly effective in small tumors. Surveillance programs are considered cost-effective as they increase the proportion of patients diagnosed at an early stage and this results in the possibility of treatment. Surveillance of patients known to have LC should be performed to detect tumors 2 cm. The cadence of performing the studies are not fixed, but according to the doubling time of HCC, a study every 6-month is recommended. Ultrasound is the most commonly used technique for this purpose, and the detection of any new focal lesion in the follow-up of LC should raise the suspicion of HCC. The probability of a small lesion to be an HCC increases with the size. HCC is infrequent in lesions 1 cm (close follow-up is recommended), one-third of lesions between 1 and 1.5 cm may be HCC and the proportion may reach 90% in focal lesions 1.5 cm. CT or MRI can also be used for screening, but produce an increase in cost and radiation, thus not fulfilling the criteria for a screening test. CEUS, CT or MRI are used for non-invasive diagnosis and for staging. In the setting of a patient with liver cirrhosis, a solid nodular lesion found during ultrasound (US) surveillance has a high likelihood of being a hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, it has been shown by pathologic studies that many small nodules detected by US in cirrhotic livers do not correspond to HCC. The differential diagnosis between small HCC and non-malignant hepatocellular lesions may be very challenging. Nodules detected during US surveillance are further investigated with dynamic imaging techniques, including contrast-enhanced US, contrast-enhanced multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) and contrastenhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In fact, one of the key pathologic factors for differential diagnosis that is reflected in dynamic imaging studies is the vascular supply to the lesion. Through the progression from regenerative nodule to low-grade dysplastic nodule (DN) to high-grade DN to frank HCC, one sees loss of visualization of portal tracts and development of new arterial vessels, termed nontriadal arteries, which become the dominant blood supply in overt HCC lesions. It is this neovascularity that allows HCC to be diagnosed. However, two further parallel processes take place during the carcinogenetic pathway towards dysplasia and full malignancy: a) the progressive loss of biliary polarization of the hepatocyte and the derangement of the microscopic secretory structure; and b) the progressive nodular depletion of Kupffer cells. MRI performed with tissue-specific contrast media (hepatobiliary and reticulo-endothelial) gives an insight on this "grey area", in which significant hystological changes are already present without an evident arterial supply of the nodule. Ultrasonography is commonly regarded as the technique best suited to evaluate the acute scrotum, since modern transducers with high-definition imaging and high sensitivity to flow allow depiction of both fine anatomic details and intratesticular vessels in all cases. The diagnostic approach has to consider that causes of acute scrotum have different frequencies according to patient age. Torsion, of the testis or of its appendages, is more common in the pediatric age group; infections are more frequently encountered in adults. In suspected torsion, detection of intratesticular flow with color Doppler allows a diagnostic sensitivity of 86%. However, small flow signals can be seen in low-grade torsions; detection at spectral analysis of high-resistance flow within intratesticular arteries may help to avoid false negatives. Torsion of the testicular appendages may be recognized when a small nodule, adjacent to a normal-looking testis, with normal intratesticular flow, is encountered. Infection usually starts at the epidydimis and is diagnosed on clinical grounds; imaging is only rarely needed, but may be helpful in assessing involvement of the testis. In patients with trauma, imaging plays a key role in assessing testicular integrity, since surgical repair is needed when there is testicular rupture. Other, less common, causes of acute scrotum involve the scrotal skin, vessels and spermatic cord. Additionally, in rare cases, "non-scrotal" causes of acute scrotal symptoms may be encountered. In these patients, scrotal symptoms, or signs, are due to extension to the scrotum of intrabdominal inflammatory or traumatic pathologic changes due to patency of the processus vaginalis. Ultrasound is the key modality for the evaluation of the scrotal content, while MR is indicated in selected patients only. A histological diagnosis cannot be achieved and solid masses must be considered as malignant. Seminomas present as nodular hypoechoic masses, while non-seminomatous germ cell tumors are commonly heterogeneous and there is frequent association with testicular microlithiasis. Color Doppler is not beneficial for lesion characterization. A growing challenge is the incidental detection of very small hypoechoic lesions, which tend to be more frequent in subfertile men. They are often benign Leydig-cell nodules, but malignancy cannot be excluded. When solitary, ultrasound-assisted testis sparing surgery is an option. In men with retroperitoneal lymph node metastases, scrotal ultrasound is indicated. The testicular primary tumor may be shrunken, fibrotic and calcified (i.e., burned-out lesion). Benign testicular lesions may mimic malignancy. A rounded mass with concentric layering is typical of benign epidermoid cyst and testis sparing surgery is justified. Men with segmental testicular infarction and hematoma are symptomatic and a careful follow-up may be the appropriate strategy. Solid epididymal mass lesions are most likely to be benign tumors, i.e., adenomatoid tumors, sperm granulomas or chronic (granulomatous) epididymitis. Malignant extratesticular and extraepididymal tumors are extremely rare in adults and include lipomas, liposarcomas or inflammatory masses. Ultrasonography (US) and MR imaging are the first-line modalities in patients with penile disease. The penile anatomy is well defined after pharmacologically induced erection /tumescence using high-resolution gray-scale US or MR imaging. The morphologic alterations include changes in the size and structure of the corpora cavernosa and the thickness of the tunica albuginea that can be studied well with US and MRI. With the distension of the penis, the tunica albuginea stretches and thins, while the erectile tissue distends and becomes hypoechoic on US or hyperintense on T2WI. The vascular supply to the erectile tissue is well explored with color Doppler US or with angio RM imaging after contrast injection. The tunica albuginea, the corpora cavernosa and the cavernosal arteries display different signal intensity on T2-weighted images. The most frequent penile pathology observed in the clinical practice are Peyronie's disease, fibrosis of the penis, trauma, tumors and complications after penile prothesis implantation. Erectile dysfunction is the second main group of diseases that are well explored with Doppler sonography. The resulting velocity waveform is displayed and the peak systolic and end-diastolic velocities are measured. It is possible to find the differences between arterial and venous erectile dysfunction and the results influence the therapeutic opportunities. The Israel Radiological Association (ISRA) was founded in 1927, 21 years before the declaration of the State of Israel (1948) . During the period from 1933 to 1935, hundreds of doctors immigrated to Israel from Germany and Austria. These physicians had a profound influence on medical practice in Israel, which changed from GP-based practice to specialized medicine based on experts. The first major medical meeting in Israel, which took place in Tel Aviv in September 1934 and included 150 doctors, was a radiological meeting! Professor Ludwig Halberstater, Director of Radiology at 'Charite' Hospital in Berlin, who came to Jerusalem in 1933 and founded the first radiotherapy service in the Middle East, formed the backbone of local radiology at that time. The ISRA includes to date more than 500 members and has two roles. It runs a union professional activity and has also an academic role in defining and updating the syllabus and supervising the training programs. It also takes part in defining medical radiological policies, standard of procedures and guidelines as well as organizing national and international meetings. Regulations of public healthcare in Israel restrict the installation of CT and MRI units. Nevertheless, the rate of examination per unit is one of the highest in the world. The Israel radiological community is also actively involved in the high-tech industry, in the research and development of advanced imaging projects. Israeli radiology appears to face similar problems and challenges as the modern radiology elsewhere. Session Objective: 1. To become familiar with the history, training programmes and utilisation patterns of the radiological profession in Israel. The hi-tech environment in Israel: Contribution of the radiological community to projects in medical imaging Y. Inbar 1 , T. Gaspar 2 ; 1 Tel Hashomer/IL, 2 Haifa/IL (Yael.Inbar@sheba.health.gov.il) Medical devices and pharmaceuticals are produced in Israel for more than a century. The first Israeli pharmaceutical company was established in 1901. With the advent of advanced technologies in the late 1990s, the face of Israel's life sciences industry has profoundly changed. The availability of capable partners in the fields of electronics, communications, computer science, electro-optics and medical sciences took the development of medical devices to a new level and introduced advanced innovations in digital imaging, electro-medical devices, telemedicine, surgical equipment, diagnostic kits and rehabilitation equipment. Today, there are over 750 active life sciences companies with approximately 50 new ones starting up each year. One of the important factors contributing to the success of this industry is the cooperation between academia and the entrepreneurial spirit. There are more than 100 companies or start-ups linked to various aspects of imaging such as health IT (image management, teleradiology and archiving), MRI, ultrasound and other imaging devices including minimally invasive therapy applications. This presentation includes examples of hardware and software projects, which were developed in cooperation with the radiological community in Israel. Among those are an intra-operative MR system, MR-guided focused ultrasound system, a new technique employing sound for cardiac and chest imaging, hardware and software related to MDCT and to coronary imaging and more. Computed tomography (CT) takes an integral part in the evaluation and management of the emergent patient. This presentation evaluates the trends in the utilization of CT, as used in the emergency room (ER), over more than a decade (1995) (1996) (1997) (1998) (1999) (2000) (2001) (2002) (2003) (2004) (2005) . It includes a volume of more than 2,400,000 ER visits and 300,000 in-patient CT examinations, 170,000 of which were performed on emergency bases at the request of the department of emergency medicine. While the number of ER visits increased by only 14-17% over this period, the volume of CT examinations on emergency bases increased by 3-6-fold. An overwhelming increase of CT exams was observed during the night shift with particular increase in body CT studies. National guidelines for minor head trauma imaging, the increased use of CT for acute abdomen, technical developments such as the introduction of spiral and MDCT, the installation of CT in the ER premises are all proposed explanations to the factors that may contribute to the observed changed trends. The role of CT as an emergency tool in multi-casualty events (MCE) of civil and military nature is also described and discussed. Logistical aspects related to hospital preparedness to mass disasters, in general, and the specific role of radiological departments and their multi-disciplinary integration are considered. Pulmonary radiology has been the cradle of many diagnostic signs, starting with the most famous of all, the silhouette sign. In this presentation, common pulmonary signs have been selected, with the criteria that they should be recognizable and useful in daily practice. Their recognition should help in suggesting a diagnosis or, more often, to narrow the differential diagnosis. A "sign" in radiologic imaging can be defined as a pattern of certain findings seen at on radiography, ultrasound, CT, or MR. Such a sign, once recognized, published, and taught, may aid the learned educated radiologist to diagnosein diagnosing specific entities and disorders. In the chest, signs play a major role, mainly because of the complex anatomy, and the associated difficulties in the interpretation of findings. For example, iIn the mediastinum aund pleura, many useful signs have been described, including "Naclerio's V sign,", the "3 sign,", the "ring-around-the-artery sign," and the "split pleura sign," -just to name a few. In this course, we will present the most important clinical signs in imaging of the mediastinum and pleura. Specifically, the anatomic and morphologic basis of these signs at radiography and cross-sectional imaging will be elucidated, and their clinical use in every day practice will be discussed. According In accordance withto the format of the session, interactive teaching will challenge every attendee to test his or her knowledge, and to learn about the most useful signs. The first 100 years of research in medical imaging was characterized largely by the development of new methods in the laboratory followed by translational research -often termed bench-to-bedside research -aimed at establishing the clinical role of the new methods. Few bio-scientists outside of radiology used medical imaging methods in their work. In the 1990s, three broad-based advances converged to change this dramatically and to create a new era for imaging in biomedical research: (1) the development of practical digital methods for acquiring, storing and analyzing images, (2) the invention of new MRI-based functional imaging methods and (3) the explosion of new approaches to molecular imaging. Today, scientists from literally every biomedical discipline are adopting imaging methods to take advantage of their unique capabilities as probes of biological systems and structures. The perceived power of "bench-to-bench"-translation of imaging methods is bringing imaging scientists and bio-scientists together in interdisciplinary teams aimed at tackling many of the most interesting and important questions facing science today. Imaging methods are now transforming entire disciplines such as the cognitive neurosciences and are contributing building blocks of knowledge in many others such as systems biology and genomics. Imaging has come of age and occupies an important position in the pantheon of research methods. Atherosclerosis is a major health problem associated with high morbidity, particularly in Western countries. Due to the good vessel contrast, the extended field of view coverage and the high spatial resolution, MR-angiography (MRA) is the modality of choice for the detection and grading of atherosclerotic lesions. Its three-dimensional character allows for an exact grading of stenoses. Complications of atherosclerosis such as focal dissections, aneurysms or vessel occlusions with collateral vessels can be exactly demonstrated. In combination with morphologic sequences, the evaluation of atherosclerotic plaque composition is also feasible. This lecture will give a comprehensive overview on imaging of atherosclerosis with a focus on MRA. The specific advantages and drawbacks of MRA will be highlighted and MRA will be compared with other available imaging techniques such as CTA and Doppler ultrasound. Typical sites of atherosclerotic vessel involvement and typical imaging findings will be presented. Appropriate MRA-protocols will be presented in due consideration of parallel imaging techniques, dedicated contrast agents and of high-field imaging. The lecture will also present suitable means of post-processing for accurate detection and grading of stenoses. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography (CE-MRA) has revolutionized vascular imaging in recent years and has become a widely accepted alternative to intra-arterial digital subtraction angiography (IA-DSA). The modality allows for routine, high-fidelity depiction of the neurovascular, thoracic, abdominal, upper-and lower extremity vascular trees. In addition, CE-MRA is a minimally invasive and truly three-dimensional (3D) imaging modality. After data acquisition has been completed the vascular tree can be viewed from any desired perspective; at the same time information about the relationship between vascular structures and surrounding tissues can be obtained. In this lecture we will discuss different non-atherosclerotic causes of arterial disease and how MRI can be used to differentiate the different causes. Although advanced atherosclerosis is the underlying cause of peripheral arterial occlusive disease in the vast majority of patients, in up to 20% of patients, diseases other than atherosclerosis may be responsible for the complaints. Patient demographics incongruent with the typical history and complaints of intermittent claudication or chronic critical ischemia, or lesions found in atypical locations may provide clues to an alternative etiology such thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger's disease), different forms of vasculitis, cystic adventitial disease, connective tissue diseases or vascular compression syndromes. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with the major differential diagnoses of nonatherosclerotic disease including vasculitis, congenital disease and dysplastic changes. It has long been recognized that the inherent tissue contrast between liver parenchyma and liver tumors is greater for magnetic resonance (MR) than computed tomography (CT). This is especially true when comparing unenhanced CT and unenhanced MR. However, this inherent advantage has not necessarily thrust MR ahead of CT in clinical practice. The comparison between CT and MR is complicated by the fact that neither CT nor MR is reliant solely upon unenhanced imaging and because the various imaging parameters are widely different. For example, CT tends to have a major advantage over MR in terms of in-plane spatial resolution, slice thickness, interslice gap and acquisition speed. MR, on the other hand, has the ability to acquire many more post-contrast enhancement phases, due to the lack of ionizing radiation. In general, post-contrast imaging with either iodine and CT or gadolinium and MR yields similar enhancement patterns since both are small molecular weight extracellular agents. In the past, MR and gadolinium-based agents were preferred over CT and iodine-based agents in patients with renal insufficiency. This advantage no longer exists, however, due to the recent elucidation of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis. MR-cholangiography does have an advantage over CT in the biliary tree and is particularly useful for depicting intrahepatic bile duct anatomy in patients being evaluated prior to living-related liver transplantation. Furthermore, some gadolinium-based contrast agents (i.e. Multihance) demonstrate delayed biliary excretion which can be helpful for characterizing certain tumors such as focal nodular hyperplasia. Multidetector helical CT (MDCT), with its faster rotation times, has led to new dimensions in spatial and temporal resolution in CT imaging. One-millimeter slice collimation or less can be applied that leads to isotropic voxels and allows very high quality multiplanar and 3-D image reconstructions. In the assessment of pancreatic disease, MDCT is mainly used to improve spatial resolution. MIP and minIP reformations allow for assessment of both pancreatic vessels and duct. The evaluation of resectability in patients with pancreatic cancer remains a diagnostic challenge, especially regarding the preoperative assessment of vascular invasion. Thin-slice multiplanar reconstructions obtained with MDCT provide an exact depiction of the spatial relation between the tumor and the potentially invaded vessels and thus have the capability to improve the assessment of local resectability. MDCT remains the standard of reference technique for the assessment of most pancreatic diseases, including pancreatic cancer, endocrine or cystic tumors, acute and chronic pancreatitis. MRI is a strong competitor in terms of evaluation of biliary and pancreatic ducts and is useful for the evaluation of associated liver disease. In the 1990s, CT questioned the role of intravenous urography (IVU) in a number of clinical conditions, i.e. renal colic, trauma, uroseptic fever, obstructive uropathy. More recently, the spread of MDCT units, which allow the capture of urographic images comparable to those obtained with IVU, offered the possibility of substituting IVU in clinical situations where imaging of the entire urinary system with detailed calyceal evaluation was required, i.e. asymptomatic haematuria, follow-up of transitional cell carcinomas, congenital anomalies, fistulas, TB, and planning of difficult endourological procedures. Nevertheless, a very limited number of comparative studies are available and above all the radiation issue scared the radiological community: the radiation exposure in MDCT exceeded the dose for IVU significantly. However, the radiation dose largely varies in the literature, depending on the CT urographic protocols, and more specifically on scanning parameters and number of phases. The efforts of the manufacturers and additional protocols refinements will probably allow further reduction of the X-ray dose, but the best way to lower it is the radiologists' awareness and their selection of different approaches. CTU technique, similar to IVU, has to be tailored to the clinical problem, high X-ray dose being justifiable in patients at high risk of neoplasms, not in patients with a very high probability of having benign disease. Such a tailored approach is highly likely to provide CTU the possibility of cancelling the residual role of IVU. Coronary CT angiography was the topic of numerous publications, presentations and extensive discussion over the last 5 years. As the technology starts to mature, the questions arise whether the new developments would further improve the results of the method, whether the excellent image quality and preliminary results would be sufficient to define the clinical role of the method and, last but not least, whether additional costs arising from the introduction of this technique would be balanced by the expected benefits. Expert speakers on technology development, clinical application and cost effectiveness of coronary CTA will ellaborate on these questions and, in a final panel discussion, we will try to identify those patients who cannot benefit from this technology. Since its introduction, coronary CTA has progressively advanced from an imaging modality applied for research purposes to that of a widely used diagnostic tool that has in the meantime fully entered the daily clinical practice. Even with 64-section CT scanners, limitations in cardiac imaging were perceptible that mainly included the high, but limited, temporal resolution. Thus, coronary CTA was of limited diagnostic value in patients with high heart rates and arrhythmia. In addition, obesity and severe calcifications hindered an accurate diagnosis and the results were unsatisfying in many cases. Using coronary CTA as a clinical tool, the entire coronary artery tree has to be depicted with diagnostic image quality. Otherwise, the patient will not benefit from this procedure as he would need to undergo subsequent invasive work-up in clinical practice. The novel dual-source technology solves many of the problems of previous scanner types and also introduces approaches to reduce radiation exposure to the patient. Image quality of dual-source CT is improved in patients with high and irregular heart rates, obviating the need to administer betablockers prior to the scan. Besides new scanner types, software improvements of existing CT technology such as cardiac sequence technique may be applicable in selected patients with low and stable heart rates. Future technical developments including 256-section CT and flat-panel CT will be explained, and promises and limitations in the application of these technologies will be discussed. Especially since the introduction of 64-slice CT, coronary CT angiography has become increasingly robust. Under certain conditions, the technique allows to reliably demontstrate and rule out coronary stenoses. However, relative to the small dimensions and rapid motion of the heart, the spatial and temporal resolution of CT are still somewhat limited. Also, CT angiography is a purely diagnostic technique, which does not allow immediate intervention. Selection of patients for CT angiography must therefore follow two important principles: Patient conditions must be favourable for high image quality and the information that can be gained by CT angiography must be clinically useful in the individual patient´s situation. Patient characteristics that will usually allow high and diagnostic image quality are a relatively slow and regular heart rate (preferably below 60/min), the ability to perform a breath hold of ~10 s and the absence of morbid obesity. Since a contrast agent is necessary, renal failure is a relative contraindication. Clinically, the benefit of CT angiography will be limited in the setting of high pre-test likelihood of disease, because CT, as opposed to cardiac catheterization, does not allow immediate intervention in case a stenosis is found. In many patients, however, the symptoms, the results of stress tests or other findings will mandate the rule out of coronary artery stenoses, while pre-test likelihood is not very high. In these situations, coronary CT angiography can be very beneficially applied. However, only if coronary CTA is expertly performed and interpreted, will it be clinically useful. The diagnostic accuracy of non-invasive (imaging) tests for coronary artery disease (CAD) has been extensively evaluated in literature. Inspite of the low sensitivity and specificity of stress ECGs (in men 72 and 77%, respectively; in women 61 and 70%, respectively), it is still being used as an initial test in most hospitals. In two recently published systematic reviews and meta-analyses of non-invasive imaging tests (Heijenbrok Am Heart J 2007; Vanhoenacker Radiology 2007), we found the following pooled sensitivity and specificity results and associated 95% confidence intervals: stress echocardiography (155 studies): sensitivity 79% (78-81%), specificity 87% (86-89%); stress SPECT (70 studies): sensitivity 88% (87-90%), specificity 73% (69-77%); CT calcium scoring (21 studies): sensitivity 93% (91-96%), specificity 55% (45-64%); 64-detector MD-CTA (6 studies): sensitivity 93% (88-97%), specificity 96% (96-97%). Optimizing the diagnostic imaging strategies for patients with chest pain could potentially result in major health benefits and cost savings. The estimated effects on health and cost will depend on the prior probability of CAD, the non-invasive tests performed and the consequences of missing the diagnosis of CAD on long-term outcomes. For example, replacing the conventional workup consisting of stress ECG plus stress SPECT plus coronary angiography if indicated (total mean diagnostic costs Euro 2000-3000) with a single non-invasive imaging test (e.g. MD-CTA, diagnostic costs Euro 500) can potentially increase the number of CAD cases identified annually in Europe by approximately 150,000 and reduce the diagnostic workup costs by roughly 2 billion Euro annually. The role of imaging in the accurate detection and diagnosis of tumours of the spine is dependent on the inherent sensitivity and specificity of the imaging modalities, the interpretative and processing skills of the reporting radiologist and a sound knowledge of the biological behaviour of the different tumoral pathological entities. This short talk will therefore focus on the strengths and weaknesses of the imaging modalities, the imaging signs used in the detection of spinal pathology and the differentiating imaging features related to the specific tumoral conditions. Tumour-like conditions will also be included in the differential diagnosis as well as coverage of the interventional radiological techniques used in the diagnosis and treatment of tumours of the spine. Infective spondylitis represents 2-4% of all cases of osteomyelitis and is increasing in prevalence. The most common causative pyogenic organisms are Gram-positive bacteria, mainly Staphylococcus aures. Rarely, spondylitis is the result of infection with Gram-negative bacteria or nonpyogenic micro-organisms (Mycobacterium tuberculosis). Typically, the lumbar spine is involved, followed in frequency by the thoracic, sacral and cervical spine infection. The hematogenous spread of infection via arterial or venous system is the most common route of contamination. It may be also the result of different spinal operations, the extension of infection per continutatem from a contiguous focus or direct implantation of micro-organisms following diagnostic or therapeutic disc punctures. Vertebral infections, pyogenic as well as granulomatous, represent serious disease entities, which if left unrecognised may cause neurological compromise and late spinal deformities. Therefore an early diagnosis with prompt treatment is of utmost clinical importance and mainly based on the use of different imaging modalities. In practice, bone scintigraphy, conventional radiography, CT and MRI are utilised. Due to its high sensitivity and specificity, MRI The increase in the number of surgical spinal procedures makes imaging of the postoperative spine ever more important. The rate of complications both acute, such as bleeding, infection or dural tears, or late onset, such as recurrent herniation, spinal stenosis, pseudoarthrosis, accelerated degeneration or instability, has been multiplying. There is a variety of imaging techniques available for the diagnostic evaluation of the postsurgical spine, including conventional X-rays, computed tomography and MR imaging. Imaging findings depend on the pathology for which the surgery was performed, the patient's individual anatomy, the segmental level and the kind of surgical procedure as well as the time after operative treatment. Since several complications of the surgical procedure as well as superimposition of the original disease process and surgery-related alterations may complicate the interpretation of imaging findings, one or the combination of different imaging techniques may be required. Both the instrumented and non-instrumented postsurgical spine will be discussed in this presentation including procedures such as simple herniectomies, fusion surgery using cages and/or instrumentation. Signs represent an easy way of mnemonics, characterized by the imagination of the radiologists who first described them. Signs either represent a pathognomonic finding of a disease or a radiological finding suggesting a list of various disorders. The most commonly found signs in disorders of the axial skeleton will be explored interactively, including the following: posterior vertebral scalloping, ivory and pancake vertebra, fluid-fluid level, hair-on-end, salt-and-pepper calvarium, reverse hamburger bun, naked facet and fluid-sign/vacuum intervertebral cleft. Many of the above signs are depicted with a certain imaging modality. Others are depicted with more than one imaging modality. The explanation of the signs will be highlighted in detail. Multiple signs are described in musculoskeletal radiology and have been designed for educational reasons. Indeed, many of these signs are easy to remember and are particularly helpful for effective communication with the referring clinician, because they refer to ordinary things from daily life. The nomenclature is very variable. Some signs are specific for a certain location (e.g. double PCL sign, anterior drawer sign, boutonniere deformity, heel pad sign), whereas others are not (e.g. onion peel appearance, button sequestrum). Many signs are named after food (e.g. cookie bite sign, sausage digit, broccoli sign), others resemble animals (e.g. anteater nose sign, sea gull's wing, swan neck deformity), or refer to specific tools or objects (e.g. absent bow tie, spade hand, Erlenmeyer flask deformity). Still others are named after famous persons (e.g. Terry Thomas sign). In this lecture, examples will be given of classic signs of the peripheral musculoskeletal system, which will be particularly helpful in making a confident diagnosis or differential diagnosis. The initial investigation of a pelvic mass is invariably with ultrasound. Analysis is based on the following criteria: size; calcifications; septa; wall thickness; papillarities; mixed cystic and solid state; blood flow; contrast enhancement; and abnormalities outside the presenting lesion. Certain benign lesions such as haemorrhagic cysts and dermoid tumours can present characteristic features. Clot retraction and the change of blood with time can accurately define a haemorrhagic cyst. Likewise, a fat/fluid level, echogenic plug or dermoid mesh indicate a dermoid tumour. Appropriate clinical features help too; for instance, fever points towards an abscess and pregnancy and pain in someone known to have a fibroid suggests fibroid degeneration. Papillarities, a mixed cystic and solid pattern and evidence of disease outside the presenting lesion are strong pointers to a malignant lesion. When an adnexal mass is found, the operator must take into account the age, menstrual status, prior and presenting history as well as the ultrasound appearances in deciding the nature of the lesion. Possible decisions are: a) benign, no follow-up needed; b) benign, but needs removal or other treatment; c) most likely benign, follow-up with ultrasound after an interval; d) possibly benign, but level of uncertainty high, proceed to MR to characterise the lesion; e) malignant, proceed to CT scan for staging. Finally, in patients unfit or unsuitable for surgery, biopsy may be needed to confirm the nature of a tumour. Transabdominal omental biopsy or transvaginal biopsy of a pelvic mass are well tolerated and provide reliable results. Ultrasound is the first line imaging modality to assess a suspected adnexal mass. However, overall approximately 20% of masses on US are considered as indeterminate. MRI has been established as a powerful modality to further investigate these lesions. The latter include benign complex masses, such as dermoids, endometrioma or other benign hemorrhagic lesions, leiomyomas, fibrothecomas, hydropyosalpinx and ovarian cancer. The purpose of further imaging these lesions includes a) identification of the origin, b) differentiation of benign from malignant tumors and c) differentiation of benign lesions that warrant intervention from those that do not. Characterisation of an adnexal mass by MRI is based upon morphologic features, signal characteristics and perfusion. In indeterminate masses, a diagnostic algorithm will be presented, which depends on the findings using standard MRI with T1 and T2WI. Such lesions are divided into the three following categories: a mass bright on T1, a mass dark on T2WI and a cystic solid mass. Depending on these features further characterisation is possible by using additional sequences including fat saturation, chemical shift imaging or contrast enhanced imaging. CT staging, especially multislice CT, is the modality of choice for staging ovarian cancer. The prognosis of patients with ovarian cancer is still related to the tumor stage at laparoscopy and residual tumor after cytoreductive surgery. Nevertheless, tumor debulking is not always possible because of the tumor extent and planning surgery might be difficult. Thus, the three roles of imaging are to select the candidates for primary chemotherapy if the lesions are nonresectable, to determine the best sites for biopsies in case of peritoneal carcinomatosis, and to help to define the therapeutic strategies in a multidisciplinary approach. Resectability on imaging depends on two major factors, lesion size and location. The imaging criteria for predicting nonresectable disease must be known and include abdominal wall invasion, retroperitoneal presacral disease, lymph node involvement above the renal hilum, peritoneal implants 2 cm (porta hepatis, intersegmental fissure, gastrosplenic and gastrohepatic ligaments, diaphragm) and invasion of small bowel mesentery. CT staging must include chest, abdominal and pelvic images to detect also distant metastasis. In case of nonrespectable lesion, the treatment must begin with primary chemotherapy in order to allow debulking surgery. Nevertheless, sensitivity of CT is still low in detecting small peritoneal implants ( 2 cm). Whole body MR imaging, as for all potential screening methodologies, has to diagnose curable problems with minimal false negative findings. Only recently has it become possible to examine the whole body in an acceptable time frame. To begin with, it is likely to be used for just one system, such as examining the musculoskeletal system for bone and soft tissue metastases. Later, it may be used for a wider search. The panellists will discuss progress and some of the associated controversies. Screening is a rather new application of MRI. Single organ MRI can be performed for tumor screening, for coronary heart disease or stroke. Whole-body (wb) MRA for the first time allowed "whole body" imaging. Wb-MRA can be extended to a rather "complete" imaging work-up of atherosclerosis, if the brain and heart are included. This concept of "disease-specific" screening can also be transferred to malignancies. Imaging often consists of either fluid-sensitive or 3D gradient-echo sequences, which cover the whole body. After adequate preparation, also MR colonography can be added. Within an acceptable examination time of 90 min, these two strategies (atherosclerosis and tumor screening) can be combined into a "total" screening protocol. One of the limitations of wb-MR screening is that unexpected abnormalities will be discovered, and that many structures, though included in the field of view, might not be evaluable (joints, small bowel, prostate, breast). The amount of image data may have its part in the rate of false negative findings. The few existing studies on screening usually deal with novel MR techniques. Screening studies in non-selected groups of asymptomatic individuals show low prevalences of malignancies or atherosclerosis; prospective studies are still lacking. Extended table movement range and simultaneous multi-channel data acquisition allow for wb coverage and parallel imaging. Data acquisition with a moving table promises faster imaging, thus potentially reducing examination costs. Despite all technical advances, MRI will need to be subjected to prospective cohort studies to provide a detailed investigation of parameters determining cost effectiveness. Previously, authors have emphasised the role of whole body MRI (WBMRI) as an alternative to bone scan in the detection of skeletal metastases, in the assessment of total tumour volume in breast carcinoma, in unknown tumour detection, in the evaluation of multiple myeloma and lymphoma and in the assessment of muscle diseases. In most cases, WBMRI has replaced a multimodality approach facilitating diagnosis and staging as a single study. This talk describes the relative cost-effectiveness of WBMRI in clinical practice by comparing it to conventional strategies. A diagnostic test is said to be "cost-effective" when the additional benefits it provides are considered to be good value for the money spent, usually by comparison to an alternative conventional strategy. There are four types of full economic evaluation (cost minimization analysis, cost-benefit analysis, cost-effectiveness analysis and cost-utility analysis) [Unsupported Character -&#8313;]. This talk focuses on the use of cost-effectiveness analysis to calculate cost per additional unit benefit of WBMRI as an alternative to conventional strategies in day-to-day clinical practice employing reimbursable costs of major European health-care insurers. The presentation focuses on the ethical dimension of the value of whole body MR imaging (WBMRI). What can 'ethics' contribute to the evaluation of WBMRI? Ethical orientation regarding complex practical questions needs to be based on reasoning, but it should take empirical data into account as well. Ethical core concepts and approaches will be identified that may be useful for this purpose. Ethical evaluation relies on principles of medial ethics such as respecting patient autonomy, especially through obtaining informed consent. Procedural ethics goes beyond the individual patient-related approach; it includes discourse and consensus building at the level of professional teams, institutions, academic societies or other relevant groups. Combining ethical principles and procedural approaches allows for the development of guidelines or other "tools" that may help to make ethically justified judgments. Studies have raised concern that informed consent and autonomous patient decision-making do not always lead to convincing results. Offering expensive services with potentially complex consequences for the patient may increase these difficulties. There is evidence of a lack of transparency and unfairness in the use of limited resources, especially in costly diagnostics. Spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage is a common cause of an acute focal neurologic deficit and represents up to 15-20% of all strokes. The purpose of this presentation is to review imaging findings in various types of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhages and to summarize their characteristic appearance on different imaging modalities. Patients with intracranial hemorrhage can present a formidable diagnostic challenge to the clinician. Moreover, neuro-imaging findings of intracerebral hemorrhage are highly variable and depend on many factors such as imaging technique (US, CT, MRI), location of the hemorrhage (basal ganglia, brainstem, hemispheres, etc.), age of the bleed (hyperacute, acute, subacute, chronic), underlying lesion (cavernous malformation, amyloid angiopathy), etc. The role of the radiologist is threefold: 1) to consult with the clinician and recommend the optimal imaging strategy; 2) to establish the correct diagnosis and determine the cause of the hemorrhage; 3) to participate in the treatment planning of the patient. Ultrasonography plays an important role in the detection of perinatal hemorrhage (premature infants). In the adult population, CT is the method of choice in the hyperacute and acute stages of intracerebral hemorrhage, whereas MR is the preferred technique in chronic hemorrhage. To illustrate the degradation of blood products, we shall discuss the CT and MR characteristics of hyperacute, acute, subacute, early and late chronic hemorrhages. MR is particularly useful in detecting sequelae of diffuse axonal injury due to shearing stresses. In conclusion, a comprehensive understanding of the pathophysiology and evolution of an intracerebral hemorrhage is essential to adequately interpret the imaging findings. Stroke is a well-known clinical syndrome that is caused by an acute event leading to ischemia of the brain or an intracranial hemorrhage. Apart from such acute presentations, cerebrovascular diseases can also develop more gradually. Various conditions can be responsible for such a protracted course. Such conditions can affect the carotid arteries, the large intracranial vessels or the small vessels of the brain. The underlying diseases affecting these vessels are heterogeneous and comprise conditions such as atherosclerosis, fibrohyalinosis, amyloid angiopathy and vasculitis. These conditions often remain undetected during life, whereas the evidence is growing that they are major contributors to conditions such as agerelated cognitive decline and intracranial hemorrhages. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the clinical presentation of chronic cerebral vascular disease. 2. To understand the advantages and drawbacks of the various radiological techniques for imaging the brain parenchyma and the intracranial and neck vessels. 3. To be able to establish a cost-effective diagnostic strategy for patients with suspected vascular brain disease. 4. To learn the differential diagnosis of chronic cerebral vascular diseases. CVT is a rare disease compared with arterial stroke; however, in recent years more frequent cases have been diagnosed due to improved imaging techniques. The annual incidence of CVT is 3-4/1 million population. Most of the adult are women of childbearing age. A wide spectrum of symptoms can be found with acute (37.2%), subacute (55.3%) or chronic (7.2%) onset. The most frequent symptom is headache, but seizures, focal neurologic deficits and even coma can be detected. MR with venography is considered, at the present time, to be the most sensitive non-invasive technique. T1 and T2 sequences show thrombus and depending on the signal, the age of the clot can be evaluated. Abnormal signal in a sinus plus corresponding absence of flow void in venography confirms the diagnosis. MR is also very sensitive to parenchymal changes. Disadvantages of MR compared to CT are that it is time consuming, the patient needs to collaborate, it is not widely available and requires experienced professionals to avoid pitfalls. CT is almost always the fisrt choice exam because of accessibility, speed and simplicity. Direct and indirect signs can be visualized, but an entirely normal exam can also be found. Spiral CT and more recently multidetector-row CT has increased tremendously the sensivity in the diagnosis of CVT. Disadvantages include the need of contrast injection and radiation. CT and MR are competitive and complementary techniques, the choice between which depends on experience and accessibility to the equipments. Future prospects seem to indicate that CT/angio will probably be the elective procedure in the acute phase and MR with major applications in the follow-up of patients with CVT. The major advantage of PET/CT is that in a single instrument it adds anatomical detail (CT images) to molecular PET images. Three potential applications of PET/CT can be distinguished: 1. Diagnostic studies, where accurate localization of metabolic abnormalities is vital for clinical decision making (e.g. staging), requiring a PET study in combination with a full clinical CT scan. 2. Quantitative PET studies, where anatomical precision is less vital. In this case a low-dose CT scan for attenuation correction purposes may suffice. 3. Treatment planning studies for radiotherapy, where addition of a PET scan allows in adding molecular information (e.g. metabolic activity or degree of hypoxia) to the conventional anatomical approach. PET and CT scans are not acquired simultaneously. In practice, the patient's bed moves from the CT to the adjacent PET gantry. As the patient remains in the same position, however, there is no need for fusing the images. For many PET studies, quantification is required. A PET/CT scanner can therefore only be used optimally if it still allows such quantitative studies. In this respect, the main difference between PET/CT and stand alone PET is the way in which attenuation correction is performed. Therefore, attention should especially be given to the issue of mismatch between CT and PET data, leading to attenuation of correction artefacts. This could be due to patient movement (between scans) or inappropriate bed design (bending between gantries). Attention should also be given to the accuracy of attenuation correction, especially when using contrast material for CT or with metal implants. Recently, imaging devices integrating a CT scanner with a dual-headed SPECT camera have been developed. Furthermore, considerable progress has been made also in the field of software-based image registration, since data compatibility between different modalities has been much improved. However, evidence on the anatomical accuracy of software-based registration between SPECT and CT is still scarce; most authors report the anatomical inaccuracy of that technique to be in the order of 1 cm. With SPECT/CT hybrid imaging, the accuracy of image fusion is expected to be much better. The first known data show that the anatomical mismatch between SPECT and CT is approximately 1 mm in regions of the body not moved by respiration and in the order of 4 mm for thoracic and abdominal lesions. In SPECT/CT data sets, CT may be used for attenuation correction of the SPECT images. Applying this technique to skeletal scintigrams, the deeper structures of the body will gain in counts compared to the more superficially located parts of the skeleton. However, misalignments between SPECT and CT will lead to considerable artefacts when attenuation correction is used. Therefore, for the clinical application of that technology, an exact data match is mandatory and it should be employed cautiously. The high anatomical accuracy of image registration by SPECT/CT offers the potential to exactly relate SPECT abnormalities to an anatomical region and elucidate unclear SPECT findings by obtaining a CT in the same imaging session. This potential greatly enhances diagnostic accuracy, which will also be demonstrated in this lecture. The combination of MR and PET poses severe challenges due to the fact that the photo multiplier tubes (PMT) used in today's PET scanners cannot be operated in high-magnetic fields. Therefore various groups pursued different concepts to overcome these problems: 1. Use of a heavy magnetic shielding between the MR magnet and the PET camera. 2. Use of light guides to place the PMTs further out of the magnetic field. 3. Use of avalanche photodiodes (APD) instead of PMT to construct an MR-compatible PET camera. A second challenge to MR-PET is the attenuation correction of -Quants. It is actually one of the merits of PET-CT that this information is gained out of the CT image at no cost, via the Hounsfield units. On the contrary, MR images provide no equivalent. Therefore, alternative approaches can be based on 1. image segmentation and classification; 2. machine-based learning from PET-CT -MR reference data; 3. atlas-based approaches. Several groups have published MR-PET images based on the different approaches and thus provided the proof of principle for each approach. In addition, rodent images with functional studies have been achieved with the light guide/PMT as well as with the APD approach. Lately, also human brain images have been acquired. Many academic groups as well as industry are solving the technical challenges of MR-PET integration. The availability of fully functional demonstrators for rodent and human imaging will pave the road map for clinical MR-PET applications. In this lecture, attention will be focused on gas distribution in abdominal emergencies and on acute mechanical problems like malrotation and intussusception. Abdominal trauma is not included. Plain abdominal films are frequently obtained in abdominal emergencies. The importance of gas distribution is discussed with special attention on free intraperitoneal air. The most important abdominal emergency is a malrotation complicated by volvulus. Absent or incomplete rotation of the primitive bowel results in a small mesenteric root, which predisposes the bowel to a volvulus with possibly bowel necrosis. Ladds bands, which run from the liver across the abdomen may accompany a malrotation and can cause obstruction, mostly of the distal duodenum. The radiological diagnosis is by contrast swallow and can be difficult. The transition from completely normal rotation to non-rotation is gradual and the position of the duodenal-jejunal junction is not always obvious. Meticulous technique is required to limit the "grey zone" between normal and abnormal. Ultrasound can demonstrate an inverted relationship of the superior mesenteric artery and vein as a sign of malrotation. A "whirlpool sign" means that a volvulus is present. Patients with intussusception can be dangerously weakened wih hypovolaemia and electrolyte disturbances. Proper surveillance is mandatory. The initial diagnosis of intussusception is by ultrasound. Reduction is attempted with air or liquid contrast. The results for air reduction are generally better. IBD, including Crohn Disease (CD) and Ulcerative Colitis (UC) often affect children and adolescents. Their are clinical, biological, endoscopic and histological data to approach the diagnosis and the follow-up of IBD. Imaging data play a major place in the initial detection and the localzation of the small bowel and/or colonic intestinal lesions, to provide orientation between CD and UC, and to exclude other abdominal diseases. Ultrasonography with color Doppler is the essential first step in this direction and is adapted to appreciate the disease activity. As a complement CT or MRI are more relevant for delineation of gut extension and to assert complications as abscess or fistulae.Our objectives are to point the current place of US, MRI and sometimes CT in the diagnosis and follow-up of IBD specifically in children. Learning Objectives: 1. To provide a general overview of the common inflammatory bowel diseases in children. There are a wide variety of imaging modalities of value in evaluation of biliary tract disorders in children: High-resolution real-time ultrasonography is the imaging modality of choice for screening. MR cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) plays an increasing role; but in young children sedation is needed. MRCP uses the signal from the bile within the ducts to allow visualisation of the biliary system. MDCT is indicated in selected cases. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography is invasive and requires general anaesthesia.Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography is very useful in treatment of complications of liver transplantation, lithiasis and malignant obstructive jaundice. Hepatobiliary scintigraphy uses a tracer (HIDA) that is taken up by the liver and excreted into the billiary tract. It can be used to diagnose bile leakage. There are numerous causes of jaundice in children. The aetiology depends on the age of the child. Obstructive and nonobstructive causes should be differentiated. Biliary atresia is defined by the atresia of the extrahepatic bile duct. It is very important to obtain an early diagnosis to afford the patient a successful outcome, but the role of imaging is limited because of the absence of dilatation of the bile ducts. Choledochal cyst is a localised dilatation of the biliary ductal system. Five types have been described. The frequency of bile plug syndrome, cholelitiasis and choledocholitiasis has been increasing. Neoplasms are very rare. Biliary problems after liver transplantation are the most common complications. They are more frequent in reduced-size transplantation. We will review biliary obstruction, bile leakage, mucocele and stones. The role of the radiographer is changing very rapidly in the 21 st century, as the education and professional development of radiographers continues to improve, and as cash limited health care economies seek ways to deliver high quality health care more efficiently. The current practice of radiography in the United Kingdom provides a case study of the enormity of change taking place in radiographers' roles. Specifically, reporting is a role that is becoming integrated into the role of the radiographer, and it is now possible for a radiographer in the UK to reach consultant level status (23 consultant radiographers in the UK at April 2007, with the number continuing to grow). Research is vital to support the enhanced roles of radiographers, and excellent professional leadership and management is essential to ensuring that radiographers can continue to increase their contributions to high quality, cost effective health care delivery. Hopefully, all radiographers with a higher education and also those pursuing a master's degree will join the communication platform and be active participants in the group. Some of the strategy document issues are to identify research needs and priority areas. The main objective is to establish radiography as a unique research discipline and thereby ensuring an evidence-based radiography practice in the future. RadForum aspires to cooperate with the other Nordic countries and to establish a new board of directors at The Nordic Congress in Copenhagen 2009. The possibility to share a common open web site with an internet-based peer-reviewed journal will be a progression which will encourage the collaboration between radiographers in the Nordic countries. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn about The Norwegian Radiography Research Group. 2. To learn about the research activity among Norwegian radiographers. 3. To understand the potential to radiography research. 4. To become familiar with the term "science of radiography". 5. To appreciate radiography as a unique discipline with its own knowledge base. A-280 17:00 Technology is made to be used (Dahlbom 1997). Radiology Informatics is a discipline focusing on the use of information and communication technology (ICT) within radiology. The CLINTEC Department at Karolinska Institute has a new research group with its discipline within Radiology Informatics. The aim of the group is to analyse and present how work changes as medical staff and new information technology become intertwined and how we can design the information technology of the future. The group of researchers applied both ethnographic qualitative and quantitative research methods. The studies were conducted at the Swedish radiology departments. Our interest lies firstly on how radiology becomes distributed and thereafter how distributed work changes the healthcare organisation. Distributed work includes the sharing and transferral of data within and across health organisations. It requires more than new technology, good ideas, strong leaders, positive framework and extensive resources; it also requires a deep competence in what may be labeled "the virtual organisation". Realising the virtual organisation will have effects on individual's work i.e. how they perform work, their understanding of work and the way they think of work. What these effects will be cannot be foreseen. Increased competence of radiology informatics can improve the design and use of ICT, just as it can improve our understanding of the effect on work and professional roles of digitalisation. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with the radiology informatics research group from Karolinska Institute, Sweden. 2. To learn about the use of information and communication technologies. 3. To concentrate on the effects of ICT use with focus on changes in work practice, production and workflow. to be more aggressive and prone to metastasis. Hence, quantification of contrast enhancement provides information about tumour behaviour supplementary to that obtained from tumour morphology, aiding tumour diagnosis and evaluation of therapeutic response. Simple measures of enhancement are affected by factors other than angiogenesis, e.g. patient weight and amount of contrast medium, and more advanced quantification can reduce such variability. Methods for assessing heterogeneity of tumour enhancement are emerging. Analysis of contrast enhancement is simpler and more widely available than many other methods for imaging angiogenesis. Furthermore, angiogenesis does not always parallel other aspects of tumour physiology such as glucose metabolism. Uncoupling of tumour vascularity and glucose metabolism is more common in aggressive tumours and may develop in response to therapy. Multi-modality imaging of vascular-metabolic relationships can therefore provide further insights into tumour behaviour and sub-classify response. There are a number of commonly available MRI techniques that are able to evaluate vascular functionality in clinical practice. The most commonly known technique is dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) exploiting susceptibility and relaxivity MRI mechanisms. This lecture will outline the biological basis of the observations seen and show that imaging data can be analysed quantitatively or qualitatively for the purposes of lesion characterisation and for assessing response to therapy (to conventional and novel therapeutic methods). The strengths and weaknesses of these two analysis techniques will be compared given the emergence of sophisticated analysis techniques now being launched by software/hardware companies. Attendees will also be guided on emerging techniques that are likely to impact on the field in the intermediate future. Learning Objectives: 1. To show that empirical methods can be used successfully in clinical practice. To discuss what software to use to quantify and display angiogenesis information. 3. To discuss factors that impedes quantitative assessments. 4. To learn how to assess therapy by parametric imaging methods. A-283 17:00 C. Information you can get J.O. Barentsz; Nijmegen/NL (J. Barentsz@rad.umcn.nl) In this course, the available postprocessing methods for evaluating dynamic MRI results will be shown. Simple methods evaluate the level at the start of enhancement, at peak enhancement, and at wash-out; more sophisticated methods show semiquantitative parameters, such as time of start, time to peak, and slope of wash-in and wash-out; finally, there is true quantitative evaluation using pharmacokinetic models, providing parameters like K trans , K ep , and extracellular volume. These methods will be illustrated by showing cases of breast and prostate cancer. Also, the clinical value of dynamic MRI will be illustrated. Dynamic MRI, in general, provides important additional information on anatomic imaging, the location and extent of tumor and early response to therapy. Finally, the combined value of dynamic MRI with other functional techniques will be discussed, e.g., the combined use of dynamic MRI and MRS of prostate and breast cancers. Pulmonary nodules are commonly detected on radiography and particularly CT of the chest. In more than 50% of asymptomatic adult smokers, at least one non-calcified pulmonary nodule is detected on examining the chest with MSCT. Almost all of of these nodules are small (maximum diameter of 10 mm or less) and also more than 95% are benign. Therefore, non-invasive techniques are required to diagnose the very few malignant nodules among the many benign lesions. Different modalities are available: 1. Follow-up with unenhanced low-dose thin-section CT to detect or exclude growth, ideally utilizing computer-assisted volumetry for early detection of growth. The aim of radiological staging of a bronchogenic carcinoma is to determine its clinical stage to solve the problem "What is the adequate treatment?" The first question concerns T, the tumour. CT is the best and its aspects may have prognostic consequences. The second question is "What is the node dissemination, N?" CT has an advantage, which is its good spatial resolution, especially in the hila, and the functional drawbacks are completed by PET/CT. The last question is "Does metastasis exist, M? CT and PET/CT are completed by MRI of the brain. Anywhere, sometimes guided by clinical signs but often silent, it is mandatory to search for metastases since they contraindicate surgery, modify the general treatment and, sometimes, require local treatment, including radiofrequency. Finally, depending on the clinical stage (I-IV) and the WHO clinical status, the patient can be included in a standard protocol, even with a pathologic stage, or benefit from a new therapeutic approach. Staging a patient with bronchogenic carcinoma implies an accurate determination of the size of the tumour, the potential infiltration of the tumour into the adjacent structures, the involvement of hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes and the detection of distant metastases. Recently, combined PET/CT scanners have been introduced in clinical practice. These systems permit the acquisition of PET and CT images coregistered by means of the hardware in the same imaging session. The major benefit of PET/CT lies in the direct link between the information on metabolic changes of structures and the highly detailed anatomic CT information of these structures. The additional information of integrated PET/CT can be the following: 1. Detection of lesions initially not seen on CT or PET. 2. A more precise localisation of lesions, a better delineation of the surrounding structures and a better distinction between tumour and distal atelectasis. 3. A better characterisation of the lesion as benign or malignant. The benefit of PET/CT compared with PET in nodal staging appears to lie in an increase in specificity. According to the literature, an important contribution of FDG/PET is its ability to exclude malignancy in most distant lesions with equivocal CT. Integrated PET/CT can be valuable since exact correlation of the FDG accumulation becomes possible. The general conclusion can be that integrated PET/CT will be the oncological staging "one-stop-shop" examination of the future for staging bronchogenic carcinoma. Information derived from cancer imaging provides a fundamental framework to direct subsequent approaches. However, this information is becoming increasingly complex with the development of new and more sophisticated technologies. Breast anatomy is extremely variable depending on age, personal constitution, hormonal status, and physiological changes with pregnancy, lactation and menopause. Appropriate knowledge of this normal variability is fundamental to the identification and characterization of artefacts as well as pathological findings. Stavros has extensively described several sonographic features that should be considered in the differential diagnosis of breast lesions, including mass shape, orientation, margin characteristics, lesion boundary, echo pattern, posterior acoustic beam behaviour, surrounding tissue changes, and vascularity. A synthesis of such heterogeneous sonographic signs has been developed by the American College of Radiology and described in The Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) for US. This system provides a standardised language for inter-professional and inter-institutional communication in order to improve the overall management of the lesions. MRI of the breast identifies glandular tissue regardless of the amount of underlying fat tissue and demonstrates skin, nipple and chest wall components adequately. Motion artifacts are minimized in prone patient positioning in a breast coil, hands against legs and head positioned on a front holder allowing breathing with a relaxed neck. Because the detection of breast lesions relies on visualization of abnormal contrast enhancement during T1-weighted imaging, the suppression of white fatty signal intensity is mandatory. Subtraction of precontrast images from post-contrast images is a technique used in both 2D and 3D sequences; spectral fat suppression and water excitation are other fat suppression techniques. Abnormal enhancement is close to vessel enhancement but exhibits unusual morphology (spiculated borders, rim enhancement, segmental enhancement, irregular linear enhancement, etc.) and may display washout kinetics. The description of both morphological and kinetic enhancement characteristics follows the BI-RADS lexicon to allow standardization and clinical acceptance of results. The interpretation of enhancing elements within a breast into a risk category of malignancy takes into account the patient's age, phase of the menstrual cycle, personal risk of breast cancer and history of or current medical, surgical and radiation therapy. According to the clinical situation an abnormal finding may be read differently. Knowledge of tumor histology in patients with known breast cancer is also important as invasive lobular cancer, medullary breast cancer or ductal carcinoma in situ often not exhibit washout kinetics. A comparison with prior mammography and ultrasound is crucial for integrating the findings of MRI in the final diagnosis. Teleradiology is probably the most extensively developed area of telemedicine. There are no doubts about its added value to healthcare, particularly in reference to imaging services. When used appropriately, teleradiology can significantly improve access to quality radiological services. In this environment, new opportunities arise, making it possible to share specialised care and optimise the use of technological and human resources. This new scenario requires novel organisational approaches to define and coordinate relations among radiologists, between radiologists and clinicians, and ultimately between patients and radiologists. First and foremost, teleradiology is a means of providing the radiological image interpretation and consultation by professionals located some distance from the site where the images are acquired, due either to a lack of human resources or specialised knowledge at the institution requiring the services. Although much emphasis was formerly placed on the technological aspects involved in establishing reliable and secure connections between the different sites, a teleradiology project involves much more than overcoming physical distance. The real challenge in teleradiology today is in integrating a variety of information (not just images) into the workflow of different professionals working at least in two different institutions. Although the technical difficulties related to transferring information have been overcome, these aspects are nonetheless important today. However, it has become clear that it is even more challenging and important to establish guidelines to ensure smooth and efficient workflow and to reach a consensus regarding the criteria to determine the roles of the different professionals involved. Session Objectives: 1. To become familiar with best practice in teleradiology. 2. To learn about the different practical applications. 3. To appreciate the influence of teleradiology on future trends in organising diagnostic imaging services. 4. To emphasise the benefits, potentials and risks of teleradiology. Quality standards J. Reponen; Raahe/FI Teleradiology is the electronic transmission of radiographic images from one geographical location to another for the purposes of interpretation and consultation. Today, the development of communication networks makes it possible to exchange images, which are of original quality and obey the DICOM standard. A successful technical framework follows the published ACR teleradiology standards and ESR guidelines. Special attention should be given to the quality of the reading workstation, but the speed and reliability of network connections and security measures are equally important. The quality of teleradiology reports is related to the contents of the requests. Often the connection to the RIS and HIS of the sending site is inadequate and not all the necessary comparison images and patient record texts are available. Thus a better integration to the electronic patient record is needed. Also, additional manual workload to the personnel should be avoided. The basis of teleradiology service is a written contract between the customer and the provider. It specifies for example the requested services, response time and the professional qualification of the reporting radiologists. A key factor is a clinical audit of the reports. In cases of cross-border services, there are additional questions related to responsibility, legal and language issues. For the buyer of services, the principal question is trust. The local hospital bears the full responsibility towards its patients. Thus, the head MR imaging of the liver is a diagnostic technique that can evaluate not only the morphological abnormalities with an impressive signal and contrast resolution, but also the functional and biochemical properties of liver diseases. MR performs better than contrast enhanced MDCT and US in the detection and characterization of liver tumors. The impact of both conventional and specific contrast agents in the clinical settings will be commented upon. However, the main topics of this lecture will be related to the ability to perform, evaluate and quantify fat and iron deposits in the liver, the degree of edema and fibrosis in the liver parenchyma, the diffusion related changes of the liver disease, the approach to quantify tissue oxygenation, and the chemical spectroscopic composition of the liver and its inflammatory disorders. Additionally, the perfusion evaluation of angiogenesis, permeability and extracellular extravasculare space through the analysis of the pharmacokinetic properties of the liver and its lesions will be shown. There is a large group of patients who can be diagnosed, treated and followed up with these new MR techniques in a proper and tailored way. New and accurate liver MR imaging parameters can detect chemical, vascular, structural and molecular changes relevant to the patients' healthcare status. With these new MR tools, which can accurately quantitate abnormalities in a reproducible way, we will be able to establish the presence and severity of a disease and its prognosis. The ability to move from technical development to clinical research, thereby impacting the workflow, is in the hands of radiologists. MDCT is considered to be the best performer in diagnosing the full range of pancreatic inflammatory and neoplastic conditions. In this setting, MRI is generally used to obtain additional information that may be useful for differential diagnosis or for planning therapy. Hardware improvements, advances in fast MRI techniques and the use of gadolinium-chelates and/or hormonal stimulation with secretin expanded the indications and improved the performance of MRI in investigating the pancreas. Using these ingredients we can assess the morphology (signal of the parenchyma and detailed imaging of the pancreatic ducts) and the exocrine function (quantification of flow in the ducts and of duodenal filling) in a single session. This approach is indicated in diagnosing the early stages of pancreatitis, in defining the cause of recurrent attacks of pancreatic pain (sphincter dysfunction, main duct strictures, and intraductal cystic neoplasms) and in detecting more subtle complications of pancreatitis that may necessitate specific endoscopic approaches such as main pancreatic duct (mpd) disruption and fistulous tracts. MRI has been reported to be as sensitive as ERCP in detecting pancreatic adenocarcinoma limited to the mpd and it may challenge MDCT in its detection abilities. However, the prediction of tumor non-resectability is poor and related to the unreliable detection of small metastatic lymph nodes and mesentery invasion. The differentiation of a focal inflammatory mass from pancreatic cancer remains a challenge. The recent advent of high-b-value diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) with acceptable SNR has brought a new "marker" in identifying pancreatic disease. Although non-specific, this approach may help in the differential diagnosis of pancreatic cancer and pancreatitis. Multi-detector row CT (MDCT) scans are changing the imaging strategies in (acute) cerebral ischemia and are proving to be an excellent way to assess the functional status of brain tissue. Non-contrast CT remains valuable in ruling out hemorrhagic stroke. Contrast-enhanced perfusion MDCT is performed during intravenous bolus injection of a high-concentration iodinated contrast agent, followed by a fast series of images. Density values change over time and reflect iodine concentration. Sequential images are combined to generate time-density plots. Software is used to calculate parametric maps which reflect blood flow (i.e. perfusion, expressed in mL/min/100 g tissue), blood volume, and mean transit time of the contrast bolus. With advanced data processing techniques it is also possible to assess blood-vessel permeability and size of the extracellular compartment. In acute stroke, areas of reversible ischemia demonstrate reduced perfusion, but preserved blood volume. This suggests that the auto-regulation of cerebral microcirculation is intact, and that therefore the brain tissue remains viable. Patients with reversible ischemia are potential candidates for thrombolysis, to prevent progression of the ischemic region to a completed stroke. Conversely, when a reduction of both perfusion and blood volume is observed, this indicates irreversible infarction. Disadvantages of MDCT perfusion imaging include substantially higher radiation dose, markedly increased data load and the need for time-consuming data analysis. An advantage of MDCT is that, thanks to the high temporal resolution, the total quantity of contrast medium can be reduced. In conclusion, MDCT provides a better understanding of the pathophysiology of cerebral ischemia and may contribute toward improving patient outcome. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the impact of multidetector CT on imaging strategy in acute and chronic cerebral ischemia. 2. To discuss the optimal techniques for MDCT of the brain, with emphasis on CT perfusion and CT angiography. Multidetector computerized tomography (MDCT) has put CT back on the map of modern radiology. It is easy and quick to perform and has very few contraindications. The possibility of obtaining images in all three planes and even making oblique reconstructions is a valuable tool not only for the radiologist but also for the surgeon and the radiotherapist. MDCT of the neck should practically always be performed during intravenous contrast infusion, provided the patient does not have a renal disease. Skeletal, vascular and soft tissue lesions in the neck are revealed with high resolution. In patients with a lump in the neck as the first symptom, MDCT often shows not only the metastasis but also the primary tumor. In this oncologic population, CT of the neck should always be followed by CT of the chest and upper abdomen in the same setting, which gives the referring clinician a "one-stop shopping". At the Lund University Hospital and its referring area of 1.5 million people, fine needle cytology is the first diagnostic step taken in assessing patients with suspected tumours. MDCT is the primary radiological modality in patients with cytology-proven head-and-neck cancer. MRI is used as complementary tool in selected cases to further identify the exact tumor extension and not as a primary modality. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration can be used for detection of lymph node metastases. PET-CT is the latest modality introduced in this field, and preliminary results indicate that this could be used as the first modality in patients with recurrent cancer in the neck, since both CT and MR are very difficult to interpret due to post-therapeutic changes. While open surgical exploration still represents the most commonly applied surgical technique, minimally invasive surgery (MIS) is becoming widely accepted in the light of the reduction of access trauma for the patient. In addition, the surgical scenario is evolving under the influences of a number of emerging technologies. Image-guided surgery, augmented reality, intelligent surgical instruments, robotics and bioengineering are contributing to evolve the surgical procedures from a "traditional" model, based only on the surgeons' skill, to the "computer-assisted" model, where surgeons and machines work together with diagnostic imaging modalities as their guide. Full integration of advanced imaging and robotics/mechatronics into interventional radiology and minimally invasive surgical methods will result in fundamental changes in therapeutic strategies and approaches. The computer-assisted model improves the quality of surgical intervention, providing tools and methods that assist (never substitute) the surgeon in making the best use of his/her skills. Advances in technology have already resulted in sweeping changes in diagnostic radiology, and more widespread use of modern therapeutic devices, computers and advanced imaging technologies will have a far-reaching effect on surgery as well. Session Objectives: 1. To discuss the integration of advanced imaging techniques for the assessment of intra-operative anatomy. 2. To emphasise the need for a close collaboration between radiologist and surgeon in order to prevent turf battle. 3. To present the advantages of the novel approach for planning and simulating the interventional procedures. Intraoperative navigation using radiological data and software support N. Navab; Munich/DE The growing number of imaging modalities and the increase in their resolution have provided physicians with a large amount of heterogeneous data. However, each modality comes with its own user interface and requires considerable interaction for providing appropriate viewing during interventions. The traditional monitor-based solutions for diagnostic imaging do not satisfy interventional requirements. In order to design new medical procedures taking full advantage of the available functional and anatomical imaging, engineers and physicians have started to work closely in different labs around the world. In this presentation, we present several examples of new end-to-end solutions developed by such multidisciplinary teams. These solutions often take advantage of multimodal preoperative imaging for the creation of patient-specific anatomical and/or physiological model, allowing advanced surgical planning. Our focus in this talk is on taking full advantage of multimodal imaging intraoperatively. In order to do so, one wishes to register the preoperative data to the patient. However, due to large deformations for most abdominal applications, the preoperative data could only serve for planning and as a basic reference. For guidance during interventions, one needs to use intraoperative imaging. We present new methods for acquiring co-registered intraoperative functional and anatomical images without need for registering them to the patient. These so-called 'registrationfree' methods allow us to provide physicians with automatically fused multimodal image data as well as advanced surgical navigation. We present different examples, in which such solutions have been not only integrated within the medical workflow, but also evaluated by surgeons and interventionalists. Surgical navigators provide a visual guidance to the surgeon during the surgical procedure. In particular, passive navigation systems give a 3D representation of the surgical scenario, updated in real-time and detected by means of computer graphics techniques, and show dangerous conditions, thereby providing an alert message to the surgeon. The surgical navigator integrates the virtual scenario created preoperatively with the different information provided intraoperatively by the surgical tools (e.g. video or ultrasonography images, or sensor data of mechatronic/robotic tools). The manipulation of volumetric imaging data in an augmented reality environment ("virtual patient") is becoming commonplace, thus dramatically increasing the need for a better integration of radiological and surgical competences. Therefore, educational changes are required for both radiologists and surgeons, who will have to learn how to master the technology that empowers them to bridge between the panoramic imaging allowed by diagnostic modalities and the key-hole imaging, which is typical of minimally invasive surgery. They will have to learn to work as a team, where the radiologist (a "new type of radiologist", as the title of the discussion states) will have to support (and even to train) the surgeon by carefully tailoring dedicated processing of multimodality data sets acquired on each individual patient. This is the only way to achieve a truly personalized treatment planning and to minimize the risks of surgery. Lesions of the superior labrum and the long head of biceps tendon have recently been recognized as important sources of chronic shoulder pain and instability. Frequent sites of damage include the superior labrum and biceps anchor (superior labral anteroposterior = SLAP lesions), the proximal portion of the biceps tendon and the reflection pulley system, which is formed by the corocohumeral (CHL) and superior glenohumeral (SGHL) ligaments. Lesions of these structures can either occur in isolation or represent associated findings in patients with glenohumeral instability or rotator cuff tears. Arthrographic imaging techniques (MR and CT arthrography) appear particularly useful in depicting morphologic changes in this anatomically complex area. This refresher course reviews the anatomy of the superior labrum and rotator interval (including normal variants), the etiology and classification of lesions of the superior labrum, biceps tendon and pulley system, the diagnostic performance of different cross-sectional imaging techniques, and the relevance of imaging findings with a view of making therapeutic decisions. Imaging features are discussed on the basis of arthroscopically/surgically confirmed cases. Carcinoma of the lung is one of the first neoplasms in the Western world. The majority of radiologists know how to diagnose a carcinoma of the lung. Nowadays, it is important not only to diagnose it, but also to perform the proper radiological work-up, to establish the stage, and adequate treatment. In patients treated with chemotherapy, it is necessary to know the evaluation of the response to treatment. In treated patients, it is important to follow-up and know how to evaluate the signs of recurrence, which should be distinguished from undercurrent diseases and post-radiotherapy changes. Thyroid scintigraphy provides the visualisation of functional thyroid tissue. The radionuclides that are used in thyroid scans are 123I, 131I or 99mTcO-4. The choice of isotope is dependent on the clinical question. One of the most common indications for thyroid scintigraphy is the evaluation of thyroid nodule(s). It provides relevant information regarding the functional status of the nodules (cold vs. hot nodule) to evaluate possible malignancy. Another common indication of thyroid scintigraphy is the differential diagnosis and management of proven hyperthyroidism. It enables the differentiation between thyroiditis, Graves' disease and autonomous thyroid nodule. In case of thyroid cancer, the long-term follow-up after surgery and radioiodine therapy is based on periodic whole-body scans (WBS) performed with 131I. If thyroglobulin level is elevated but WBS is negative, 18 F-FDG-PET may be useful for the localisation of cancer foci best performed with PET/CT. The role of nuclear medicine for pre-surgical localisation of the hyperfunctioning parathyroid glands is also well established. Parathyroid scintigraphy (most widely performed with MIBI or tetrofosmine) permits the use of unilateral and minimal invasive surgery while reducing operation time, complication rates and patient morbidity. It also enables the detection of unsuspected ectope parathyroid adenoma(s), which may otherwise be missed on routine surgery. For better anatomical details of detected lesions by scintigraphy, SPECT/CT can be used in a single device. On the basis of the author's experience, the combination of MIBI and US appears to be the most logical approach. Usually, high-resolution sonography is the primary imaging method of the thyroid und parathyroid glands. In diffuse thyroid diseases, as struma diffusa, sonography is used to determine the volume of the gland. With three-dimensional US, the volume can be calculated with a low intra and interobserver variability. Sonography is of limited value if retrosternal extension of a struma is present. In autoimmune thyroiditis as Graves disease, the gland is enlarged and hypervascularized in color Doppler. Thyroid inferno is a typical feature in this disease. In autoimmune diseases as Graves disease and Hashimoto thyroiditis, the thyroid most times is hypoechogenic. The peak systolic velocity can be measured in the inferior thyroid artery for follow-up of this diseases. Nodular formations are frequently found sonographically. Sonographic signs of benign and malignant nodes are presented. Since a broad overlap of benign and malignant nodules exist, US-guided biopsy will be discussed. The role of sonography in thyroid cancer will be presented. US is used as a guidance for ethanol ablation of autonomic thyroid nodes. In hyperparathyroidism, sonography is used to localise parathyroid adenomas, and the accuracy is about 80%. Ectopic parathyroid adenomas are difficult to find. US-guided ethanol ablation is mainly used in secondary hyperparathroidism. In primary hyperparathyroism, US-guided ablation is only indicated in selected cases. Papilllary carcinoma is usually relatively small, well defined and localised. A minority, however, are locally invasive and may invade through both lobes of the thyroid or outside the thyroid including into the larynx and trachea and occasionally the oesophagus. Punctate or cloudy calcific areas (psammoma bodies) may be apparent on CT. Areas of cystic necrosis are often present within the tumour. Lymph node metastases are extremely common, up to 50% of cases at presentation and may be bilateral. Lymph nodes may show calcification and vary from entirely solid and hypervascular to large or entirely cystic. Follicular carcinoma is also occasionally aggressive and locally invasive. They are rarely cystic and are much less commonly associated with lymph node metastases (roughly 10%). Anaplastic carcinomas are classically locally invasive into a variety of structues including the carotid arteries and jugular veins. They often show substantial cystic necrosis and haemorrhage. Amorphous calcification is common. Lymph node metastases are common and up to a quarter involve the mediastinum. Medullary cell carcinoma is usually solid and may show coarse or psammomatous calcifications and local invasion. Up to 50% are associated with neck and mediastinal lymph node involvement. Around one-third of these tumours are familial and may be associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia in which case they are often bilateral. Thyroid lymphoma is almost always primary and often associated with Hashimoto's disease. It usually appears as a solitary mass, occasionally as multiple nodules. It rarely necroses. Recent advances in breast interventional procedures have allowed not only a significant improvement in diagnostic accuracy, but the possibility of stepping forward "minimally invasive" therapeutic indications under image guidance of benign and malignant lesions. Therapeutic percutaneous breast procedures can be divided into two categories, namely, techniques based on removal (vacuum-assisted devices and percutaneous excisional biopsy) and based on "tissue destruction" (ablation by radiofrequency, cryotherapy, high-intensity-focused ultrasound, laser therapy and focused microwave phased array thermotherapy). Vacuum-assisted devices play an important role in percutaneous removal of benign lesions such as fibroadenomas, papillomas (whether or not in the context of nipple discharge) and inflammatory pathology. The procedure is safe with good results in terms of costs, cosmetic acceptance and removal of lesions, as has been demonstrated in several recent publications. The main limitation is the size of the lesion; however, the introduction of large-bore needles (9G-8G) has made the removal of benign lesions up to 3 cm possible. Techniques based on "tissue destruction" are mainly oriented to the treatment of malignant lesions and require a comprehensive diag-nosis and staging previous to the procedure. An increasing number of publications state that radiofrequency ablation is a promising minimally invasive technique in the treatment of infiltrative breast carcinomas less than 2 cm, when compared to immediate surgery. Although most of these studies have been oriented in an experimental basis and small series, prospective randomized trials are being carried out to comparatively analyze local recurrence and overall survival of patients treated with radioablation+RT and breast conserving surgery+RT. Currently, the intervals for mammographic follow-up of patients with invasive breast cancer, DCIS, high-risk and precursor lesions varies widely from centre to centre. Evidence for mammographic surveillance intervals for patients with invasive breast cancer and DCIS will be reviewed and suggestions made regarding an evidencebased regime for follow-up of these patients. High-risk and precursor lesions are a heterogeneous group. Patients with atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH) have four to five times increased risk of developing invasive breast cancer, rising to six times risk if premenopausal, and ten times risk if there is a first-degree family history. Lobular neoplasia is a spectrum of lesions including atypical lobular neoplasia (ALH) to lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS). These lesions are a risk factor for development of invasive cancer, but not true precursor lesions. With ALH, there is four to five times risk of invasive disease and with LCIS,eight to ten times risk, both in the ipsilateral and contralateral breast. About 10-20% of patients may develop invasive disease 15-25 years after diagnosis. The long-term evidence for increased surveillance in all these groups is lacking, but annual mammographic screening seems to be a pragmatic approach. Flat epithelial atypia is considered to be a high-risk lesion because of the association with DCIS in adjacent tissue. Long-term studies are few, subsequent risk of invasion is probably low and there is no evidence for increased surveillance. The evidence for the role of MRI and other breast imaging modalities in surveillance is emerging and will be discussed. The purpose of this course is to give an overview of the cerebral and cerebellar migration disorders. Particular attention will be paid to the MR appearances and the classification, which also considers histological and genetic findings. According to the time frame of the formation of the cerebral cortex between the 8 th and the 28 th week of gestation, three groups are distinguished in a flexible classification: (1) The abnormalities of neuronal proliferation occur in the early days of cortical development and often return a high-signal on T2 weighted images. Focal cortical dysplasia is usually associated with blurring of the gray-white matter interface, useful in the differentiation with polymicrogyria. (2) The abnormalities of neuronal migration occur during the migration of the neurons from the germinal matrix to the cortex. They return a signal similar to that of gray matter. Lissencephaly is also referred to as agyria-pachygyria complex. Heterotopic gray matter can be located at any point along the route of migration from the subependymal region to the subcortex. (3) Later during gestation, malformations of cortical organization can be observed. Polymicrogyria refers to an increased number of small gyri. The inner border is sharp, but irregular, which allows the differential diagnosis with pachygyria. Schizencephaly is lined by a polymicrogyric cortex and extends from the subependymal region to the pia. In the cerebellum cortical dysgenesis, cortical hypertrophy and an A 91 B C D E F G aberrant orientation of the folia can be observed. Cortical dysgenesis may be associated with small cyst-like inclusions. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the normal embryological course of neuronal migration and organisation of the cerebral cortex. 2. To discuss the different types of migration disorders and their typical imaging features. 3. To discuss the neuroradiological differential diagnoses. Neuroimaging plays a crucial role in the timely diagnosis of prenatal and postnatal central nervous system (CNS) infections and for therapeutic decision making. Although pyogenic infections of the central nervous system are not a frequent group of diseases in the pediatric population, their morbidity and mortally are very high. Therefore, CNS infections require prompt diagnosis and treatment for avoiding severe complications that can lead to an undesired outcome. It should be noted that the imaging findings are sufficiently specific to suggest the underlying cause in some pediatric patients. For example in uncomplicated cases of meningitis cranial computer tomography might be sufficient for clinical management. However, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is considered superior to other imaging methods in depicting subtle and early abnormalities and is therefore considered to be the method of choice in the work-up in most cases of suspected CNS infections in the pediatric population. Not only the primary CNS infection but also the sequela of CNS infection, including hydrocephalus, subdural collections, ischemia/infarction, cerebral abscess, demyelization, and vascular thrombosis, can be correctly depicted and any interval change over time can be followed with current imaging techniques. Newer MRI techniques such as diffusion-weighted imaging and magnetic resonance spectroscopy add additional information and are considered to be helpful for the final diagnosis of CNS infections. The objective of this lecture is to describe the most common pediatric prenatal and postnatal CNS infections, emphasizing key pathological and neuroimaging features, and to outline the strengths, weaknesses, and applications of the current neuroimaging technology. Intracranial tumors in early infancy are often thought to be congenital even though some cases fail to show any clinical signs and symptoms until some time after birth. Congenital brain tumors (CBT) are often arbitrarily divided into "definitely congenital" (present at birth), "probably congenital" (producing symptoms within the first week of life) and "possibly congenital" (producing symptoms within the first 6 months of life). CBT represent fewer than 2% of all childhood brain tumors. The clinical features include enlarged head circumference, associated hydrocephalus, and asymmetric skull growth. At birth, large head or tense fontanel is the presenting sign in up to 85% of patients. Initially, neurologic symptoms are comparatively rare. The prenatal diagnosis of CBT has significantly benefited from the introduction of prenatal MRI studies. Postnatal imaging involves a combination of MRI and CT for the detection of calcifications. Teratomas constitute about one-third to one-half of these tumors and are the most common neonatal brain tumors. They are often immature because of primitive neural elements and, rarely, a component of mixed malignant germ cell tumors. Other CBT include choroid plexus papilloma, primitive neuroectodermal tumors, and atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors. There is a strong predilection of CBT for supratentorial locations. Differential diagnosis includes spontaneous intracranial hemorrhage and congenital brain malformations, especially giant heterotopia. Prognosis for patients with brain tumors at birth is generally poor, usually because of the massive size of the tumor. The most favorable outcomes are with choroid plexus tumors where aggressive treatment leads to disease-free survival. The past few years has seen the rapid assimilation of digital X-ray systems within the field of diagnostic radiology. Clinical applications of these systems span the entire range of imaging from small, dedicated dental X-ray intra-oral systems to high-resolution digital mammography, high frame rate cardiac acquisition and even 3D rotational angiography. Three distinct detector technologies dominate current, commercially available digital X-ray detectors, namely computed radiography based around photostimulable phosphor plates, electro-direct flat panel and opto-direct flat panel detectors. This talk will start by describing the basic technology that underpins these detectors, giving examples of their current clinical application and the relative merits of each technology type. We will then follow the signal conversion and noise transfer stages through the detector. For the photostimulable plates, this involves generation of the latent X-ray image, subsequent production of optical photons via laser stimulation and final light collection using a photomultiplier tube. For flat panel systems, the detection process involves conversion of X-rays to secondary quanta (either light photons or electron-hole pairs), followed by sampling of this signal by the thin-film transistor pixel matrix. Design compromises that affect the resolution and the noise properties of these detectors are then discussed. Finally, both objective and subjective image quality results are used to demonstrate the image quality that can be achieved using the current generation of these detectors. The International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) published in 2004, a document entitled "Managing patient dose in digital radiology". Diagnostic information provided by modern digital detectors can be equal or superior to conventional film-screen systems, with comparable patient doses, but with digital systems, an overexposure can occur without an adverse impact on image quality. Overexposure may not be recognised by the radiologist or radiographer. A tendency to increase doses can occur. The document includes eight formal recommendations dealing with: 1) training aspects; 2) review of diagnostic reference levels; 3) patient dose audits; 4) availability of the original image data to the user; 5) optimisation when new digital systems or new post-processing softwares are introduced; 6) procedures for quality control; 7) justification criteria; 8) role of the industry promoting tools to know and control the exposure parameters. It is expected that the ICRP report would help to profit from the benefits of this important technological advance in medical imaging with the best management of radiation doses to the patients. It is also expected to promote training actions before the digital techniques are introduced in radiology departments and to foster the industry to offer enough technical and dosimetric information to radiologists, radiographers and medical physicists to help in the optimisation of the imaging. Some ongoing efforts to standardise patient dose data from digital technology, carried out by the International Electrotechnical Commission, will be presented together with some results of the European SENTINEL Consortium. The aim of all imaging methods is to answer the diagnostic question with sufficient quality and certainty. Decoupling of image acquisition, image processing and image documentation lead to new possibilities and risks for digital radiography. For the digital imaging methods, a suitable choice of parameters could lead to advantages in diagnostic information. An unsuitable choice could lead to harmful effect and result in wrong diagnosis. The aim of image quality optimisation should be to reach the necessary quality with the lowest possible dose. The following concept shows the strategy for optimisation and quality assurance in digital radiography. 1. Optimisation: Optimal post-processing is not independent of the dose range (acquisition parameters). Therefore, the necessity exists to optimise the quality depending on clinical criteria (like organ field, clinical problem, demand image quality). 2. Objectivation: Performing each kind of examination (organ program) in different reference centres could be a strategy for quality management. Afterwards the result would be objectivated by phantom exposures. 3. Standardisation: (defined bandwidth of image quality). The range of results, which correspond to a sufficient image quality, will be defined by these reference centres. For an unknown equipment, image quality can be determined by evaluation of similar phantom exposures. Dose and quality management means that in a broad range, the dose and image quality can be optimised and adapted to the clinical questions. For the future optimisation, objectivation and standardisation will be necessary in the framework of European quality assurance program. Foreign body aspiration and ingestion is a common problem encountered by a radiologist dealing with children. The spectrum of foreign bodies aspirated or swallowed is very wide. In this presentation, only solid foreign bodies are discussed. Foreign body aspiration involves the lodging of foreign material in the respiratory tract. Complete obstruction in the upper respiratory tract is an emergency, where diagnostic imaging does not play a major role. Those foreign bodies that reach the bronchi or get beyond can result in partial or intermittent obstruction. Furthermore, they may have a "ball valve" effect leading to hyperinfilation or complete collapse. The primary diagnostic imaging modality is chest X-ray and particularly one in exspiratory phase in order to mark out the hyperlucency of the lung. Bilateral decubitus chest radiographs can provide additional information. Fluoroscopic evaluation of the lungs and diaphragm during breathing are helpful. In foreign body ingestion, the gastrointestinal tract is the site of involvement. Esophageal foreign bodies and, depending on the type of foreign body, those in the stomach may require emergency endoscopy. Radioopaque objects can be detected on a radiograph that covers the whole gastrointestinal tract, lateral neck, AP chest and abdomen radiographs. In the case of non-radioopaque foreign bodies, oral administration of contrast media under fluoroscopy is helpful to depict the object in the esophagus. There are foreign bodies like batteries and magnets that deserve special attention. A negative radiograph or fluoroscopy does not exclude the diagnosis of foreign body aspiration and ingestion. The majority of hospitals in the UK have been using computed radiography for a number of years. Digital radiography is now being introduced as equipment is replaced. This talk will focus on the experience of a district general hospital housing the major trauma centre for the area. A digital radiography unit was introduced into one of the dedicated trauma rooms early in 2007. The advantages of using this unit quickly became apparent. The impact of this new technology on image quality, dose reduction and speed of delivery have been considerable. However, quality assurance, maintenance and knowledge of potential pitfalls are important factors in enabling users to get the best out of the unit. Clinical feedback has been positive and with increasing use by the radiography staff, the imaging service to patients has significantly improved. The last decade has seen the profile of the radiographer in the emergency department raised to new levels. Clinical assessment, image acquisition, image reporting, decision making and discharge are all tasks, which may now lie within the scope of the emergency department radiographer. New technological applications are revolutionising the way diagnostics are used at an earlier stage in a patient's assessment. This presentation will discuss the UK and international perspectives in relation to role development and provide examples of historical, current and future opportunities as well as explore some of the implications for education, professional practice and autonomy for the future. In today's medical -and specifically, -radiologic -environment, competition is not only a buzz-word, but a dominant factor directing that directs streams of patients, influencing influences the flow of capital, and building builds the intellectual capacity of institutions. Competition revolves mainly primarily around the larger market place of whichin which private radiology groups, and as well as public and academic hospital departments, want to compete for a fair share. The radiologist's armamentarium in the battle for the market, i.e., patients, includes include several factors, such as including quality of service, quality of communication, and quality of care delivered (among others). In this session, we will strive to familiarize our colleagues from different continents, countries, and health care systems with the principles and practice of using quality as a business tool. This challenging task will be met by our panel of experts who will look at the factors which that make a radiology practice thrive, examine quality as a "success factor,", and provide practical tips for setting upestablishing a quality management program. Come prepared for interesting lectures, and bring your most burning crucial questions to the panel discussion following that will follow the formal presentations. Building a radiology practice is a two-step process, starting with market research to determine who your customers are and what they need or want. This is followed by market outreach to educate customers about what your practice offers, why it is superior to that of your competitors and how best to access your services. Market research indicates that success factors for radiology practices include ease of access to their services (ordering process, location and available procedures), timeliness of service (time to next available appointment), timeliness of communication (turnaround time from study completion until report is delivered), quality of care delivered (level of expertise, correct diagnosis and studies performed are appropriate for indications) and quality of the experience or quality of service for patients and referring physicians and their staffs (courtesy, comfort, education and safety). Market outreach involves making all stakeholders aware of the available services offered by a practice and how best to access them and addressing any perceived problems in quality or service. At the Massachusetts General Hospital, we visit all newly appointed referring physicians to welcome them to the institution and teach them how to access our services. We visit every referring practice on a regular basis to see whether they have unmet needs or expectations and periodically survey our external stakeholders to determine their impressions of us.  A B C D E F G Quality as a success factor J.E. Husband; London/UK The wide range of sophisticated technologies available today has brought radiology into a new era in which imaging is central to diagnosis and management of disease. This increasing focus on imaging has changed the role of the radiologist and the radiology department from simply providing the results of a test to becoming clinical leaders, often directing treatment decisions. To achieve success in this expanding role, the radiology service requires a robust system of quality assurance and a framework for a continuous improvement. Key issues to be addressed in setting and developing quality standards include clinical outcomes, patient safety, patient experience, work force and resource efficiency. Such quality standards must be underpinned by good governance, strong leadership and team work. These principles will be discussed, drawing on experience gained to date in developing an accreditation programme of radiological services by the Royal College of Radiologists in partnership with the Society and College of Radiographers in the UK. This programme has been supported by the Department of Health in the UK and by other major healthcare bodies and provides a flagship for the development of accreditation in other specialties. The results of the pilot phase currently underway will be briefly reviewed. For every organisation interested in quality improvements, the introduction of quality management (QM) and certification is a logical step. This is particularly true for radiology departments, which serve as central hub and therapeutic directional point for patient management in every hospital. The decision to establish a quality management and certification program is necessarily made by the leadership. Nevertheless, a factor that is critical to the success of such a venture is to enlist all co-workers and employees into the team approach. In QM, several processes, such as patient services, performing and reporting diagnostic procedures, and error and risk management, must be designed, optimized, and made known to every co-worker involved. Documentation is an integral part of QM, as is information for all stakeholders. Examples of detailed tasks include structuring and standardizing imaging protocols, creating key performance indicators for the major processes, detailing job descriptions for every employee, building a patient safety and risk management program, in addition to many others. In this presentation, the major success factors for establishing a quality management, risk management, and patient safety program will be discussed. In addition, practical tips, which may be potentially helpful for the novice, will be provided. And, finally, the personal experiences of a radiology leader who successfully established a QM program will round off this session. MRI has become a technique of choice for the evaluation of myocardial infarction (MI) and can at the present time be considered as the gold standard for the assessment of infarct size and transmurality, and for the detection of micro-vascular obstruction. MI is due to blockage of an epicardial artery, resulting in hypo-perfusion in the infarct area, seen as a hypo-enhancement on first-pass imaging. However, imaging of MI using MRI relies mainly on delayed enhancement imaging, 10 min after injection of gadolinium. After an acute MI, there is an increase in the permeability of the vessels, and contrast infiltrates slowly in the interstitial space (wash in), with slow wash out, and is responsible for contrast staining in the infarct area. MI is seen as a contrast uptake, more or less transmural and more or less extended within the ventricles. These findings closely correspond to the histological limits of the necrosis. After a reperfused MI, a dark zone may be seen in the centre of the lesion surrounded by contrast enhancement. This corresponds to microvascular obstruction, an area with no contrast uptake at delayed phase, which is associated with a poor prognosis (nonviability Assessment of myocardial viability is an integral part of the workup and decision process in the treatment of patients with ischaemic heart disease. The concept behind the assessment of myocardial viability is that even patients with severely dysfunctional myocardium may have significant improvement in function following revascularization. Since any process of revascularization carries both risk and high costs, particularly in patients with poor ventricular function, it is important to make an accurate diagnosis and assessment of these patients. The main imaging modalities used are stress echo, nuclear imaging and cardiac MRI. Of these methods, cardiac MRI offers the most effective method of combining a general cardiac assessment of anatomy and function with two potential methods of determining viability both of which can be carried out in one examination. These methods are: a) Stress MRI evaluation of myocardial contraction based on the principle that chronically ischaemic or 'hibernating' myocardium will respond to low-dose Dobutamine infusion (5-20 micrograms/Kgm/min) by increasing contractility. During the past years, the major problem of non-invasive cardiac imaging has been to obtain the optimal temporal and spatial image resolution of a moving organ with small-calibre vessels. Recent developments in MDCT technology have led to the optimization of cardiac examination including assessment of coronary arteries, left ventricular function and, to a lesser extent, myocardial perfusion and viability. Such developments are the combination of multi-row-detectors and fast gantry rotation together with simultaneous acquisition of ECG signal, so that images are obtained either by scanning or reconstructing data at the point of least cardiac motion. The addition of a second tube has dropped the temporal resolution to 80 msec, resulting in detailed imaging of the coronary tree with high accuracy in detection, localization and characterization of the atheromatous plaque and the degree of stenosis caused, while works-in-progress have shown assessment of intracoronary flow feasible. At the same time, myocardial infarction can be assessed by evaluating both early and delayed myocardial enhancement as well as perfusion with recent studies in both animals and humans showing a good correlation with MR and SPECT. Hypoenhancement during the arterial phase may represent myocardial infarction with a hypoperfused, but viable, myocardium, while left ventricular wall thinning will be observed in chronic infarction. During delayed enhancement, it is feasible to detect subendocardial infarctions and differentiate occlusive from reperfused myocardial infarction. Perfusion can be assessed with the trade-off of an excessive radiation dose. Overall, MDCT is a fast, more-and-more comprehensive, non-invasive cardiac examination with shortcomings that are becoming lesser. The technique of CT colonography has steadily evolved and improved since it was first described over a decade ago. Protocols vary with regard to the type of bowel preparation used (colon cleansing versus faecal/fluid tagging), use of spasmolytic agents (buscopan versus glucagon versus no antispasmodic agent), method of colon distension (CO 2 versus room-air, manual versus automated distension, patient-controlled versus physician-controlled insufflation), use of IV iodinated contrast material, patient positioning, acquisition protocols including use of low mAs techniques, use of electronic cleansing, and formats used for image interpretation (primary 3D versus primary 2D reading). This lecture will describe the range of bowel preparations available for CT colonography, describe the principles of data acquisition, and discuss options for image interpretation of data sets including the relative merits of 2D and 3D viewing. I will discuss currently accepted minimum performance requirements in terms of data acquisition and image interpretation based on expert international consensus. Finally, I will propose a policy of good practice for implementing a CT colonography service including proposals for standardised reporting of findings and the necessity of quality assurance, adequate physician training and accreditation. CT colonography (CTC) is an accurate technique for the detection and classification of colonic lesions. Data interpretation is performed on a computer workstation, equipped with dedicated CT colonography software. CTC data sets can be evaluated by a primary 2D or a primary 3D approach. In either case, the alternative viewing technique must be available for rapid correlation and characterization of any suspicious findings. Primary 2D evaluation is based on "lumen tracking," by interactively scrolling through the axial slices and multiplanar reformatted images, focusing only on the air-distended colonic lumen from one end to the other. Primary 2D evaluation provides information about the attenuation of findings during the search process and is more time-efficient. Primary 3D evaluation is based on 3D virtual endoscopy in an antegrade and retrograde fashion. Primary 3D evaluation was shown to be sensitive for polyp detection because both, the conspicuity, especially of small and medium-sized polyps, and the duration of visualization, are increased. Colonic findings are characterized by their morphology, attenuation characteristics, and mobility. Knowledge of the CTC imaging features of common colonic lesions and artifacts is necessary for characterization of findings and to differentiate between definite colonic lesions and pseudo-lesions. Computer-aided detection (CAD) may have the potential to reduce the number of perceptual errors by providing the radiologist with a second opinion, pointing out possible abnormalities that might otherwise be missed. However, dedicated reader training and further technical improvements are important to increase the accuracy and ease of interpretation of CTC. Liver transplantation is the accepted treatment in patients with irreversible liver cell failure, some metabolic disorders and a selected group with hepatocellular carcinomas. Over the last decade, the major transplant centres have reported improving survival rates, even though they have developed more complex surgical techniques and treated more marginally higher-risk patients. This successful outcome has been dependent on appropriate patient selection, robust surgical technique, improvement in immunosuppression, and the recognition and treatment of complications. Interventional radiology has been a core speciality in achieving these goals. Interventional radiology is important to the potential recipient where techniques such as TIPSS, chemoembolisation and local therapy may obviate the need for or defer the timing of transplantation. This is an important consideration, because, though split liver, live-related and non-heart beating donors have increased the donor pool, there is an increasing number of potential candidates with a rise in the prevalence of viral liver disease. Improvement in surgical techniques have reduced the incidence of the more common vascular and biliary complications, although the quest for normal graft function and histology has increased the demand for non-invasive diagnosis and the reversal of any structural vascular or biliary abnormality detected on USS, MR and MDCT. Vascular techniques of angioplasty and stent placement are proven techniques in reversing the sequels of graft ischaemia and portal hypertension. MRC allows diagnosis of biliary strictures that may be treated by stent placement or dilatation. This presentation will review the European experience of these techniques. The portal vein (PV) is a vessel that collects the venous blood of the entire digestive tract, spleen, pancreas, and gallbladder. It ramifies within the liver, defining the segmental anatomy of the organ. Portal hypertension (PH) is a syndrome that naturally develops in diseases and conditions that impede the normal drainage of the PV. Its anatomic location, deep in the abdomen, makes access to it for any investigation relatively difficult. The PV can be percutaneously catheterized through the transhepatic and transjugular approach. Transumbilical and transmesenteric catheterization techniques are alternative approaches requiring a cut-down performed in the epigastrium or minilaparotomy. The selective catheters cannot be safely inserted through the spleen. The transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) is a percutaneous method of creating a portosystemic shunt for decompression of symptomatic PH. Prehepatic PH, which is related to the stenoses of the PV or its tributaries is suitable for angioplasty and stenting. An adjuctive embolotherapy of gastroesophageal varices most frequently prolongs the interval between possible recurrent PH due to TIPS stenosis and rebleeding. Transhepatic catheterization is also utilized in islet cell transplantation in which islets can be perfused into the liver via the PV. In patients prior to hepatectomy and insufficient future liver remnant (FLR), the embolization of PV branches must be as complete as possible to avoid the development of intrahepatic portoportal collaterals that may limit regeneration. In patients who have diffuse liver disease in addition to liver tumors, the FLR has to be 40% to permit a safe resection. Stroke diagnosis, prognosis, and risk of recurrence, as well as clinical evaluation and treatment decisions are influenced by the stroke subtype, ischemic or hemorrhagic, topography and extension, and likely causative mechanism. Identifying this subtype can be better achieved in the early phase of acute ischemia with the use of various neuroradiological techniques, such as CT, CTA, CT perfusion, multimodal MRI, and DSA. Knowledge and understanding of the advantages and drawbacks of these techniques for proper assessment of acute stroke is essential to establish the most cost-effective diagnostic strategy, which should be based on evidence-based published data and on personal experience and equipment availability. Thrombolytic therapy in acute ischemic stroke patients requires an adequate selection strategy, which can be based on unenhanced brain CT or on more advanced neuroradiological techniques, such as multimodal CT or MRI. These advanced techniques can provide an estimate of the presence or absence of potentially salvageable ischemic brain tissue (ischemic penumbra), and accurately identify the location of the arterial occlusion. A critical overview of the use of these techniques for this purpose will be presented. Criteria for thrombolytic therapy based on the findings obtained with advanced neuroradiological techniques will also be presented interactively with clinical cases. Endovascular techniques for both ischemic and hemorrhagic (intraparenchymal and subarachnoidal) strokes, such as superselective intra-arterial thrombolysis, mechanical clot retraction, and various occlusive procedures will be described, critically reviewed and discussed. The entire field of medicine is moving towards more individualized or "personalized" approaches. This holds true not only for therapeutic strategies -where more refined, stage-adapted procedures are in use to meet the individual needs of a given patient -but also for the field of early diagnosis and prevention. Adequate risk stratification and risk-adapted, individualized screening policies are advocated. Regarding the early diagnosis of breast cancer, population-based mammographic screening has been shown to help reduce breast cancer mortality. Mammographic screening, reduced post-menopausal hormone intake and the development of new, targeted therapies all contributed to the reduction of breast cancer mortality that has been observed in the last couple of years. Still, breast cancer is one of the most frequent cancers overall, and it continues to be the leading cause of cancer death in women, indicating that there is room -and need! -for improvement. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the breast has been introduced a decade ago. Over recent years, it has become increasingly evident that breast MRI by far the most powerful breast imaging technique that is currently available. Across all different clinical and screening scenarios, MRI has been shown to be superior to mammography -be it for diagnosing primary or recurrent, invasive or intraductal, familial or sporadic breast cancer, irrespective of a woman's breast density -and yet it is the technique only slowly being adopted in clinical practice. Arguments against the use of breast MRI include costs, frequency of false-positive diagnoses, lack of trained radiologists, lack of minimally invasive biopsy capabilities, lack of evidence by randomized, controlled clinical trials, and, last, fear of overtreatment. In this lecture, these concerns are reviewed, discussed and weighted against the advantages of screening and diagnostic applications of breast MRI. as "TB anywhere is TB everywhere", reflecting a message of urgency and shared responsibility. We, in India, have made renewed efforts and a "Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme (RNTCP)" has been developed almost a decade ago. This is the largest TB control programme in the world, which detects and puts on DOTS (directly observed treatment short course) more than 100,000 patients every month. Since the inception of the programme, about 6.7 million patients have been initiated on treatment, thereby saving more than 1.2 million additional lives. With 100% geographical coverage in March 2006 and treatment success rate of over 85%, RNTCP has been recognised internationally for the fastest expansion in the history of DOTS. Cure rates have more than doubled, and deaths reduced sevenfold. This symposium is a tribute to the renewed spirit to fight the dreaded disease and I hope the Indian speakers will also be able to enlighten the gathering from the rest of the world about the sporadic encounters of the disease in their settings. Combating TB is a long-term, but a winnable battle. To identify the unusual appearances of intracranial tuberculous infection and to discuss the role of newer imaging modalities like spectroscopy, which aid in the diagnosis of the same. Giant tuberculomas present as mass lesions, which commonly pose a diagnostic dilemma. Sometimes it is difficult to differentiate them from glioma, metastases and pyogenic abcesses. We present few cases of intracranial tuberculous infections with unusual location and morphology: 1. Tuberculosis of the pituitary gland is extremely uncommon and may masquerade as non-functional pituitary neoplasm. We describe imaging findings in three patients and review the pattern of involvement. 2. A case of an unusual mass like "giant" extra-axial tuberculoma during pregnancy whose morphology and imaging made meningioma a close differential diagnosis. MR spectroscopy served to complement MR imaging and provided diagnostic information. Two other cases with smaller extra-axial lesions were also evaluated. 3. Giant tuberculomas present as mass lesions, which commonly pose a diagnostic dilemma. Sometimes it can be difficult to differentiate them from glioma, metastases and pyogenic abcesses. We studied 30 cases and found that elevated lipid peak with Cho/Cr ratio less than 1.5 ppm in lesions measuring more than 2.5 cm suggested the diagnosis of giant tuberculoma in 77% of the cases. Modern imaging has made diagnosis of CNS tuberculosis easier. However, the appearance of these tuberculous lesions is varied, diverse and sometimes difficult to diagnose. Newer MRI imaging techniques like MR spectroscopy and perfusion add to the information and help in arriving at the final diagnosis. Spinal TB is the commonest cause of non-traumatic compressive myelopathy. Early diagnosis, made possible by MRI, and prompt institution of treatment are essential to prevent permanent neurologic deficit or spinal deformity. MRI can most efficiently delineate common patterns of involvement of spinal and paravertebral structures in TB and is also very useful in follow-up. Contiguous osteomyelitis of two or more vertebral segments is the common presentation, with varying degree of accompanying soft tissue component and abscess loculations. Progressive bone destruction causes collapse of the affected vertebrae, which is more anterior in the dorsal spine because of weight transmission, leading to characteristic gibbus deformity. There may be diffuse involvement of cord as myelitis or rarely tuberculomas may be seen as focal mass-like lesions. Follow-up scans on patients during successful treatment of the disease shall serve to illustrate changes that suggest healing. There are conditions that mimic common tubercular patterns, such as non-Hodgkins lymphoma and osteoporotic vertebral end-plate compression, which need consideration in the differential diagnosis. Abdominal tuberculosis is one of the commonest diseases in our part of the world. Ultrasound (US) is often the first modality to screen vague abdominal symptoms and fever of unknown origin, which form the common clinical presentation of abdominal tuberculosis. It is important to pick up the changes and suggest the diagnosis so as to avoid delay and multiple investigations. Advances in US resolution have opened new vistas in the evaluation of GIT disorders. US demonstration of thickening of the bowel wall, peritoneal involvement, fluid with septa and necrotic nodes enables the diagnosis of abdominal tuberculosis in the appropriate clinical settings. US-guided aspiration of ascitic fluid and nodes is simple and can further authenticate the diagnosis. US is also simple, safe and economical compared to other imaging modalities and can be used to monitor the response to ATT in these patients. Our experience has made us to experiment and improvise the technique of US, which will be highlighted by the use of case material from a busy private establishment where we use all modalities and deal with abdominal tuberculosis in everyday practice. Pulmonary tuberculosis is one of the commenest disease entities in tropical countries with an estimated 12-14 million cases of tuberculosis in India, the chest being the most common area involved. The recent emergence of drug-resistant organisms and increase in the incidence of AIDS and diabetes have led to tuberculosis being seen with protean manifestations. We observed various atypical clinical and radiological presentations in day-to-day practice. Patients with tuberculosis may present as ARDS, clinically as well as radiologically with pulmonary edema. Some patients may present with acute symptoms such as sudden onset of dyspnoea, haemoptysis and radiologically show pneumonic consolidation proving to be tuberculosis. Mediastinitis with collections in the posterior mediastinum may be due to tuberculus oesophagitis. Immunocompromised patients, e.g. HIV positive or post renal transplant, show tuberculosis associated with other opportunistic organisms. Patients with tuberculosis may be asymptomatic, as detected in few of our cases during the preoperative workup for coronary artery bypass graft (CABG), and most of them were diabetics. Since the introduction of multidetector-row CT (MDCT), the evaluation of pulmonary circulation has dramatically improved, enabling the radiologists to use CT as a precise diagnostic tool in many categories of patients, including dyspneic patients. This improvement in image quality is directly linked to the increased spatial and temporal resolution of CT acquisitions recently reinforced by the introduction of ECG-gated acquisitions of the entire thorax. The latter technology allows complete suppression of cardiac motion artifacts at the level of central and peripheral vessels, which is the sine-qua non condition for the development of accurate computedaided-diagnostic tools. However, its use is associated with increased radiation exposure and this lecture will review the clinical situations in which ECG-gated benefits outweigh their current limitations. The second field of development concerns the evaluation of peripheral pulmonary vessels, currently poorly investigated on transverse CT scans. The second objective of this lecture will be to summarize our needs in clinical practice and to illustrate the potential solutions to improve the evaluation of pulmonary vessels beyond the subsegmental level and to integrate lung perfusion imaging in daily practice. Lastly, this lecture will review the current status of functional imaging of the pulmonary circulation, emphasizing the areas in which it provides more information than morphological imaging. The arterial system is a critical network delivering the fuels of metabolism to the body's tissue. As the super highway for the arterial system, the aorta is a critical structure in supplying oxygenated blood to all the tissues of the body. MDCT an-giography has become the dominant modality for diagnosing and characterizing abnormalities of the aorta and its branches. Abnormalities such as dissection or atherosclerotic occlusion can slow the flow of traffic within the aorta and in extreme cases block flow resulting in end-organ ischemia. If these obstructions develop over a sufficiently long period of time, then collateral vessels form to bypass the obstruction, preventing end-organ ischemia. In the case of aneurismal disease or other diseases affecting the strength and integrity of the aortic wall, the primary concern is for aortic rupture and exsanguination. MDCT is effective in characterizing aortic abnormalities both for primary diagnosis and for managing treatment options. Following repair of the aorta, MDCT is equally beneficial in assessing the robustness of the repair. This presentation will focus on the optimal techniques for using MDCT to study the aorta as well as on the key imaging findings in the identification and characterization of aortic abnormalities. MDCT angiography has become a powerful tool in the evaluation of vascular diseases. The high spatial resolution and speed of acquisition of up to date scanners allow excellent results to be obtained, not only in the assessment of large calibre arteries but also in the evaluation of smaller branches. The clinical results are strictly dependent on the quality of the examination; therefore much attention must be paid to the scanning technique, the administration of the contrast agent and the synchronization between the two. The differences in acquisition among the different generation of scanners will be shown. Extremely important are also the methods of post-processing used; in this respect the possibilities with different reconstruction algorithms will be shown in terms of clinical results and time needed. Clinical applications and results in abdominal vessel disease and peripheral arteries disease will be shown, also in comparison with other imaging modalities. Emphasis will also be given to the importance of CT angiography in treatment planning. X-ray dose to the patients, suggestions to reduce exposure and optimization of scanning will also be discussed. The role of MR imaging is steadily increasing in the evaluation and management of small intestinal diseases. Its main advantages include the excellent soft-tissue contrast, based on multiple contrast mechanisms, and the absence of radiation exposure, as opposed to CT. MR enteroclysis is based on duodenal intubation and administration of a maximum of 2 l of a biphasic intraluminal contrast agent with the patient lying in a prone position. An iso-osmotic water solution with PEG may be used. MRE is as accurate as CE in the detection and localization of the affected SB segments, estimation of wall thickening and length of involvement in patients with IBD. Wall thickening, significant enhancement of the mucosa and relatively hypointense submucosal edema have been reported as common findings on postgadolinium T1-weighted images in active Crohn disease. Significant enhancement of mesenteric lymph nodes in post-gadolinium T1-weighted images and presence of deep ulcers are consistently demonstrated in patients with active disease. Perfusion imaging based on T1-weighted sequences may be used to quantify local blood flow, whereas T2-weighted images are utilized to discriminate edema from fibrosis. In patient with IBD, a tailored MRE examination protocol, providing optimal image quality, can demonstrate the transmural nature and extent of inflammation, depict lesions beyond severe luminal stenosis, characterize further stenotic lesions, identify intraperitoneal extension or extraintestinal complications and allow accurate disease subtype classification. Patients who present with acute symptoms, indicating intestinal obstruction or abscess formation, or patients requiring investigation for obscure GI bleeding should be directed first to CT, due to the issues of availability limitations and cost effectiveness. Because ultrasonography (US) is often the first imaging modality used in patients with abdominal symptoms, the radiologists who perform abdominal imaging should be familiar with normal and abnormal small bowel US appearance. This lecture will detail the technical conditions for US examination of the small bowel, stressing on high resolution and advanced US techniques. Elementary images and criteria of both normal and abnormal small bowel will be described including identification of a small bowel loop, use of patent peridigestive changes to focus the US examination on an abnormal intestinal loop, and evaluation of an intestinal wall thickening for an appropriate diagnosis of the main intestinal diseases. The potential role of US in patients with suspected acute or chronic small bowel diseases will be discussed, with a special dedication to the impact of US examination on the management of patients with inflammatory lesions (as Crohn disease) to know how and when US could be used as the first-step examination in these patients.On the contrary, endoscopy refinements such as capsule endoscopy (CE) and double balloon endoscopy (DBE), which are the only means to extend preoperatively the frontiers of endoscopic examination beyond the proximal jejunal or the distal ileum loops, should be considered only as last step examinations in precisely defined conditions. The technical conditions of small bowel examination with CE and DBE will be presented and the indications and contra indications, advantages and limits of these techniques discussed, with a special dedication to obscure intestinal bleeding. New developments in CT-and MR-imaging allow efficient acquisition of highresolution images of the liver. Especially, in patients with known primary cancer, accurate detection and differentiation of liver tumors are essential for optimal-treatment planning. To reach these objectives, new techniques and contrast agents may be used according to certain protocols. During this session, we will elucidate frontiers in liver imaging and discuss the advantages and limitations of both CTand MR-imaging of the liver.  Optimising MDCT for the detection and characterisation of liver tumors F. Caseiro-Alves; Coimbra/PT (fca@netvisao.pt) The major advances of MDCT for liver imaging derive from the combination of growing acquisition speed and reduced slice thickness, resulting in increased temporal and spatial resolution, routinely allowing high-quality multiplanar reconstructions and 3D rendering. From 4 row to 64 row scanners, the acquisition time needed to encompass the whole liver has been further reduced from 15" to not more than 5" per liver phase as seen on contrast-enhanced dynamic studies. This creates the opportunity to evaluate distinct liver phases and to separate them into pure arterial, late arterial and parenchymal phases of enhancement when using multiphasic imaging. Although beneficial, increased acquisition speed may increase a new problem since the optimal phase to depict a particular tumor may be completely missed when using such ultra-short acquisition times. To rationally choose the best MDCT protocol for liver tumor detection and characterization, the radiologist should be familiar with the normal distribution, and pharmacokinetics of iodinated-contrast agents especially related to total iodine load, concentration and injection rate, which should be tailored to address the specific clinical demand. Protocols are also strongly dependent on the nature of the tumor under evaluation (hyper or hypovascular) which should govern several parameters such as type of multiphase imaging, nominal slice thickness, and retrospective reconstruction. Pros and cons of different MDCT protocols will be addressed and some practical tips will be provided to optimize liver studies going from the 4 row to the most recent 64 row scanners. Learning Objectives: 1. To describe CT protocols to optimize the detection and characterization of liver lesions and explain advantages and disadvantages of different MDCT techniques (4-row to 64-row). 2. To provide protocols for optimal delivery of i.v. contrast media. 3. To explain the value of multiplanar reconstructions in the preoperative setting. Maximising the accuracy of MRI for the detection and characterisation of liver tumors J. Gaa; Munich/DE (gaa@roe.med.tum.de) Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has become the most important diagnostic tool for the detection and characterization of primary and secondary liver tumors. Improvements in gradient hardware and phased-array technology allowed implementation of high-quality breath-hold T1-and T2-weighted pulse sequences. Application of respiratory triggering can provide T2-weighted images of the liver with high spatial resolution. In addition, diffusion-weighted imaging shows excellent tissue contrast and has the potential for detecting small tumors. Quantitative measurement of ADC-values may be valuable in distinguishing malignant from benign hepatic lesions. This course describes recent advances in MRI of the liver such as fast imaging techniques and diffusion-weighted MRI. Optimized protocols for lesion detection and characterization will be provided. Learning Objectives: 1. To describe recent advances in MR imaging of the liver, such as fast imaging and diffusion weighted MRI. 2. To provide protocols for optimal lesion detection and characterisation. The role of contrast agents in liver MRI P.J.A. Robinson; Leeds/UK (106030.3217@compuserve.com) Because of the wide range of pathologies in the liver, and the number of contrast agents available, it is inappropriate to use a single protocol for all liver cases. An optimum approach requires a review of unenhanced images, along with all available clinical data, to determine the best choice of a contrast agent. Extra-cellular gadolinium agents which produce transitory T1 enhancement analogous to iodinated contrast in CT provide a powerful method for the detection of liver lesions, and can characterise most lesions which are distinctly hyper-or hypo-intense to liver on unenhanced images. The liver-specific contrast agents are more effective in characterising lesions which appear close to iso-intense on unenhanced images; this includes most benign hepatocellular lesions, and some well-differentiated malignancies. Liver-specific agents -both T1 enhancing (positive) and T2* enhancing (negative) -also offer a small additional improvement in sensitivity when compared to ECF gadolinium, for the detection of small tumours when optimum technique is used. MR cholangiography with gadoxetic acid or mangafodipir can be helpful in patients with non-dilated ducts in whom MRCP may be difficult (e.g. potential live transplant donors). The combination of ECF gadolinium with an iron oxide agent to produce a double-contrast effect offers the most effective approach for the characterisation of suspicious nodules in the cirrhotic liver. The double-contrast technique is also valuable in problem cases in which the initial single contrast examination is equivocal. Learning Objectives: 1. To understand the basic pharmacodynamics and the enhancement characteristics of the contrast agents used in liver MRI. 2. To become familiar with the appropriate selection of acquisition parameters for each type of contrast agent. 3. To appreciate the advantages and limitations of each agent in specific clinical applications. Why liver tumors appear as they do? Imaging-pathologic correlation P.R. Ros; Barcelona/ES (pros@hsp.santpau.es) As demonstrated in this special focus session, the study by MDCT and MRI of liver neoplasms can be challenging. However, achieving a preoperative, non-invasive imaging diagnosis is not only of paramount importance for proper patient management but also possible in many occasions. The state-of-the-art MDCT and MRI appearance of benign and malignant neoplasms is based on their pathologic features. Knowing the underlying histologic and gross pathology of liver neoplasms allows us to understand, and therefore remember, their characteristic imaging features and offer a likely diagnosis. We correlate the pathologic features with the imaging findings in the main primary liver neoplasms. We discuss as well a few uncommon neoplasms with characteristic imaging findings. The presentation is organized along the different cellular lines in the liver (hepatocytes, biliary epithelium, and mesenchymal cells) since each of them is capable of giving rise to benign and malignant neoplasms. We review focal nodular hyperplasia, hepatocellular adenoma, biliary hamartoma, hemangioma, hepatocellular carcinoma, intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and angiosarcoma. We prove why and how imaging-pathologic correlation enables us to state why liver tumors appear as they do. Learning Objectives: 1. To compare CT-and MR imaging with histopathological findings in primary and secondary liver tumors. 2. To explain the appearance of uncommon liver lesions. The role of imaging and the radiologist in the management of back pain is pivotal to ensure the optimum balance between cost effectiveness and clinical effectiveness. The attending radiologist needs to be familiar and conversant with the spectrum of spinal signs and symptoms and their importance in generating a request for the most appropriate mode of imaging in back pain sufferers. In addition, it is invaluable for the radiologist to be familiar with the natural history of degenerative spinal disorders and the therapeutic options available for their management. Of the vast spectrum of spinal disorders, it is essential that the detection of disease and the correct imaging interpretation is of the highest order. This requires appropriate use of imaging modalities with particular reference to MR imaging and a thorough knowledge of the imaging appearances of inflammatory, infective and neoplastic pathological processes. The strengths of the imaging department are measured by the available resource and expertise not only in the provision of non-invasive imaging, but also in the interventional imaging procedures used in both diagnosis and therapeutic management of back pain. The interactive session is specifically designed to show, using well-chosen case material, how best to apply imaging for the optimum and accurate management of back pain. Since the introduction of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) and percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) in the 1980s as well as the more recent advances in endoscopic treatments for ureteric stones, the choice of the most suitable method of treatment for a given patient with a stone in the kidney or ureter has evolved as a result of regular audits. Several factors affect stone management, these include stone size, stone site, calyceal anatomy, evidence of obstruction, renal function and stone radiolucency. PCNL is mostly indicated with large stone sizes (burden) of 2.5-3 cm, failed ESWL (this includes stones in the lower calyx), cystine and radiolucent stones, abnormal or anomalous renal anatomy (making ESWL difficult, if not impossible), including horseshoe and ectopic kidneys, calyceal diverticula, infundibular stenosis, body habitus and spinal/pelvic skeletal deformities, etc. Careful patient selection and preparation before PCNL is essential for the successful outcome, including appropriate imaging, particularly with CTKUB and CT urography with or without 3D reconstruction, which has become essential for the planning of difficult punctures. The techinque for percutaneous renal access will be discussed with emphasis on instruments such as needles, guidewires, dilators as well as anatomical landmarks, choice of puncture site, difficult punctures, post procedure drainage and complications. The successful outcome in PCNL depends on a team effort involving imaging, endourology, anesthesia, nursing staff and the entire team of a busy stone unit. Many stones in the collecting system have a complex 3D structure, e.g. staghorn calculus. When planning a percutaneous stone extraction of such a stone from an IVP or a standard CT, it is often impossible to decide the optimal track. Often, these patients end up with multiple tracks, but with remaining stones. Our goal has been to make the patient stone-free using one track. The question is how to minimize the risk, but optimize the result? The goal has been reached by extended radiological planning with 3D-CT, creating the track under CT guidance and with a radiologist assisting the endourologist during surgery. The CT examination is performed with thin slices ( 1 mm) in two phases, native and excretory phase. 3D-images of the stone and the collecting system are produced in a workstation. On these 3D images, it is then possible to choose an optimal and safe track. In the most complicated cases, a biomodel of the collecting system with the stone is produced. When a high puncture, above the 12 th rib is chosen, the puncture is performed under CT guidance. Using CT guidance will minimize the risk. Finally, we have found that a radiologist attending in OR, supplying the endourologist with 3-D information from the two-dimensional fluoroscopic image, is of great help. Besides watchful waiting, there are four major techniques for the treatment of stones in the urinary tract, namely ureteroscopic stone extraction, extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL), laser lithotripsy through a flexible pyeloscop and percutaneous stone extraction. It is up to the endourologist to chose the best technique for each individual stone. In this decision, it is not only the effectiveness in stone removal, which has to be considered, but also patient safety and discomfort. Indications for percutaneous stone extraction are large stones ( 20 mm), ESWL-resistant stones and patients with anatomical difficulties. The majority of renal stones, which are treated with percutaneous technique are large and with a complex 3-dimensional structure. To avoid complications, when performing percutaneous stone extraction, the ideal is to create a track to a lower or middle calyx and with a puncture below the 12 th rib. However, the problem is that in some cases the whole stone cannot be reached by a lower calyx puncture and in other cases the stone cannot be reached at all by a lower calyx puncture. Often these patients end up with multiple tracks, but with the stones remaining. In these cases, a high puncture could solve the problem. But a high puncture means an increased risk, as the track may pass the pleura, lung, liver or spleen. Mammography is still the pillar of breast imaging. It gives a comprehensive view of both glands. It allows a direct view of some components, but anatomic definition may be limited by the reduced number of views and the need for compression. Sonography has the greatest potential in the definition of normal anatomy, but has a restricted field of view. The resolution may be very high, but requires an appropriate scanning technique. Sonography provides dynamic views of the ductal system, both normal and abnormal vascularity. It is even possible to differentiate the elasticity of normal parenchyma and stiff tumors. Its value is higher within the anterior compartment such as the skin, subcutaneous fat, superficial fascia and Cooper's ligaments. The integrity of these elements is important to exclude pathology or its diffusion. The presence of abnormal vessels in a doubtful glandular area usually suggests the need for a biopsy to confirm a tumor. Anatomical definition is reduced in large and/or fatty breasts and in the deepest area due to the reduced resolution. With magnetic resonance, anatomical resolution is not at its best, but changes of normal tissues are still clear. This exam better visualizes the deeper structures that are usually poorly defined both by mammography and ultrasound. Sonography is also the best method to evaluate the lymph nodes; alterations in normal morphology, cortical thickness and vascularity offer valuable information that may be enhanced by the use of specific contrast agents. This overview of different 3D-4D breast ultrasound (US) imaging modalities should bring a better understanding of its technical use and diagnostic information. The following 3D-4D imaging techniques are based on automatically acquired US volumes (Voluson®-technique): The multiplanar display view is the typical mode of 3D US data presentation. Surface mode rendering represents the data within a volume of interest. Glass body rendering is a transparency mode, which makes the gray-scale data transparent and shows the colour flow data in a surface-rendered mode. The inversion mode offers a 3D surface presentation of echo-poor lesions. Volume contrast imaging (VCI) works with static 3D and with dynamic 4D breast scanning. Volume calculation and virtual computer-assisted organ analysis of a lesion is performed with VoCal software. Tomographic ultrasound imaging (TUI) is a tool to document static 3D US volumes. 3D-4D US of the breast offers diagnostic information of the coronal plane. In this plane, benign lesions show the compression pattern sign, and malignant lesions the retraction pattern or star pattern sign. The indeterminate pattern combines signs of compression and retraction or star pattern. Glass body rendering in combination with power-Doppler, colour-Doppler or high definition-flow imaging presents the intra-and peritumoral 3D vascular architecture. 3D-Targeting proves correct or incorrect needle placement in all three planes. 3D-4D US is technically advanced and suitable for the daily diagnostic and interventional breast work. Compared with routinely used 2D US, 3D-4D breast US provides additional information in diagnosis and intervention.  Should thermal ablation replace partial nephrectomy? P.R. Mueller; Boston, MA/US (pmueller@partners.org) The argument as to whether percutaneous ablation of renal cell carcinoma is better or worse than laparoscopic partial nephrectomy may never be resolved as a comparison study is almost impossible to perform. Suffice to say that results in the literature suggest that any exophytic tumor from the kidney that is 4 cm or less can be completely ablated via a percutaneous approach. Clearly, there are legitimate questions with percutaneous ablation on whether treatment of larger tumors or tumors that are more centrally placed will be successful. However, several technical innovations have been developed in recent years to allow treatment of central tumors and those close to the ureter can be treated, and initial results are encouraging. Laparoscopic surgery though has become even more "minimally invasive" recently, and some patients may actually go home on the same day of surgery. On the other hand, laparoscopic partial nephrectomy does require general anesthesia. This is certainly not a requirement for percutaneous ablation. In fact, in our experience, over 90% of the cases can be performed under local anesthesia and conscious sedation. A 7-year experience from the Massachusetts General Hospital comparing partial nephrectomy and RFA shows comparable short-term cancer control. Patients who are over 60 years with three or more significant medical co-morbidities are better served by percutaneous RFA. This talk will present both pros and cons of percutaneous ablation and will include the audience in a discussion on what makes ablation good and/or difficult. Learning Objectives: 1. To learn the differences between nephron sparing surgery and percutaneous RF ablation. 2. To understand the advantages and disadvantages of both techniques. Percutaneous cryotherapy: When should it be preferred to radiofrequency? X. Buy, A. Gangi; Strasbourg/FR (xavier.buy@chru-strasbourg.fr) Cryotherapy achieves tumor ablation with lethal freezing temperatures ranging from -20 to -40 °C. This technique has been successfully used in liver, kidney, lung and bone. Miniaturization of the cryo-probes allows their percutaneous use in computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) tunnel. Compared to the other thermal ablation techniques, the ice ball created during the cryotherapy procedures can be clearly visualized under CT or MR guidance. This allows a precise tumoral coverage. Multiple electrodes (up to 30) can be activated simultaneously to treat large lesions (thermal synergy) or several non-adjacent lesions at the same time. Pain induced by cold temperatures is reduced, so majority of the procedures can be performed under local anaesthesia or light conscious sedation. Conjunctive tissues and vessels offer resistance better to cold than to heat; this can be beneficial in some cases where adjacent structure requires protection, but can also potentially increase the risks of post-procedural haemorrhage and tumor seeding. The duration of the cryotherapy procedure is similar to radiofrequency, but the cost is slightly B C D E F G Mammography, particularly when combined with US and MR-imaging, is an effective imaging modality for detection of non-palpable breast lesions. Some of these lesions require further characterization. Percutaneous biopsy is faster, less invasive, and less expensive than surgical biopsy, and is therefore becoming the preferred alternative. Percutaneous needle breast biopsy is recommended for lesions categorized as BI-RADS 4 and 5. Guidance for percutaneous biopsy is provided by stereotaxis, ultrasound, and MR. Stereotactic guidance is used for lesions seen only by mammograms and not by ultrasound, particularly microcalcification clusters, small opacities in fatty breasts and architectural distortion. Stereotactic equipment is designed to calculate the position of a designated site by localizing its position in the x, y, and z axes from the breast surface. Stereotactic guidance units are divided into two basic types: add-on units and dedicated prone tables. Imaging on these units is available as conventional or digital spot mammographic imaging. An increasing number of needle and biopsy probes are available, including small-gauge needles, cutting needles in combination with guns, and directional vacuum-assisted-devices. The last type is more often used under stereotactic-guidance. Directional vacuumassisted biopsy devices are attached to a vacuum. The vacuum draws tissue into a side-hole in probe and a rotating cutter advances over the tissue, cuts a core from the breast, and withdraws the specimen. Directional vacuum-assisted biopsy devices are available in 14-, 11-, and 8-G. Because of the ability to remove smaller lesions completely, it is necessary to place a localization clip to mark the biopsy site to identify the area for surgical removal or follow-up. Learning Objectives: 1. To become familiar with presurgical localisation procedures. 2. To understand basic principles and technical apects of stereotactic technique. 3. To learn when and how to perform stereotactic vacuum-assisted biopsies. to an academic career is obviously a huge task. The combination of good parenthood and a reasonable career as an academic radiologist demands family-friendly work patterns, cultural and social environments supporting this rather common but complex family design, and last but not least, well-structured and efficient academic career plans. Strict guidelines for academic education, academic promotion and academic resources contribute to en effective commitment to an academic career along with family life. Furthermore, elimination or outsourcing of time-consuming administrative duties and obstacles promotes a deeper engagement in academic research and university teaching. Learning Objectives: 1. To identify key conflicts in combining parenthood with academic work. 2. To relate different working conditions and lifestyles to these conflicts. 3. To reflect on possible problem solving strategies. Family friendly work patterns: How to integrate them in radiology departments C. Roche; Galway/IE Radiologists will be attracted to those jobs that offer flexibility in an environment where they can have an interesting career. Departments that promote family-friendly workplaces have an edge when it comes to recruitment and retention of skilled employees. Family-friendly policies are a way to support and recognize the changing needs of employees at different points in their lives and careers. They are good for business, they are good for the radiologists and they are good for their families. Learning Objectives: 1. To explain how radiological work patterns will change over the next 10 years with an increasing proportion of female radiologists. 2. To understand the challenges facing radiology departments as they try to balance demands for flexible working hours with provision of service. 3. To illustrate how evolving technologies can help to create a better work-life balance. Serious diagnostic mistakes are followed either by absent, delayed or erroneous patient management and may be lethal or carry significant complications, increased cost and patient's suffering and misery. In emergency medicine, a correct and complete diagnosis must be formulated at once. A considerable number of factors may exist at the origin of serious diagnostic mistakes. They may be related to hospital organisation of emergency medicine, communication, equipment, choice of investigation modalities, technique and medical and paramedical expertise. Other factors are the type of lesion or injury and pathophysiology. These general and specific factors will be discussed in the following conferences. Session Objective: 1. To understand the numerous factors generating serious mistakes in emergency radiology applied to the central nervous system, chest, abdomen and the musculoskeletal system. Central nervous system D. Balériaux; Brussels/BE (dbaleri@ulb.ac.be) More than ever, mistakes will be avoided by the radiologist if time is taken for talking to the patient and/or his family as well as to the referring clinician. Mastering the new upcoming techniques in the field of neuroimaging is mandatory to provide the right diagnosis at the right moment! Learning Objectives: 1. To comprehend clinical situations for which proper management and adequate choice of optimal imaging modalities is of utmost importance. This includes not only traumatic but also infectious, vascular and tumoral pathologies. 2. To understand how and why serious mistakes are sometimes made and how to avoid them by being more aware of the absolute necessity for a radiologist to be informed by the referring physician about the patient's clinical history, clinical examination and suspected pathology. 3. To become familiar with the latest technical performances of spiral CT and MRI enabling fast and accurate diagnosis of pathologies requiring rapid therapeutic actions. Chest C. Beigelman-Aubry; Paris/FR Computed tomography (CT) has always been a modality of choice for the exploration of non-traumatic and traumatic chest emergencies. With new generations of multidetector-row CT, fast volumetric acquisitions are obtained with high-spatial resolution allowing 2D and 3D reformats of excellent quality. These post-processings may have a great added value under some conditions. However, potential pitfalls may be encountered due to inadequacy of technical factors including dose, effective slice thickness, reconstruction interval or kernel chosen according to the researched pathology. Most often, these examinations require contrast media administration. In some situations, the site of injection may preclude correct analysis of structures, especially ascending aorta and supra-aortic vessels in the case of jugular or subclavian catheter injection. Moreover, pitfalls may be created by inadequate quality or timing of vascular opacification. Window settings have also to be adapted to the diagnosis suspected. Dedicated post-processing protocols must be applied to each anatomical compartment to avoid certain lesions, especially with polytrauma patients. Systematic matching of created images with native images will avoid potential mistakes of interpretation. Last, knowledge of artefacts created by external devices, respiration or vascular motions has always to be integrated for a correct final diagnosis. Learning Objectives: 1. To be familiar with technical factors including acquisition and reconstruction parameters potentially generating pitfalls in CT analysis in chest emergencies. 2. To be aware of potential pitfalls due to contrast media administration, including the site of injection, the quality and timing of vascular opacification or the window settings used. 3. To know when and how to use post-processing tools in specific conditions especially in polytrauma patients according to the underlying pathology researched. 4. To recognise the artefacts created by external devices or respiratory motion for final interpretation. A-399 16 To understand how mistakes in abdominal imaging may occur, it is necessary to consider both generic and specific causes. In the former, these may arise from failure of observation or deduction by the individual radiologist, but also include errors as a result of failed communication or misleading clinical information. Technical issues may also contribute but these are a relatively small cause of erroneous reports. Specific causes related to abdominal imaging include modality choices, contrast errors, as well as in many circumstances a failure to appreciate the pathophysiology of the acute abdomen. They can thus be summarised as follows: Errors related to modality choice are typified by the inadequacies of the plain abdominal film and a failure to realise the limitations of this examination. Likewise, ultrasound although extremely useful in specific clinical situations has limitations in the whole abdomen. The use of contrast agents is often essential, but it is just as imperative that the radiologist is aware of the dangers of administering barium sulphate to a patient as is knowledge of the correct protocol for administering intravascular contrast agents during CT examinations. Again indications of their use will depend on the potential diagnosis. Finally any radiologist reporting examinations in the acute abdominal situation must be aware of the numerous causes and the protean nature of their manifestations. Failure to do so may have catastrophic consequences for the patient. Liver cirrhosis is an extremely common condition. Diagnosis relies on pathological findings. Nevertheless, imaging data (US, CT, MRI) are highly accurate in detecting cirrhosis. Changes of liver contour, anatomy and contrast enhancement should be identitied, as well as the varions appearance of regeneration, from the "coarse pattern" to discrete liver nodules. Identification of fibrosis mimicking tumours will be detailed. Cirrhosis is commonly associated with portal hypertension (PH); identification of collaterals is the major sign of PH. The attendees will be trained to learn the classification of PH, based on physiopathology and aetiology and to explain and identify on US, CT or MRI the major collaterals like paraumbilical vein, left gastric vein and splenorenal shunts. Physiological signlficance of each group of collaterals will be detailed, evaluating if possible the risk of variceal bleeding and/or encephalopathy. Special attention will be paid to the identification of partial obstruction of the portal system, either related to splenic vein or superior mesenteric vein obstruction. In that case, most of the collaterals are portoportal shunts. The importance of assessing the portal venous system for patency prior to liver/portal surgery will be explained, as well as the possibilities for percutaneous treatment as an alternative to surgery in the palliation and treatment options of PH, including intra-hepatic shunting and embolization of arterioportal fistulas. Indications and follow-up of TIPS are challenging issues and will be discussed. In order to illustrate these topics, several cases will be presented with audience interactive participation using an electronic voting system (keypads). Basic science has delivered new insights into the molecular background of human diseases, which may lead to novel diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. To translate preclinical approaches into clinical application, functional methods are required. This symposium will focus on two aspects, namely, angiogenesis and stem-cell tracking. Angiogenesis is a complex process involving pro-and anti-angiogenic mediators, multiple cell types and growth factors. For initiation and progression of angiogenesis, angiogenic factors are essential. This led to the concept of anti-angiogenic therapy, which is designed to starve tumors by disturbing their blood supply. In this context, several anti-angiogenic agents or genes have been successfully used in preclinical models and clinical studies. These new treatment approaches need novel diagnostic tools for the assessment of vessel density and perfusion prior to and following therapy. Techniques to noninvasively quantitate tumor perfusion, vessel density or permeability are complemented by new strategies to visualize specific targets on vascular cells and cell recruitment to the sites of angiogenesis. Stem-cell therapy is an attractive new strategy in the management of patients with cardiological or neurological diseases. Whatever the mechanisms underlying the therapeutic efficacy are, either cell replacement or bystander immunomodulation, a key issue to address for translation into the clinic is the development of in vivo, noninvasive methods for tracking the transplanted cells. Imaging allows in the in vivo monitoring of cells and can provide a better understanding in the evaluation of the functional effects of cell-based therapies. Magnetic resonance imaging, nuclear medicine techniques and optical-based approaches utilizing different cell-labeling techniques have been shown to provide a valuable means for monitoring cell therapies in vivo. Session Objectives: 1. To introduce techniques for the non-invasive quantitation of tumor blood flow, vessel density and cellular/molecular markers of angiogenesis. This will be done for radio-isotope based methods and for magnetic resonance imaging. 2. To discuss the advantages and drawbacks of the methods presented with respect to their preclinical and clinical utility. 3. To present techniques for cell tracking for radio-isotope based methods and for magnetic resonance imaging. 4. To present preclinical and clinical evidence for the successful application of these methods in monitoring and optimising cellular therapies. Imaging of angiogenesis with MRI M. Neeman; Rehovot/IL (michal.neeman@weizmann.ac.il) Angiogenesis, the growth of new blood vessels, requires coordinated participation of numerous cell types and signaling pathways. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) facilitates anatomical, functional, cellular and molecular non-invasive visualization of the basic biological mechanisms that execute angiogenesis, in addition to its role in preclinical drug development and clinical imaging of response to pro-and anti-angiogenic therapy. Expansion of the vascular bed by angiogenesis is characterized by vascular hyperpermeability, reduced vasoreactivity, instability and high tortuosity. The plasticity of the vasculature during angiogenesis is accompanied by activation of signaling pathways in endothelial cells, and subsequent changes in cell surface markers corresponding to growth factor receptors, transporters and adhesion molecules. In addition, enzymes secreted to the interstitial space and plasma proteins extravasated from leaky blood vessels result in profound changes in the extracellular matrix. Angiogenesis is facilitated by the recruitment of endothelial and accessory mural cells, which can be followed by MRI. Functional imaging of blood volume, blood flow, perfusion and vasoreactivity shows the consequence of angiogenesis. Recent developments in molecular imaging of specific cell surface markers using targeted contrast agents, imaging markers for gene expression and enzymatic activity and tracking recruitment of vascular cells further expanded the repertoire for MRI of angiogenesis. Thus, MRI provides a comprehensive multiparametric view of the angiogenic process. Learning Objectives: 1. To outline the mechanisms and potential imaging targets in the angiogenic process that are accessible by MRI. 2. To review the functional MRI tools available for imaging angiogenesis. 3. To review the molecular and cellular MR methods for imaging angiogenesis. Imaging of angiogenesis using radiolabelled peptides R. Haubner; Innsbruck/AT (Roland. Haubner@i-med.ac  Angiogenesis is a complex multistep process involved in a variety of pathological processes including rheumatoid arthritis, diabetic retinopathy, psoriasis, restenosis and tumor growth. The interest in basic angiogenesis research is sparked by the translational therapeutic potential aimed at developing anti-angiogenesis drugs as novel therapeutics for tumors and a number of non-oncological diseases. Thus, imaging techniques allowing non-invasive monitoring of corresponding molecular processes will be of great interest for basic research as well as for planning and controlling corresponding anti-angiogenic therapies. One target structure involved in the angiogenic process is the integrin v 3, which mediates the migration of activated endothelial cells during vessel formation. It was found that peptides containing the amino acid sequence Arg-Gly-Asp (single letter code: RGD) bind with high affinity to this receptor. Meanwhile, a variety of radiolabeled RGD-peptides have been introduced for monitoring v 3 expression using nuclear medicine tracer techniques. Here some aspects of tracer development are highlighted and some preclinical and clinical data as well as the potential of this class of tracer to characterize angiogenesis are discussed. C. Interventional procedures L. Steyaert; Bruges/BE (luc.steyaert@pandora.be) Fine needle aspiration (FNA): Cytological sampling with 20-23 G needles is the least invasive technique. Ultrasound-guided FNA is adequate to establish diagnosis of malignancy, but gives no information on invasiveness and requires an experienced cytopathologist. Mainly used for (symptomatic) cysts and to sample lymph nodes, it thus helps to select patients for sentinel node procedure. Core needle biopsy (CNB): 16 or 18 G needles are adequate for nodular lesions; 14 G is not necessary. Two or three samples per lesion are sufficient. The procedure is usually done immediately following a diagnostic mammography and/or ultrasound exam. It is the standard first choice procedure. Better histological material gives a more confident diagnosis and less false results than FNA. It is less reliable for microcalcifications. Freehanded ultrasound guidance is the most used method. Vacuum-assisted biopsy (VAB): This uses larger (11-7G) needles and is performed under local anaesthesia. Vacuum aspiration gives optimal sampling and enables retrieval of the sample while leaving the needle in place. Main indications are foci of microcalcifications (stereotactic guidance), suspicious enhancing lesions not visible on mammography or ultrasound (MRI guidance), indeterminate nodular lesions, or very small suspicious lesions in difficult areas close to the skin, chest wall or axillary region (ultrasound guidance). Quality assurance: Visual inspection of the cores is a simple method to judge the quality of the sample. Changes in the white substance seen on the MRI are normally non-specific and appear due to inflammation of the brain parenchyma, degenerative diseases, autoimmune diseases, tumours and vascular diseases. The correct diagnosis may be supported by the clinical history data, findings and labour data. During the evaluation of the changes of the white substance, an exact topical analysis of the lesions, space occupying effects and the enhancement after the gadolinium injection can be achieved. T1 and T2-weighted sequences are generally enough to conduct an approximate diagnosis. Detailed statements are possible with MTI, diffusion-weighted imaging and MR spectroscopy, but they contribute little to the specification of the changes and will be used in the future mainly for the evaluation of the development of a disease. Analyzing morphological changes on the scan, the following approach should be used: symmetry of the changes; laminar or focal lesions; round, oval, slotted forms; localisation and number of lesions in sub-cortical, corpus callosum, periventricular, supra-and infratentrorial; localisation of the changes, only in white matter or changes in white and grey matter; signal intensity in T1-and T2-weighted sequences; focal or generalized space occupying effect; and presentation of contrast agent enhancement. T2-weighted sequences are the preferred sequences over proton density sequences. FLAIR sequences show high-contrast changes, enhance the significance of lesions in the grey matter, however, show less infratrentorial lesions. Changes of the U-fibres in the subcortical area are important references for the differential diagnosis. In the presentation, special attention will be paid to changes in multiple sclerosis, systemic immune mediate diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus, Behcet disease, sarcoidosis, noninflammatory vascular syndromes, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), neuromyelitis optica, central pontine meyelinolysis, infectious diseases and metabolic diseases. A printed summary of characteristic images and typical pathological findings will be distributed to the participants. Neuroradiology plays a significant role in the field of dementia. Early diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases causing cognitive decline is crucial to start treatment strategies aiming at neuroprotection. This implies precise characterization of the preclinical and early clinical stages, such as mild cognitive impairment and prodromal Alzheimer's disease (AD). Different neuroimaging techniques have shown the ability to provide characteristic findings in these early stages, which may be useful as biomarkers. This applies to both structural and more functional techniques, including MRI, MRS, fMRI, SPECT and PET. Differential diagnosis of patients with dementia has also improved with the use of neuroradiology. MRI is useful in characterizing vascular lesions in patients with dementia. Patterns of involvement have been described in fronto-temporal lobar degeneration, which are useful in the distinction from AD. Characteristic imaging findings have been described in Creutzfeld-Jakob disease and in dementia in Parkinson's disease, using both structural and functional imaging techniques. In genetically conditioned diseases causing cognitive impairment, such as Huntington's disease (HD), MR techniques, both structural and functional, have demonstrated its usefulness. MRS and MRI have shown changes in the brain in preclinical carriers of HD, which correlate to neuropsychological performance, and may therefore serve as early biomarkers. The use of these biomarkers as indicators of treatment response in clinical trials is currently being investigated. To date, no such biomarker has been accepted as a surrogate marker. However, potential biomarkers, such as progressive brain atrophy, are being applied to research in dementia. CNS infection is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality and has an increasing prevalence in the general population. The incidences of these are largely dependent on the involved compartment and immunological status of the patient. Most of the CNS infections can be treated successfully as long as they are detected early. It has been shown that delays in diagnosis can lead to increased morbidity and mortality. Radiological evaluations play an important role in the diagnosis, subsequent treatment and treatment monitoring. The most useful classification of the CNS infections is according to the anatomic space involved. Each of these spaces has distinct clinical features and a variety of predisposing conditions. Infections of each compartment have distinct imaging findings and differentiation can be made using these characteristic imaging patterns. MRI has become the modality of choice with its higher sensitivity. Contrast administration is mandatory and increases the sensitivity. Imaging findings vary from obliteration of CSF space, thickening and enhancement of the meninges of meningitis to prominent ring enhancement with peripheral edema and central necrosis of brain abscess according to its location and stage. Neoplasms, nonbacterial granulamatous diseases and acute ischemic lesions should be considered in the differential diagnosis. MR imaging techniques undergo a steady process of ongoing developments and improvements, ensuring development towards a faster, more accurate, more patient friendly and more widely applicable noninvasive imaging modality. The most challenging, also most driving, development in recent years is the clinical implementation of parallel imaging (PI) techniques. As gradient strength comes to the limit of peripheral stimulation, these techniques allow for a further substantial speed-up of MR acquisitions. PI literally allows stepping from a single phase-encoding step technique to multiple phase-encodings at once. To elaborate, PI allows for a reduction of necessary phase encoding steps with the subsequent reconstruction of missing lines based on the additional consideration of the distribution and signal contribution of single elements in a multi-element array. Therefore, the application, speed and success of PI are directly linked to the existence of multi-channel MR receiver systems and to the use of dedicated multi-element coil arrays. While in the beginning of PI 2D techniques have been used with single direction acceleration, most recent 3D techniques further push PI with acceleration in two dimensions, allowing ~8-16 times faster imaging. Therefore, 3D techniques such as MRA substantially benefit from PI enabling the use of high temporal resolution in dynamic imaging or alternatively higher spatial resolution within the same acquisition period. Many vendor-provided protocols already incorporate PI techniques, but successful application is substantially dependent on individual optimization. This lecture reviews the basics and clinical implementation of PI in various applications and provides an overview on upcoming developments. Improvements in hardware and software have made it clinically feasible to obtain high-resolution whole-body MRI in a relatively short time; the technique represents a promising alternative to multi-modality diagnostic algorithms. Since the extended anatomy to be covered is much longer than the homogeneous region of the MR scanner, the available techniques can be divided into two main approaches. In the so-called "multistation" approach, dedicated MR sequences to different anatomical regions are applied at different table positions. With an aim towards decreasing the acquisition time of MR data, acquisition during either automated step-wise or continuous table motion has received significant interest recently. Examination protocols have been adjusted to specific clinical indications. For instance, healthy subjects have undergone a different protocol for screening than patients with malignancy for staging. A main part of the presented whole body MRI protocols has been based on coronal T1-weighted TSE-imaging which is used to obtain an overview and fat suppressed short tau inversion recovery (STIR) imaging with high image contrast as an overall search sequence. Whole-body MRI has mainly been applied in oncology for staging of malignant tumors or metastases detection, and promising results have been obtained in comparison to FDG-PET/CT or multi-slice CT. The technique has also been applied to assess the extent of muscle diseases and for whole-body cardiovascular and tumor screening. Although the clinical relevance of the technique in secondary prevention and surveillance of diseases is unclear, the potential acceptance for these indications, including research, is great. Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) is based on the tissue-depending signal attenuation caused by incoherent thermal motion of water molecules (Brownian motions). There are multiple ways of obtaining DWI: fast spin echo, single-shot and multi-shot echoplanar imaging (EPI), with water excitation or water suppression (STIR), and steady state free precession. We use a single-shot diffusion (DWI) EPI sequence. Inverse greyscale intensity scale is applied on 20 mm-coronal MIP, to obtain a "PET-like" image. This static coronal projection allows direct comparison with other modalities (bone scan) or sequence (coronal STIR in a whole-body MRI protocol). The principal interest of this sequence lies in its contrast resolution. As there are no anatomical super positions, it decreases the time of reporting. It is of particular interest in the evaluation of bone marrow diseases, particularly multiple myeloma. In our experience, the use of DWI increases the sensitivity of a whole-body MRI protocol for the detection of lymph nodes, mostly in the mediastinohilar areas, and it is of great interest for initial staging of lymphoma and therapeutic follow-up. Single-shot diffusion EPI appears as the most sensitive sequence in staging, but its inherent sensitivity to susceptibility artifacts prevents its use as a standalone technique and obliges a confrontation with a more conventional sequence, like coronal STIR. DWI is a good complementary sequence in clinical routine and for many indications. It increases the sensitivity in the staging protocol and accelerates the examination reporting. For decades, imaging of the urinary tract has relied on intravenous urography (IVU) as the primary imaging modality. In more recent times, CT urography (CTU) and MR urography have taken over a lot of the imaging of the urinary tract. The process has been spurred on by fast technological advancements such as the use of multidetector-row CT and MRI using higher field strengths and powerful gradient systems. While some departments have completely abolished IVU, in others it still remains a frequently used examination technique, especially for non-malignant disease. As there is a paucity in the number of recent guidelines and comparative studies focusing on imaging management and outcome for common clinical scenarios, this abolition is often not based only on thorough scientific evidence. Other factors such as local preferences, technical improvements in CT and MRI, and the general trend of substituting projection by cross-sectional imaging techniques play an important role. This session will critically review comparative studies, radiation doses, economic factors, and the individual strengths and weaknesses of CTU and MRU in comparison to IVU for common clinical scenarios. Such an analysis should provide an improved understanding of: which patients and indications the use of CTU or MRU is justified, for which patients and indications IVU will remain a viable alternative, and how to optimize all existing urography techniques. Assessing PHT is mandatory for patient healthcare, comprising preoperative status, particularly for hepatocellular carcinoma resection. Portal hypertension is assessed by a portal gradient of 5 mm Hg or more. This measure is invasive. Portal hypertension is accurately explorated with Doppler ultrasound, including pulsed, color and power Doppler. Flow rates could be measured by Doppler ultrasound, as well as reversal flow or thrombosis. Portal vein thrombosis is related to clot, but tumorous thrombosis is frequent too. Concerning the hepatic veins and outflow, Doppler patterns are of interest. Indirect imaging features have a good specificity when viewing portal venous collaterals associated with liver morphological changes and parenchymal disorders. Collateral pathways are multiple, concerning various parts of the abdomen and pelvis, appearing in a random order. Some pathways are frequent and some are uncommon. Not only ultrasound, but also MDCT or MRI could assess these collaterals. Enlargement of the spleen and ascitis are less specific, but are part of the features of PHT. Searching of causes and diagnosis and treatment follow-up of the complication are performed with these techniques. 
