852259cf8d157b7b60e63a97ad3c69c89e14c664




The intrinsic problem of fast imaging in MRI is the fact, that a two-dimensional entity (the image) has to be reconstructed from the intrinsically one-dimensional MRI-signal. This requires the consecutive m easurement of n x n data points in order to acquire all data points for reconstruction o f the n x n pixels of an image. Since spatial encoding is performed using switched magnetic field gradients, the imaging speed is strongly dependent on the speed of gradient. State-of-the-art gradient system s (25 mT/m am plitude, 2 0 0 -6 0 0 μ sec risetime) reduce the switching time in fast examinations using sequences like ERI, single shot-RARE, GRASE or Burst-imaging to 10% of the total imaging time or less. Further improvements in gradient performance will then lead to only insignificant decreases in imaging time. A conventional spin-echo o r gradient-echo image requires about 2 -3 s pure acquisition time. According to a basic theorem of signal theory, the signal-tonoise (S/N) scales with the square root o f the acquisition time. This means, that an image with 50 ms acquisition tim e will have a 7 -8 -fo ld low er S/N. This illustrates that the final barrier for fast imaging is S/N rather than gradient speed. In general, the reduced S/N is com pensated by lower spatial resolution. It is therefore not surprising, that most applications of fast imaging are functional rather than morphological. Imaging approaches, which use prior knowledge in order to reduce the number of datapoints to be acquired promise further reductions in imaging time. Apart from so-called keyhole imaging, non-Fourier approaches like singular value decomposition (SVD)-techniques have been demonstrated to be able to lead to further reductions in imaging time by a factor o f 5 -1 0 fo r repetitive measurements on the same volum e of interest. " High speed" MRI does usually not refer to an exact time limit for data acquisition and will be discussed in this clinical overview in term s of 'lim ecritical" examinations that became available or crucially optim ised by recent hardware improvement. Aim o f this lecture is to sum marize current state of related methodology (f-MRI, perfusion and diffusion imaging) in view o f clinical applicability and to highlight its diagnostic yield. Functional MRI to study cortical activation has raised considerable interest am ongst radiologists and neuroscientists. The greatest advantage of echoplanar technique consists in better anatomical coverage and higher tem poral resolution, the first being more im portant fo r patient studies. The m ost evi dent clinical application is the mapping of brain functions to guide surgical planning. W ith more clinical experience F-MRI will also offer an objective way to document neurological o r neuropsychological deficits in difficult to assess patients including com atous patients and infants. To w hat extent activation studies carry prognostic information for individual patients, however, needs further evaluation. Echoplanar imaging allows additional hemodynamic (perfusion) and diffusion assessment without exceeding tolerable total examination times, even in crit ically ill patients. Primary role for both techniques is the early delineation of stroke and possible identification of tissue at risk. If larger patient studies replicate data from animal studies, MR will become an indispensable tool for individual therapy tailoring in stroke units. Tum or characterisation as well as depiction of transient cytotoxic edema or altered perfusion in neurodegenerative diseases further extend capabilities of MRI beyond imaging structural abnormalities. High speed imaging in the cardiovascular system is dearly needed because cardiovascular structures undergo rapid motion resulting in image degradation, and because MR-angiography requires relatively long acquisition times. The new strong gradient systems now available on MR imagers substantially improve the capabilities of cardiovascular MR. GRE, ERI and hybrid sequences all have been designed fo r the purpose of evaluating the cardiovascular system. W hile ERI sequences work in principle, their introduction into daily practice is hampered by imaging artifacts unique to ERI data acquisition. ERI techniques seem suitable to image cardiac morphology, wall distortion and function. EPI-MRA techniques have also been explored and will likely evolve into clinically useful imaging protocols, while the most im portant and elusive task: MRA of the coronary arteries has yet to be solved. Other pulse sequences, making use o f the fast gradient systems, have had more immediate impact on cardiovascular imaging. These sequences are used to evaluate perfusion and other function param eters in the heart, but most notably, the use o f very fast GRE techniques in conjunction with a con trast media bolus yields excellent angiogram s of the thoracic and abdominal vessels in a breath-hold. This technique is quickly becoming the superior MR angiographic technique. 5 High speed MRI o f the abdom en and the m usculoskeletal system J.L. Bloem, M. Wasser, H.J. van der W oude, J. Doornbos; Leiden/NL Fast SE (FSE) and GRE in combination with various artefact reduction tech niques have proven to be insufficient to freeze motion while providing high contrast and spatial resolution images fo r general purposes. In clinical imaging there still is a need for MRI techniques with improved high spatial resolution, reduction o f artefacts secondary to bulk motion, and high contrast. These issues can be addressed by techniques like magnetization prepared fast GRE, (multi-shot) ERI techniques, and hybrid techniques such as GRASE (GRE and SE) . The (potential) solutions and problem s (saturation, blur, T2* decay and decreased contrast, chemical shift, etc.) of these techniques in liver imaging will be discussed. A nother reason fo r high speed imaging shared by abdom inal and m uscu loskeletal imaging is analysis o f dynam ic MRI to allow evaluation of tissue vascularization and perfusion. In this field spatial resolution and native contrast become less of an issue, therefore allowing focus on speed. Clinical applica tion, especially in oncologic imaging, in relation to data acquisition methods and post-processing will be discussed. A final clinical application of high speed imaging in the musculoskeletal system is MR-fluroscopy. Instead of morphology, function o f loaded joints is analyzed. S3 SS mass 24%, calcification 18% and circumscribed mass 4%; Frequency of missed cases present in dense breasts 76%. 82% of missed cases were subtle o r intermediate in degree. The m ost common mammographie feature in dense tissue was architectural distortion; a vague o r spiculated mass in fatty tissue. (1) True interval cancers occur twice as frequently as those missed. (2) Most missed interval cancers are due to subtle and non-specific mammo graphie findings. Purpose: Airway complications, such as bronchopneum onia are common after general anaesthesia and may be due to aspiration. This may be the consequence o f impaired striated musculature in the pharynx and larynx caused by residual neuromuscular paralysis postoperatively. The effect of curare on the swallowing apparatus is not well understood. Methods and Materials: Fourteen healthy humans (2 2 -4 4 y) were included after Human Ethical Committee approval. Simultaneous videoradiography and pharyngeal manometry was applied during rest, liquid swallowing of a water soluble contrast medium, and phonation. The mechanical adductor pollicis "train-of-four" (TOF) response w as recorded following supramaximal ulnar nerve stimulation at the wrist using a Myograph analyser. After i.v. infusion of vecuronium (0.1 mg/ml) TOF ratios of 0.60, 0.70, 0.80 and > 0.90 were obtained. Results: Pharyngeal constrictor muscle function was not affected at any level of paralysis. The resting tone o f the upper esophageal sphincter was significantly reduced at TOF ratios 0.60, 0.70 and 0.80 (p < 0.05). There was also a reduced muscle co-ordination and a shortened bolus transit time at TOF ratio 0.60. Eight volunteers had laryngeal penetration o f contrast media at a TOF ratio of 0.80 or less. Conclusion: We conclude that residual neurom uscular paralysis with TOF ratios of less than 0.90 are associated with functional impairment of the pharynx resulting in pharyngeal dysfunction and impaired protection of the airways with increased risk o f aspiration in the postoperative period. Coordination o f swallowing and respiration is of fundam ental importance for safe swallowing, i.e., that no part of liquid and solids reach the airways. In order to better understand this coordination, we examined 98 swallows in dysphagic patients by sim ultaneous video-radiography and respirogram. The presence of misdirected swallows were indicated and the duration's of the pharynx passage, the deglutition apnea, and the respiratory cycle were calculated. The study revealed that misdirected swallows had a somewhat prolonged pharynx passage, a som ewhat shorter deglutition apnea, and a shorter respiratory cycle. Despite the small differences the ratio between duration's of the deglutition apnea and the pharyngeal passage (the swallowing safety index) were significantly shorter in patients with misdirected swallows that in patients without (1.8 [1.0-4.2] versus 4.5 [2.4-6.7]; p < 0.001). Swallows with a low swallowing safety index had an increased risk of misdirected swallows even when the duration of the pharyngeal passage w as normal and S 6 it is concluded that low swallowing safety index is a risk factor fo r misdirected swallow. The study also revealed that the duration of the deglutition apnea did not adjust to the time o f the pharynx passage. Age shortened the deglutition apnea but did not influence the duration of the pharynx passage which may indicate that aspiration in elderly dysphagic subjects is more a consequence of a disturbed respiration than of pharyngeal dysfunction. Misdirected swallow did not influence the phase of the post swallow respiration (54% expiration) compared with correctly directed swallows. The swallowing safety index is of substantial value when evaluating dysphagia. To date, 4 patients (3 m, 1 f) with acute (n = 2) and chronic (n = 2) dissection of the aorta (Type A: n = 2, Type B: n = 2) complicated by infrarenal aortic occlusion, severe ischemia of one o r both legs and hypoperfusion o f the left kidney (n = 1 ) underwent percutaneous fenestration and balloon dilatation of the dissection membrane. Prior to intervention, contrast-enhanced spiral-CT w as performed to depict the true and the false lumen and to define the site o f fenestration. After diagnostic aortography of the true and the false lumen via bilateral fem oral accesses, a 30 cm long 10 F sheath w as inserted into the true com pressed lumen and an intravascular sonographic probe (IVUS) w as advanced into the false lumen from the contralateral side. Transseptal puncture was performed with a TIPS needle under IVUS guidance followed by dilatation of the puncture site using 8 to 18 mm balloon catheters. In one patient a 15 mm /10 cm Wallstent® was placed into the aorta and left common iliac artery to maintain perfusion of the extremity. Results: Fenestration relieved lower limb ischemia in all patients. Hypoper fusion of the left kidney could not be resolved due to progressive thrombosis of the renal artery. One patient died the day after the intervention due to myocardial infarction; autopsy revealed a patent aortoiliac stent and an open fenestration site. Conclusion: Percutaneous fenestration o f intimai flaps in aortic dissection using IVUS guidance is a cost-effective, less invasive alternative to surgery to treat lower limb ischemia. 32 Outcom e of aortic dissection after surgical repair: M onitoring with Magnetic Resonance Imaging R. Fattori, P. Bertaccini, F. Celletti, I. Caldarera, G. Rocchi, E. Negrini, B. Descovich, C. Bnà, A. Pierangeli, G. Gavelli; Bologna/I Patients operated on for aortic dissection remain at a considerable risk of long-term mortality. Aim o f this study was to assess the capability of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) to identify and monitorate the postoperative com plications of aortic dissection. MRI was performed in 67 patients operated on fo r acute aortic dissection (61 type A and 6 type B). No residual dissection w as visualized in 16 patients (24%). A residual intimai flap was present in 51 patients (76%) with partial throm bosis of the false lumen in 25 cases (37%). Partial thrombosis of the false lumen was correlated to the diam eter of the false lumen (p = 0.0002) and to the presence of a periaortic hematoma (p = 0.0001). The pathological findings observed were aneurysmal dilation of the aorta (24 patients), chronic periprosthetic hematoma (10 patients), dilation of the coronary ostial reimplantation (3 patients), prosthetic infection (1 patient) and severe aortic regurgitation (2 patients). Twentysix of the 38 patients undergoing a scheduled follow-up showed a median increase in aortic diam eter > 5 < 10 mm/year. In conclusion, MRI is an optimal technique in the follow -up o f surgical treated aortic dissection providing an accurate dimensional evaluation of the aorta and identifying early com plications responsible fo r late death. (1 ) Endovascular stenting of aortic aneurysm s has become a routine procedure in many hospitals. Leakage, thrombosis, displacement and fracture of the stent are the most common postoperative com plications. O ur study will show the optimal imaging modality for the postoperative exam ination of aortic stent grafts. (2) From August 1994 until August 1996 105 aortic aneurysm s have been stented in our hospital with three different devices (Mintec, EVT, Chuter). The postoperative exam inations were done with Spiral-CT (150 ml contrast, delay 25 sec, slice thickness 4 mm, pitch 1 .5 -2 , increment 3 mm) including multiplanar reconstructions and CT-Angiography, Color-Coded Duplex Sonography (CCDS) and DSA. The maximum aneurysm diam eter was measured before and after stenting. (3) Spiral-CT provides all im portant information concerning the postoperative com plications mentioned above. C CDS does not show throm botic material in the stent and is o f limited use in obese and meteoristic patients. DSA is not reliable enough in the detection of m inor leakages and does not show the position of the stent in the throm botic part of the aneurysm. (4) Spiral-CT with multiplanar reconstructions and CT-Angiography is the most reliable imaging modality in the postoperative examination of aortic stents. Purpose: To assess the usefulness of special acquisition, post-processing and display possibilities available with Phase C ontrast (PC) MR angiography in the evaluation o f giant intracranial saccular aneurysm s in com parison with the Time-of-Flight (TOF) technique. Materials and Methods: 5 patients with intracranial giant saccular aneurysms have been examined by parenchymatous (MRI) and angiographic (MRA) mag netic resonance imaging techniques. The MRA study systematically included 3D Time-of-Flight (TOF), 2D and 3D Phase Contrast (PC) sequences. 2D and 3D cine PC sequences were obtained with retrospective cardiac gating (16 samplings/cardiac cycle). In all PC sequences averaged modulus, magnitude of complex differences and directional phase differences images were reconstracted from the original data set. Besides conventional Maximum Intensity Reconstructions (MIP), ciné loops were also created either from all three types of available source images. Results: Parenchymatous MR images and MIP reconstructions from both the 3D TOF or 3D PC MRA data sets provided useful information about the gross m orphology of intracranial giant saccular aneurysms. Source images from both TO F and PC sequences were useful in the analysis of the geom etry of the aneurysm neck. In addition to this, source images from PC sequences also provided information about inflow and outflow pathways. Directional phase difference images obtained in different orthogonal planes allowed analysis and decomposition of flow patterns inside the aneurysm al sac. These possibilities combined with the ciné-loop presentation, provided hem odynam ic information about intraaneurysm al flow patterns (video presentation) . Conclusion: The recently available 2D and 3D PC acquisition techniques and post-processing algorithm s with ciné display possibilities provide a unique and unprecedented insight into the hem odynam ic aspects of giant intracra nial aneurysm s in a non-invasive and reproducible way. Inflow and outflow pathways, as well as intraaneurysmal flow patterns (regular-circular or irreg ular) are usually detectable. These preliminary observations suggest that the PC-MRA assessment may contribute to a better understanding of the natu ral evolution and prognosis of these relatively rare vascular pathologies and possibly lead to more adequate therapeutic measures. loxaglate lodixanol RBF Normal -19 ± 4 -5 1 ± 16 Ischemic -1 1 ± 6 -6 1 ± 11 Conclusion: W e have shown that non ionic dim er iodixanol induces a signif icantly higher decrease in RBF than ioxaglate both in normal and ischemic kidney, lodixanol may therefore have a clear nephrotoxic potential in human. The aim of this study was to measure the distribution of dose from dental panoramic tom ography using a simple patient equivalent phantom and to assess the possible use in routine perform ance testing. A simple sliced hom ogeneous soft tissue equivalent phantom with locations fo r therm olum inescent detectors was designed and constructed. Dose distri butions were measured fo r a num ber o f dental panoramic units and showed highly non-uniform distributions with discreet peaks. The maxima in dose appeared to coincide with the centre(s) of rotation. Comparative measurements were made using a sliced anthropomorphic head phantom. The distributions were generally of a similar shape with only minor differences due to effects such as shading by boney structures. In conclusion, the m easurement o f a full dose distribution was not consid ered essential in routine performance testing although it may be useful to characterise the distribution fo r different machines on installation. The use of a simple hom ogeneous phantom w as found to give a good indication of the dose distribution in a patient. C onsistency o f performance is often as sessed by m easurement o f the radiation output at the approxim ate centre of the scanned volume. However, this measurement will be very dependent on precise location o f the detector and may require a positioning tool. 114 A com parison of subjective and objective approaches to the d o se-im a g e quality optim ization for digital subtraction angiography D.M. Marsh, J.F. Malone, P. Cooney; D ublin/lfìL The need fo r optimization in Digital Subtraction Angiography (DSA) and Diag nostic Radiology in general is well established, and several recent meetings organised by the CEC and others have highlighted the fact that there is much confusion on the part of manufacturers and end users regarding optimization strategy. This study examines tw o different possible approaches: i) utilising Signal-to-Noise Ratios and other rigorous objective Image Quality indices such as W iener Spectra (representing optimization with respect to noise), and Modulation Transfer Functions (representing optimization with respect to resolution); and ii) Subjective optimization incorporating an observer's psycho visual process by m eans o f well established measurements such as Bar Test Patterns for limiting resolution and also Threshold Contrast Detail Detectability measurements. Results dem onstrate good agreem ent between both of these approaches in term s o f an optimal dose solution; however it is apparent that some objective m easures such as W iener spectra have greater dose sensitivity and are not subject to the problem s associated with observer threshold criteria, which may thereby have implications in the choice o f optimization strategy fo r specific imaging tasks in a broader radiological context. 115 Radiation exposure to medical staff in angiographic and interventional procedures R. Dorffner, A.A. Bankier, O. Sözer, R. Novotny, M. Kontrus, J. Lammer; Vienna/A tentorial, hemisphere, lobe, deep or superficial, involvement o f critical areas, crossing of the midline, relationship with great vessels and ventricular system; third, to identify the gross pathological structure: solid versus cystic, hem orrhagic, necrotic, presence o f calcifications, vascularization. Finally, based mainly on the analysis of the previous findings, an histological diagnoses may be attempted and criteria regarding surgical or conservative treatm ent and prognosis may be provided. The modality of choice for the best evaluation of a tum or is magnetic res onance, employing T1 and T2 weighted sequences, Gd enhanced studies, slices in the three orthogonal planes. CT may however be sufficient fo r the first diagnosis; MR is m andatory fo r detection of multifocal locations and metastases. Angiography is nowadays rarely required, mainly fo r preoperative evaluation of relationship of the tum or with arteries o r venous sinuses or for preoperative em bolization of meningiomas. 119 B. Vascular diseases of the brain M. Forsting; Heidelberg/D Vascular diseases of the brain include a huge variety of pathologies. In most of them the key step in diagnostic work-up is some type of imaging and in some of them endovascular therapy is an alternative to surgical treatm ent options. In patients with a suspicion of an ischemic lesion CT should be performed first. With new CT scanners the diagnosis of ischemic infarction can be done within the first 4 hours and C T angiography can additionally visualize the site of the vessel occlusion. New MRI techniques like perfusion-and diffusion-weighted MRI allow to visualize capillary perfusion and intracellular disturbances. In pa tients with veno-occlusive disease MRI has already replaced CT and invasive angiography. Vascular malformations like AVMs o r cavernom as can be diag nosed by MRI (sometimes in combination with MRA). The therapeutic concept in AVM patients, however, is still based on invasive angiography. In many patients with AVMs endovascular therapy is part of the therapeutic concept, in some of them a total occlusion of the malformation can be reached via endovascular techniques. Angiography is still the most sensitive technique for patients with a suspicion of an intracranial aneurysm . СТА and MRA, however, are on the way to replace traditional angiography. N ew endovascular tech niques with detachable coils are promising and might already be an alternative for a subgroup of patients with intracranial aneurysms. The classical and more recent presentation of demyelinating and infectious diseases of the brain will be presented: 1. Demyelinating diseases: Epidem iology and consequences on health cost; classification, clinical presentation, SEP, dementia; MR aspects according to time and etiologies; strategies according to age, according to MR presentation. The classical infectious diseases will be shortly pre sented: meningitis em pyemas -encephalitis -abscess, etc. The AIDS diseases will be em phasised: specific encephalitis; opportunistic dis eases (lymphomas -toxoplasm osis -cryptococcosis...); progressive multiple leucoencephalopathie... Conventional or digital chest X-Ray is currently still the most often used primary method of cardiac imaging. A careful professional analysis o f the cardiac silhouette and of the cardiopulmonary-vasculature enable to proof o r to exclude with high sensitivity however with a low specificity most of the cardiac failures in adults. Outside of the radiological work up, echocardiography is the m ost frequently applied technology to evaluate cardiac morphology and function. Worldwide only a few radiological institutions perform coronary angiography SA and cardiac ventriculography. Most frequently coronary angiography and car diac ventriculography are applied in com bination with cardiac catheterization in collaboration with or just by cardiologists. Functional, m etabolic and perfu sion studies o f the heart using various isotopes are perform ed probably more frequently than coronary angiographic examinations, mostly by ou r collègues from nuclear medicine o r cardiologie departments. CT, Electron-Beam-CT and Magnetic resonance are increasingly used in the evaluation of cardiac diseases. The purpose of this lecture is to discuss the present state o f the art in the diagnostic work up o f patients with known or suspected coronary artery disease. Filippo Casolo (Milan) will inform us how to perform and how to evaluate coronary angiographic studies. Richard Underwood (London) will dem onstrate the present state of the art o f cardiac MRI using the standard and most advanced MR-sequences. The results o f the clinical w ork up of more than 300 patients studied by means of Electron-Beam -Com puted-Tomography with suspected coronary artery disease will be reported by Rainer Rienmüller (Graz). Marty Lipton (Chicago) will focus on the strength and needs o f modern digital imaging and reconstruction techniques and the demand fo r integrate imaging modalities to optimize patients care. 122 Diagnostic coronary angiography F. Casolo; Milan/I The presentation will focus on several issues: (1) Should coronary angiography become an outpatient procedure? How to accomplish that? (2) Problems regarding contrast media administration: types, doses and doserates. Should the contrast media be injected manually or by using an automatic power syringe? (3) How many angiographic views are necessary to image each coronary artery? W hich views? Can a standard sequence of views proposed for coronary angiography in the majority of patients? (4) Might we (or must we) avoid to perform left ventricular angiography in selected patients and why? (5) Should LV angiography be obtained before coronary imaging or at the completion of that part o f the study? (6) Filmless coronary angiography: present status and future trends? (7) How to report study results (the radiologic report). Magnetic resonance imaging has a significant role in investigation and m an agement of the cardiac patient. Spin echo sequences produce high resolution three dimensional images with high contrast between cardiac structures. Cine gradient imaging provides additional functional information, and velocity m ap ping allows velocity of blood flow and other moving structures to be measured reproducibly and accurately. Together these techniques provide im portant clinical information in patients with congenital heart disease (particularly in adults) and aortic disease, where magnetic resonance can be considered a prim ary imaging technique that can guide management and surgery without the need fo r invasive investigations. In patients with pericardial disease, myocardial disease, valvular disease and tumours, magnetic resonance imaging supplements the information available from other techniques such as echocardiography, and it can be considered a secondary imaging technique. In patients with ischaemic heart disease, the main role of magnetic resonance is in the assessm ent of ventricular function, including myocardial motion, thickness and thickening. These are important parameters of myocardial viability and the com bination o f cine MRI with myocardial perfusion scintigraphy is particularly valuable in the assessment of hibernating myocardium and the selection o f patients with ischaemic heart failure that will benefit from revascularisation. Rapid MR imaging techniques such as rapid gradient echo im aging and echo planar imaging have allowed noninvasive coronary angiography to be developed and early results are promising. W hilst reasonable sensitivity and specificity can be achieved in selected patients, the techniques are not yet sufficiently robust fo r routine clinical use, except perhaps in defining the course o f anomalous coronary arteries. Further developm ents which allow tracking of the diaphragm during normal respiration avoid the need for breath-holding and this improves the quality of MR coronary angiograms significantly. The same techniques have allowed myocardial perfusion to be assessed from tracking a bolus of contrast medium through the myocardium and agreem ent with scintigraphic techniques is good in selected patients. Whilst further developm ent is necessary, it is possible that MRI will allow com plete anatomical and functional assessment of patients with coronary artery disease. The real place of cardiac MRI will then be decided by practical issues such as availability of scanning time and professional expertise. Com prehensive cardiovascular diagnosis requires both quantitative assess ment of cardiac anatom y and function. Patients suspected o f heart disease are usually studied by several non invasive and invasive imaging techniques, because no single modality usually provides all the necessary information for an optimal m anagem ent decision. Digital imaging has the potential to revolu tionize cardiac imaging by providing a complete evaluation with only one or tw o minimally invasive studies. Digital imaging offers the potential fo r rapid quantitation, segmentation and rendering including 3-D im aging, and multimodality image fusion. In the future Com puter Aided Diagnosis will also be used to analyze images obtained with high speed MRI, CT and Ultrasound in 2, 3 and even 4-Dimensions. Digital techniques have the potential to measure regional myocardial perfusion and ischemia. Since the power of the com puter chip doubles while its cost approxim ately halves every three years, the prospects for the future are exciting. However, the full impact of digital imaging will only be felt when the integration and connectivity of imaging devices is greatly improved. Once implemented, high speed image acquisition matched by rapid digital data quantitation and display will become routine fo r patient care. Finally, digital technology will be a key factor in the evaluation of treatm ent and for crucial patient outcom e studies. Results: 31 males and 47 females. Average age 52.5 ± 13.7 years. 12/78 (15%) in surgical group; 6 had surgery, 2 awaiting surgery and 4 surgical re ferrals. Analysis with M ann-W hitney U tests. There w as a significant difference (p < 0.05) in three main areas between the surgical referred o r treated group and the group managed medically. The average age of the surgery group was 60.2 ± 14.6 while that o f the medical group was 50.8 ± 1 3 .1 years. The patients with clinical signs of nerve entrapm ent and those with spondylosis on the plain film were significantly more likely to undergo surgery. Purpose: To com pare com puted tom ography (CT) and myelography in estab lishing lumbar disc herniation and determ ine the prim ary examination method of imaging. Materials and Methods: W e have examined 154 patients. A total of 462 intervertebral discs were analysed. C T and myelography were used for all patients with symptoms of lumbar nerve roots lesion. The gantry angulation was adjusted so as to lie parallel to the plane of the disc. Every case was accompanied by establishing the degree o f bulging and the level o f compres sion. W e examined not more than three levels simultaneously. Myelography was performed using lumbar puncture by injection o f Omnipaque 180 or Omnipaque 240 (from 8 to 15 ml, depending upon the individual size of the dural sac and contrast medium used). During the procedure spinal fluid pressure was measured and the material fo r laboratory examination taken. Plain films were used to estimate nerve roots sheaths shape and contour. Results: Among 462 discs C T showed no pathological changes at 197 cases, disc bulging at 121, and herniation at 144 levels. Myelography has demonstrated 241, 106, and 135 discs appropriately. Based on findings at surgery and clinical signs, the true positive rate for myelography was 87.7 per cent, for CT 93.5 per cent. Conclusions: C T represents a noninvasive method with no puncture com plications and an ability to dem onstrate extremely lateral herniations that com bines with relatively low cost and radiation dose. The advantages of myel ography conclude visualisation of dural sac contents and better diagnostic information at operated patients. Purpose: To evaluate the diagnostic perform ance of a new multi-slab 3D-FSE sequence, acquired with a high performance MR scanner in under 7 minutes, in comparison with conventional multi-scan procedures. Methods: 30 patients were included in the study. The conventional scan protocol included sagittal and axial 2D T2-w FSE acquisitions. In addition a 3D-FSE sequence (TR/TE 3500/109, ETL 8, 8 -1 0 slab, slice thickness 1 mm), was obtained in all patients. Reformatted images were obtained in the sagittal, coronal, axial and, if necessary, oblique plane with a slice thickness o f 2.6 mm. Prospective analysis o f the images was performed by tw o experienced radiologists separately fo r the 2D-image sets and the 3D-FSE images. The diagnostic performance o f the 3D-im ages matched that of the 2D-images. All pathologies identified on the 2D-SE images involving vertebral bodies (n = 31), intervertebral discs (n = 45), ligaments (n = 5), paraspinal muscles (n = 4), subarachnoid space (n = 3) and spinal chord (n = 1 ) were correctly identified on 3D-FSE images. Additional diagnostic information was provided by the 3D-sequence in 6 patients. Conclusion: W ith 3D-FSE a com plete multi-planar spine evaluation can be performed within 10 minutes, with no loss of diagnostic accuracy compared with conventional 2D-spin-echo sequences. . Associated BME w as found in 9/30 vascularized SN. Mean diam eter of vascularized SN surrounded by BME w as significantly greater (8.2 mm) than mean diam eter of the other vascularized SN without BME (mean 6.4 mm, P < 0.05). Vascularized SN were significantly sm aller (mean 5.2 mm) in asymptomatic patients than in patients with back pain (mean 7.9 mm; P < 0.05). Presence o f BME adjacent to SN was less frequent in asym ptom atic (1/7) than in symptomatic patients (10/23). Conclusion: Vascularized SN are bigger in size and more frequently associ ated with bone marrow edema in patients with back pain than in asym ptom atic patients. Enhanced MR-imaging demonstrates vascularity of SN. Results: PVS was present 11/13 in the " Marfan group" and absent in the control group. There was 11 true positives, 1 true negative confronted with CT or MRI results. In one case dural ectasia w as detected only on enlargem ent of the neural canal on CT without PVS. One anterior meningocele w as depisted on CT exam. Conclusion: Posterior scalloping vertebral is a sensible sign fo r dural ectasia on lumbo sacral plain radiography. C T o r MRI exam s should not be necessary required to confirm dural ectasia involvement. This prospective study will be completed. 14:50 132 Foraminal size w as scored fo r all MR images. Results: Diagnostic functional MR images were obtained in all patients. MR and myélographie measurements were highly correlated (r > 0.97) with a 5 mm 95% confidence interval o f diam eter differences. No significant difference was present in the three positions with regard to foram inal size. More patients had anxiety during myelography than during MR imaging (16 vs 6) and more patients had significant pain during myelography (19 vs 13). Conclusion: Functional MR imaging in a sitting position is feasible and can replace myelography with regard to spinal stenosis. Foram inal stenosis did not appear to depend on the position o f the patient. 133 The role of Bertolotti syndrom e in treatm ent-resistant lumboischialgia R. Szentgyörgyi, E. Vörös, R. Barzó; Szeged/H Purpose: To determ ine the role o f C T scan of muscles in diagnosis, differential diagnosis and follow -up o f different muscular dystrophies. M ethods and Materials: S eventy-four examinations on 61 patients with a definitive diagnosis of muscular dystrophy were retrospectively studied. The study includes myotonic dystrophy (29), Becker's (11), facioscapulohumeral (6), limb girdle (6), autosom al recessive childhood (4) and other smaller groups (5) of muscular dystrophies. Images were obtained on six different levels. Studied param eters were muscle size, attenuation, delineation and presentation o f m uscular fascia. Results were com pared with the results of 12 healthy persons. Results: There are significant differences between the groups o f muscular dystrophies by average rates of atrophy, hypertrophy and fatty infiltration. W e observed tw elve different types o f fatty infiltration in different stages of muscular dystrophies. Facioscapulohumeral and Becker's muscular dystro phies showed the highest scores for atrophy, fatty infiltration and end-stage appearance. The highest rate of hypertrophy was found in limb girdle muscular dystrophy. Except fo r facioscapulohum eral muscular dystrophy, the symmetry rates were more than 90% fo r all studied patterns. Conclusion: Atrophy, hypertrophy and fatty infiltration are m ajor findings of muscular dystrophies. Selective involvement and pattern type make CT examination an im portant tool in the differential diagnosis and follow up of muscular dystrophies. Purpose: Using C 0 2 fo r DCBE is recommended as it may decrease pain afterwards but recent studies suggest it produces inferior distension. This prospective double blind study was designed to evaluate the use o f an a ir/C 0 2 mixture. We randomised 105 patients to receive air, C 0 2 or a 50/50 mixture as the insufflation agent in DCBE. G ases were administered from prefilled bags. Those requiring additional insufflations before over couch films were recorded. Post procedure symptoms were evaluated by questionnaire. Distension and mucosal coating were assessed independently. Results: There w as no difference in mucosal coating. Those given C 0 2 had significantly less immediate and delayed pain than the other tw o groups. There was no difference in pain between air and the mixture. Distension with air was graded better than with the other two agents but the difference did not reach statistical significance. However 50% of patients receiving C 0 2 and 40% of those receiving the mixture required additional insufflation before over couch film s as distension was considered suboptimal, com pared to 17% o f those given air, which w as statistically significant. Conclusion: Using C 0 2 caused less pain than using air or the mixture although greater volum es were required to produce adequate distension. 14:10 137 Radiologic evaluation of double-contrast barium enema: Intra-and interobserver variation S. S te in e 1, К. L ø k e n 1, S. Holmboe 2; 1 Oslo/N, 2 Bae rum /N Purpose: To assess the Intraobserver and interobserver variation of the double-contrast barium enema (DCBE). Radiographs from a random sample of 110 out of 2416 patients exam ined with DCBE were studied. All radiographs were evaluated as part of the clinical routine, then after tw o months in a repeated blinded reading by the same radiologist, and independently by a second radiologist. Technical quality, pathological findings, and clinical advise were recorded. Kappa values were calculated. Values > 0.75 represent excellent agreem ent, between 0.75 and 0.40 good to fair, and < 0.40 poor agreement. Results: Main results in the multiple reading report (i.e. positive findings at least once) were diverticular disease (n = 58), polyps (n = 24), and tumours (n = 6). The Intraobserver and interobserver variation values were: overall conclusion (normal vs pathological): 0.85 and 0.72, technical quality: 0.74 and 0.30, diverticular disease: 0.66 and 0.58, polyps > 10 mm 0.80 and 0.67, tum ours 0.85 and 0.74, repeated examination: 0.39 and 0.29, another examination (e.g. sigmoidoscopy, colonoscopy): 0.32 and 0.11. Conclusion: Intraobserver agreem ents were higher than interobserver agree ment. Agreement on diagnoses ranged from excellent to good, while agree ments on the need fo r repeated o r further exam inations were poor, indicating diverging attitudes o f significant practical importance between radiologists. 14:20 138 CT in acute right colon pathology. Com parison with contrast enema and pathological findings J.H. Boverie, M. Baghaie, R.F. Dondelinger; Liège/B Purpose: To evaluate prospectively the accuracy of C T in patients with acute symptoms located in the right lower abdom inal quadrant. Methods and Materials: Thirty-one patients presenting with right flank pain, tenderness, fever and leucocytosis, underw ent CT as an initial examination. S 2 8 Subsequently, contrast enem a [CE] was performed (barium: 22, water-soluble agent: 9). Diagnosis was confirmed at surgery: appendicitis: 6, diverticulitis: 5, adenocarcinoma: 4 Purpose: to assess the potential of Helical Hydro-CT (HHCT) for the preoper ative TNM-staging of colorectal carcinomas. Materials and Methods: 75 patients with suspected colorectal carcinomas were studied prospectively. For distension of the bowel wall a suspension of water and methylcellulose w as given rectally. Bolus tracking was used to optimize parenchymal and vessel contrast. Then spiral scanning of the abdomen/pelvis w as performed. TNM -stage o f colorectal carcinomas was assessed and com pared with histopathologic findings. Results: 94% of all colorectal carcinom as were correctly localized by HHCT. T-staging was correct in 77%, N-staging in 58% and abdominal M-staging in 83% of all cases. , Conclusions: Colorectal màlignancies may reliably be diagnosed by HHCT. The accuracy of HHCT in determ ining especially the T-and M-factor of colorectal carcinomas is high. HHCT is a non-invasive imaging technique that is easy to perform and therefore may be of potential value in the preoperative management of patients with large bowel cancer. Methods and Materials: Three-dim ensionally reconstructed virtual CT colo noscopy was performed in 30 cases in patients with known colorectal tumors. After cleaning, the colon w as retrogradely inflated with air and iv. peristalticolyticum was administered. Forty to fifty 5 -1 0 mm collimation slices were applied (with breath holding in the upper abdomen) covering the whole colon. Three-dimensional views, endoscopic views and double-contrast-enema-like views were reconstructed on a separate workstation. Results: In 26 of the 30 patients the CT endoscopy was highly similar to original endoscopic pictures, and barium enem a examinations. In two cases virtual colonoscopy could dem onstrate additional lesions not reached at colonoscopy. CT endoscopy gave endoscopic views from both oral and aboral directions, or surgical views also, with lateral opening o f the bowel. Additionally the transmural tum or extent and the locoregional lymph nodes could be visualized on partition images. Conclusion: Virtual C T colonoscopy, although can not replace endoscopy, might have applications: it can serve as a screening tool fo r colorectal cancer and may be used also fo r ruling out a higher lesion and staging the tum or in one session. 142 Fat-suppressed breath-hold MR im aging of the colon with intravenous and endolum inal contrast agents: Prelim inary results F. Sardanelli, E. Melani, E. De Cicco, P. Renzetti, E Rosso; Genova/I Purpose: To test the feasibility of studying the colon by MR imaging with intravenous and endolum inal contrast agents. Methods and Materials: After preparation with colon-cleansing regimen used for X-ray double contrast barium enema (DCBE), 5 normal subjects and 4 patients au'iicted with known idiopathic ulcerative colitis (IUC) were examined at 1.5 T. In supine position, coronal and axial fat-suppressed breath-hold FLASH T 1 -weighted sequences (7 -9 slices, about 20 s) after hypotonization (Buscopan, 20 mg intravenous) and air insufflation (1 500-200 0 cc) were performed. The same images were acquired after endorectal adm inistration of Ferumoxsil (Lumirem, 600 cc) and intravenous injection o f Gd-DOTA (Dotarem, 0.2 mmol/kg). Results: Sigmoid and rectal walls, not sufficiently distended after only air insufflation, were well depicted after administration of negative endolum inal contrast. In the IUC patients, the disease progression localized by MR was consistent with the DCBE findings; moreover, a strong enhancem ent of colic wall was observed in different regions, likely pointing out segm ents with "active" disease. Examination tim e was about 20 minutes. Conclusions: The feasibility of MR study of the colon with negative and positive contrast agents was demonstrated. IUC patients could undergo MR examination in serial control of disease evolution. 143 MR large bowel double contrast enem a (M RLBDCE) for the study of colon neoplasm s: A new technique, prelim inary results in humans G. Braccini, P. Boraschi, R. Gigoni, P.C. Giulianotti, L. Vannucci, F. Mosca, G. Perri; Pisa/l FOV, 2 mm section). O f these, a 3D endoscopic 'fly-through' w as rendered. 'Fly-throughs' and 2D cross-sectional images were analysed by tw o blinded observers fo r the presence of polyps. Subsequently the feasibility o f the tech nique w as assessed in a human subject. Following uneventful conventional colonoscopy a gadolinium containing enem a was administered. A supine and a prone data set were obtained. Results: 'In vitro' the sensitivity/specificity fo r the detection of polyps based upon endoscopic MR was 87/96% . For polyps measuring 5 mm o r less the sensitivity was only 70% : fo r larger polyps it increased to 95% (p < 0.01). Analysis of cross sectional images rendered an overall sensitivity/specificity of 57/84% (p < 0.001 ). 'In vivo' assessment of the technique demonstrated its feasibility. Only the contrast-filled colon w as visible on the 3D data set. Com bined exoscopic and endoscopic inspection of the colon allowed a thorough assessment o f the colonic wall. (14) veins unless the thoracic outlet approach w as contraindicated, in w hich case the femoral (10) o r basilic (1) veins were cannulated. All accesses were carried out in the cath lab under fluoroscopic guidance, under local anaesthesia and continuous EKG monitoring. A chest X-ray w as performed 2 to 4 hours later, to check fo r pneumothorax. Results: the follow -up ranged from 28 to 864 days (total 25236, mean 215.69). The incidence of pneum othorax w as very low (4/150, 2.68% ). Late com plications were: com plete dislocation (4/160), partial dislocation (4/160), throm bosis (2/ 160), fibrin sleeve (2/160), catheter breakage (2 partial, 1 com plete), only 7 local infections (4 CVC, 3 ports). Conclusion: the safety of the percutaneous approach was proven by 100% success in cannulating and a very low incidence (2.68%) in early com plica tions. All late mechanical com plications were handled by radiologists. 14:05 146 Percutaneous D enver peritoneovenous shunt as palliative treatm ent of refractory m alignant ascitis F. Orsi, G. Villa, M. Pizzamiglio, F. Abbate, M. Bellomi; Milan/I Introduction: Refractory malignant ascites is a frequent sequela of many neoplastic disease. Sym ptom s due to an accumulated critical volume of ascitic fluid may be the most debilitating aspects of the malignant process. Many palliative options have been employed with poor results. A simplified radiologically guided technique fo r insertion of a peritoneovenous shunt is described. M aterials and Methods: Two patients with refractory neoplastic ascites (one breast cancer and one pancreatic adenocarcinoma) were treated by a percu taneous insertion of a Denver peritoneovenous shunt between subclavian vein and peritoneous cavity. The procedures were entirely performed in the angio room with fluoro and ultrasound guidance. Time duration o f the procedure SS w as about 60 minutes. The patients were closely monitored fo r hemodynamic changes and then discharged one day later the procedure. Results: Procedures had no technical com plications or im portant hem ody namic changes (Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation, heart failure etc.). In patient with breast cancer the shunt has been correctly working fo r six m onths (until patient death). The second catheter is regularly shunting after three months. Both catheters needed no management. Conclusions: In patients with poor prognosis refractory ascitis can be a diffi cult problem to manage. Radiological percutaneous insertion of a peritoneove nous shunt is to be considered a good alternative due to the microinvasivity and ease of procedure. 14:15 147 Conception of an interventional radiology section with a surgical philosophy F. Joffre, Ph. Otal, D. Colombier, H. Ramon, M. Benne, H. Rousseau; Toulouse/F Purpose: To describe the objectives, the conception and the functioning of a new interventional section conceived as an surgical operating suite. Methods and Material: Interventional radiology leads to perform more and more com plex interventions requiring an adapted environm ent and strong rules to fight against nosocomial infections. M oreover indications fo r procedures requiring surgical access, and or com bined radio-surgical interventions are increasing. An interventional section has been designed to solve all these problems. The interventional suite is com posed of three angio-rooms. The access in controlled and sterile environm ent is preserved by permanent air handling. The circuits o f patients, staff and materials are separated. After one year's experience, it is possible to em phasize the advan tages of such a structure. All the interventions are perform ed with the best conditions (radiological and surgical). The quality of care fo r the patient, the efficiency o f the staff, the work planning are improved. It is demonstrated that it is possible to perform combined endovascular and surgical procedures in a radiologic departm ent if a well-adapted structure exists and if good cooperation between physicians of multiple discipline is gotten. Conclusion: O ur experience dem onstrate that the best way to perform endo luminal and com bined radiosurgical interventions is to w ork in a interventional section located in the radiology departm ent and associating rules of surgical operating rooms and the best quality of X-ray guidance. 14:25 148 CT-guided transosseous biopsies of lesions hidden behind bone G. Åström, H. Ahlström, С. Sundström, H. Hagberg; U ppsala/S Purpose: To evaluate a transosseous core biopsy technique o f lesions hidden behind bone. Material and Methods: In fifteen anterior m ediastinal lesions and one retrocrural lesion a transosseous trajectory (transsternal 14, transclavicular 1, transvertebral 1 ) were considered to be safer than a paraosseous approach. The trajectory was performed with use o f a coaxial length-m atched bone biopsy system with an eccentric drill (Bonopty "). Multiple core specimens (mean 3.8) fo r diagnosis and other analyses were obtained by means of an automatic cutting needle (M onopty'"). The desired depth o f the sampling needle could be controlled by means of a breakable plastic depth gauge. Results: In all cases, the specimens were adequate fo r a reliable diagnosis. Subtyping of lymphoma was successful in 4/5 patients. In 2/2 patients, cyto static drug analysis were successful. In 9 cases mediastinoscopy or surgery w ere avoided. Patients experienced less discom fort from the osseous penetra tion than from the injection of anesthesia. One patient had a m inor mediastinal bleeding. Conclusion: CT-guided transosseous biopsies with a coaxial bone biopsy system with an eccentric drill, facilitated multiple core sampling o f mediastinal or retrocrural masses hidden behind bone. performed introducing a guide-wire through the superior punçtum into the canaliculus and advancing it across the obstruction into the inferior meatus of the nasal cavity. After pulling out the guidewire, the stent was advanced retrograde and released into the sac and the lacrimonasal duct. The average time of the procedure was 24 minutes (range 10-60). Results: The technical success rate was 100%. No m ajor procedural compli cation ocurred in any patient. After a mean of 75 days follow-up 17 out 19 stents were patent (89.5%). Conclusion: Considering as initial experience, placing a polyurethane naso lacrimal stens is a procedure easy to perform, well tolerate and with a high success rate. 14:40 150 Percutaneous biopsy with new rotation needles and a biopsy gun P. Müller, A. Beck; Karlsruhe/D Purpose: The intent of the device is to provide a high quality core specimen for histopathologic analysis and to reduce crushing artifact especially in bone or soft-tissue lesions. The new technique has several main components: self-constructed new rotation needles, a principle of an inner and outer needle and the use o f a biopsy gun. The m otor driven 18 gauge rotation needle has a female thread and a male screw and rotates as the inner needle into the target tissue, while the outer 16 gauge cannula persists and avoids deviation of the rotation needle. Furthermore the biopsy gun has a scale to determine the exacte depth of the inner needle and provides rotational capabilities up to 600 rpm. Results: Clinically the automatic system has been succesfully used in 65 patients with tw o false-negative results. The specimens are taken from bone, pancreas, kidney, lever, lung and the retroperitoneum. The use of a biopsy gun in connection with new rotation needles provides tissue sam ples of a high diagnostic yield, enables easy site access and the possibility of manifold biopsy. The system is usable in "hard" and "soft" lesions and allows safe guidance under flouroscopic or C T control. Up to now there are no com plications observed. 14:50 151 Stenoses o f arterialised iliac veins after thrombectom y: Longterm results of PTA and stent implantation W. Wohlgemuth, K. Bohndorf, W. Tietze, H. W eber; Augsburg/D Purpose: Evaluation of longterm follow-up results o f endovascular procedures in stenoses of the iliac veins Materials and Methods: Subsequent 35 patients presented with stenoses of iliac veins after operative throm bectom y with creation of an arteriovenous fistula in the groin. 42 PTAs were performed, a stent was placed additionally in 7 cases. All patients had an intraoperative angioscopy o f the pelvic veins and were followed using phlebography and/or duplex sonography over a mean follow-up time of 4, 1 years (min. 1 month, max. 10 years 8 month, 1 patient lost in follow-up). Results: PTA was successful in 34/35 patients (97%). The patency rate (life table analysis) was 74% after 1 year, 69% after 2 years and 67% after 7 years. There was a statistically significant (p < 0.01) difference in the cumulative patency (45% versus 84%) after 2 years between patients with pathologic and normal angioscopic findings but no relevant difference between patients with stents o r without (71% versus 63%). Conclusion: PTA and stenting are excellent modalities to treat pelvic venous stenoses after operative throm bectom y with a-v fistula. The longterm patency does not depend on the procedure (PTA alone versus additional stent) but on the condition of the vein at the time of thrombectomy. 152 CT-guided FNAB of m iddle mediastinal lesions: Preliminary experience using a suprasternal approach G. Belfiore, L. Camera, A. Vetrani, G. Fraioli, M. Salvatore; Naples/I The aim of the study w as to evaluate the technical feasibility, success rate and safeness of a suprasternal approach in the CT-guided biopsy of middle mediastinal lesions. Thirty patients with gross disease located in the middle mediastinum were submitted to a CT-guided biopsy using a suprasternal approach. All patients gave their informed consent to the procedure which was performed in local anesthesia. The needle (22 G W estcott or cutting) was introduced in the right para-tracheal space with both a cranio-caudal (2 5-30°) and medial-lateral inclination (10-20°) with the patient in a supine decubitus. Lesions ranged in diam eter between 2.5 and 5 cm and involved different sites such as the right para-tracheal (16 pts), right tracheo-bronchial (11 pts) and the pre-tracheal nodes (3 pts). Adequate material fo r diagnosis was obtained in 27 out of 30 patients (90%). Most patients (18/27) had various types of lung cancer including epidermoid carcinoma (7), adenocarcinoma (5), small cell carcinoma (4) and large cell car cinoma (2). Correct identification of different histotypes occurred in 16 out 18 patients (89%). Seven patients had lymphoma (5 non-Hodgkin's, 2 Hodgkin's. No m ajor com plication was observed. Four patients (13% ) experienced a mild hypotension w hich did not require any treatment. In summary, CT-guided biopsy of middle m ediastinal lesions can be safely and successfully performed using a suprasternal approach. To describe percutaneous CT-guided superior hypogastric plexus block using the anterior approach. Materials and Methods: In 7 patients with severe pain from pelvic m alig nancy, CT was employed to guide block of the superior hypogastric plexus with alcohol, using anterior approach of the needle. Patients were placed supine, and the needle advanced to the anterior surface of L5, just below the bifurcation o f large vessels. After injection of 1 ml of contrast to confirm correct positioning, a solution made of 10 (the first 4 cases) o r 15 ml of alcohol, 4 ml of marcaine and A d d itio n a l ml o f contrast medium was injected. The degree of pain relief was assessed using a four grade analog scale (none, mild, moderate, complete). Results: Needles were always successfully positioned, with bilateral spread of alcohol around iliac vessels. Pain relief was graded as com plete in 2 cases, moderate in 1, mild in 3, none in 1. Three patients had to reuse opiod analgesics after 8, 7 and 25 days. Best results were observed with the largest am ount of alcohol. No com plications were observed. Conclusions: C T guided percutaneous block of the superior hypogastric plexus with the anterior approach is safe and feasible in severe pain from pelvic malignancies. Further experience is needed to identify the best suited dose of alcohol to obtain long-lasting pain relief. To evaluate metallic stents in the palliation of patients with tracheo bronchial malignancy. Methods and Materials: 16 patients with irresectable malignancy involving the trachea and major bronchi were treated by insertion o f W allstent endopros theses. 13 patients had obstructing lesions and were treated with uncovered stents. 3 patients with tracheoesophageal fistulae were treated with covered endoprostheses. The endoprostheses were placed using fluoroscopic and endoscopic guidance under general anaesthesia. Preprocedural assessment and follow-up was done using clinical criteria including a dyspnoea score, and by chest radiographs. Results: W allstent placement was technically successful in all patients. One very ill patient died 2 hours following stent placement. All esophagorespiratory fistulae were com pletely closed by stenting. An improvem ent of tw o grades in the dyspneoa score occurred in 6 patients, a single grade in 4 patients. At a mean follow-up of 5.6 months, 8 patients were alive. Tum our overgrowth in 1 patient was effectively treated with an additional stent. 1 fistula recurred. Conclusions: W allstents offer a rapid, safe and effective m ethod o f palliating malignant obstruction and fistulae of the major airways. Even though dyspneoa is not improved in all cases, pulm onary collapse and sepsis are prevented. 155 Efficacy of wallstents in treatm ent of ureteral obstruction caused by m alignancies E.K. Lang; N ew Orleans, LA/USA 8 mm diam eter) and double "J" stents (antigrade approach) and sometimes percutaneous ureteroneocystostomy. Results: The procedures succeeded technically in all patients (36 via anti grade passage, 8 via antigrade ureteroneocystostomy). Follow-up 1 -4 8 months; 11 patients w ere alive at the end o f one year, 3 at two, 2 at three and 1 at four years At the end of the first year or time of death the Wallstents were patent in 18 patients (69%), 2 years 4 (25%), 3 years, 2 (22%), 4 years 1 (17%). Two stents occluded in the first year. The MEAN patency was 9.87 months. Six patients were lost to follow-up in the first year, three more in the second. Double "J" stents were retained in all patients fo r at least one month; 14 were reinserted cystostocopically at various intervals. Additional W allstents were placed in six patients to manage tum or propagation. Moder ate hydronephrosis developed in six patients with intact drainage as assessed by intravenous urography and ultrasound. In 2 patients with presumably intact drainage creatine clearance deteriorated. Conclusions: W allstents in conjunction with double "J" endostents provide long-term internal drainage of urine in patients with ureter com prom ised by advanced pelvic neoplasm s o r results of treatment. The ease of extending W allstents by telescopic overlapping and exchange of double "J" endostents is emphasized. Material and Methods: Eight healthy volunteers and 34 patients with proved diffuse interstitial lung disease were studied on a 1.0 T system. Imaging included T2-weighted FSE, ECG-gated segmented T1-weighted breath hold FLASH sequences and T1-weighted SE sequences pre and post adminis tration of Gd-DTPA. 8 mm thick sections were obtained on the level o f the tracheal bifurcation and on levels 5 cm superior and inferior to the bifurcation. Quantitative image evaluation included S/N and С/N measurements of lung tissue fo r 7 defined ROI's per lung on each level. The standard o f reference for disease activity was determ ined by a scoring system including results of bronchoalveolar lavage, ventilatory function tests, high resolution CT and follow -up chest radiographs. Results: C om pared to healthy volunteers in patients with interstitial lung disease significantly increased S/N and С/N ratios were observed in FSE (p < 0.001) and SE (p < 0.05) sequences. Sensitivity of FSE sequences in detecting diffuse interstitial lung disease w as 91% and specificity 100%. The respective data fo r T1-w eighted SE sequences were 95% and 100% before and 70% and 100% after Gd-DTPA. Differentiation between high and low disease activity could be achieved with a sensitivity of 85% and specificity of 93% with FSE sequences. Respective data fo r T1-weighted SE sequences were 75% and 71% pre and 65% and 93% post contrast enhancement. Conclusion: MR imaging may provide im portant information on the activity of diffuse interstitial lung disease, especially when T2-weighted FSE sequences are used. Methods and Materials: Lung dam age w as induced in 48 rabbits by instillation of 5 mL of bleomycin sulfate (10 mg/kg body weight) into a lower-lobe bronchus via balloon catheter. MR imaging examinations were performed in groups of 8 animals 3 and 24 hours, and 8, 14, 30, and 80 days after the initial damage. MR examinations o f 15 control animals (in 3 groups of 5) were done 3 hours, 24 hours, and 8 days after instillation of 5 mL of 0.9% NaCI. MR imaging at 1.5 T included conventional T1-weighted sequences before and after injection of Gd-DTPA (0.2 mm ol/kg body weight) and T2-weighted fast SE sequences. The signal intensity (SI) and contrast enhancem ent o f injured lung were evaluated in com parison with contralateral healthy lung respective to lungs of control animals. All anim als were killed immediately after MR examination, and the lungs were removed and fixed before sectioning and staining. Results: There was good correlation between contrast enhancement at MR imaging and histologic findings. The early phase with acute alveolitis showed lesions with high SI on T2-weighted im ages and marked contrast enhancement after Gd-DTPA, w hereas the late fibrotic stage revealed significantly lower SI and contrast enhancement o f the lesions. To describe the 3He MRI findings of normal pulm onary ventilation in healthy volunteers and to evaluate abnorm alities in pneumologie patients. Methods and Materials: Hyperpolarized 3He gas (V = 300 ml, p = 3 x 105 Pa, polarized to 35 -4 5 % by optical pumping, provided in special glass cells) was inhaled by eight healthy volunteers and ten patients with different pulmonary diseases. Imaging w as performed with a 3D FLASH sequence (TR = 11.8 ms; TE = 5 ms; transm itter am plitude 5 -8 V corresponding to a flip angle < 5°) in a single breath-hold (2 2 -4 2 s). Clinical and radiological examinations were available for correlation. The studies were carried out successfully in 8/8 volunteers and in 8/10 patients. The central airways were constantly visualized. The lung parenchyma of volunteers with normal ventilatory function exhibited rather homogeneous intermediate to high signal, w hereas patients with obstructive lung disease and/or pneum onia presented severe signal inhomogeneities. Bronchogenic carcinoma, cavities, pleural effusion caused large areas with no signal representing the lesion itself and adjacent ventilatory disturbances. The extent of these findings had not been presumed from chest X-ray or CT. Conclusion: 3He MRI is a promising new modality for the assessment of pulm onary ventilation and its abnormalities. Further studies are needed to determ ine its potential clinical role. 14:30 Purpose: the aim of our work was to identify Gd-DTPA possibilities in the evaluation of the mediastinal rest after therapy in patients affected by Hodgkin disease. Material and Methods: between February '95 and July '96 we selected (48) of (220) patients on the basis o f the evidence of mediastinal rest on CT af te r chemotherapy alone (22 patients) o r both chem o-and radiotherapy (26 pa tients). All these patients underwent 67Ga scintigraphy. For all patients, standard MRI examination was performed on a 0.5 T equipm ent using Spin-Echo T 1 -and T2-weighted (w.) sequences on axial planes, with slice thickness of 8 -1 0 mm. Subsequently, in 44 patients, we have used Spin-Echo T1-w. sequences on ax ial (8 -1 0 mm.) and coronal planes (5 mm) after Gd-DTPA i.v. administration. In all patients, MRI follow -up was performed between 2 and 9 months. Results: We obtained different patterns of signal intensity (SI) on T2-w. images and on T1-W. images after contrast medium administration. In particular, (8) patients, with high positivity on 67Ga scintigraphy, showed high SI on T2-w. images and a marked enhancement after Gd-DTPA. This condition was related to mediastinal rest activity. In (16) patients, with different 67Ga scintigraphy behaviour, we noticed a nonhom ogeneous SI on T2-w. images and irregular enhancement after Gd-DTPA, which better depicted the different components of the mass, as in presence of a partial active mediastinal rest. Clinical and MRI follow-up confirmed this condition. In the last 22 cases, with negative scintigraphy (± ), the hypointensity on T2-w. images and the absence of enhancement after contrast medium were related to a fibrotic evolution of the mediastinal rest. Conclusions: In our opinion use of Gd-DTPA seems to have great possibilities in the evaluation of these patients, com bining volum etric and activity-related data. 14:40 161 Brachial plexus involvem ent in oncology: Limits o f CT and MRI C. Beigelman, O. Lucidarme, M. Vasile, I. Mourey-Gérosa, P. Grenier; Paris/F Purpose: To evaluate if non invasive imaging procedures can predict a tumoral involvement of the brachial plexus (BP). Material and Methods: Over a 5-year period, 12 patients suffering from brachial plexopathy and/or an apical mass in a carcinologie context were treated surgically. This retrospective study com pared imaging to surgical data. Ten patients with a Pancoast tum or and 2 with a previous history of breast cancer treated with radiotherapy underwent preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (n = 10) and computed tom ography (n = 10). Results: A contact between the lesions and BP was present in 2 cases, a lack of visualization with infiltration o f BP in 4, a nodular thickening o f BP in 2, and an encirclement of neurovascular structures in 3. Brachial plexus was not involved (n = 4) in 2 cases o f contact, 1 infiltration and 1 nodular thickening. There was a tumoral involvement (n = 7) in 3 cases of lack of visualization, 3 of encirclement and 1 nodular infiltration with abnorm al signal of scalene muscles. Involvement of the nerves sheaths (n = 3) could not be differenciated from a real infiltration (n = 4). Conclusion: Imaging data do not seem to be valuable to predict tumoral involvement of the brachial plexus, nor the resectability o f the lesions. 14:50 162 Respiratory motion of the lung assessed by MRI: Im plications for spiral CT imaging protocols P. Vock, C. Stoupis, O. Heid, V. Im Hof; Bern/CH Purpose: To quantify the position and movement of the pulm onary structures during respiration using fast MR imaging in order to optimize thoracic spiral CT protocols. Methods and Materials: 10 healthy volunteers (5 fem ale, 5 male, 31 ± 3 years) were studied using a cardiac-gated HASTE sequence at 1.5 T (Magnetom Vision, Siemens Co.). Images in axial, sagittal and coronal planes were obtained during inspiratory and expiratory apnea. Respiratory excursions of structures were measured. Results: Expiratory elevation w as absent a t the apex, 9 -1 5 mm at the carina, pulmonary arteries and upper lobes, 1 9 -2 2 mm at the middle lobe and inferior veins, 3 1 -4 4 mm at basal segments and diaphragm atic domes, and 68 mm for the costophrenic angles. Conclusion: Even in supine position, the lung base moves significantly during respiration, w hereas the apex is nearly fix. Since apnea periods of 15 -30 seconds during spiral CT are a limit fo r many patients, respiratory motion artifacts are more likely to occur with superoinferior than with inferosuperior scanning protocols. 163 Anatomy o f pulm onary veins: Role of magnetic resonance angiography A. Carriera, R. Fossaceca, M. Baratto, С. Scapati; Chieti/I Purpose: To optimize the MR-Angiography technique in the selective study of the pulmonary veins. Material and Methods: A fter giving their written consent, tw enty consecutive normal volunteers (13 males, 7 females, mean age 30.5 years) were enrolled in this prospective study. MR-Angiography was performed using a 1 T super conductive magnet and 3D TOF technique. After contrast medium injection (GD-DTPA 0.2 mmol/kg) fast imaging with a steady-state free precession (FISP) sequence w as used. The images were acquired on the coronal and sagittal planes. Results: MR-Angiography on the coronal plane well visualized 124 venous vessels in the right lung versus 106 visualized on the sagittal plane. Whereas in the left lung MR-Angiography on the coronal plane visualized 96 vessels versus the 44 visualized on the sagittal plane. Our results allow to draw three conclusions: the TOF 3D with contrast medium is a good technique fo r the study o f the pulm onary veins; the venous vessels with a larger diam eter are better visualized; the integration of the acquisitions on the coronal and sagittal planes allows the visualization of a higher num ber of the venous vessels. 164 Reliability of pulmonary artery segm ent detection by CE MRA К. Winter, M. Boos, A. Rudin, G. Bongartz, W. Steinbrich; Basel/CH Purpose: To assess the detectability o f peripheral pulm onary arterial branches. Methods and Materials: 30 healthy volunteers underwent breathhold CE MRA in a high performance scanner (1.5 T, 25 mT/m). M easuring tim e varied between 3 0 -4 4 sec for a 3D TO F sequence (TR = 5 ms, TE = 2 ms, FA = 15', matrix size 166 x 256, partition thickness 2 -2 .2 5 mm, volum e thickness 5 0 -9 0 mm) with simultaneous injection of 0.2 mmol/kg BW Gd (power injector, MEDRAD). Bolus timing w as calculated individually according to a test injection o f 3 ml. All MRAs were reconstructed identically (MIP, targeted MIP, MPR). All segmental pulm onary vessels seen were counted with respect to the vascular generations by definition o f the bifurcations. Results and Conclusions: All distal pulm onary artery branches w ere clearly seen up to the 4 th -7 th vascular generation. Lack o f more peripheral visual ization than 4th generation was due to a limited box volume, m ostly ventrally (middle lobe, lingula). In 10 patients with varying thoracic vascular pathology which were investigated accordingly, all MRAs gave diagnostic documentation o f the pathology with exact display of localization and extent of the lesion (pulmonary embolism, vascular abnormalities, vascular compression). to the time fo r the CT-examination including patient transfer time. Since the patient often is in the CT-scanner fo r another examination (i.e. the head), the relative tim e fo r the cervical CT-examination is less. Helical C T evaluation is more time consuming for the doctor than reading plain radiographs. The diagnostic quality is higher fo r the C T exam concerning the C 1 -2 -and C7-Th1-region, and equal to plain radiography concerning the C 3 -6 area, but our material is to small to allow a definite conclusion. Conclusion: Helical C T saves time and may offer a higher diagnostic quality com pared to conventional X-ray examination in imaging of cervical spine injury. 14:15 167 Com parison of spiral CT and incremental CT in lumbar spine: Which are the best scan parameters? C. Rehm, W. Reith, M. Bahner, I. Zuna, G. van Kaick; Heidelberg/D Introduction: For spiral com puted tom ography (CT) advantages over con ventional CT are established for thoracic and abdominal imaging. The major advantage is the short acquisition time with the possibility o f volume-scanning of an entire region. Spiral CT is not widely used in the diagnostics of diseases of the lumbar spine. The aim o f our study w as to compare spiral CT with incremental CT to evaluate the best scan parameters in scanning the lumbar spine. Material and Methods: 7 dead bodys were examined. Tomographies were performed on a SOMATOM PLUS 4 CT-scanner (SIEMENS AG, Erlangen, Germany). Scanning param eters for incremental CT were 1.5 s rotation time, 3 mm slice thickness, 140 kV tube voltage, 292 mA tube current and a gantry-tilt parallel to the discs. Spiral CT's were performed with 140 kV tube voltage, 292 mA tube current, a pitch varying from 1.0 to 1.5 and slice thickness of 3 and 5 mm. Reviews of the spiral CT's were performed with a standard wide (360°) linear interpolation algorithm for the best com parison as well as com parable image noise. Evaluation was done in a blinded randomized way. Two experienced radiologists reviewed all CT's separately. Evaluation param eters were: delineation of the disc, the posterior edges of the vertebra bodys, the Lig. flavae, the dural sac, the facets and the nerve roots at the level L4/L3 and L5/S1. Also subjective scoring of the image noise was evaluated. All param eters were assigned to a sem iquantitative value between 1 and 4, 1 being a poor result and 4 being the best result. Statistical analysis was done with the F-test fo r partial sums o f squares. The sem iquantitative scoring showed that the there was a slightly better result fo r incremental CT, next was the spiral CT using a pitch of 1.0 and a slice thickness of 3 mm. A slicethickness of 5 mm and/or a pitch o f 1.5 gave lesser image quality. Conclusions: This study demonstrated that in lum bar spine the best image quality is obtained using incremental CT, but spiral C T with the same scanning parameters gives nearly the same results. Thus, in trauma patients spiral CT with its shorter acquisition tim e can be used having sufficient image quality. Results: In just one case of sedation we could not manage to finish scanning so we were forced to give Ketamine. In all cases we have not any complication, and children w here observed only 30 minutes after scanning. In anaesthesia with Ketamin, we have 2 cases when IPPV was necessary, the period of active observation w as more than one hour, with specific demands (quiet surrounding, darkness etc.) Conclusions: Sedation with Midazolam has enormous advantage above any kind of anaesthesia because of simplicity, lake of complication, and time spending. Anyway, the Ketamin should remain as a useful drug for cases w hen sedation is not enough potent fo r completing an examination. To study the effects of ionic and non-ionic iodinated contrast agents in acute cerebral ischemia on infarction volume, neurological performance, and mortality in a rat model of middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion. Methods and Materials: W e induced focal cerebral ischemia in 64 rats us ing an endovascular occlusion technique o f the MCA. Four hours after MCA occlusion, 16 anim als received sodium iothalamate (588 mg iodine/kg), 16 anim als received iopromide as single bolus (518 mg iodine/kg) and 16 animals as double bolus (1036 mg iodine/kg). Sixteen anim als received equivolumetric (1.4 ml/kg) saline (control group). Neurological score and body weight were recorded every 8 hours. Twenty-four hours after vessel occlusion all ani mals were sacrificed and their brains stained with 2,3,5 triphenyl-tetrazoliumchloride to assess infarction size. Results: The normal and the double clinical dose of iopromide did not affect infarction volum e and neurological performance. Sodium iothalamate caused an increase in infarction volum e and w orsening of the neuroscore compared with the control group (p < 0.05). Mortality in the iothalamate group was 25%, compared to 12.5% in the control group and 6.25% in the iopromide groups, respectively. Conclusion: Our results suggest that bolus injection of the non-ionic iopromide in clinically relevant doses does not significantly affect infarction volume and clinical symptoms of cerebral ischemia. Non-ionic contrast agents should be preferred to ionic contrast agents during the acute stage of cerebral ischemia. 14:40 170 Prognostic value of computerized tom ography in nontraumatic intracerebral haem orrhage R. Maksimovió, S. Domonji, J. Marinkovic, B. Goldner, S. Milosevic, P. Petrovic, B. Prstojevic; Belgrade/YU Purpose: The aim of the study was to evaluate the diagnostic value of com puterized tom ography (CT) in patients with intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) as well as to identify prognostic factor of intrahospital mortality of these pts. Our study group included 105 pts, (63.9% males, mean 49.84 ± 10.28 years) admitted to the hospital with suspected in tracerebral hemorrhage. All pts underwent clinical workup, CT, and cerebral panangiography. Analyzed param eters were as follows: clinical (sex, age, symptoms, neurological deficiency, fam ily history), C T parameters (presence and am ount o f blood in endocranium according to Fisher's m odified scale, hemorrhage site, ventricle system, edema), angiographic (type and site of changes, dimensions, spasm), timing o f operation from the onset of symp toms, and vital status during the hospitalization. Predictors of intrahospital mortality were analyzed using backward logistic regression. Results: On the first C T there w as no blood in 5 (4.8% ) pts, mild subarahnoid hemorrhage (SAH) in 18 (17.1% ) pts, moderate SAH in 19 (18.1%) pts, while no SAH o r minimal blood in subarachnoidal space but with intracerebral o r intraventricular hemorrhage w as present in 63 (60%) pts. Angiography revealed no abnorm alities in 29 (27.6%) pts, in 57 (54.3%) pts aneurysm, multiple aneurysms in 15 pts (14.3%), AV malformation in 4 (3.8% ) pts. During hospitalization 21 (20.0%) pts died. Intracerebral hematoma or intraventricular hemorrhage on Ct w as more often in pts with normal angiographic findings (y = 0.4 + 2.4x, risk = 11.5) and were associated with intrahospital mortality. Conclusions: Using CT, it is possible to detect intracerebral hematoma or intraventricular hemorrhage more often In pts with normal angiographic findings. Furthermore, they could be regarded as statistical significant predictor of intrahospital mortality. Purpose: of this study was to evaluate the true incidence of BMT-complicating subdural hygromas and hematomas (SDH). Patients and Methods: 50 Patients of a prospective study (Group I), suffering from leukemias and Non-Hodgkin-Lym phoma were examined before and 3 -4 weeks after BMT with cranial CT. 6 patients with subdural effusions were additionally examined with MRI (T,S E, T2TSE, T2*GRE). One Patient underwent SPECT after i.v. pertechnetate. A previous retrospective study (Group II) with 106 patients had received CT-SCANS only after post-BMT onset of neurological symptoms. The occurrence of subdural effusions was correlated with diagnosis, hematologic parameters and therapeutical aspects (radiation, intrathecal chemotherapy), vital signs. Statistically CHI-Square and WILCOXON 2-Sample test were used. Results: 9 (18%) of 50 Group I patients had symptomatic bilateral subdural effusion and brain edema. O f 106 Group II patients (retrospective study) only 5 (4.72%) showed com plicating SDH. Occurrence o f SDH significantly cor related with intrathecal methotrexate application. Only one patient underwent operative SDH-drainage. Other SDH resolved after 8 -1 2 weeks. Hygromas did not originate from hematomas. Conclusions: a) seemingly insignificant symptomatology in post-BMT pa tients had led to few er CT-examinations and to lower calculated complication numbers in retrospective G roup II patients, b) intrathecal chemotherapy has to be reconsidered in further treatm ent schemes, c) bulk flow mechanism from brain edema more likely than hematoma is the cause fo r hygroma formation. 174 MRI and Tc-99m HM-РАО SPET o f the brain in system ic lupus erytematous (SLE) R. Conforti, M. lovino, G. Panascì, T. Cinque, W. Del Vecchio; N aples/I Neuropsychiatrie event are a frequent com plication of Systemic Lupus Eritematous (SLE) even if findings at autopsy poorly correlate with clinical events, with only a little fraction of patients presenting typical vasculitic lesions. In this study 60 pts (45 females, 15 males, mean age 29.4 years; mean duration of the disease 8.6 years) underwent MRI and brain SPET at an interval of 1 week between the two studies. All pats were under therapy with corticosteroids that was not suspended fo r examination. MRI was done using a 1 T scanner; images were acquired in axial and coronal plane using sequences T1 and T2 weighted; SPET was performed using a single head rotating gam m a cam era after the i.v. injection of 555 MBq of TC-99Hm-PAO. 41 out of 60 post presented pathological images both at MRI and SPET. MRI alterations were divided in atrophy, focal and diffuse subcortical disease. SPET images showed a focal or diffuse decrease of cortical uptake with a distribution that was not necessarily related to alterations seen by MRI. Both MRI and SPET can individuate cerebral alterations in SLE pts also without clinical events. Results: Axial and sagittal pattern recognition m ethods were successful in determining central and major sulci in normal cases, but were uncertain in 74% of pathologic ones. Multiplanar Reformatted images generated from 3D MRI acquisitions and thin (3 mm o r less) CT slices, were 94% certain, but cortical pattern evaluation needed considerable skill. Curved reformations, resembling world maps, 3D reformations (feasible for thin and thick acquisitions), gave easy to com prehend anatomical descriptions. SAS MR acquisitions gave the most practical solution to brain surface anatomy depiction. Conclusion: Using one or more of these m ethods will perm it the radiologist to determine the location of pathological processes with regard to cortical functional zones with more confidence. Purpose: The predictive role of MRI in the assessm ent of recurrent bleeding and associated growth disturbance in hemophilia is still not fully defined. Material and Methods: 18 knee joints of 16 hemophiliacs with a mean age of 9.7 years (range 2 -1 4 ) were investigated. The study protocol included clinical exam, X-ray and MRI obtained at the same day. MRI was performed with a 1.5 T Magnetom (Siemens, Erlangen). The series com prised of T1-SE images pre-and post contrast fo r evaluation o f synovial changes, 3D-GE sequences with fat saturation (3D-FLASH-FATSAT) fo r the depiction of cartilage and FLASH-2D sequences with high susceptibility sensitivity fo r blood products. Results: Only in tw o children with a known history of recurrent bleeding into the knee joints and severe hemophilic arthropathy on X-ray (Petterson score 7 and 12, respectively) massive synovial proliferation, destruction of the cartilage and intraarticular hemosiderin w ere found. In the rest o f the children, no changes on X-Ray were noted. However, in all children with a history of recurrent bleeding, the FLASH-2D sequences revealed diffuse hemosiderin deposits within the intraarticular soft tissue. In addition, the FLASH-2D sequences could also detect hemosiderin in fo u r knee joints (22%) with no clinical history o f articular hemorrhage. Conclusion: These findings implicate the im portance of routine MRI screening in all hemophilic children. The early detection o f intraarticular hemosiderin might implicate the necessity fo r factor VIII prophylaxis to postpone the occurrence of severe arthropathy. 14:50 181 Study o f neonatal osteom yelitis and arthritis: Tc-99m-labeled human im m unoglobulin G scintigraphy and conventional radiography T. Biegahski, A. Midel, E. Mtodkowska; Lódz/PL Purpose: To evaluate the usefulness of Tc-99m-labeled nonspecific human immunoglobulin scanning in the foci detection of acute neonatal osteomyelitis. In 41 neonates with suspected osteomyelitis and/or arthritis 73 inflammatory foci were detected by conventional radiography and sonography. Imm unoglobulin scintigraphy w as performed in 24 neonates of this group with imaging in 4 h and 24 h. Results and Conclusions: 43 lesions w ere revealed by scintigraphy in 24 patients. In 70% of inflam matory sites the intensity of radionuclide uptake cor responded to the degree of radiographic changes. Scintigraphy visualized 2 additional lesions without evident clinical symptoms. Increased uptake was ob served in the early stage of inflammation in 2 patients while radiographs were negative. Accumulation o f IgG does not differentiate the anatomical structure within the inflammatory site i.e. soft tissues, bones or joints. False negative scintigrams (interpretations): symmetrical hip arthritis (2 patients) and sites of sequestra o r bone defect (3 patient). 8 false positive foci were visualized by IgG scintigraphy. In chronic osteomyelitis (3 patients) radionuclide uptake as markedly increased as in acute process. 182 Fibrom atosis colli -A benign cervical m ass of the newborn -Sonographic diagnosis Y. Barki, L. Läufer, H. Schulman, D. Fliss, A. Lieberman; Beer-Sheva/IL Purpose: An ultrasound study was performed in 25 newborns presenting with a lateral neck mass, sometimes associated with torticollis. Methods and Materials: 25 babies ranging from 3 weeks to 2 months, were examined with high resolution ultrasound using 6 .5 -1 0 mHz frequency transducers. In 7 cases color and power Doppler were used and hyperemia was suggested in 5 cases. Results: U ltrasound shows that this condition is non neoplastic and is confined to the stenocleido mastoid muscle. Only in one case CT and MRI were performed and due to the rapid growth o f the mass, operation confirmed the benign nature of the process. In all the cases the remission w as complete. Conclusion: Pediatric neck masses cause great concern am ong parents who at times detect these lesions incidentally. The radiologist must be familiar with the imaging characteristics of a variety o f non-neoplastic conditions S 36 such as fibromatosis colli. Sonographists can give quite definitive information to clinicians and can also reassure parents about this relatively unknown disease. 183 Generalized lym phangiom atosis: Findings on CT and MRI with gross-pathologic correlation P. Wunderbaldinger, K. Turetschek, M. Hörmann, К. Paya, B. Partik, E. Horcher, A.A. Bankier; Vienna/A Purpose: Generalized cystic lymphangiomatosis (GCL) is extrem ely rare and has only sporadically been imaged with MRI and CT. The aim of our study was to review the spectrum of GCL on MRI and CT and to investigate whether these modalities could yield relevant diagnostic information. Materials and Methods: We reviewed MRI and C T examination of five patients (3 female; 2 male; mean age 4.6 years) with GCL. Diagnostic imaging covered examinations of head, neck, thorax, and mean age 4.6 years) with GCL. Diagnostic imaging covered examinations of head, neck, thorax, and abdomen in all patients. Examinations were analyzed findings priorily reported to be typical of GCL, i.e., lytic bone lesions, pleural effusion, and multiseptated parenchymal cystic masses. The presence of any other pathology was also recorded. Imaging findings were com pared to clinical reports and post-autopsy specimen. Results: Typical findings of G CL (lytic bone lesions, pleural effusions, cystic masses) were seen in all five patients. Findings not priorily reported in the literature included diffuse pulm onary interstitial thickening (5/5), pulmonary interstitial nodules (3/5), diffuse thickening of the mesenterium (5/5), nodular thickening of the bowel wall (1/5), and cystic lesions of the spleen (3/5). These findings had partly been mistaken fo r inflammatory lesions. Conclusion: MRI and CT imaging may substantially broaden the spectrum of pathologies seen in G CL and, thus, should contribute to optimize clinical management of the disease and to avoid misdiagnosis. Results: In all cases, blood flow became undetectabled during hip extension and adduction. In 39 cases, flow disappeared during forced hip abduction; in the remaining 3 cases a clearly diminished Power-Doppler signal was present. The angle at which flow became undetectable varied from 55 to 85°. In some newborns the critic angle w as not the same for both hip joints. In forced flexion position, decrease, without disappearance, in normal vascularity was generally observed. (1) Physiologic position provides optimal blood supply to the femoral head. (2) Forced extension and adduction owe to total absence of Doppler vascular flow signal. (3) Forced abduction cause the same response except for some instances. Purpose: Purpose of the study was to determ ine the value of a whole body STIR-TSE sequence in diagnosis and follow-up of bone marrow lesions in multilocular malignomas in children, com pared with 99mTc bone scintigraphy. Methods and Materials: 5 children with various multilocular tum ors (3 PNET, 1 rhabdomyosarcoma, 1 Ewing's sarcoma) with 64 bone marrow lesions at time of diagnosis underwent a whole body MR imaging and a 99mTc bone scintigraphy simultaneously in a 3 ( -6 ) monthly interval. The study was performed with a 1.5 T MR imaging system (Philips Gyroscan ACS II) with a fast short time inversion recovery sequence (STIR-TSE) in a coronal slice orientation. Results: From 64 bone marrow lesions, detected with both m ethods com bined at time of diagnosis, the STIR-TSE sequence alone showed 49 lesions. 37 lesions were found with scintigraphy alone, w hereas 5 additional lesions were detected in the skull and the ribs. The hyperintense focal lesions, detected with the STIR-TSE sequence, showed a long persistance o f their high signal intensity during therapy. Conclusion: A STIR-TSE sequence was more sensitive in the detection of bone marrow lesions of malignomas in children, com pared with 99mTc bone scintigraphy. showed an early steep increase o f SI o f the liver up to 90 sec and further enhancem ent up to 600 sec following bolus injection. Maximum enhancement was shown 20 min after administration of Gd-EOB-DTPA. SI o f the liver was significantly (P < 0.05) increased following 12.5, 25, or 50 μΓΤΐοΙ/kg Gd-EOB-DTPA. However, С/N was significantly improved following only 12.5 and 25 ^m o l/kg Gd-EOB-DTPA (P < 0.05), w hereas a dose of 50 ^m o l/kg resulted in no significant enhancement of С/N. Optimal С/N was obtained 20 min post injection. Conclusion: Gd-EOB-DTPA is a safe contrast medium that is well suited for dynam ic MR imaging. A dose of 12.5 дто1/кд Gd-EOB-DTPA is sufficient fo r imaging o f focal liver lesions. Liver enhancement and С/N ratios were significantly increased when compared with pre-contrast values. 188 Pharm acokinetics of the liver-specific contrast agent Gd-EOB-DTPA in relation to liver im aging in man G. Schuhmann-Giam pieri, R. Maibauer, M. Mahler, G. Roll, S. Schmitz; Berlin/D Purpose: The study w as performed to evaluate the effect of dose on phar macokinetics and efficacy of Gd-EOB-DTPA as a liver-specific hepatobiliary contrast medium (CM) fo r Com puted Tomography (CT). Materials and Methods: Pharmacokinetics in serum and the pattern o f elimi nation was investigated in eighteen healthy volunteers up to six days following a ten-m inute infusion o f 0.2, 0.35 and 0.5 mmol Gd/kg BW. Pharmacokinetic behavior was com pared with the CT attenuation data in the liver parenchyma following administration of the same doses in patients. Results: Urinary and fecal excretion accounted for about equal portions of the administered dose. The degree of renal elimination increased with increasing doses w hereas renal clearance and half-life from urine data was not effected by dose. Dose-normalized AUC (area under the serum concentration-time curve) was significantly increased with increasing doses indicating saturation in liver uptake fo r the highest dose. This finding was in good agreem ent with the measured net increase in liver attenuation by CT. Conclusion: Hepatic disposition revealed slight saturation phenom ena fo r the highest dose, e.g. 0.5 mmol Gd/kg. Nevertheless, this well-tolerated dose resulted in sufficient uptake by human liver allowing fo r C T liver imaging in patients. 189 MR of the thoracic tumours: Role o f the contrast medium A. Carriero, R. Fossaceca, N. Magarelli, C. Ciccotosto; Chieti/I Purpose: to com pare the diagnostic accuracy of the MR without and with contrast medium in the staging (T) of the thoracic tumours; surgery was the gold standard. M aterials and Methods: 20 patients with thoracic tum ours underwent MR with a superconductive magnet (1.5 T) and Spin Echo sequences T1 w (TR 500 ms, TE 15 ms) and T2 w (TR 2000 ms, TE 2 5 -9 0 ms). The T 1 w sequence was performed without and with contrast medium (Gd DTPA 0.2 mmol/kg). The relationship o f the tum our with the surrounding structures was evaluated by a reader giving tw o diagnostic judgem ents: infiltration o r not infiltration. The results so obtained were com pared using Friedmann test (P < 0.05). Results: MR without and with contrast medium in all cases showed the correct identification of the tum ours (range 2 -7 cm). In the Preoperative evaluation, basic MR showed sensitivity of 67%, specificity of 69% and diagnostic accu racy of 68%; MR without and with contrast medium had sensitivity o f 92%, specificity of 97% and diagnostic accuracy of 95% (statistically significant difference). Conclusion: in our experience, in the staging of the thoracic tum ours (T), regarding the relationships with surrounding structures, the contrast medium increases the overall diagnostic accuracy o f the MR. To evaluate the pattern of enhancement using the superparamagnetic AMI-25 versus gadolinium in patients with liver cirrhosis due to W ilson's disease. Material and Methods: 11 patients with clinically and histopathologically proven W ilson's disease were investigated using unenhanced and AMI-25-S 38 enhanced MRI (Endorem®: 15 д то 1/кд body weight). 9 of these patients underwent MRI with gadolinium (Magnevist®: 0.1 mmol/kg body weight). Us ing histopathologic findings patients were devided in group 1 (non-acute stadium (n = 2): distinct liver cirrhosis and normal laboratory data) and group 2 (acute stadium (n = 9): active liver cirrhosis and changes of laboratory data). Results: In T2-weighted sequences, patients with non-acute stadium showed no changes of liver parenchyma unenhanced versus hypointense nodules using AMI-25-enhanced MRI. Patients with acute stadium demonstrated hy pointense nodules using unenhanced and AMI-25-enhanced MRI. Nodules showed a percentage signal intensity loss of 57.1% ± 2.6 (non-acute stadium) versus 62% ± 1 1 . 9 (acute stadium). C ontrast-to-noise ratio changed from -1 .4 ± 1 . 5 unenhanced to -1 .1 ± 0.6 enhanced (non-acute stadium), and from -1 .5 ± 0.98 unenhanced to -1 ± 1 enhanced (acute stadium). Unen hanced T1-weighted images revealed no changes (non acute stadium) versus slight changes of liver parenchyma (acute stadium). Gadolinium-enhanced T 1 -weighted scans increased detection rate for both groups. Conclusion: AMI-25-enhanced MRI is valuable in the staging of patients with W ilson's disease revealing a specific morphologic pattern. 191 Investigation into the use of gadolinium as a contrast agent in vascular angiographic procedures N. O 'Hare, P. Smiddy, M. Molloy; Dublin/IRL Purpose: Iodine has been extensively used as contrast enhancing agent in radiographic angiographic procedures. In some patients, Iodine hypersensi tivity o r renal impairment makes the use of Iodine based agents hazardous. Gadolinium has been used as a contrast agent in MRI with proven patient tolerability. In this project the use o f Gadolinium as a possible contrast agent in angiographic procedures was examined. A three pronged approach to this investigation was used. Methods and Materials: Firstly the use of Gadolinium and Iodine was com putationally modelled. The minimum detectable quantity of both Iodine and Gadolinium was determ ined for various kVp's, inherent filtration and tissue thickness. In the second phase, tw o objects containing equal weights o f Iodine and Gadolinium were imaged on a Philips DVI system. The contrast was de term ined digitally as a function of kVp and inherent filtration. The results were compared to those obtained from the model. In the final phase, patients with known sensitivity to Iodine based agents, and requiring vascular angiography were imaged using gadolinium (Magnevist) . The initial results show that Gd-DTPA can be used as an alternative contrast agent to Iodine. Gadolinium can be used particularly in the case of large patients, high inherent filtration and/or high kVp's. Initial results with patient images will be shown. 192 Determ ination of dosis optim um in Gd-enhanced renal MRA S. Bock, K. Winter, E. Jakubowski, G. Bongartz, W. Steinbrich; Basel/CH Purpose: To optimize contrast media dosage fo r Gd-bolus enhanced MRA of renal arteries. Methods and Methods: 10 healthy volunteers were investigated using a Siemens Vision MRI unit (1.5 Tesla, 25 mT/m). Single breath-hold technique was applied with sim ultaneous injection of a 30 ml i.v. bolus. 3 different dosages (0.05, 0.1, 0.2 mmol Gd/kg BW corresponding to half, single and double dose) where injected on three consecutive days. A 3D TOF sequence (TR = 5 ms, TE = 2.1 ms, FA = 30°, matrix size 224 x 256, partition thickness = 1.5 mm, vol. thickness = 60 mm, measuring time = 44 sec) was invariably used. Bolus timing w as adjusted individually to center of k-space according to a preceding 3 ml test bolus injection. MRAs were evaluated by MIP and ROI measurements in the renal segm ent o f the abdominal aorta, proximal renal arteries and background signal. Qualitative and quantitative visualization of renal arteries was assessed by tw o experienced radiologists, blinded concerning dosages and personal data. Results: Single and double dose technique show no significant difference concerning the visualization and contrast evaluation of healthy renal arteries. The lowest contrast media concentration used was clearly inferior in regard of imaging qualities. Conclusion: We propose that the widely used triple dose CE MRA of renal arteries could be replaced by single dose technique, because our results strongly suggest that single dose (0.1 mmol Gd/kg KG) has equal diagnosticai benefit. 193 Technical requirem ents for the use of a power injector for dynamic MR-imaging T. Allkemper, H.M. Gissler, P. Reimer, G. Schuierer, E.J. Rummeny, P.E. Peters; M ünster/D Purpose: To evaluate w hether power injection of contrast media guarantees a constant flow-rate fo r dynamic MRI. Methods and Materials: A pressure controlled commercially available power injector (Ulrich AG, Ulm, FRG) with a flow-rate of 5 ml/s was used. Commer cially available gadolinium chelates (gadopentetate dimeglumine (Magnevist®, Schering AG, Berlin, FRG), gadodiamide (Omniscan®, Nycomed AG, Munich, FRG)) were tested fo r flow-rates with intravenous access lines (Insyte-W®, Becton Dickinson, Heidelberg, FRG) with diam eters of 1 6 ,1 8 , 20, 22, 24, and 26 gauche. Every measurement was repeated 10 times for each diameter and each contrast media. All contrast media were tested at room and body temperature. Results: Both, tem perature and diam eter of i.v. access lines have an important influence on real flow-rates. Only i.v. access lines < 20 gauche should be used in combination with pressure controlled power injectors. Conclusion: Dynamic MR-lm aging with power injection of contrast media requires intravenous access lines < 20 gauche to maintain a constant high flow-rate. The assessment o f pulm onary ventilation is of substantial need in the diagnosis, monitoring and follow-up o f numerous pulm onary diseases. Considering the developm ent o f an appropriate MR-technique, one eminent precondition has to be fulfilled: contrast agent droplets have to be small enough to obtain sufficient contrast agent distribution within the lungs and to obtain homogenous enhancement o f the lungs. Thus we are describing the development and first use of a new Gd-DTPA-aerosol optimized fo r MRventilation-imaging of the lungs. Materials and Methods: The distribution of a contrast agent within the lungs is determined by the droplet diameter, which itself is determined by the surface tension. A new Gd-DTPA-based aerosol with Mannitol and Lutrol® (Schering AG, Berlin), has a reduced droplet diam eter size and surface tension compared to Magnevist®. Two experimental groups are examined: (I) 3 subgroups of male Wistar han. rats (n = 5/group) are undergoing mask-ventilation for 5, 10 and 15 min. with (1) Gd-DTPA-aerosol, (2) Magnevist® and (3) 0.9% NaCI, using a new ultrasonic nebulizer capable to produce particles with a size of < 2 μπ\ (total 97% < 3 дгп) to reach homogenous alveolar lung deposition. Imaging (precontrast; 5 min., 30 min., 60 min. and 14 h post-contrast) is performed using a 2.0 T system with a SE-Sequence (TR = 150 ms, ТЕ = 3 ms, Slice = 3 ms, NEX = 16). (II) 3 subgroups of W istar han. rats (n = 5/group) are examined with a model of artificial segmental brochial obstruction using again (1) Gd-DTPA-aerosol (2) Magnevist® and (3) 0.9% NaCI. Results: 1) MR-images o f healthy rats dem onstrate homogenous lung en hancement showing homogenous contrast agent uptake. 2) MR-lmages of rats with artificial segmental brochial obstruction show segmental lack o f en hancement. Currently we are optimzing the duration and the frequency of inhalation, the time of postcontrast imaging and the application scheme. The results of our ongoing study indicate that Gd-DTPA-aerosol can be used as a potential isoosm olar contrast agent fo r ventilation-imaging of the lungs. Results: In 6 of 24 patients with unremarkable conventional enteroclysis findings, intraabdominal pathology such as thickening of the intestinal wall, an abscess, peritoneal malignancy and cecum mobile were identified. In the remaining patients, MRT showed good correlation with conventionally obtained data and provided im portant additional information regarding extraluminal involvement and possibly the severity of the disease such as fistulas and abscesses. Conclusion: MRT, carried out using this technique, provides im portant addi tional information regarding intra-and extraluminal changes with good image quality. 15:20 196 The use of gadolinium chelates as X-ray contrast agents in clinical studies T. Albrecht, P. Dawson; London/U K Purpose: Scattered reports have appeared in the literature on using Gdchelates as X-ray contrast agents. This study was undertaken form ally to investigate the contrast effects of Gd in patients undergoing digital subtraction angiography (DSA), intravenous urography (IVU) and CT. M aterials and Methods: 15 patients attending fo r coeliac axis DSA (n = 5), abdominal CT (n = 5) and IVU (n = 5) were injected with 0.3 mmol/kg GdDTPA (maximum approved dose). For DSA and IVU, images were categorized as diagnostic o r non-diagnostic. For CT enhancem ent w as measured in H ounsfield Units (HU). Results: DSA: All 5 patients had diagnostic arteriogram s and 4/5 indirect portograms were diagnostic. IVU: 4/5 studies yielded diagnostic pyelograms. All nephrograms were relatively poor. CT: Average peak aortic enhancement was 75 HU but duration w as short. In all 15 cases enhancem ent was weaker than that achieved with routine dosage of iodinated agents. Conclusion: GdDTPA yielded diagnostic arteriogram s in all cases and diag nostic indirect portograms and IVU's in most cases. Its efficacy in CT proved limited but higher doses than currently approved would be potentially useful. Gd-chelates may be clinically useful in X-ray studies on patients at high risk of anaphylactoid reactions to iodinated agents. The quantification of structural elem ents of bone tissue is important fo r the evaluation of metabolic bone diseases, in particular for the assessment o f fracture risk. We propose the application of com plexity measures fo r the quantitative analysis of trabecular structures in vertebral bodies. Methods and Materials: Axial slices of 1 mm thickness of lumbar vertebrae from human cadavers were obtained on a CT-Scanner. These slices were evaluated with algorithm s based on measurement m ethods derived from non linear dynamics, e.g. Shannon-Entropy, Renyi-Entropy. The BMD of the same vertebrae w as measured by OCT. The vertebrae measured by QCT were divided in tw o groups: normal BMD specimens, osteoporotic specimens. Results: The osteoporotic specimens were clearly distinguishable from the normal specimens by com plexity measures. The difference o f structural ele ment distribution o f osteoporotic vertebrae is maintained through the entire vertebrae although there are slight differences from slice to slice. Conclusion: C om plexity measures are a valuable tool to quantify trabecular structures in vertebrae. 14:15 199 A 3D stereolithographic spongiosa model to quantify the potential of high resolution QCT and MR in the analysis of structural parameters of trabecular bone K. Engelke, S. Prevrhal, J. Coman, C. Süß, W. Kalender; Erlangen/D Purpose: To develop reproducible spongiosa models fo r the characterization of the potential of high resolution CT and MR applied to the structural analysis of trabecular bone. Methods and Materials: Arbitrary structures can be transformed into 3D plastic models using the new technology of stereolithography. The input data can either be generated on a com puter or can be derived e.g. from a 3D C T datasets. The models are build slice by slice. W e used artificial regular grid structures to characterize hom ogeneity and spatial resolution of the stereolithographic process and a μΟΧ dataset fo r the spongiosa model. Results: Stereolithographic models of artificial geometries showed that a spatial resolution o f 100 д т and variations of ± 20 д т are technically achievable. Plastic models of the 3D digital bone model were manufactured successively using various magnification factors. The bone models were based on а д С Т data set o f a trabecular bovine bone sam ple (1 cm3, 176 consecutive slices, thickness 56 д т ; in plane pixel size 56 д т ) . Conclusion: For the first time a realistic standard of trabecular bone is available which can be used to verify structural parameters as determined by high resolution Q C T and MR. The model can be used for a comparison of 2D and 3D structural analysis methods and for an analysis o f decreasing spatial resolution. Structural characteristics can easily be changed by. e.g. thinning or removing trabeculae in the digital model. Thus a whole set of realistic structural conditions in healthy and osteoporotic patients can be easily simulated. 14:20 200 A novel method for digital X-ray imaging of the com plete spine A.H.W. van Eeuwijk, S. Lobregt, F.A. Gerritsen; Best/NL Purpose: To develop an acquisition protocol and reconstruction algorithm to obtain digital X-ray images of the com plete spine. Modern standard digital X-ray system s can be used instead of non-standard sized and special-purpose film -based equipment. M aterials and Methods: We use standard digital X-ray equipm ent to acquire a num ber of images with limited Field O f View (FOV) and translated along the path of the spine. Together these images will cover the complete spine. A special algorithm, running on an EasyVision Workstation, is developed to paste these images together to form an overview of the complete spine. Results: The proposed approach offers a lot of advantages. (1) Modern standard digital X-ray equipment can be used. (2) The required X-ray dose is low er than for conventional radiographs, while image quality is better. (3) Com puter assisted measurements can be performed on these overview images with accurate results Conclusion: The digital method is a significant step in the direction towards better diagnosis in the area of spinal deformities. 201 Im age quality and lesion detection in 3D-CT of a bone phantom F. Stöblen, К. Neumann, R Hermann, R. Langer; Essen/D Purpose: Aim of the study was to evaluate the image quality and image artifacts in 3D-CT o f small bony lesions using a bone phantom. Methods and Materials: An artificial phantom with a CT density similar to child's skull and defined linear and round lesions was examined with spiral C T (Somatom Plus 4, Siemens AG, Germany) with varying scan parameters. Surface shaded display (SSD), maximum intensity projections (MIP) and multiplanar reconstructions were evaluated with regard to lesion conspicuity and reconstruction artifacts. Results: Multiplanar reconstructions were superior to MIP reconstructions in lesion conspicuity and diagnostic confidence. In SSD reconstructions lesions w ere obscured depending on scan parameters and lesion size, shape, and orientation. Conclusion: The proper technique fo r 3D -C T of bone lesions is influenced by a variety of scan and reconstruction param eters and depends on the nature and size of the lesions. Even the optimal scan technique does not allow correct depiction of small lesions and has therefore to be used carefully. Conclusion: There was no statistically significant difference between screenfilm system and aSi-detector images in respect to detectability of fractures and cortical bone lesions. ASi-detector technology holds promise in terms of dose reduction in skeletal radiography without loss of diagnostic accuracy. 206 Com parative study of two film -screen-system s for skeletal radiography: Dosage reduction and improved im age quality by an anti-crossover layer M. Kolbe, P. Insight Skeletal System (Insight, a.-p. and lateral). The a.-p. views were independently evaluated by 6 examiners in a blinded m anner and random order. Each examiner was asked to score the images regarding 8 diagnostic and 4 quality criteria on a 5 point scale. Statistical analysis consisted in non-parametric paired tests. In 40 patients fractures of the distal radius were diagnosed. The diag nostic security was improved fo r the Insight system (p < 0.05). Assessment of image quality showed an improvement fo r the Insight system at the trabecular bone and for the general rating without statistical significance. Insight system enabled a dose reduction of 25%. The new film-screen-system Insight Skeletal Imaging System showed an improved diagnostic security and better image quality combined with a reduction o f the exposure dosage. 15:25 2 0 7 Monitor presentation for reporting of digital radiographs in comparison to different laser film form ats H. Bonél, С. Pistitsch, К. Herrmann, R. Braunschweig, M. Reiser; M unich/D Purpose: Digital radiography provides the opportunity to use different film formats and viewing monitors fo r the presentation of the same radiograph. The purpose o f this study was to determ ine the usability of m onitor presentation for reporting of digital radiographs of skeletal structures in comparison to different film formats. Materials and Methods: We used the Agfa Diagnostic C enter ADC 70, a storage-phosphor computed radiography system to depict pelvis, skull and long bones. On the basis o f critical structures typical fo r the specific anatom ic area, radiographs of 50 different patients were evaluated by fo u r observers. The same radiographs were presented on 8" x 10" , 11" x 14" film s and a viewing console (1280 x 1024 matrix), respectively. Each reader had to decide whether critical structures were presented worse, equal o r better in comparison. Results: On assessment of the tw o different film formats, critical structures were presented equal o r better on the small in com parison to the large film form at (p < 0.05). Conclusion: Critical structures can be evaluated with the same diagnostic accuracy on the small format. W hether currently available monitors, which still in process of evaluation, can totally replace laser films, remains to be seen. T2 TSE (4.30 min) were acquired and analyzed by measurem ent o f the signal intensity (SI) and calculation of SI ratio and lesion to liver. Statistical analysis and as confirmatory study CT was performed in all patients. R e su lts: T1 Wl demonstrated a SI difference of 23% (p = 0.34) between lesion and liver fo r all lesions, T1WI with FatSat a SI difference of 12% (p = 0.77). T2WI demonstrated a SI difference of 34% (p = 0.32) and T2TSE 44% (p < 0.029). Subsequent we measured the SI differences between liver and lesion for hemangiomas [T1 Wl 33% p = 0.38), T1 W l with FatSat 12% (p < 05), T2WI 40% (p = 0.49), T2TSE 51% (p < 0.01). For HCC the m easurem ents showed in T1W I a SI difference o f 11% (p < 0.2), T1W I with FatSat 6% (p < 0.7), T2W I 39% (p < 0.49) and T2TSE 45% (p < 0.58). For colorectal metastasis the measurements showed in T1W I a SI difference of 33% (p < 0.26), T1WI with FatSat 23% (p < 0.93), T2WI 21% (p < 0.05) and T2TSE 34% (p < 0.5). C o n c lu s io n : The econom ic imaging o f the liver should include T1W I and T2TSE. Both sequences dem onstrate statistical significant a better liver to lesion contrast than the more time consuming (+7 min) sequences T1W I with FatSat and T2W I in conventional spinecho technique. (SPIO) . Methods and Material: 16 patients with known focal hepatic lesions (60 m etastasis and 9 HCC) were explored with the following sequences using a 1 T MR tom ography (Magnetom Impact-Siemens): TSE STIR T2 W, TSE T2 W (BH), SE T2 and DP W before and 60 minutes after i.v. injection o f SPIO (0.075 ml/kg). Image quality, lesion detectability before and after contrast medium (c.m.) w ere evaluated qualitatively by subjective assessment (two operators in blinded fashion) and quantitatively calculating signal-tonoise ratio (S/N) fo r liver and lesions and lesion-liver contrast-to-noise ratio (C/N). ANOVA was used to establish the level of statistical significance of the observed differences between sequences. Results: TSE STIR T2 w as more sensible than TSE T2 (85% vs 55%) and than SE T2-DP (85% vs 60%). After injection of SPIO all sequences collectively detected much more lesions than without c.m. and TSE STIR showed the best sensibility (98%); TSE T2 (BH) increased a lot the sensibility (70% ) in spite of turbo factor. The smallest lesion detected was of 5 mm. Quantitative analysis demonstrated a significant decrease in hepatic S/N, in lesion S/N and a significant increase in C/N (P < 0.01). Conclusion: utilization of SPIO improved detection of malignant liver lesions; TSE STIR T2 seems to be the best sequence to use. 14:20 210  A prospective study including 20 patients with sus pected focal liver lesions on CT or ultrasound was undertaken. Iron-oxide enhanced MRI was performed on a 0.2 T and at 1.5 T system. Both examina tions w ere perform ed in one session. T2 weighted sequences were analysed. Evaluation included lesion counts, determ ination of lesion conspicuity and overall image quality (both graded on a scale 1-5). Quantitative analysis was performed on 29 lesions. Lesion to liver signal intensity and contrast to noise ratios were calculated. Results: 59 lesions were detected on high field, 63 on low field. On both system s median value for lesion conspicuity was 3. No statistically significant difference w as found. Global image quality w as rated higher on the high field system: 3 vs 2 fo r the low-field system (p = 0.0017). Quantitative analysis showed no difference fo r lesion to liver signal intensity ratios or contrast to noise ratios. Conclusion: Better image quality on the high field system does not result in a better lesion detection, o r a better lesion conspicuity. Low field systems appear to have equal diagnostic value in lesion detection as compared to high field system s in iron oxide enhanced MRI of focal liver lesions. In the 166 patients with < 8 FLLs, a significantly higher number o f lesions was detected following Gd-BOPTA administration (p < 0.009 -0.001). Confidence in detecting/excluding lesions w as significantly improved by Gd-BOPTA injection (p < 0.001). Lesion characterisation was better for delayed post-contrast than pre-contrast images, with increased confidence in distinguishing solid from non-solid lesions. Bolus dynamic imaging pro vided additional confidence in lesion characterisation in 17 -25% of patients, compared to plain and delayed post-contrast MRI. Dynam ic and/or delayed Gd-BOPTA enhancement was considered radiologically useful in 82% of pa tients. The additional information provided by Gd-BOPTA could help to change diagnostic conclusions in 47% of patients, and was reported to influence the management of 23% of patients. Conclusions: Gd-BOPTA-enhancement was useful both during dynamic scanning and in delayed imaging of FLLs. 14:50 2 13 MRI of liver neoplasm with superparam agnetic iron oxide vs СТАР: Histopathologically controlled study J. Scharf, V. Hoffmann, T. Roeren, G.W. Kauffmann; Heidelberg/D Purpose: to assess sensitivity and specifity o f magnetic resonance (MR) imag ing enhanced with parenterally administered iron oxides (MR+) vs computed tom ographic arterial portography (СТАР). Methods and Materials: 42 patients with suspected malignent liver lesions were examined prospectively with СТАР an MR+. The MR protocol comprised a breath hold FLASH 2d and tw o T2-weighted spin echo before and after contrast enhancement (EndoremR, Guebet) 18 patients were operated and were evaluated histopathologically. Results: 32 of 38 lesions were detected correctly in СТАР. 2 benign lesions were graded as malignent, 6 lesions were not seen and 9 findings were false positives. MR+ detected 27 lesins including 4 additional lesions that were not seen without enhancement. 5 Lesions w ere only detected on the enhanced FLASH image and not on the T2 weighted images. By contrast 4 false positive findings were not seen on the enhanced T2 weighted images. The sensitivity of magnetic resonance imaging enhanced with parenterally administrated iron oxides is lower than that of СТАР and specifity is lower than that of unenhanced imaging. Materials and Methods: 37 renal arteries were studied in 17 hypertensive pa tients who underwent Doppler scanning before and 1 hour after administration of Captopril. Pattern recognition criteria were applied to classify the Doppler waveforms as having a normal or pulsus tardus configuration. Renal resis tance index (Rl) was measured on segmental vessels in an upper, middle and low er area within the renal sinus. Doppler scanning results were com pared with those of arteriography in normal arteries (n = 16), stenotic arteries (n = 19) and occlusions (n = 2). Results: On the basis of recognition of the pulsus tardus by using acceleration time, Captopril test don't significantly increase the sensitivity o f Doppler in detecting renal artery stenoses. In the other hand, the Δ Rl decreased significantly only in the stenotic artery (P < 0.01). The application of the Captopril test to renal echo-D oppler may represent a feasible, non invasive, and inexpensively useful tool particularly when the evaluation of the main renal artery is difficult. Purpose: W e investigated the link between renal artery stenosis and chronic heart failure, and w hether PTRA can be used to treat such patients. We present a series o f six patients (3 male, 3 female) with hypertension who developed congestive cardiac failure. There w as no overt coronary o r valvular heart disease. All the patients were investigated with renal arteriography and found to have renal artery stenosis. 2 patients had bilateral renal artery stenosis, 4 had stenosis o f an artery to a single functioning kidney. Subsequently 8 technically successful PTRA procedures were performed to these lesions. Results: All patients underwent a significant diuresis in the first seven days after PTRA and showed significant weight reduction of between 1.7 kg and 6.5 kg (mean 3.8 kg). In all patients there was improvem ent o r resolution of heart failure. The mean supine blood pressure fell from 189/93 to 149/80. Average creatinine values prior to angioplasty were 175 mmol/l and 149 mmol/l at follow up. Some patients were able to reduce or discontinue diuretic medication with no return o f symptoms of cardiac failure.  : СТА o f the renal arteries was carried out in 56 hypertensive patients: section thickness 2 mm, pitch 1.5, increment 1 mm. 120 ml of contrast medium were injected with a flow rate of 4 ml/s and a median delay of 22 s. Postprocessing included multiplanar reconstructions (MPR), MIP and 3D (segmentation based on dual-thresholded seeded VOItechnique). Quantification relied on density measurements, stenoses were classified as < 50% , 50 -7 5 % , > 75% and occlusion. Results were correlated to intraarlerial DSA. Results: Together with 18 accessory renal arteries a total of 130 vessels was am enable fo r evaluation. СТА detected all accessory renal arteries. Evaluation was not possible in 4 MPRs and one MIP. Regarding > 75% stenoses and occlusions as clinically significant, sensitivity was 89% fo r the 3D, 94% for the MIP and only 72% for the MPR. The specificity was about 94% fo r all techniques. The positive predictive value was 84% for 3Ds and MPRs, and only 62% for the MIPs. Conclusion: СТА of the renal arteries using 3D-reconstruction or MIP provide a high degree of diagnostic accuracy. СТА reliably detects accessory renal arteries. 14:30 Material and Methods: 20 renal transplant recipients with suspicion of renal artery stenosis underwent intra-arterial DSA and MRA without (n = 8), both without and with (n = 2) and with intravenous (i.v.) injected gadolinium (n = 10). Intra-arterial com puted tom ography angiography (СТА) and, in patients with significant stenosis, intra-arterial pressurements served as the gold standard. Results: 3-D phasecontrast MRA was considered superior to 2-D inflow angiography. In some cases the image quality was, however, so bad that the evaluation o f suspected stenosis was impossible. Gadolinium -enhanced MRA gave better quality of images and shorter investigation times than MRA without gadolinium . No false negative results with MRA were seen. Metal surgical clips gave artifacts w hich in two cases were misinterpreted as significant stenosis in contrast-enhanced MRA. DSA resulted in one false negative case. Conclusions: A preliminary evaluation of our results indicates that gadoliniumenhanced MRA provides at least equally good diagnostic information as DSA. The use o f i.v. non-nefrotoxic gadolinium and the possibility to perform image reconstructions in any plain makes gadolinium -enhanced MRA a promising technique fo r future use in the diagnosis of renal transplant arterial stenosis.  The RA o f 49 patients (31 m, 18 f) were studied following conventional angiography (CA). Imaging was performed on a 1.5 T MR system (GE Signa EchoSpeed) using a contrast-enhanced (0.3 mmol/kg Gd-DTPA, 2.5 ml/sec) 3D SPGR sequence (TR/TE: 3.9/1.5 ms, 40°, 0.75 NEX). 44 coronal sections (1 .8 -2 .2 mm) were acquired in 2 3 -2 8 s. For analysis, each RA was divided into 3 segments: proximal, middle and distal (origin to renal hilum). The aorta was separated into a supra-and infra-renal segment. The visibilty of each segm ent was characterized on a 4-point scale. Similarly the presence o f stenoses were recorded fo r each segment on a 4 point severity scale. G rade 2 and 3 was regarded as significant (> 50% luminal narrowing), Grade 4 represented occlusion. Results: All but 3 segments seen on CA were visualized with MRA. All 11 accessory renal arteries identified on CA were well depicted by MRA. Seven stenoses of the aorta were correctly graded by MRA. 40 RA-stenoses (29 significant) were identified on CA. 26 lesions were graded correctly by MRA. The sensitivity and specificity of MRA fo r all RA stenoses was 84% and 96%; fo r significant stenoses it rose to 90 and 99% respectively. Conclusion: Breath-held 3D MRA provides excellent image quality and high diagnostic accuracy in the assessment of RA disease. 14:50 222 Gadolinium -enhanced 3D MR angiography of the renal arteries: Preliminary experience M. Jörgensen, H. Rosenthal, R. Brunkhorst, M. Galanski; Hannover/D Purpose: To evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of breath-hold 3D MR an giography o f the renal arteries with high-dose gadolinium in comparison to conventional arterial DSA. Methods and Materials: Thirty patients scheduled fo r arterial DSA (renovas cular hypertension = 15, kidney donors = 8, after renal transplantation = 3, renal tum ors = 4) were examined additionally with a fast 3D SPGR sequence (flip angle 60°; TR/TE 13/2.5 ms) using 30 ml gadolinium (flow 2 ml/s) and 20 ml saline (flow 1.5 ml/s). A set of 28 coronal slices (slice thickness 2 mm) was acquired in 42 seconds breath-hold with a torso phased-array surface coil (1.5 T; GE Signa). Image analysis included interactive cine mode, 2D multiplanar reform ations (MPRs), 3D surface shaded displays (SSDs) and maximum intensity projections (MIPs). Results: Three-dimensional MR angiography with gadolinium identified 9/12 accessory arteries and classified correctly 50/54 normal renal arteries, 5/6 non-significant (< 50%) and 8/9 significant (> 50%) renal artery stenoses. SSDs and MIPs tend to overestimate vascular stenoses. Interactive analysis (cine mode) and 2D MPRs were essential for correct classification. Vascular enhancement w as insufficient in 3 patients. Patients and Methods: Outcome data of 25 patients with transplant renal artery stenosis referred to angioplasty during a 9-year period were reviewed and analyzed. The indication fo r angioplasty was either an increase in the serum creatinine or a rise in blood pressure. In 80% of the patients the an gioplasty was carried out using the crossover technique from the contralateral femoral approach. In the rest, either an ipsilateral fem oral o r transaxillary approach was used. 2 renal arteries were stented. Results: In 60% of the patients the stenosis were immediately distal to the anastom otic side. One patient had fibrom uscular dysplasia of the transplanted artery. The other patients had narrowings more distally including the branch vessels. The initial diagnosis was established either by colour code duplex sonography o r spiral CT. In 72% o f the cases the angioplasty or stentimplantation w as successful o r partially successful. In 2 patients angioplasty was not attempted on account of high-grade kinking of the transplant renal artery. In one patient who received an additional Y-graft the transplant renal artery was reanastomosed onto the graft and was hence not angioplastied. In the rest of the patients the angioplasty was not successful either because of an elastic stenosis or inability to catheterize the artery. The patients where angioplasty was unsuccessful o r not carried out were subjected to resurgery. 74% of the patients, w ho received PTA showed a significant fall of serum creatinine. Only 58% o f the patients responded with improvement of the blood pressure. One patient developed an arterial dissection and required stenting of the renal artery. In a further patient branch artery occlusion was noted. Conclusion: PTA including stent implantation is technically successful and is associated with a good clinical outcom e in the majority of cases. PTA should be viewed as the primary treatm ent modality in transplant renal artery stenosis, before proceeding to resurgery. Since the advent of MRI, our knowledge about spinal cord lesions has increased considerably MRI is often the only imaging modality to be performed as soon as a spinal cord lesion is clinically suspected. Appropriate MR techniques should be applied including not only T1, T2 and Gadolinium enhanced T1 weighted images using at least tw o different imaging planes but also angio MR and myelo MR. In this course, we will review the recent advances in the diagnosis fo r tum oral, traumatic, infectious and inflammatory lesions o f the spinal cord. Guidelines for proper diagnosis as well as differential diagnosis will be discussed. The use of MRI fo r the follow -up o f spinal cord lesions will be enhanced. 2 2 7 B. Diseases of the vertebral column S. Holtås; Lund/S Degenerative disease: Pathology of the spine is dom inated by degenerative disease. Evaluation should consist of plain films com bined with C T or MRI for evaluation of the soft tissues, including the disc. In spinal stenosis a combination of m yelography and C T is useful. Increased availability, decreased cost and improved quality of MRI have made this modality the primary choice in evaluation of degenerative disease at many centers. Tumors: Primary extra-axial tum ors in the spine are rare. Intradurally, meningeoma and neurinoma are the dominating lesions. In the epidural space, metastasis constitutes the vast majority o f tumors. The diagnosis of spinal tum ors has been greatly facilitated by MRI, which is the modality of choice for evaluation. However, fo r screening of non-sym ptom atic metastatic disease, isotope studies are still most cost-effective, although there are some tumors, such as myeloma and lymphoma, which som etim es give a false negative examination. Infection: Spinal epidural infections are relatively rare but important, since correct and early diagnosis usually leads to perm anent cure, w hereas an overlooked diagnosis might lead to permanent neurological deficits. MRI is the modality of choice and the epidural abscess com bined with discitis is easily shown in the typical case. In rare cases, hem atogenous spread directly to the epidural space can be visualized. Tuberculosis is increasing in the W estern World due to immigration. Tuberculosis usually affects the vertebral body and causes significant paraspinal involvement, including psoas abscesses. Despite w idespread disease, the symptoms can be rather mild. The diagnosis is usually easily established with MRI. hydraulic distention (in case of adhesive capsulitis) are usefull. Arthrography can also be helpfull fo r guiding intra-articular injection o f therapeutic drugs. For optimizing joint imaging by use o f an iodinated contrast medium with or without the com bination o f a ir (double contrast), one should use a contrast medium which, in joints, is proven to be superior to others. That is generally a dim er w hich showed a slow er penetration in the cartilage (imbibition) and hence less quick blurring of the cartilage contours. In case of a prolonged need of contrast medium, such as in CT arthrography, one should add some epinephrine (0 .2 -0 .3 cc epinephrine 1:1000) to the contrast medium. The CT arthrography can be performed by means of double contrast as in the shoulder o r in the other joints fo r diagnosing free bodies and/or cartilaginous damage by m eans of single contrast with air. Arthrography now a days would be mostly performed with a digital universal fluoroscopic unit (tube under the table) (e.g. Diagnosi 76, Philips) with the possibility also to expose conventional filmcassettes. A double focus with one very fine focal spot (0.3) provides good quality images. For smaller joints using one emulsion film exposed in a cassette with one intensification screen will provide excellent radiographs. This lecture will deal with optimizing joint imaging o f the m ajor joints according the above mentioned principles, and by showing the best puncture techniques, the need of stressing, the best positioning and the planes to investigate. 2 2 9 MR im aging techniques G. Adam; Aachen/D For optimizing MR imaging of the joints, a sophisticated knowledge of MR system hard-and software conditions and coil technologies, sequence and contrast preparation techniques and the use of paramagnetic contrast agents is necessary. The objective o f this w orkshop is to elucidate the basic principles of different m agnet configurations including dedicated MR systems, and the MR sequence technology. The applications of surface coils in different anatomic regions and their influence upon signal to noise ration and spatial resolution will be explained. The advantages and shortcomings o f conventional imaging techniques will be discussed and also the current applications of newer sequence developm ents like fo r cinem atic joint imaging. The possibilities of contrast preparation techniques like fat saturation and magnetization transfer contrast and their com bination with different pulse sequences will be explained. Furthermore, the intravenous and intraarticular application of paramagnetic contrast agents and their use fo r joint imaging will be reviewed. Finally, diagnostic guidelines for the most important joint examinations like the knee, the shoulder, and the hip will be presented. The increasing developm ent of new technologies in last years has allowed the availability of numerous and sophisticated equipment fo r breast imaging, whose utilization requires skill and expertise of true professionals of breast diagnosis with a multimodality integrated approach. Diagnostic performance of single techniques has been therefore improved. In the clinical practice, early detection o f subtle and minimal lesions becomes more and more frequent and early diagnosis of breast cancer is possible nowadays much more than before. Furthermore, new Bio-imaging technologies are getting increasing attention and w ider evaluation. On the other hand, many topics are still to focus: multicentric cancer, in situ cancer, atypical proliferative lesions and clinical recommendations fo r screening of women aged 4 0 -4 9 years. High quality technology, specific knowledge and experience in breast pathol ogy and standardization o f operating levels, must be considered as essential requirem ents to achieve the best results in early detection of malignant breast lesions. In the clinical setting, the exact size of a m alignant tumor, multifocality and an extensive intraductal com ponent are im portant factors in the pre-selection of patients fo r breast conserving therapy (BCT). Careful selection based on the evaluation of high quality mammography, magnification vieuws, ultra sonography and magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) keeps the occurrence of recidiv tum or growth after breast conserving therapy within an acceptable range. In the age group below 50 however, mammography is much less sensitive in the detection of breast cancer. Imaging techniques like ultra sonography and MRI and maybe in future full size digital mammography with com puter aided diagnosis can play an im portant role both in the detection and in the evaluation of malignant breast lesions in this age group. Because of the rather low specificity, their role in breast cancer population screening is limited. From the different imaging techniques the possibilities fo r detection and evaluation are discussed.  Just about 5% o f the mammographically detected micro calcifications (MC) are associated with cancer, usually with intraductal cancer. The differentiation between "benign" and "malignant" MC is highly important to avoid unnecessary surgical biopsies. On the basis of the anatom ic structure of their origin, we distinguish ductal-and lobular-type MC. Practically in all cases, the ductal-type linear or branching MC is associated with a malignant process, usually the comedo-type, poorly differentiated ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), the mammographie interpretation of which is straightforward. The lobular-type fine granular MC may be associated with both malignant o r benign processes. The malignant process is usually the non-com edo, well-differentiated (cribriform/micropapillary/clinging) DCIS. The benign process is usually some type of fibrocystic "disease", often with atypical ductal hyperplasia. The mammographie interpretation of the lobular type MC is rather difficult. Cer tain guidelines may help in the distinction between a benign and a malignant process. Multiple clusters (3 o r more) are usually associated with DCIS. C omedo and non-com edo intraductal carcinomas differ in anatom ic distribu tion, mammographie detectability and biological behaviour. These differences should be considered in making a therapeutic decision. C om edo DCIS has a high malignant potential in term s of the chance fo r developing into an invasive process, in contrast to the non-com edo DCIS which has a low malignant potential. Approximately 10% of all breast cancers can be detected in their intraductal (in situ, non invasive) phase. That is, 90% are detected w hen they have already become invasive. The reason fo r this is the fact, that only a part of DCIS is associated with mammographically detectable microcalcifications. Invasive cancers can be divided in tw o groups based on their biological be haviour: special types (about 30% ) and non-special, o r common types (70%). Special types, such as lobular invasive, tubular, mucinous and medullary car cinom as have a relatively good prognosis com pared to the common types. They also have rather typical mammographie and histopathologic features. The non-special type invasive ductal carcinomas constitute the majority of in vasive breast cancers. They have poorer prognosis, that is, a higher metastatic potential than special type invasive carcinomas. They lack special mammo graphie and histologic features and show up usually as poorly outlined densi ties on the mammogram. Because of their high metastatic potential, the early detection o f invasive ductal cancers (detection in their pre metastatic state) has a greater impact on mortality than the special type invasive carcinomas. The clinical examination, the plain film s o f the abdomen, and sometimes contrast studies are used since a long time and remain the basic explorations for the management. In elective conditions depending of both the clinical status and the medical experience, Sonography (US) may be used. In small bowel obstructions (SBO), Computed Tomography (CT) has been and should be used in order to improve diagnostic and management accuracy: CT is accurate for the diagnosis of high grade obstruction but is less reliable for diagnosing low grade obstruction, CT is considered to be the best imaging modality for determining the cause of obstruction; the ability of CT for diagnosing bowel loop strangulation is evaluated. This course will revisit the results, the limits and the role o f Imaging for the diagnosis and the management of patients with suspected bowel obstruction. A special attention will be paid to obstructions occurring in post-operative or post-traumatic conditions, to obstructions with fever, and to obstructions in patients who have been previously treated for an abdominal malignant neoplasm. The recent availability o f coated stents has allowed the endovascular treatm ent of aneurysms. Thoracic and abdominal aorta, iliac, fem oral and popliteal arteries are the most frequent locations in w hich a covered stent can be used. In peripheral arteries and thoracic aorta a tube-graft of various size can be effective to exclude the aneurysm from the streaming flow, although a previous side branch embolization is som etimes necessary to avoid aneurysmal feeding. In most abdominal aortic aneurysm s a bifurcated prosthesis is mandatory since many aneurysm s extend to the bifurcation or the upper portion of common iliac arteries. Many technical problem s exist in stent-grafting of abdom inal aorta aneurysms: the correct sizing of aneurysmal neck and iliac arteries, the proper w ay of hooking the stent-graft to the artery, the delivery of the device from the femoral approach, the precise and stable positioning, the percutaneous achievement of the intraluminal bifurcation. Moreover a great care has to be used in clinical and technical indications. Several aortic grafting techniques have been proposed and tested in animals and humans using bifurcated and tube-grafts. In clinical experiences im m e diate and late leaking of the intraluminal by-pass have been encountered, despite the correct sizing of the prosthesis, due to sliding o f the stent, late breaking o f the prosthesis network or feeding o f the aneurysm by aortic o r iliac collaterals. Great efforts in devices developm ent will probably overcome these technical problems and permit the endovascular treatm ent to be an effective alternative to surgical reparation. Recent data has shown a recrudescence of Pulmonary Tuberculosis in Europe, but not so significant as in other regions of the World. The interest fo r the radiological approach has been renewed and many authors have described im portant modifications of Pulmonary Tuberculosis pattern in the adult. It is important to analyse the normal and innusual patterns of the disease. According to this, AA review the radiological aspects of PT also mentioning its association with AIDS or Cancer. Special reference is made to the new radiological aspects described in cases evaluated by CT or HRCT. Special attention has been focused on the images o f drug-resistant tuber culosis. It is emphasized the utilization o f interventional techniques in the diagnosis. Sunday the clinical suspicion, evaluate the extent of the disease and its progression in the follow -up series, and discover the complications. The chest radiograph maintains a key role in the ICU. Its simplicity, repeata bility, low cost and high performance at the different thoracic levels make it a superb w indow open on the different problematics o f the chest. The importance of a rigorous technique and of a precise knowledge of the anatomy should be stressed, particularly in order to discover the iatrogenic complications. CT and US may also be helpful occasionally. The purpose of this session is to review the basic principles of diagnostic testing and their role in clinical decision making. We first will define and explain the concept of diagnostic accuracy, and its importance in the technology assessm ent process. Next, we will illustrate the calculation of sensitivity, specificity, and predictive value using real-world clinical examples represented by fam iliar two-by-tw o tables. The clinical utility of each concept will be discussed and com pared. Then, we will offer m ethods to understand and avoid biases that com m only affect the assessment of diagnostic tests, including spectrum bias and verification bias. Lastly, we will demonstrate the use of the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, describe its strengths and weaknesses, and outline its relationship to sensitivity, specificity, and diagnostic accuracy. The goal of the session will be to integrate concepts of diagnostic accuracy into the everyday process of clinical decision making. Attendees will also gain an understanding of the fundam ental principles that underlie outcom es research and cost-effectiveness analysis in radiology. At the end of the session, attendees should be able to critically evaluate the accuracy of imaging tests and apply their understanding to radiologic practice. Digital imaging modalities have become an accepted tool to carry out radi ological work in a fam iliar way. Advanced information processing and com munication tools, however, provide new ways fo r radiology to evolve. Various levels of com puter hardware and software are the basic informatics enabling technologies for diagnostic tool development. The tutorial will briefly introduce the structure of informatics as a science and engineering discipline. It will then focus on those aspects of the application level which have the potentially greatest impact on radiology. Computer graphics and com puter vision, in particular, but also neural networks, fuzzy sets, and generic algorithm s will be discussed. These new tools can augment diagnostic activities and are therefore part o f a promising com puter assisted radiology. A. Todd-Pokropek; London/U K An aim of the use o f digital methods in radiology is to improve the diagnostic accuracy and efficiency of the services provided. Eighty percent of all computer errors are introduced at the planning stage, before any coding takes place. To reduce such errors and improve effectiveness, it is necessary to define the domain, specify user requirements, w ork out the data structures 'methods' and data flows, design the architecture, and (try to) make the implementation fu tu re p ro o f. Formal m ethods exist, fo r example functional, data, and oper ation models. However, com prom ises are required, e.g. in matching existing standards such as DICOM .vithin the context of healthcare-wide networks, and the requirements fo r image quality and speed within the limitation of cost effective implementation. This is know conventional software engineering, but the specific implications fo r radiology will be presented. In addition, it is impor tant to present the chain o f processes though which a digital image passes being: acquisition, manipulation, display, analysis, and evaluation. The impact of digital methods in image form ation has extending throughout radiology, from CT, through MR to ultrasound and use of photostim ulable plates. Handling and manipulating such data, from simple processes such as windowing, to complex operations such as factor analysis leads to the need to present the information (not data) in the most effective manner, to provide tools (often from computer vision) to enhance detection, quantitation, and interpretation, leading finally to the need for good evaluation m ethods, such as (but not only) ROC analysis. Renal artery stenting has proved of increasing value, particularly in patients with renal vascular hypertension secondary to renal ostialstenoses. Technical aspects of renal angioplasty utilizing both simple coaxial techniques, and those employing guiding catheters and more com plex coaxial techniques will be demonstrated based on video tapes from liv e " patient demonstrations. Primary stenting will be discussed, and techniques presented in detail. Discussion will include technical aspects of catheter and guidewire selection, as well as use of anti-coagulation. 245 Renal artery PTA/stents (part III) The technique of percutaneous transluminal renal angioplasty (PTRA) has remained unchanged over the last decade. However, advances in catheter and guidewire design have permitted safer and more successful treatm ent o f even severe proximal renal artery disease as well as access to branch stenoses. Our standard protocol fo r PTRA includes a femoral approach using a 6-F vascular sheath. Initially, aortography and pressure gradient measurement are performed. Once a 6-F sidewinder-1 catheter and a floppy "Bentson" guidewire (Schneider) have crossed the lesion, the floppy wire is exchanged for the more rigid 0.035" " Rosen" o r "TAD" guidewire (Cook, ACS). A road-map technique using a 6-F " Infinity" guiding catheter (Cordis) monitors inflation of a "Smash" balloon-catheter (Schneider) at the site of stenosis. Control angiogram and pressure gradient measurement are used to confirm success of angioplasty. At the present time, indications fo r renal stenting are ostial atherosclerotic lesions, immediate elastic recoil o r dissection of the vessel after PTRA and restenosis. We use a nonarticulated "Palmaz" stent (Johnson&Johnson), which is mounted on a "Smash" balloon catheter and advanced through a 6-F vascular sheath. Stent deploym ent is performed after appropriate positioning of the stent using the road-map technique. Adjunctive medications include heparin, aspirin and ticlopidine. (2) Tumoral volume; (3) Nodal invasion. The limits o f CT will be discussed. Indications for CT or MRI will be finally discussed with the tw o other speakers. The tw o staging system s most frequently used are those proposed by the AJC and the UICC are not specific and not precise in their recommendations as to choice of imaging procedures fo r staging of a given tumor. Furthermore prominent head and neck oncologists have expressed their concerns about shortcomings of the most recent TNM classification for laryngeal. They find that prognosis is not related to TNM values to a sufficient degree. There are more and more indications that radiological techniques can provide im portant prognostic information regarding tum or volum e and abnorm alities in cartilage. Tum or volum e appears to be an im portant prognostic factor for local control in laryngeal cancer treated with radiotherapy alone. A large tum or volume, especially combined with evidence o f abnorm al signal in cartilage, appears to worsen the prognosis significantly. Specific questions that need to be answered by radiology differ regarding the site of the lesion: supraglottic or glottic. Therefore tum ors originating from these sites need to be discussed separately. 248 C. Post-operative follow-up R. Maroldi; Brescia/I An adequate control of laryngeal carcinoma can be achieved by surgery (con servative and radical), by radiotherapy or by a com bination of both. Supraglottic neoplasms surgically treated show low incidence of recurrence at the primary site (2-4% ), more frequently at the base of the tongue, while the recurrence rate after radiotherapy for glottic carcinoma is much higher (5 -40% ). The clinical diagnosis of a recurrent tum our can be difficult, especially in patients with a persistent postradiation edema. Therefore, knowledge of the normal CT appearance of the larynx after conservative and radical surgery plays a significant role in the differentiation between recurrent carcinom a and changes due to therapy. This normal postoperative pattern includes typical changes of the laryngeal framework, thickening of the mucosa covering arytenoid carti lages, developm ent of "pseudocords" and "pharyngeal pouches" with air or liquid content. Interestingly, CT seems very useful in detecting nonneoplastic causes of submucosal expansive lesions (eg chondroradionecrosis, laryngocele). The most frequent CT findings of recurrent lesions after surgery consist of a mass larger than 10 mm spreading beyond the larynx, thickening o f the anterior commissure, erosion of residual cartilages. Furthermore, CT provides an accurate map of the submucosal extent of recurrent tum ours either at the prim ary site o r at the tracheal stoma. Different causes of vocal cord mobility impairment can also be demonstrated by C T or MR. Over the last tw o decades radiological diagnostic procedures requested for and performed on children have increased both in num ber and complexity. Quality images are essential to justify the procedure trauma, caused by either immobilisation techniques or the radiation burden. Children are not small adults, their response and cooperation is unpredictable. Radiographers handling children during diagnostic procedures m ust also handle the adults w ho care for those children. The aim o f this session is to present realistic, practical and cost effective methods fo r the handling of children during diagnostic procedures, leading to the production of high quality, low radiation diagnostic images. Reference will be made to all imaging modalities. W e will discuss the special needs of children fo r these and the requirements fo r sedation o r anaesthesia. 2 5 0 B. Im aging the staging of renal cell carcinoma Imaging is extrem ely im portant in determining the type of surgery undertaken in patients with proven renal cell carcinoma. In this presentation the strengths and limitations of each of the relevant techniques will be outlined, highlighting particularly the correlation between the imaging findings and the pathological staging. Over the past decade, CT has become the most widely used technique fo r staging renal cell carcinoma, partly due to the very high overall accuracy of up to 90% that has been achieved. MRI appears to have a similar overall accuracy to CT, w hereas ultrasound is less accurate than CT or MRI in the overall staging of tumours. However, ultrasound is extremely accurate in identifying and localising the clinically im portant tum our extension into the intrahepatic vena cava and right atrium and if local surgical practice requires only a knowledge o f venous invasion, a technically adequate ultrasound examination may suffice. All techniques are unreliable in detecting early perinephric spread. The speakers o f this Symposium will not address technical or experimental issues, but rather will focus on the real impact of digital radiology on our professional practice. 254 Specific diagnostic applications of digital vs. conventional radiology M. Reiser, R. Braunschweig, M. Schätzt, H. Bonel, C. Pistitsch; Munich/D Purpose: Recently, Digital Radiography (DR) has become more widespread in Radiology. This is based on (1 ) image quality assurance (2) dose reduction (3) cost effectiveness (4) integration of conventional radiology in PACS's. It's the aim of this lecture to present a survey o f specific diagnostic applications of DR. Materials and Methods: Two different digital modalities are frequently used: Digital Luminescence Radiography (DLR) and Digital Fluoroscopy (DF). Pulsed Digital Fluoroscopy is a modern technique with param ount interest for dose reduction. For practical application, DLR proved useful fo r radiogra phy of the musculoskeletal system and chest. DF came out from angiography and is utilized for investigations in gastroenterology and recently fo r traum a tological emergency cases. To clarify the present status a large num ber of ROC-studies have been taken. Results: Pulsed DF ensures a reduction o f up to 80% of radiation dosage. DF presents the image data while the investigation is on and offers the opportunity to take image data as fram e grapping. DF offers a reliable image quality. For the delineation o f erosive gastritis digital fluoroscopy is no adequate. DR generally avoids repetetive X-ray examinations and thus contributes to moderate dose reduction. ROC-studies confirmed image quality of DLR as equal to the conventional film-screen system (speed class 200/400) in (nearly) all applications. Monitor assisted reporting is very helpful. Conclusions: DR has m ajor advantages for musculoskeletal and chest ex aminations, angiography as well as gastroenterology. Image quality, dose reduction, cost effectiveness and integration into PACS's offer tremendous possibilities fo r its clinical. 255 Impact of im age processing in daily routine P.F.G.M. van Waes; Utrecht/NL A conventional departm ent gravitates to an increasingly digital environment. Clinical necessity dictates expansion o f image processing in daily routine. Radiology is in essence "editing" of massive data volum e stacks to provide patient management data, navigation, minimal invasive therapy and to assess effectiveness. Success is based upon reliable pattern recognition, facilitated by: (1) (1) patient identity must be "consistent" in all system s and repetitive introduc tion via keyboard should be avoided (2) image files must be distributed to the different medical specialists in a format and within a user interface that suits their specific needs (b.e. the needs o f a neurosurgeon, a general internist o r a practitioner are totally different). (3) provision should be made for interactive "prefetching" (= sending the folder in advance fo r archive) and "preloading" (= sending exam ination folder after completion from the modalities), in order to alleviate traffic problem s in the network. A strategy is presented in order to achieve those goals practically with the existing technologies within hospital environment, making use of: (1) a client server architecture with HIS/RIS/PACS organized in a maximal decentralization and integration. (2) grouping of medical specialists in clusters, in function of their objective needs and the different technologies that can be used. (3) automatizing the acquisition of patient I.D. data from HIS/RIS and different modalities. 2 5 7 Digital vs. conventional radiology: An econom ical assessm ent R. Passariello; Rome/I The relationship between costs and outcom e in health care in general and particularly in radiology, has been, in the last years, reason of debate. W hile the clinical benefit in presence of well defined results can be easily measured in case of a new modality, a new procedure or a new product, this is more difficult when the relationship is not only strictly direct and quantifiable, such as in the case of the use of digital vs. conventional radiology. In this case in fact, while some items are tangible and their costs valuable (equipments, service, films), other items are less tangible and quantifiable (staff, training, hospital infrastructure, productivity, diagnostic accuracy, etc.), especially if w e consider that the potential benefits of DR concern sim ultaneously the radiologist, the referring physician, the patient and the hospital. For the economic assessment we have considered the data published in the literature with those obtained in four different radiologic departm ents from hospitals having different characteristics (Leuven, Monza, Rome, Treviso), where partial o r full DR system s of different industries are active. If we consider the tangible items (equipments, service, films) there is a difference between DR and film-screen radiology, the first one costing more than the second from 6 to 18% per year. This extra cost, which should be progressively reduced, is largely com pensated by the reduction o f exposure errors (from 3.3 to 6.0% ) and of radiation exposure of the patient (50%), better file and administration management, improved productivity, possibility to use CAD systems, better patient management, better training of student and residents, etc. C ore-needle biopsies are being considered as good alternatives to traditional surgical biopsies. Not the less they are more invasive than fine-needle aspi ration citology. Their cost is higher and they may produce tissue changes that alter the imaging appearance. All three guidance systems can be used: palpation, ultrasound and stereotactic imaging. For nonpalpable lesions ultrasound guidance is safer and quicker; in all cases the needle must be fired in a way that is parallel as possible to the thoracic wall. Direct visualization of the needle allows correct positioning and monitoring of the whole procedure. Core biopsies are done with spring activated guns using needles ranging from 14 to 18 gauge. After injection o f lidocaine a small nick is made so that the needle can be easily passed. One to five passes into different areas of the lesion are required. A new biopsy device, the mammotome, uses vacuum and a tissue transport mechanism so that multiple sam ples can be obtained with one insertion. Microhistology is 94% and over accurate, and adequate tissue is provided for many prognostic markers. Although malignant masses will quite always prove positive also with fineneedle cytology, fo r more difficult diagnoses (fibrosis, fat necrosis, infiltrating lobular carcinoma, DCIS) core biopsy appears to provide better specimens for analysis.  due to m isinterpretation of weak CC T criteria, a mistake, which was frequently followed by severe hemorrhage. Thus such a protocol is not applicable in the "real world" to anybody. A more careful and sophisticated patient selec tion will be the price to be paid fo r a therapy, efficacious and safe as we. The experience with local intraarterial fibrinolytic treatm ent in stroke patients demonstrates, that it is necessary and possible to separate more exactly those patients who may benefit from fibrinolysis from those who undergo an unreasonable risk with any fibrinolytic treatment. Indicational criteria fo r the carotid endarterectomy are well established. The related com plication and recurrency rate o f this procedure at optimally trained centers is well known and accepted as a standard. Seem ingly carotid angio plasty meets this standard but ongoing studies have to give evidence. Stents have become a valuable tool predom inantly to fight intimai flaps and treat severily calcified plaques. However the tool is not optimally adopted to carotid use yet. According to the technical evolution o f endovascular treatments the man agem ent o f intracranial haemorrhage is more and more a multidisciplinary approach in which the interventional neuroradiologist has an im portant place. Facing a patient with intracranial haemorrhage, first we must collect a ll the inform ations useful fo r diagnosis: Circumstances o f initial bleeding, evolution, clinical symptoms. A grading must be established according to the "Glas gow Coma Scale". The CT scan must be realized in emergency most often without contrast injection, to see a subarachnoidal bleeding, an intracranial hematoma and/or an intraventricular haemorrhage. It is very im portant to es tim ate the ventricular dilatation which can require an external shunting. The angiographic study of both internal carotid artery and both vertebral arteries is realized by transfem oral approach. The classic A.P., lateral and oblique pro jections can be replaced by spin angiography able to show the malformation which has bleed and to study its angioarchitecture (neck of aneurysm-nidus, feeding pedicules and draining veins of an AVM...). The angiographic study o f cerebral circulation m ust be exhaustive; haemodynam ic parameters are im portant. We m ust appreciate the frequent vasospasm and multiple aneurysms are not rare. A transcranial Doppler is mandatory to follow -up the cerebral blood flow. Indeed, blood inside subarachnoidal space can induce vasospasm and hydrocephalia. The risk of vasospasm is high: a preventive treatment with calcium channel blockers is immediately started. A precise follow-up with transcranial Doppler allow s to detect the vasospasm as soon as possible; if a neurological deficit appears, an hyperselective intracranial angioplasty can be necessary in emergency. According to clinical evolution, CT scan can be repeated to know if brain oedem a o r ventricular dilatation is developing. When there is a ventricular dilatation, a ventricular shunt is mandatory. After these initial examinations, we m ust decide w hat is the best treatment and when this treatm ent must be done. To day, all the team s agree to do the treatm ent as soon as possible, very often in emergency. W hen endovascular approach is indicated, the best solution is to do immediately the endosaccular treatm ent after the end o f the angiography. The best indications fo r endovascular approach are often poor indication for open skull surgery and vice versa: vertebrobasilar aneurysm and anterior com municating aneurysm are good examples. The aneurysm of the first bifurcation of the middle cerebral artery remains difficult for endosaccular packing. Indication fo r treating in em ergency a ruptured brain AVM o r a dural fistula, are rare. A very close cooperation between neuro-anaesthesiologists, neurosurgeons and interventional neuroradiologists is necessary to choose the best treatm ent that is to say the less risky, the m ost comfortable and the less expansive. Clinical examination of the paediatric scrotum can be difficult, as the child may be em barrassed, frightened or in pain. Accurate differentiation must be made between the surgical emergency o f acute torsion of the testis from medical condition such as epididymo-orchitis. Although Grey Scale ultrasound o f the scrotum provided useful information, it was only with the advent of Colour Doppler ultrasound that a precise and accurate diagnosis of testicular torsion could be made. Power Doppler ultrasound technology can now be used to give further information about blood flow, particularly in the younger child where the testis is small and in whom it is often more difficult to detect flow in the normal testis using C olour Doppler. The use of Colour Doppler ultrasound and other relevant imaging modalities will be discussed fo r the following clinical situations: (1) Acute scrotal pathology: Testicular torsion or epididymo-orchitis. (2) Scrotal hernia/hydrocele/patent processus vaginalis. (3) Medical conditions (Henloch-Schonlein Purpura; acute leukaemia). (4) Undescended testis. The fact that ionic high-osm olar contrast media are no longer used intravascularly in the majority o f European countries has changed the debate from a financial one to an interesting academ ic one. Several new non-ionic monomers as well as non-ionic iso-osmolar dim ers are now available and it is more difficult to dem onstrate any important clinical dif ference between the various non ionic agents as it was possible to do between the high-osmolar and the low-osmolar contrast media. Indeed, demonstration of improved biocompatibility of contrast media is possible only if preclinical data are perceived as reliable, and if the indications given by them are used in the clinical setting through well designed, randomised, double blind clinical trials, in which all possible biases are avoided, and in which study populations that are more vulnerable to contrast medium toxicity are selected to maximise differences in safety between the agents. Still some differences am ong non ionic com pounds with regards to their efficacy, tolerability and side effects, with em phasis on delayed reactions, are matter for discussion. Contrast medium nephrotoxicity is another controversial topic. Until recently no difference between ionic and non-ionic contrast media was demonstrated. It seems now reasonably to believe that the low-osmolar contrast media are less nephrotoxic than the high-osm olar agents in patients with impaired renal function. Diabetic nephropathy is by far the m ajor risk factor fo r contrast medium nephrotoxicity and it requires adequate prevention. However lowosmolar contrast agents are by no m eans to be considered non-nephrotoxic. There were 5 early immediate conversions due to too short stentgrafts. There were 3 late conversions due to 2 migrations after 12 mo. and one due to proximal late leak after 8 mo. 30 days mortality included 6 patients of whom 5 patients were non-surgical candidates. In the remaining 42 patients the AAA were excluded. However, repeated percutaneous interventions including embolizations o f iliolumbar arteries in 4 patients were required in 14 patients. Surgical redoes including additional stentgrafts due to late migration in 3 patients were needed in additional 10 patients. Significant decrease in size occurred in the completely excluded AAA. In conclusion endolum inal exclusion of AAA using stentgrafts is feasible. However close postoperative imaging is necessary in order to recognize late com plications which often require reinterventions. Late m igrations may occur. Non-surgical candidates are exposed to high mortality risk. Meticulous measurement o f the length and diam eter o f the aneurysm and the proximal and distal neck is important. Spiral-CT angiography and i.a.-DSA with a m arker catheter are most useful fo r these measurements. For safe attachem ent of the stentgraft the proximal neck of the aneurysm has to be at least 15 mm in length and 2 mm sm aller than the graft diameter. Contraindications fo r endolum inal graft placement are tortuous o r narrow iliac arteries, a short or wide proximal neck or throm bus in the aneurysm a neck. Up to 2.5 years follow-up of the first clinical pilot studies have shown that aneurysm s can be treated successfully by stent grafts. However, leaks at the proximal or distal anastom osis, due to graft tears o r lumbar reperfusion are the most common cause of treatm ent failure. It has been dem onstrated that even small leaks might cause enlargement o f the aneurysm . Therefore a strict follow-up program with spiral-CT and immediate occlusion o f leaks by stent grafts or em bolization is mandatory. Graft thrombosis and proxim al instability has been described as well. The technique of graft placement will be explained by video demonstration. Computed tom ography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) are the imaging methods of choice in the evaluation of the oropharynx. They offer an ex cellent anatomical delineation and are mainly used in the assessment of tum ors (> 90% squamous cell carcinoma), rarely fo r evaluating inflam matory lesions. Contrast-enhanced CT is a very informative technique that is fast and reliable; helical-CT offers further improvem ent (acquisition tim e 2 5 -4 0 seconds). 85% S 55 o f tum ors enhance after contrast media application and are easily differentiated from surrounding structures. Infiltration into deeper com partm ents and bone destruction are demonstrated reliably. However, dental filling artifacts may be problematic, and small or superficially located tum ors are hard to detect (no contrast enhancement). MRI excels with superior tissue contrast that is even improved after Gadolinium application o r enhanced by the use of special sequences (fat suppression). Dental fillings or dense bone do not result in artifacts. Axial, sagittal, coronal and oblique scans may be acquired without moving the patient. Measurement time is a disadvantage (compared to CT); it may be shortened by using gradient echo o r turbo spin echo sequences. The depiction o f bone is inferior to C T and it may be tedious to evaluate at least 3 sequences to obtain the entire information. This is one o f the reasons fo r secondary reconstruction (3D images) to dem onstrate all relevant features at once. In this presentation the potential role of the different imaging techniques in the staging of tum or spread to mediastinal lymph nodes is reviewed. Particular attention is given to the potential role of com puter tom ography in the staging o f non-small-cell lung cancer, but in addition other im aging modalities, such as magnetic resonance imaging and nuclear medicine, and other tumors, such as small-cell lung cancer, esophageal tumors, and lymphoma, are discussed. 2 7 6 B. Abdom inal and pelvic nodes S. Delorme; H eidelberg/D This is a review of the role o f imaging procedures for the assessment of abdominal and pelvic lymph nodes. The diagnosis of malignant lymphatic spread is rarely the sole purpose o f imaging, but part of a general abdominal examination, mostly by C T or US, o r increasingly with MRI. These studies are often requested in order to receive information about the situation to be encountered during surgery, or to be alerted to irresectability or to unexpected metastases outside the initially planned area of exploration. In most surgically treated tumours, the role o f imaging fo r preoperative staging is limited, either due to its insufficient sensitivity, or because the initial treatm ent is independent o f the lymph node stage. Imaging is commonly used to verify the treatment response to chemo-o r radiotherapy and for follow-up. The m ost im portant aspect o f clinical mammography is Quality. In no other radiological examination Quality is such a crucial factor. The danger of low quality in mammography is to overlook small operable cancers and on the other hand to ask fo r to many unnecessary biopsies. Factors influencing the quality of a mammogram are: (1 ) Mammography apparatus. (2) The film-screen combination. (3) Fysical-technical aspects of processing. (4) Positioning technic and the skills and knowledge o f the radiographer. (5) The knowledge and experience o f the radiologist. The necessity o f high quality clinical m am m ography in a situation of nationwide breast cancer screening, when many of the screen detected cancers are not palpable, is discussed. Indications are given fo r additional vieuws and additional techniques. High quality mammography can only be carried out with properly trained radiographers. They have to be able to perform excellent quality mammograms from both the positioning and technical point o f view. The radiographer in addition should possess the social skills to support the woman during the examination, as well as carry out quality assurance procedures. Positioning: Breast positioning is an art. Incorrect positioning is the most common problem when evaluating a m ammogram . The skills required to perform optimal mammographie positioning are high. The standard views are: the cranio-caudal view, and the medio-latero-oblique view. The m ost im portant additional views are: the latero-medial/medio-lateral view; coned down spot view; magnification view; and "Cleopatra" view. Quality A ssurance procedures: A technically optimal mammogram is de pendent on a num ber of factors, such as equipment, screen-film combination, cassettes, processing conditions, darkroom, etc. Image quality standards must be established. To maintain the highest standard of image quality, a quality assurance programme has to be implemented. It is the radiographer's duty to carry out quality control procedures, such as performing a phantom image, a sensitometric stepwedge, etc. Teamwork: The team responsible to obtain optimal mammogram s consists of the radiologist, the radiographer and the physicist. The radiographer should participate in the multidisciplinary meetings. Focal pulm onary lesions are am ong the most common findings in daily radiol ogy practice. At imaging, focal lung disease may present as nodular opacity or as a localized area of pulm onary infiltration o r consolidation. C auses of focal lung disease include malignant lesions, such as bronchogenic carcinoma, solitary metastasis, and carcinoid tum ors, or benign abnormalities, such as granuloma, hamartoma, vascular processes, and focal areas of inflammation. Modern imaging techniques are of paramount importance in the detection and classification of these abnormalities. C om pared to plain chest films, CT offers the advantage of providing unique m orphologic clues that may help character ize focal pulm onary processes. MR imaging can aid in tissue characterization, particularly in the identification of vascular lesions. Undoubtedly, the radiologist has a pivotal position in the assessm ent and management of focal pulmonary abnormalities. The role of the radiologist involves the identification of a focal lesion, the selection of the most appropriate imaging techniques to narrow the differential diagnosis, and the steering o f invasive measures that could establish a definite diagnosis. By designing a specific diagnostic approach to a patient's focal lesion, the radiologist serves as the ideal guide who can guarantee a high quality and cost-effective patient care and management. The introduction of high-resolution com puted tom ography (HRCT) has revolu tionized the radiologic approach of patients with suspected diffuse infiltrative S 56 lung disease. Over the last ten years, this technique has enabled precise analysis of the morphological changes occurring at the level of the lung parenchyma as well as better understanding of the distributions of abnorm ali ties. On the basis of close correlations between HRCT findings and pathologic lung abnormalities, it has been possible to clarify the term inology used to describe abnormal CT findings and thus, to avoid non specific terms. An accurate interpretation of HRCT scans requires a detailed understanding of normal lung anatom y and of the pathologic alterations in normal lung that occur in the presence of disease. In addition to the four large categories of HRCT findings in diffuse infiltrative lung disease, the distribution of parenchymal abnormalities must be integrated when attempting to reach a diagnosis or differential diagnosis o f diffuse lung disease using CT. The aim of this lecture is to review the predom inant patterns of lung involvement and the characteristics of lungs changes observed in the most com monly encountered entities. Specific attention is directed to the newly developed protocols using spiral CT technology aimed at identifying mild form s o f lung infiltration. In this State-of-the-Art Symposium 'Ultrasound and 3D Imaging' the novel developments o f 3D echography will be explained. The session is divided into three parts. In the first part the principles o f 3D are explained fo r the organ image acquisition and display methods. Scanning methods include parallel slicing; pivoting or fan-like scanning o r the stepwise rotational image acquisition every few degrees as can be performed with multiplane probes. For moving organs such as the heart, triggering is required. Examples include cardiac as well as vascular 3D imaging. The session will be continued with an explanation of the 3D approach and capabilities for blood velocity imaging. Also here, as in the organ imagine, information must be acquired in multiple known planes. Power Doppler 3D images will be compared with Color Doppler 3D results. At the end o f the session much attention will be given to clinical experiences, with 3D. Examples will be mainly of cardiac origin. For instance, 3D results in 250 patients are presented. Three-dimensional echocardiography may ultimately become the best ap proach to study the anatom y and pathology o f organs. The surgeon may now have a look in advance at w hat he will find during surgery. 282 Principles, recent advances and future prospects o f 3-D echo imaging techniques N. Bom; Rotterdam/NL To reconstruct an organ in its true anatom ic dimensions, sequential acquisition of all cross-sectional planes encompassing the entire organ is necessary. Scanning methods include parallel slicing; pivoting o r fan-like scanning o r the stepwise rotational image acquisition every few degrees as can be performed with multiplane probes. For moving organs such as the heart, triggering is required. Echographie 3-D imaging is applied, fo r example, in the fetus; the heart o r the arteries. Data acquisition fo r arteries is based on the parallel slicing technique with various echo-catheter pull-back devices. Limitations include interpolation and resolution aspects as well as the reconstruction of arteries as "straight tubes" . With improved and faster automatic contour software, 3-D does allow to obtain important new diagnostic information to be derived in a simplified way. Recent advances in this area are derivation of arterial plaque volum e in diseased segments or the automatic volum e m easurement in bladder control. Based on mosaic transducers o r with fast rotating sector scanners, 3-D information can be obtained in real time. Having this information available instantaneously, is expected to greatly enlarge the diagnostic use of 3-D methods. 2 8 3 Technical possibilities of color flow im aging in 3-D R. Novario; Varese/I Conventional ultrasound scanners allow to obtain 2D map of blood velocity in a plane defined by the orientation o f the probe. It is not possible to have information about velocities out of plane. In order to have a com plete understanding of flow disturbances it is necessary to study velocity and shear stress distribution over the whole vessel volume. 3D color Doppler system have been recently proposed, based on the recon struction of the 3D velocity distribution in the volum e of interest, acquiring several 2D color fow mappings in known planes. To obtain different planes, it is possible to move the transducer with a motor-driven hand-held assembly, or to hand-m ove it, with o r without position sensors. The color and grey-scale information o f each 2D image can be separated and the 3D reconstruction can be calculated distinctly. Power Doppler 3D velocity images are better then images obtained with C olor Doppler because of the higher sensitivity of the Power methodology. The acquisition has to be synchronized with the cardiac cycle and an ECG trigger is needed. It is also possible to show tem poral series with the 3D representation of the flow during the whole cardiac cycle. It has be shown that 3D velocity and spatial accuracy is good. The use of ultrasound contrast media in order to increase th e D oppler sensi tivity was recently tested. This leads to an higher signal to noise ratio in the 3D flow mapping. The special acoustic resonance properties of some contrast media make it possible to develop special scanning m ethods m atched to this resonance behaviour. The echo can contain, in addition to the transducer dominant frequency, a strong com ponent of twice the frequency (second har monic). W ith such a method it is conceivable that the 3D detection sensitivity in small vessels could be increased clearly. A method with the capability to directly view the heart and its structures in three-dimensional dimensions (3D), rather than trying to perform mental reconstructions from two-dimensional images, would facilitate and improve understanding o f the dynamic anatom y and com plex pathology. W e developed rotatable transducer system controlled by a com puter-based steering logic considering both heart cycle variations by ECG-gating and respiratory cycle variation by impedance measurement for precordial transesophageal image acquisition. The video output o f the echo system is interfaced with the TomTec Echo-scan system which contains both the steering logic fo r image acquisition and the software fo r 3D reconstruction yielding a dynam ic volum erendered display. In addition, any desired cross-section of the head o r selected structure which cannot be visualized in planes obtainable from standard precordial o r transesophageal transducer positions can be com puted and displayed in cine loop format at 25 frames/sec (anyplane echocardiography). Electronic parallel slicing through the volum e data set allows the generation of equidistant cross-sections (paraplane echocardiography). These capabilities allow the accurate measurement of specific structures such as orifice areas of valves and chamber volum es independent from geom etric assum ptions. Our experience includes now more than 250 patients and we w ere able to obtain dynamic 3D images displaying aodic and mitral valve lesions, prosthetic valves and mass lesions in projections not available from two-dim ensional echocardiography. 3D reconstruction clearly facilitates the study of structures of unknown o r com plex geom etry such as the right ventricle, the atria, aneurysm atic ventricles in patients with coronary artery disease and congenital heart disease. More accurate measurements o f cardiac cham ber volum e are now possible independent from geometric assumptions. Comparison between 3D echo and MRI showed excellent correlation and 3D derived volum e measurement achieved a 2 -3 fold improvem ent over single and biplane area length measurement in term s of intra-and interobserver variability. Three-dimensional echocardiography may ultimately become the best ap proach to study the anatom y and pathology of the heart as it provides an objective display of cardiac size and shape throughout the cardiac cycle. The surgeon can now have a look in advance at w hat he will find during surgery, but with the additional information on function. A logical extension of 3D echocardiography will be its merging with color D oppler flow. W ith further developm ents in com puter technology the image quality and display facilities will improve and more importantly the reconstruction tim e decrease making the technique more practical. Methods and Materials: 18 femoral specimens obtained routine views, includ ing anteroposterior, oblique lateral and a lateral view of the knee -identical to the second postoperative examination of the hip after total hip artroplasty in our department. Each femoral specimen obtained 3 examinations at different rotational positions. Anteversion measurements were performed according to Norman in relation to 1) the proximal short axis and 2) the long femoral axis and com pared to measurements of fem oral neck anteversion on CT-sections (reference 3D-m ethod). The m easurem ents in relation to the proximal short axis were flawed by the actual projection, antecurvation and rotation angle. Independence of these factors was obtained when measuring in relation to the long femoral axis. Because o f slightly different reference points at the CT-method and at conventional radiography the mean difference (accuracy) was 4 C ± 2.3° (SD). The precision of m easurement at conventional radiographs w as 2.3° (SD). Conclusion: Using a simple geometrical calculation it is possible to measure the fem oral neck anteversion from a routine examination with acceptable accuracy and precision. hips), bone marrow edema (BME: n = 22), nine other hip disorders and 36 normal hips were examined with dynamic bone scintigraphy and qualitatively assessed fo r 11 scintigraphic signs in fo u r phases by three investigators. The accuracy fo r the correct diagnosis based on the individual experience was remarkably consistent for all three observers (range: 60% -61%). A cold spot in the femoral hip in both blood pool phases and the bone phase was only seen in 24% o f AVN hips. Diffuse tracer accumulation in the femoral head, neck and the trochanteric region in blood pool phases was only seen in 36% of BME hips. Logistic regression analysis of the different scintigraphic signs increased the accuracy fo r differentiating AVN and BME from other disorders or normal hips to 88% , if trochanteric uptake is present. AVN can be differentiated from BME with an accuracy of 86% if the signs of femoral head and trochanteric uptake were com bined into a diagnostic pattern. The described scintigraphic pattern increases the diagnostic accuracy of planar dynamic bone scintigraphy fo r the BMES and should be immediately followed by MRI for diagnostic confirmation. (2) To compare radiography, ultrasonography, and MR imaging in detecting these effusions. (3) For each imaging method, to determine optimal joint position (flexion-extension) and location to depict such effusions. Material and Methods: Three cadaveric elbows were studied with radiogra phy, ultrasonography, and MR imaging after injection o f 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, and 15 mis. of saline solution into the joint. All images were reviewed by three mus culoskeletal radiologists to determ ine the presence of effusion and measure displacement o f fat pads. Imaging data were analysed using Spearman corre lation coefficients to correlate fat pad displacem ent with the injected quantity of fluid. Anatomic sections that correlated with MR images were obtained also. Results: On MR images 1 ml of fluid was confidently identifiable regardless of joint position. Joint fluid preferentially filled the anterior joint recess in flexion and the posterior joint recess in extension. Displacement of the inferior aspect of the anterior fat pad correlated best with injected quantity o f fluid (0.95, p < 0.001). Ultrasonography identified 1 -3 mis of fluid posteriorly in elbow flexion, and 5 -1 0 mis. of fluid anteriorly in elbow extension. Lateral radiography identified 5 -1 0 mis. of fluid anteriorly in elbow flexion. (1) MR imaging is the most sensitive imaging method for diag nosing elbow joint effusions. (2) At ultrasonography, detection o f fluid is most sensitive posteriorly and with elbow flexion. (3) On lateral radiographs, a ship's sail appearance of the anterior fat pad is visible w hen 5 -1 0 mis of fluid is present; detection of posterior effusion on radiographs proved less reliable, regardless of joint position. 292 MRI of elbow jo int -Cadaveric study for depicting the anterior and posterior bundle separately K. Nakanishi; Osaka/J Purpose: To evaluate the anatom ical detail of ulnar collateral ligament (UCL) of elbow, we examined MRI of the cadaveric elbow joint. Subjects and Methods: Three fresh cadavers were performed MRI. Pulse sequences were spin-echo (SE) T 1 -weighted images (400 msec/15 msec.) and SE proton density and T2-weighted images (2000/20, 90). All Elbows were performed MRI w hen the elbow w as extended, and when the elbow was flexed 90 degree, 10 ml saline MR arthrography of both extended and flexed. Slice direction was coronal parallel to the humeral shaft. Slice thickness was 3 mm. After MRI, the anatomical findings were confirmed and after resecting one bundle of UCL (two posterior bundle and one anterior bundle), MRI was performed again. Results: In all three cadavers, UCL revealed as one bundle of low intensity band when the elbow was extended. In tw o of three cadavers, UCL revealed as two separate band o f low intensity when the elbow was flexed. MRI after resecting one bundle proved these tw o separate low intensity bands are anterior bundle and posterior bundle and anterior bundle w as larger than posterior. Methods and Materials: Twenty-two patients (mean age 58 yrs ± 28) with X-ray findings of single o r multiple I ALB of the knee (n = 13), ankle (n = 1). hand (n = 1), shoulder (n = 2) and elbow (n = 5) w ere prospectively studied with 7 .5 -1 3 MHz US. Twenty patients had osteoarthritis, one osteonecrosis of the knee and one osteochondritis dissecans of the talus. Diagnosis was confirmed with arthrography, C T arthrography and CT. Results: In all patients, US identified IALB as hyperechoic images with posterior shadowing usually located in a joint recess. Anechoic synovial effusion surrounded IALB in 16 cases. Synovial folds coexisted in 5 cases at knee and elbow. Visualization of motility of IALB was consistently enhanced by examining the patient in both recumbent o r upright position and applying some pressure on the joint with the probe. Results: In contrast to the 1.5 T examination the effects at 0.2 T remained relatively localized and allowed visualization of clinical im portant structures in all cases. E-MR images allowed to identify the causes of pain in 12 cases (fracture non-union n = 1, free fragment n = 1, osteochondral defect n = 4, meniscal-ligamentous n = 3, seroma n = 2, cellulitis n = 1). Neither of the high-field examinations was diagnostic. Conclusion: In addition to other practical and econom ic advantages, E-MRI can be useful fo r im aging patients in whom metallic hardware would otherwise limit the applicability of cross sectional imaging. S 5 9 TAR w as present in 20 patients. In detecting TAR the accuracy reported was 100% fo r MRI, 80% for angiography and 78% fo r CT. MRI assessed the severity and type of aortic lesion (14 partial lesions, 5 circum ferential lesions and one intimai hemorrage). No patient received surgery in the acute phase, 14 at 6.8 months from traum a and 5 patients are waiting fo r operation, while intimai hemorrhage healed spontaneously. Overall mortality w as absent. In the follow-up before surgery an increase of the post-traumatic aneurysm was detected in tw o patients (7 and 12 mm) requiring an early surgical treatment. MRI is an optimal technique to detect TAR providing accurate anatom ic details necessary to assess the severity of the lesion. Furthermore in the hypothesis of a delayed surgery MRI is indicated exam in the follow-up fo r its safety and repeatibility. 311 Long-term follow-up of aortic coarctation after patch isthmoplasty: Evaluation with non-invasive techniques P. Bertaccini, R. Fattori, F. Celletti, S. Albanese, G. Rocchi, E. Negrini, В. Descovich, G. Gavelli; Bologna/I Patients operated on fo r aortic coarctation with dacron patch isthmoplasty have a high incidence of aneurysm form ation a t the repair site. Aim o f this study was to com pare the capability of different noninvasive techniques to detect and monitorate late postoperative complications. Thirthy consecutive patients aged 8 -2 8 years were studied 5 -1 9 years after dacron patch isthmoplasty. All patients were evaluated by three different diagnostic procedures: Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), echocardiography with Doppler ultrasound and Treadmill Test (TT). MRI showed the presence of an aneurysm at the site of the dacron patch in 6 patients; the age at surgical repair o f these patients was significantly different com pared with the group of patients with no aneurysm al dilatation (12.6 ± 2.4 years vs 7.5 ± 3.4 years; p < 0.05). Echocardiography did not identify postoperative patch aneurysm in 4 cases (4/6). At the TT, 5 of these patients (5/6) were found to have a severe systemic hypertension on effort with a significantly higher pulse pressure (p < 0.001 ). All patients with aneurysm have already undergone successful reoperation. In conclusions, patients operated on for aortic coarctation need a careful long term follow-up. MRI proved to be the ideal noninvasive technique to assess late complications, being able to replace angiography. 312 Acute aortic dissection without intimai tear. Diagnostic and follow-up with CT and MR imaging V. Latrabe, F. Laurent, V. Gense, R. Lecesne, R. Roudaut, J. Drouillard; Pessac/F Purpose: Assessing the ability of TOE, CT and MR imaging in the diagnosis and follow -up of acute aortic dissection (AAD) without intimai tear. Material and Methods: One twenty consecutive cases of AAD were reviewed in order to determ ine the prevalence and imaging findings at TOE, CT and MR imaging of those without com municating true and false channel o r with a mural hematoma. Clinical and imaging follow-up of AAD without intimai tear was also considered. Results: Eighteen patients were found to have a strong suspicion of AAD without intimai tear with the following findings at TOE: broad mural thickening superior to 7 mm without intimai flap or false channel. CT (n = 12) and MRI (n = 14) showed acute mural hematomas in respectively 50% and 78%. Three cases (type A) were confirmed surgically and the others followed up. Followup (mean 32 months) showed com plete resolution (20%), stability (60%) or relapse with intimai tear (20% In one case Ga-SPECT was false negative, CT showed 3 false negative results and 5 areas with doubtful activity. In 6 patients with residual masses, the decision between partial remission and further high dose chemotherapy o r com plete remission with residual fibrosis and "wait and see" therapy management w as directly influenced by the result of the Ga-67-SPECT. Conclusions: Ga-67-SPECT is a valuable diagnostic tool for the differenti ation of residual masses of Hodgkin's lymphoma or high-grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Because of the wide spread use of potential curative high dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplantation, the detection of residual disease by radioisotopes such as Ga-67 may well become more important. 324 Differential diagnosis o f local recurrences and radiation pneumonitis after combined organ-preserving treatm ent of stage I lung cancer I.V. Kouzmine, V.P. Khartchenko, L.A. Gourevitch; M oscow/CIS Modern tendencies to organ-preserving treatm ent of early stage lung cancer have carried out the problem of early diagnosis of loco-regional recurrences. Especially after adjuvant irradiation. Before the year 1990 in 910 cases stage I lung cancer was pathologically defined (pTIS -3, pT1 -375, pT2 -532). In 88.3% surgical patients (including hilar type) the lobe o r whole lung was preserved. Conservative (limited) resections underwent 167 patients, including I I with segmental bronchus tum our (bronchoplastic segmentectomy). In 512 (56.2%) cases adjuvant radiation therapy have been executed. Combined organ-preserving treatm ent (bronchoplastic lobectomy, limited resections and radiation therapy) results in decreasing of local recurrence incidence. Pul monary fibrosis connected with irradiation developed after lobectomy in 20% cases without significant connection to bronchoplasty and in 12.3% after con servative surgery. Specificity of radiological diagnosis in cases of recurrences and pneumonitis was essentially diminished. Experience of radiological mon itoring of patients for 25 years after organ-preserving surgery is considered. Importance of CT, single photon emission com puter tom ography and fine needle biopsy in differential diagnosis o f recurrences underlined. 325 CT features of tum or recurrence after pneum onectom y U. Topal, Y. Berkmen, C. Gebitekin, E. Tuncel; Bursa/TR Purpose: To assess CT features of tum or recurrence after pneumonectomy. Materials and Methods: Eighty-eight CT scans (77 without and 11 with IV contrast injection) o f 33 patients who had pneum onectom y fo r malignant disease (carcinoma n = 29, mesothelioma n = 3, malignant carcinoid n = 1) were reviewed. The wall and content of post pneum onectom y space (PPS), bronchial stump, mediastinum including esophagus and extrapleural space were evaluated. Results: Tumor recurrence occurred in 12 patients (in and around the bronchial stum p n = 4, within PPS manifested by increased fluid n = 3, bleeding n = 2, masses over the inner wall o f thorax n = 1 and extra pleural space n = 2). Additional findings were esophageal fistula (n = 2), bronchopleu ral fistula (n = 1), acute empyema in the immediate post operative period (n = 5), chronic empyema (n = 2). All patients with acute em pyem a or acute exacerbation of chronic em pyema had feve r and high WBC. Inhomogeneity o f the fluid in PPS, slight irregularities o r contrast enhancem ent o f its walls occurred with equal frequency in patients who had recurrence and in those w ho did not. Conclusion: In this series recurrence around bronchial stum p and within PPS occurred with equal frequency. Unless there are discrete nodules o r masses, slight irregularities of the inner wall of PPS, and inhomogeneity of fluid within PPS, except for bleeding, are normal findings. Increased fluid within PPS may be either due to tum or recurrence o r acute em pyema, but the latter is associated with high fever and elevated WBC. Results: 21 patients showed a SVT in MRI/MRA. 7/9 patients showed (partial) recanalisation in follow-up studies, 2/9 no change. C om plications such as m eningeal involvement, hemorrhagic infarction, ICH o r dilated cortical veins were demonstrated in 10 patients. 6/10 CTs + contrast also suspected SVT, 4/10 follow-up studies, 2/9 no change. C om plications such as meningeal involvement, hemorrhagic infarction, ICH o r dilated cortical veins were dem on strated in 10 patients. 6/10 CTs + contrast also suspected SVT, 4/10 were negative. Etiology: mastoiditis (n = 4), posttraum atic (n = 1 ), postencephalitic (n = 1), coagulation disorder (n = 1), IRDS (n = 1), unknown (n = 11). In one case an old SVT with recanalisation was not demonstrated angiographically. Results: By this method we found an occlusion of the MCA in two patients with clinically suspected sinus thrombosis. In all patients with thrombosis the transversal slices and the multiplanar reconstructions showed filling defects or an "em pty delta" sign. W ith irregular outlines the throm bus could be depicted over the com plete course of the sinus. The MIP-reconstructions were particularly helpful in the evaluation of the vessel anatomy. In 3 patients a MR-angiography was available fo r comparison. But the smaller veins, such as the V. verm is inferior, were less clearly depicted than in CT-angiography. The CT-angiography is a fast and reliable method to exclude or verify a cerebral venous thrombosis. It can be performed immediately after the non-enhanced CT. According to our present experience CT-angiography is sufficient fo r the diagnosis of a sinus thrombosis.  Conclusion: This investigation describes fo r the first tim e the echoenhancing potentials of BR1 in the intracranial cerebral circulation. BR1 proved to be a well tolerated substance and provided a long lasting signal enhancing effect, which will be useful to optimize transcranial ultrasound diagnostics. The glandulae suprarenales o f young persons w as as a rule in the shape o f a triangle, the echogenic was hight by 75% , it was m iddle by 20% and low by 5%. The presence of hypoechogenic zone in the tissue of the glandulae suprarenales was typical fo r eldertly persons (from 41 to 67), the structure became nonhomogeneous. The sizes of glandulae suprarenales were enlarged in adenom a, oval in the shape, they had a low echogenic and nonhom ogenicus picture. The pheochromocytoma was visualised in the form of the nodular an-or hypoehogenic formation sometimes with capsulae of a cavities of destruction in the middle. nonadenomas) were examined with helical C T before and after administration o f 120 mL nonionic CM infused at 2.5 ml/sec and assigned into tw o different groups: (i) 30-sec and 90-sec delay (n = 31 pts; 18 adenom as, 13 nonade nomas), and (ii) 60-sec and 180-sec delay (n = 41 pts; 23 adenom as, 24 nonadenomas). 40 normals (n = 20 per group) served as controls. Helical C T scans at 30 minutes after administration of CM were obtained in both normals (n = 20) and pts with adenom as (n = 19) and nonadenom as (n = 24). Regions of interests were measured in the normal and pathologic area. The scattergrams and mean values of the size and attenuation values on unenhanced and enhanced scans were correlated with the final diagnoses. Results: The 41 adenom as had a mean unenhanced attenuation value of 4 ± 16 HU compared with 37 ± 12 HU fo r the 37 nonadenom as (p < 0.001). None of the 37 nonadenom as had an attenuation value less than 11 HU, whereas 25 of the 41 (61%) adenom as did. The sensitivity:specificity ratio fo r the diagnosis o f adenom a w as 61% :100% at a threshold of 11 HU. Although average nonadenom a attenuation was significantly greater than average attenuation on the 60-seconds and 90-seconds scans (p < 0.001), there was much greater overlap in the attenuation values of the adenom as and nonadenom as than with the unenhanced images. At 180-seconds after injection of CM, nonadenom as (73 ± 1 7 HU) had higher attenuation values than adenom as ( A total o f 120 mL of 60% nonionic CM was injected at 2.5 mL/sec followed by helical C T scans obtained during the corticomedullary phase (CMP; 50 sec after initiation o f CM) and nephrographic phase (NP; 180 ± 5 sec) of contrast enhancement. Differences in lesion and kidney attenuation values w ere measured quantitatively. Three radiologists independently evaluated the scans using a 5-point scale to assess lesion conspicuity. Proof of individual masses w as based on biopsy results, surgical findings, or findings on other imaging modalities (follow-up C T or power Doppler sonography). The num ber o f masses < 3.0 cm detected on CMP scans (n = 211) was significantly lesser than on NP scans (n = 295) (p < 0.01). Mean differences in enhancem ent between renal cortex and masses were 148 ± 54 HU during the CMP and 137 ± 44 HU during the NP while density difference between renal medulla and masses significantly increased from 50 ± 48 HU during the CMP to 133 ± 44 HU during the NP (p < 0.01). The conspicuity score averaged 2.6 ± 0.2 fo r m asses in the CMP versus 3.4 ± 0.1 fo r masses in the NP (p < 0.01). Characterization of m asses on NP scans was achieved in 74% of lesions < 8 mm, in 95% o f lesions 8 -1 5 mm, and in all lesions 16 -30 mm in maximum diameter, respectively. False-positive results (n = 9) occurred only on CMP scans because of lack of enhancem ent of renal medulla. Conclusion: NP scans provided greater lesion detection and better charac terization of small renal masses than CMP scans. The value was greatest in those patients who had intrarenal masses < 1.5 cm or medullary masses. The obtaining o f CMP scans seem s to offer no advantages in detection or characterization of small renal masses. NP scans should be used w hen only monophasic scanning is used to detect small renal masses. (1990 to 1995) , 57 cases of multiple renal tum ors were found at the pathological examination of 550 nephrectomies. W e retrospectively reviewed their CT examinations. They were performed with a slice thickness of 5 mm before and after contrast medium with an incremental technique. Results: Among 57 cases, only 17 have been identified on the rapport and 11 were retrospectively detected after reviewing. Overall 28 cases were detected (49.1% of cases). The size of the main tum or ranges from 3 to 5 cm. The size of the second tum or ranged from one half inferior to 1 cm and the other between 1 to 3 cm. The third one was always inferior to 1.5 cm. The number of tumor was exact in 19 cases. 9 cases were underestimated. The size of unvisible tum ors ranged from few millimeters to 1 cm. Materials and Methods: 84 intravenous injections of BR1 (5 mg/ml) were given to 11 healthy male volunteers in a randomized order. Spectral Doppler of the portal vein (doses 0 .6 -4 .8 ml: n = 40) and power Doppler o f the right kidney (doses 0 .1 5 -1 .2 ml: n = 44) were performed. All scans were subjectively evaluated by an experienced blinded observer. Using in-house software, intensity of the portal vein spectral Doppler was averaged over 1 s intervals and plotted against time. The area under the resultant time-spectral intensity cun/e (AUC) was calculated fo r each injection after normalisation for variation between subjects. Results: Tolerance was excellent. Subjectively, good and consistent enhance ment was seen with all doses: mean useable enhancement was 9 m ins for spectral and 5 mins fo r color Doppler. Minimal color blooming and no self shadowing were seen. AUC values correlated much better with dosage than subjective evaluation and a linear fit with the mean AUC fo r all subjects showed an R2 = 0.97. Conclusion: BR1 is a safe and effective agent. A linear dose response relationship was seen, supporting the notion that Doppler intensitom etry can measure microbubble density and thus be used fo r functional imaging with microbubbles. Formal quantitation has advantages in com paring administration regimes. S 6 9 Purpose: Traditionally ultrasound contrast agents are administered as a bolus providing phasic, rapidly rising and slowly decreasing enhancement over 2 -6 minutes. The purpose of this study was to investigate if a continuous infusion over up to 15 minutes can provide uniform and prolonged enhancement. Materials and Methods: 6 volunteers each received 3 infusions of Levovist over 4 -1 5 min at: 1) "standard" rate calculated individually for each subject (1 .8 -2 .4 ml/min,). 2) 'la s t'' rate at tw ice the "standard" rate. 3) "slow" rate at half the "standard" rate. Doppler intensitometry of spectral traces of the femoral artery and subjective analysis of carotid colour Doppler were performed. Results: All infusions provided enhancement with a uniform plateau phase starting after 0 .5 -2 .5 min lasting till the end of the infusion. Depending on the infusion rate, enhancem ent was < 20 min. Enhancement at the plateau was 19.5 ± 2 dB ("standard" rate), 21.5 ± 2 dB ("fast" rate) and 16.5 ± 2 dB ("slow" rate). Saturation artefacts were minimal. Conclusion: Continuous infusion of Levovist provided marked, prolonged and uniform enhancem ent of Doppler signals and improved image quality by minimizing saturation artefacts. It promises to be useful especially in the enhancem ent of larger body areas. Results: In all patients studied, the acquisition protocol led to diagnostic images. Results were independent from w hether lesions were localized in the right o r left liver lobe. Contrast-enhanced power-Doppler demonstrated scattered arterial vessels in 9/10 hepatocellular carcinomas. In 2/5 cavernous hemangiomas and in one case of focal nodular hyperplasia a feeding vessel entering the lesion was seen. Cavernous hemangiomas additionally had vascular structures at their periphery. Metastases were characterized by almost com plete absence of intra-lesional vessels. Purpose: Despite modern radiographic contrast agents, the radiologist work ing in the field of diagnosis and treatm ent is faced with a group of patients who cannot tolerate the usual iodinated contrast agents, o r only to a limited extent. Material and Methods: Using a closed gas pressure injector which we have developed, C 0 2 angiographies w ere carried out in a total of 100 patients as a replacem ent o r supplementary procedure to the usual injection with fluid contrast agent. The sub-collectives were diagnostic angiographies of the pelvis/leg (n = 72), therapeutic angiographies (n = 16), 6 insufficient haemodialysis access fistulae and 6 patients with suspected stenosis of a renal transplant artery. Results: The diagnostic information obtained was equivalent to that of an investigation carried out with contrast agent. Purpose: Carbondioxide has proven to be a feasible negative contrast medium for angiography. A problem in handling is the controlled release of the gas in the artery. One branch o f developm ent was the construction of elaborated automatic injector systems. The purpose of our study was the development of a safe, easy and cheap manual injection technique. The carbondioxide was filled from the commercial available high pressure container in a sterile drainage bag using a interlocked bacteria filter. The gas in the bag had then a pressure of 1 bar. A variable volum e of gas was then manually injected with a 50 ml syringe into an angiographic catheter o r cannula. This technique was used fo r angiography below the diaphragm. The configuration of the systems excludes unintentional release of high pressure gas completely. The administration is easy and safe. The costs of the equipm ent are fa r low er than fo r iodine contrast media and far lower than fo r automatic injector systems. The image quality is not so brilliant in com parison with iodine contrast media, but for most questions in the iliac and lower limb arteries satisfactory. The manual injection of carbondioxide in the described technique is safe, easy and cheap. To study the CT-attenuation characteristics of Gd-DTPA in order to evaluate its substitution fo r iodine contrast media in patients with relative or absolute contraindications fo r iodine utilization. Various solutions o f Gd-DTPA and iodine have been scanned in a tissue-equivalent phantom. Furthermore the influence o f the in jection rate on dilution has been evaluated in order to calculate the attenuation of Gd-DTPA to be expected in vivo. Results: Gd-DTPA is more efficient than iodine in the spectral attenuation, especially at a tube voltage o f 80 kV. An injection of a 0.7 molar solution of Gd-DTPA at 4.5 ml/sec. was calculated to be equivalent to that of a 2.36 molar solution of iodine at a lower flow rate (3 ml/sec.). Only a sufficient enhancement of arterial vessel and the thyroid can be achieved through the presently available concentration o f Gd-DTPA (0.5 mol/l). Conclusion: In regard to an optimization o f the scan start through HUsensitive triggering as well as the capability of using a higher dosage of 1.0 molar Gd-DTPA, the future application of Gd-DTPA as a CT contrast medium fo r displaying blood vessels and possible hypervascular lesions appears to be sensible in cases w here there are contraindications to the use of iodine. Presently the application of 0.5 m olar Gd-DTPA should be limited to DSA. Results: MRI with contrast-enhancement detected more lesions altogether (in dependent of size and location) than the other imaging modes. A diagnostically equivalent performance (p < 0.05) was achieved with CT during the portalvenous contrast-phase. The num ber of false positive findings w ere greater in MRI. The detection scores were significantly lower in native CT-scans, in early arterial-phase contrasted CT-scans and in native T2-weighted MRI. The lowest score was produced by native T,-w eighted MRI SE-sequences. Conclusions: Time-consuming and cost-intensive MRI with RES-specific supraparamagnetic contrast agent increases the rate of detectibility fo r ma lignant liver lesions only slightly over the rate achieved through quicker and considerably less expensive CT-Double-Spiral techniques. MRI tends also in our study to produce more false positive findings.  Comm ercially available image processing program s (Analyze, 3dViewnix) were used fo r the segm entation of spiral CT data sets. The surfaces of the segmented objects are extruded using a spider-web algorithm and transferred into a render and anim ation software (Softim age, SiliconGraphics Indigo 2) allowing interactive "fly-throughs". The tool was used to visualize and animate several different clinical areas for preoperative planning and postoperative follow up. These included 30 patients with ileal loop neobladders, 10 with larynx and 3 with trachea examinations. Results: Semi-transparent rendering of surfaces results in better understand ing o f the underlying structures during the "fly-through". The surgeon benefits from the clearer visualization of anatom ic and pathological structures and can thus plan his operative approach more easily and quickly. Conclusion: This very flexible tool has great promise in subjective image enhancement and may be applied in many different clinical fields. Quicker data flow will accelerate reconstruction and anim ation and thus allow a w ider application of this process in the near future. Purpose: Major developm ents in C T scanners has led to ever better spatial resolution due to decreasing slice thickness. The main goal of isotropic voxels I has been achieved. As a consequence the num ber of diagnostic images S71 produced increases drastically. A high performance graphics com puter allows real time rendering o f large data sets and is evaluated fo r use in routine diagnosis. M aterial and Methods: An Onyx ¡-Station (Silicon Graphics) is used as the hardware platform running with the real time 3D-view er software. The data sets are transferred via a Thin Ethernet connection from the scanner to the workstation. Preparation o f the data volum e fo r the rendering process takes only a few seconds. Results: The various param eters that can be set in real time include rotation, cutting, thresholding, coloring and multiplanar reconstruction. A stereoscopic viewing tool allows real spatial images. After 6 months o f routine clinical use, advantages in quality and especially speed of interpretation can be clearly seen. The apparatus offers new aspects and possibilities that were not available until recently. Conclusion: A very promising method of routine CT viewing is offered. The handling big data sets is drastically simplified, thereby improving the speed and quality o f diagnosis. 358 A m ultimedial virtual patient with access to medical knowledge bases C. Chizzali-Bonfadin, K.-P. Adlassnig, C. Schuh, K. Bögl, G. Kolousek, H. Imhof; Vienna/A Purpose: Based on the 3-D visualization o f a patient's СТ/MR images we are working on a multimedial virtual patient with access to medical knowledge bases. This com puter system is being designed to integrate (a) medical data from various exam inations of a patient (patient history, biochemical and clinical data, biosignals and medical images, etc.), (b) computer-based medical knowledge about diagnosis, therapy, and prognosis, and (c) 3-D representation of the patient's images. Methods and Materials: A click with the mouse o r another pointing sys tem leads to the patient's data and/or medical knowledge (reference values, anatom ical reference, decision support) connected with that anatomical posi tion in the 3-D model of the patient. All data com es from external information system s interconnected to this system through extensive use of telecom m unication means preferably via a high-speed network. Data is not stored permanently in this system. By use of an object-oriented modular design with internet-based com munication between objects, various other projects will be integrated in this system, e.g., navigation in surgery, teleradiology, telesurgery, etc. Results: A s this is work in progress, we have developed first visual prototypes on our SGI ONYX graphics supercomputer. Conclusion: Because of the rapidly growing importance of the internet and of virtual reality an integrative medical system which is based on internet technology will become most important in the future. 359 3D visualization of the tracheobronchial tree from spiral CT data sets: A fully autom ated approach H. Shin, M. Prokop, C. Schaefer-Prokop, M. Galanski; Hannover/D Purpose: To develop automatic algorithm s for surface shaded display (SSD) and virtual bronchoscopy of the tracheobronchial tree. Materials and Methods: W e scanned 20 patients with various pulm onary and bronchial diseases, using 1 -2 mm section thickness, 2 -3 mm table feed, and 1 mm increment. For segm entation of the bronchial lumen, we compared local minima detection, thresholding, and a com bination of both methods. For final extraction of the tracheobronchial tree, 3D seeded region growing was applied. Benefits o f preprocessing with lower-upper-middle filters (LUM sharpeners) were also analyzed. Results: Autom atic segmentation w as possible with all methods. Local minima detection was superior to thresholding with respect to the total length of segmented bronchi (13% increase). Prefiltering with a LUM-sharpener (3 x 3 kernel) increased the detected volume by 18% (threshold) to 20% (local minima detection). Maximum performance was achieved by a combination of both methods. Pathologic findings could be reliably displayed up to 3rd-order bronchi. Up to 5th-order bronchi could be visualized. Conclusion: Autom atic extraction of the tracheobronchial tree is feasible. Applying appropriate scan protocols, our algorithm provides the means fo r 3D display o f bronchi up to the 5th order. 360 Spiral CT angiography of abdominal aortic aneurysms: Which rendering technique should be used? U. Szeimies, C.-P. Wallner, B. Steckmeier, G. Küffer, R. Scheck, T. Pfluger, K. Hahn; Munich/D Purpose: We prospectively evaluated the diagnostic impact of three different rendering techniques o f СТА datas: surface-shaded-display (SSD), maximumintensity-projection (MIP) and volum e rendering (VR). Material and Methods: 42 patients with abdom inal aortic aneurysm s (AAA) underwent СТА. For golden standard intraarterial DSA (100%) was used. For com parison of SSD, MIP and VR same viewing angles as DSA images were performed. The rendered images were correlated with 2 D axial C T slices and i.a. DSA by three unbiased radiologists and the vascular surgeon. Results: Best evaluation of vascular anatom y and was provided with volume rendering. All information of SSD and MIP could be rendered with different opacity settings by VR. In assessing the presence and configuration of stenoses (renal n = 5, iliac n = 7) o r accessory renal arteries (n = 5) VR was superior to MIP and SSD with 98% correlation to DSA (87%, 71%). In depicting segmental renal arteries MIP and VR w ere equal, the evaluation o f spatial resolution o f vessel kinking SSD and VR were equal. VR uniquely displayed mural throm bus and exact configuration o f mural calcium. Conclusion: Volume rendering seems to be an important reconstruction technique of СТА datas and should be used in preoperative vessel imaging. Materials and Methods: 3D interactive matching (IM) and 3D surface match ing (SM) were performed in tw o phantom studies and 50 examinations of pediatric abdominal masses. IM was performed on a Picker Voxel Q worksta tion, and SM on a Hewlett Packard workstation using a modified Pelizzari's algorithm. SM was based on 3D surface models of the liver and/or kidney (after labelling with MAG3) in both modalities. Matching accuracy was verified by measuring maximum deviation of anatom ical landmarks and/or external fiducials. Results: Matching accuracy in patient studies was 0.8 cm ± 0.2 cm fo r IM, and 0.9 cm ± 0.3 cm fo r SM. However, in 19/50 cases, SM failed because of a congruency less than 75% o f segmented surfaces. This w as especially the case in patients with liver metastases. IM succeeded in all patients. Mean time demand fo r IM was 15 minutes, for SM 25 min. The interobserver variability for the operator dependent IM method was less than 5%. Conclusion: Due to the sufficient accuracy, high success rate, and accept able tim e demand, IM is our preferred image fusion technique in abdominal examinations. Purpose: CT-Angiography is at a high diagnostic quality by using different ways to display patholgigal structures. To get comprehensive information, different representations related to specific findings o f interest are necessary: To create angiographic images with comprehensive information Maximum Intensity Projections (MIP) are not enough. Multiplanar Image Reconstructions (MPR) and Three Dimensional Surface Display (3D) have to be done to find out which secondary image reconstruction is necessary related to specified cases. Methods and Materials: W e examined 70 patients with changes in the ves sels or tumorous form ations in the abdomen. W e used a Spiral-CT scanner (Somatom Plus4 Siemens), scan time: 60 seconds, slice thickness 3 mm, pitch: 1.5, rotation tim e 0.75 seconds. Up to 36 cm o f craniocaudal length could be documented. The stored raw data enabled an overlapping image reconstruction. Results: For preoperative planning the arterial vascular anatom y is well displayed in the MIP-images, the venous system can be identified best with MPR. In aneurysm s MIP and MPR showes in all cases the remaining blood supplied lumen, the calcifications and the thrombosed aneurysm atic sac. High graded stenoses o f the renal vessels can be acquired with MIP and MPR, the determination of the the degree of the stenosis is not possible. 3D-lm aging does an evaluation of the surface of blood vessels and the topograpy between vessels and bone structures. Conclusion: СТА known as MIP-imaging has to be used in the context with MPR and 3D from the raw data set to confirm the diagnosis. The com pre hensive information is the strength o f this method and a great advantage compared with MRI and MRI-angiography. Purpose: Percutaneous liver biopsy was to be carried out on asymptomatic hepatitis С virus positive patients to detect and monitor subsequent progres sion of and response to treatm ent o f liver disease. W e sought to examine the role o f image guidance during percutaneous liver biopsy, and to iden tify the type and size of autom ated biopsy needles that yielded adequate histopathological specimens while m aintaining low patient morbidity. Methods and Materials: 100 patients had ultrasound guided percutaneous liver biopsy carried out by experienced Ultrasonologists using a variety of automated biopsy needles. A further 100 patients had blind percutaneous biopsy. Patient morbidity was recorded. Cadaveric liver biopsy using the same range of devices was carried out on 50 recently (< 2 hrs) post mortem subjects who did not have liver disease ante mortem. All specim ens were blindly assessed for pathologic adequacies by an experienced Hepatopathologist. Results: 15 Gauge needles consistently yielded more satisfactory specimens in terms of the core thickness and num ber of portal tracts visualised. With needles o f 18 gauge and less the specim ens showed increased fragmentation, and the core thickness w as less than the diam eter o f liver acini, rendering assessment of liver architecture difficult. Pathological findings did not vary sig nificantly between patient and cadaver specimens. Morbidity following guided and blind procedures was compared. Conclusion: Image guidance conferred benefit during percutaneous liver biopsy with significant reduction in patient morbidity. 15 gauge devices yield more satisfactory histopathological specim ens while maintaining low patient morbidity. Material and Methods: Ten patients with suspected or recurrent lymphomas were referred for a biopsy of retroperitoneal lymph nodes. C T examination of the abdomen performed prior to percutaneous biopsy was unable to find a clear anatom ic pathway from the skin to the intended target. W e tried to displace bowel loops intervening in the expected needle pathway with a custom-designed com pression system com posed o f a perforated bowl and adjustable straps encompassing the patients abdomen. The bowl w as applied at the entry site o f the biopsy needle. Results: Successful accurate placement of the biopsy needle within retroperi toneal mass w as achieved in all patients, avoiding traversing bowel loops. Our com pression system allowed displacem ent of digestive structures, and shortened the distance between the skin and the target by 20 to 50%. Conclusion: Abdominal compression is a valuable aid to CT-guided biopsy o f deep retroperitoneal lesions via anterior route, as it allow s a more direct approach than angling the needle. It is also technically sim pler and less invasive than injecting gas o r saline to displace digestive structures. Conclusions: Ultrasound guided infusional brachytheraphy using 32P colloid is safe with few side effects and the potential to give com plete remission. The dose/response relationship is unknown. In our small material a total radiation dose exceeding 8000 Gy has given the highest num ber o f responses. In the remaining 11 cases non diagnostic specimens were obtained. Of the 33 CTguided biopsies performed in the group of patients with suspect recurrences of disease, the correct diagnosis was made in 16/23 (70%) cases o f patients with primary tum or of the large bowel. In the group of 10 patients with prim ary gastric adenocarcinoma, CT-guided biopsy correctly identified recurrence of disease in 7/10 cases. The results o f this study suggest that CT-guided biopsy repre sents a useful technique for the evaluation of primary and recurrent lesions of the Gl tract. S 7 3 The procedure was successful in all 11 patients. Complications occurred in tw o patients (hemoperitoneum, n = 1; partial thrombosis of the right portal vein, n = 1), both treated conservatively. In 7 patients a reduction of insulin therapy was obtained, lasting from 2 to 37 months; in 5 patients insulin independence was observed, lasting from 1 to 29 months. Conclusion: In our experience, intrahepatic percutaneous transplantation of pancreatic islets proved to be a simple and relatively safe procedure. Further studies are required to understand the real long-term efficacy of this experimental procedure.  The literature review and 6 of our own cases shows that these fistulas can be divided in intrahepatic (n = 49, 70%) and extrahepatic fistulas (n = 21, 30%). The most im portant causes are trauma (n = 31 ,44% ), iatrogenic procedures (n = 16, 23%) and congenital vascular malformations (n = 9,13% ). APFs and AVFs can be diagnosed by ultrasound, computed tom ography and magnetic resonance imaging. Angiography confirm s the diagnosis and in many cases allows definitive interventional radiologic treatment. Conclusion: Arterioportal fistulas are a challenge for treatment. However, radiologic interventional procedures provide a safe, low-cost, and effective method for treatment.  A total o f 68 patients with m asses of the head and neck region were exam ined with T2 and T1 weighted precontrast SE sequences (T2-SE, T1-SE) and T1-weighted postcontrast SE sequences (T1-Gd-SE) in comparison with T2 weighted precontrast fat-saturated turbo-SE sequences (T2-SPIR) and T1 weighted postcontrast fat-saturated turbo-SE sequences (T1-Gd-SRIR). Visual evaluation of the 5 sequences w as done by tw o experienced radiologists using a 5-point rating scale (W ilcoxon m atchedpairs signed-rank test). Evaluation criteria were a): delineation of the lesion and b): contrast between lesion and surrounding tissue. Results T2-SPIR offers the highest sensitivity, best delineation and contrast of lesions in comparison to all other sequences (45 superior, 18 equal, 5 inferior, p < 0.001). The contrast between lesion and fat tissue was equivalent with T1-SE compared with T1-Gd-SPIR, but T1-Gd-SPIR offers a superior contrast between lesion and muscle tissue. Fat suppression was inhom ogeneous in 6 patients due to chemical shift artifacts. Conclusion Fat-saturated sequences, especially T2-SPIR, facilitate improved assessment of head and neck lesions and may replace conventional T2weighted spinecho sequences. Methods and Materials: Twenty-three consecutive patients with symptoms related to anterior circulation cerebrovascular disease underwent color Doppler sonography, CT angiography, MR angiography and catether angiography in the same week. The modalities were blindly com pared in classifying internal carotid artery stenosis into mild (0 -29% ), moderate (3 0-69 % ), severe (7 0 -99%) and occlusion categories. Results: Of the 40 carotid bifurcations finally evaluated screening Doppler sonography was in agreem ent with angiography in 85% of the cases, using a reduced (mild, severe, occlusion) classification. 3D СТА categorisation was in 92.5% , while СТА and source image analysis allowed 97.5% agreement with angiography. For 2D TOF, 3D TOF and 3D PC MRA images noncompensated reading resulted in 70% , 55% , and 50%, while com pensated reading gave 80%, 77% and 75% agreem ent with angiography respectively. Statistically significant differences were found only between the accuracy of СТА + source image and all noncom pensated MRA readings. The authors suggest US-guided percutaneous sclerotherapy with 95% ethanol in the treatm ent of the lateral cysts of the neck (branchial cysts), as an alternative treatm ent to surgery which has a high incidence of recurrence and iatrogenic complications. Materials and Methods: 5 patients ranging in age from 10 to 72 years old (2 men and 3 women) underwent the procedure. US exam and cytology were performed in the 5 patients to confirm the diagnosis o f branchial cyst. At diagnosis, the cyst volum e varied between 15 and 25 ml. After diagnosis with the patient's informed consent, US-guided empting o f the cyst with 18 G needle was performed. The cyst was filled with 95% ethanol up to 15 ml for 20 minutes and aspirated. The procedure w as repeated three times with a week interval. The follow-up has varied from 6 to 36 months. An anti-inflammatory oral therapy with FANS w as added during treatment. Results: After treatm ent the cyst volume was reduced at about 3 to 5 ml and this volum e was mantained during the follow-up. In 3/5 of patients we have noticed the appearance of a transitory tumescence of the neck, which disappeared during a week, and in 1/5 the tumescence was accompanied by a reactive lymphadenopathy. Conclusions: US-guided percutaneous sclerotherapy of branchial cysts is a low cost procedure alternative to surgery which is more expensive and burne. Tc-99m sestamibi SPECT (600 MBq Tc-99m sestamibi) in patients with primary (n = 60) and recurrent (n = 30) squam ous cell cancer and lymphoma was compared to bone scintigraphy, CT and MRI. The results were related to the surgical and/or pathohistological workup. Sestamibi SPECT provided a 100% sensitivity in the detection of prim ary and recurrent tum or tissue and was in selected cases superior (1) to bone SPECT in differentiating periostitis from m alignant infiltration, (2) to C T in differentiating inflammatory from malignant lymph node and soft tissue infiltration and differentiating viable from non-viable tum or tissue during radio-chemotherapy and (3) to MRI in excluding neoplastic infiltration of the brain. The limitations of sestamibi SPECT com prised the high physiologic uptake in the salivary glands and in the nasal and gingival mucosa. Nevertheless, comparison with the physiological patterns of tracer distribution and quantitative analysis (tumor: background = 11.2 ± 14.3, tum ornuchal muscles = 3.0 ± 1.5, tumor:salivary glands = 1.0 ± 0.4, tumor:mucosa = 2.1 ± 1.4) lead to a correct diagnosis in all cases. Flowever, image fusion of sestamibi SPECT with bone SPECT or C T should be aspired to increase topographical orientation in post surgical patients.  Materials and Methods: Prior to fixation procedure all patients undergo con ventional CT examination and after consultation with traum atologist and neuro surgeon we plan the operation. 2 screws are inserted from posterior approach to fix С 2 hangman's fractures and Socon fixation device is used in upper dorsal region. Results: Up till now we treated 6 patients with С 2, 5 with upper dorsal frac tures and all the procedures were performed without any serious complication. Conclusion: Fixation of selected vertebral column fractures under CT guid ance is a precise method helping us in preventing the spinal cord and large vessels damage especially in upper D region w hich is under fluoroscopy usually superimposed with shoulders. The prospective of this method is the possibility of percutaneous approach as in pelvic region. (1) location in bone or soft tissue, (2) cavity wall thickness, (3) aspect of inner surface of cavity wall (4) aspect o f outer surface of cavity wall, (4) shape of the abscess, and (5) difference in signal intensity within the abscess cavity. Results: 1. Tuberculous abscesses were mainly located in soft tissues (22/28 cases, 79%), but the pyogenic abscesses, in bones (12/16 cases, 75%). 2. The inner wall of tuberculous abscesses were rugged appearance (22/28 cases, 78%), but that in pyogenic abscesses were smooth (12/16 cases, 86%). 3. No statistically significant differences were found in features o f thickness of the abscess wall, appearance of outer surface o f the abscess, shape of the abscess, and the signal intensity within the cavity between tuberculous and pyogenic abscesses. Conclusion: Tuberculous abscesses in extremities are more com monly formed in the soft tissues, and show rugged appearance of the inner wall as com pared with that of pyogenic abscesses w hich are more frequently located within the bones and the inner surfaces o f the cavities are smooth. Methods and Materials: MR imaging was performed on a 1.5 T wholebody scanner (Siemens, Erlangen) using the standard body resonator. For the continuous dynamic imaging of cervical spine movement different pulse sequence schemes based on gradient echo acquisitions were evaluated. The goal thereby was to obtain a satisfactory representation o f the myelon, CSF and the intervertebral discs, while providing a sufficient tem poral resolution to get an artefact free recording o f spine movement. A simple guiding device was developed, which allows a free movement of the investigated subject along a well defined sagittal plan. Results: Fast 2D-FISP sequences (TR = 6 ms, TE = 2.8 ms, Flip angle: 35°) were found to give the best contrast between CSF and myelon while still showing the intervertebral discs. To guarantee shortest possible acquisition times reduced scan matrixes were used. To maintain good contrast between CSF and myelon the acquisition matrix has to be 94 x 128 o r higher. Usually 1 0 -2 0 images were acquired successively within 5 -1 0 sec. Conclusions: Fast 2D-FISP sequences with optimized scan parameters were found to be suitable fo r real-time MRI of the cervical spine allowing the assessment of functional aspects of spine movement. Methods: X-rays and MRI of the sacroiliac joints (SIJ) were performed in 130 children subdivided to following groups according to modified European S pondyloarthropathy Study Group (ESSG) criteria: group 1: undifferentiated SpA (uSpA n = 41, 88% HLA B27+), group 2: differentiated SpA (n = 29, 97% HLA B27+), group 3: patients with no signs of SpA other than oligoarthritis (n = 30, 93% HLA B27+), group 4: HLA B27+ controls without arthritis (n = 12) and group 5: HLA B27-controls with other поп-SpA diagnoses (n = 18). On the basis of modified New York Criteria X-rays were evaluated by three experienced radiologists working independently and blinded to the clinical data. In a second step MR images were evaluated independently and blinded to clinical data and X-ray-features according to recently published criteria developed by our group allowing fo r differentiation between acute and chronic inflammatory changes (JCAT 1996; 20: 512-521). Sacroiliitis detected by X-rays was found in 15 patients: 4/41 in group I (9.8%), 11/29 in group 2 (38%), but not in groups 3, 4 and 5. Acute and/or chronic sacroiliitis detected by MRI was found in 35 patients: 17/41 in group I (41.4%), 15/29 in group 2 (51.7%) and in 3/30 (10%) patients in group 3, but not in groups 4 and 5. W hile only 23/260 SIJ showed definite changes in conventional X-rays (8.8%), 33/260 showed definite chronic changes by MRI (12.7%) and 59/260 showed definite acute changes by MRI (22.7%) (p < 0 .001). Conclusion: MRI is a useful method to detect acute and chronic sacroiliitis in children with juvenile SpA. Advantages in com parison with conventional X-rays are the higher sensitivity for chronic changes, the ability to document acute changes and the lack of radiation exposure. W hen medical students are introduced to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) they may enjoy the beauty and the diagnostic content of the images but may be frightened by the physics o f MRI. In order to increase the curiosity of the students on MRI physics I have given an introductory lecture in an animated style. The lecture gives the background of the MRI signals (electromagnetic waves radiating out of the human body) and describes how they induce electrical currents in the antenna of an MRI machine. The currents are analyzed in a com puter with regard to frequencies and amplitudes (Fourier analysis). The com puter presents this analysis as images which get an astonishing resemblance to human anatomy. To make the Fourier analysis easier to grasp for the students they are reminded that they as biologic machines in their eyes make Fourier analysis of a spectrum of electromagnetic waves called light and in their ears (organ of Corti) make Fourier analysis of a spectrum of sound waves radiating out from the vocal cords of a talking man (or woman) o r from a playing symphony orchestra... I will give a shortened version of my introductory lecture. Conventional MRI of the spine featuring sagittal and axial T t -and T 2-weighted imaging sequences is a highly sensitive method of demonstrating lumbar disc herniation. The specificity of the findings leaves much to be desired however: incidental findings o f herniated discs are frequently reported in asymptomatic individuals. Besides imaging the potential cause o f nerve root com pression (the herniated disc) it is also necessary to depict the actual compressed root with the highest resolution. Previously the gold standard fo r imaging the intradural nerve root and root sleeve has been myelography (syn. radiculography) involving a lumbar puncture and injection of a contrast medium. Lately a num ber o f refinements o f MRI technique have made it possible to produce high-quality non-invasive MR myelograms. A number of these techniques will be discussed. (a) T i-w e ighte d myelograms: a 3D volum e acquisition utilizing a gradient echo sequence with a spoiler prepulse produces thin (2 mm) sections with S 7 8 an improved root image. Multiplanar reform ats (MPR) can be useful in diagnosis. (b) T 2-weighted myelograms: a fast spin-echo (FSE) sequences produces very heavy T 2-weighting in short imaging time, providing detailed images of roots and root sleeves. A disadvantage is the lack o f depiction of extradural spinal structures. Two applications are possible: (2) Oblique thick-section (4 -5 mm) FSE cuts with maximum-intensity pro jection (MIP) post-processing. This provides a 3D presentation of the dural sac and root sleeves, strongly resembling a conventional lumbar myelogram. Imaging time can be drastically curtailed by increasing the echo train length to equal the num ber o f profiles, permitting all the imaging data to be acquired with a single excitation in a single 15 mm slice. Image quality is however adversely affected. (3) Axial thin-section (2 mm) 3D FSE cuts, with MIP or MPR post processing. If the previous sequences produced images resembling a myelogram, the transverse thin-section images are the equivalent of a CT myelogram with a bright signal from the CSF and containing small dots representing the intradural nerve roots. Myelographie MR images can also be produced using a T j-w e ighte d gradient echo pulse sequence, but in our experience the image quality of the FSE sequence is better. It should be stressed that MR myelography is an adjunct to the standard examination, to be used in cases where there is doubt remaining about root compression. Suggested pulse sequences, 0.5 T. (1) Sagittal T i-w eighted myelogram: 3D gradient-echo with spoiler prepulse; 394 Degenerative disc disease and gadolinium C. Manelfe; Toulouse/F Magnetic Resonance (MR) is now accepted as the best imaging modality to show water content changes consistent with degenerative disc diseases (DDD). Gadolinium (Gd) is not routinely used in clinical practice fo r screening patients with DDD except in post-operative spine when the diagnosis between recurrent disc herniation and epidural scar is discussed. However, degenerative changes and disc herniation present, during their evolution, inflammatory changes involving the discovertebral com plex (DVC) which can be demonstrated on MR enhanced images. In adult, the intervertebral disc is not vascularized on the contrary o f the foetus and newborn. Normal intervertébral disc does not enhance after Gd injection. Contrast enhancement which can be demonstrated after Gd injection in the DVC is due to the presence of granulation tissue which develops at this level. When tears o r fissures appear in the intervertébral disc o r when the disc is degenerated, vascular changes are noted. The origin of these modifications is not well known and some authors have hypothesized a possible auto-imm une response to the cartilage components. Gd enhancement at the periphery of a disc herniation is noted in 50 to 81% of cases. Gd enhancement has been noted in the weakest paris of the DVC: posterior anulus, cartilaginous plaque, central part of the disc, vertebral endplate, Schorml's mode, etc. Gd enhancement and granulomatous tissue could be the reflect o f a heal ing process affecting the DVC. Examples of Gd enhancement in DDD are shown and differential diagnosis with infections and inflammatory diseases is discussed. 395 Lesions mimicking lumbar disc disease S. Holtås; Lund/S Although rare, there are a number of diseases which can give symptoms similar to those caused by a lumbar disc herniation. To avoid diagnostic mistakes an imaging strategy which visualizes all compartments, i.e. cord, intradural, extradural and paraspinal com partments, should be used. The only modality which fulfills these criteria is MRI. Tumors, such as neurinomas, hemangiomas and metastases can occasionally give symptoms mimicking lumbar disc disease. Metastasis and other bony tum ors are usually easy to diagnose, whereas an intradural neurinoma can be overlooked if a modality such as CT, which does not show the intradural content, is used. Other causes of focal symptoms are infections, such as TBC, which is increasing in the W estern World due to immigration, and also bacterial abscesses. In other cases venous congestion compressing the nerves is found a t surgery. Paraspinal processes, such as pathology in the aorta, and tum ors in the pelvis can give symptoms sim ilar to a disc herniation. Although spinal stenosis has characteristic symptomatology, localized bony changes can cause isolated nerve-root compression. In this situation a com bination of MR and C T is helpful for diagnosis. Development o f scar tissue and fibrosis after surgery can give symptoms which cannot be distinguished from a recurrent disc herniation. In this situation the differential diagnosis is facilitated by pre-and post-contrast MRI. 396 Percutaneous techniques for the herniated lum bar disc. Current status and critical evaluation J.F. Bonneville; Besançon/F More and more specialists agree today that there are probably very few differences in the long term between patients harboring a lumbar herniated disc treated aggressively and those treated conservatively. For this reason and fo r other, there is, particularly in Europe, a continuing trend to minimize the surgical treatm ent of the disc in those particular patients w here a quick treatm ent is unavoidable (intractable pain, imperious necessity to rapid return to work....). New techniques continue to be devised fo r treating the lum bar disc but com parisons are difficult. Concerning laser discectomy, too little work has been published to evaluate this technic in term of efficacy and safety. Automated percutaneous lumbar discectomy seem s on the decline yet: a long term success rate of about only 55% even with meticulous patient selection makes it poorly attractive. Chemopapain chem onucleolysis (CNL) is nowadays more and more popular: it can be predicted from the drug sales that more than 10,000 patients with lumbar disc herniation are treated each year in Europe with CNL. With the general use of a safe extradural approach, none neurological com plications has been reported in the last few years. Management of rare anaphylactic reactions is well known. Short hospitalization time, absence of skin opening o r blood loss, absence o f general anesthesia, acceptable time for return to work make chemonucleolysis attractive in those patients whose lumbar diseased disc has to be treated. Imaging technics remain essential fo r patient selection. Purpose: This study was performed to evaluate the effectiveness of spiral arthro-CT (SACT) after 3-compartment w rist-arthrography (AG) to dem onstrate various im portant non-osseous wrist structures including capsule, ligaments, triangular fibrocartilage as well as cartilage. Methods and Materials: 5 wrist specim ens of 4 different subjects were exam ined by AG and SACT (512 x 512 matrix, 96 mm FOV, 1 mm slice thickness, 1:1 helix in the axial and semi-coronal plane and further recontructions in the sagittal and true-coronal plane). In order to code the 3 different wrist com part ments different colors were mixed with contrast material before injection. Then the non-decalcified specimens were em bedded in w ater and deep-frozen to an ice block. Afterwards rotation cryotomy w as performed in 1 of the 3 possi ble main anatom ic planes (axial, coronal and sagittal). Each cryosection was photographed and relevant anatom ic structures were directly correlated with the imaged CT morphology. Results: Following im portant non-osseous structures were constantly seen in all specimens: (1) 11 diffferent ligaments including scapho-lunate (SL), luno-triquetral (LT), S 7 9 radiocapitate (RC), radiolunate (RL), radio-scapholunate (RSL), radiocollateral (RCL), ulno-lunotriquetral (ULT), dorsal radiotriquetral (DRT), triquetral-ham ate (TH), capitato-ham ate (CH), dorsal intercarpal (DIG) lig ament. (2) Triangular fibrocartilage (TFC) with its radial, foveal, palm ar and dorsal "insertion" . (3) Cartilage o f various thickness covering distal radius and ulna as well as carpalia. Conclusion: SACT displays exactly relevant wrist ligaments, the triangular fibrocartilage as well as the thickness of wirst joint cartilage compared to the specimens. Therefore SACT can offer important information concerning wrist anatomy. 14:10 3 9 8 Spiral arthro-CT of the w rist -Clinical evaluation M.C. Freund, S. Ebner, A. Kathrein, M. Gabi, S. Pechlaner, W. Jaschke; Innsbruck/A Purpose: This study was performed to evaluate the effectiveness of spiral Arthro-C T (SACT) after 3-com partm ent wrist-arthrography (AG) in patients with various posttraum atic o r degenerative wirst pathology. Methods and Materials: In total 120 wrist joints were examined by AG utilizing digital subtraction during injection as well as digital stress images. Immediately afterwards SACT (512 x 512 matrix, 96 mm FOV, 1 mm slice thickness, 1:1 helix) was performed in the axial and semi-coronal plane with further reconstructions in the sagittal and true-coronal plane. 2 different observers analysed overall detection of 11 major wrist ligaments and the TFC as well as additional findings of SACT com pared to AG. Results: Following detection rates for 11 major wrist ligaments and the TFC were observed: TFC 100%, SL 92%, LT 78%, RCL 89% , RC 84% , RL 88%, RSL 49% , ULT 65% , dRT 49% , DIG 84%, TH 60%, CH 44% . Following additional findings of SACT com pared to AG were noted: 5x central TFC defects, 6x foveal avulsion o f the TFC, 2x RL tear, 2x ULT tear, 3x RCL tear as well as 23x chondromalacia. Due to SACT a 55% decrease of studies with unremarkable findings was noted compared to AG alone. Conclusion: SACT defines better the extent and location of the ligament or TFC injury com pared to AG alone, additionally SACT also displays chondro malacia. Therefore wrist arthrography should always be followed by SACT in order to gain more anatom ic and clinical information. 14:20 3 9 9 Triangular fibrocartilage and intercarpal ligam ents of the wrist: Standard MR im aging versus MR arthrography M. Zanetti, J. Bräm, J. Hodler; Zurich/C H Purpose: To com pare the diagnostic performance of standard MR imaging and MR arthrography in lesions of the triangular fibrocartilage (TFC) and the scapholunate (SL) and lunotriquetral (LT) ligaments. Materials and Methods: In 30 consecutive patients standard MR images (coronal T1 weighted spin-echo (600/20 msec) and T2*-weighted gradient echo sequences (FLASH: 360/10/25·)) were com pared with MR arthrograms (FLASH: 360/10/60c, 0.2 mmol/ml gadopentetate in the radiocarpal joint). C onventional tricompartmental arthrography w as used as the standard of reference. The images were evaluated blindely and separately by two radiolo gists.  The prospective study includes 43 patients with acute and chronic wrist pain, which were examined by MRI of the wrist before and after conventional three-com partm ent arthrography with a mixture of non ionic iodine contrast medium and Gd-DTPA (200:1). Coronal high-resolution GRE3D MR imaging (0 .6 -0 .8 effective slice thickness) was performed on a 1.5-T system (wrist coil). 25 patients also underwent wrist arthroscopy within four weeks after the MR exam. Arthro-MRI was evaluated jointly by tw o musculosceletal radiologists according to a 5-point scale fo r ligamental pathology and com pared to findings from wrist arthroscopy. Results: W e found advantages of arthro-MRI over arthroscopy: less invasive; no side effects; patients returned to work after 24 hours; exact correlation of intrinsic ligamental pathology with arthroscopy (TFC, SLL, LTL); better delineation of capsular structures, palm ar and dorsal intrinsic and extrinsic ligam ents com pared to arthroscopy; cheaper than arthroscopy. Conclusion: Arthro-MRI exactly delineates com plex wrist anatomy. Compared to diagnostic wrist arthroscopy the method is cheaper, less invasive and (according to our experience) without side effects. 14:40 401 MRI of D upuytren's contracture -Preoperative screening with a low field dedicated system B. Kersting-Sommerhoff, K.D. Werber, К. Becker, N. Hof, R Gerhardt; Munich/D Purpose: C orrect timing o f surgery is an important factor fo r longterm success in the treatm ent of patients with Dupuytrens contracture (DC). If inflammatory activity is present at surgery the recurrence rate of contractures is known to be significant. Methods: W e exam ined 20 patients with clinically evident DC in a low field dedicated MR-System (Artoscan) at 0.2 T. Axial T 1 and T2 weighted spinecho sequences (3 mm slice thickness) of the palm s and fingers as well as isotropic 3D gradient echo sequences with secondary reconstruction (1.8 mm) were acquired. IV contrast media (Gadolinium 0.2 ml/kg) were given before the repeat of the T1 weighted axial sequence. Signal intensity in T2 weighting and enhancement after GD were noted and the grade o f inflammatory activity was determined. 16 patients were operated and the excised tissue was examined histopathologically. Results: MRI results and histopathologic proof of inflam matory activity cor related well in 15/16 patients. T1 weighted sequences before and after GD proved to be m ost valuable. T2 weighted sequences were helpful if tissue edem a or effusion was present. The 3D GE thin slice images did not help in grading inflam matory activity. Conclusion: The low field dedicated system is well suited fo r screening DC patients preoperatively. If high grade inflammatory activity is noted surgery can be postponed to reduce the incidence of recurrent lesions. 402 High resolution ultrasonography in D upuytren's disease M. Falchi, S. Delucchi, A. Carterina, C.E. Neumaier, E. Silvestri; Genova/I Purpose: Dupuytren's disease is a common disorder of the palmar aponeu rosis of the hand often leading to disabling flexion contractures of the fingers. The aim of our w ork is to evaluate the high frequency US in the study of normal palm ar aponeurosis and its appearance in D upuytren's disease. Methods and Materials: 11 normal subjects (age range 2 2 -7 3 yrs) and 13 patients with clinically assessed multifocal Dupuytren's disease (age range 5 8 -7 9 yrs), graded in 4 stages according to the simplified classification by Tubiana, were examined with high frequency probes (10, 1 5 -2 0 MHz). Results: US identifies the palm ar aponeurosis as a subtle hyperechoic band located under the subcutaneous fat tissue. All the nodules clinically identified were described by US as hypoechoic lesions located in the subcutaneous tissues with variable length (3 -8 mm) well defined from the flexor tendons sheath. In 7/13 patients US assessed a diffuse swelling of the longitudinal bundles of the palm ar aponeurosis. Conclusions: US is able to detect the palm ar aponeurosis and to identify its appearance in Dupuytren's disease. From our results it seem s to be possible the use of US fo r staging and follow-up monitoring of Dupuytren disease. with clinical suspicion of a scaphoid fracture (< 7 days) but normal plain radio graphs. A fracture was judged, if a fracture line or/and the bone marrow edema comprised the cross-section of wrist bones in a T 1 -weighted SE (500/20), T2'weighted GE (60/17/20°), or STIR sequence (1 ,200/13/130), evaluated by two blinded readers, compared to the six w eek follow -up radiographs. Results: MRI found 14 occult scaphoid fractures (33.3%), 4 capitatum (9.5%), one trapezium fracture (2.4% ), and 2 in the distal radius (4.8%), together in 21 bones and 20 of 42 patients (47.6% ), proven in the six w eek follow-up radiographs. For MRI sensitivity/specificity for detecting radiologically occult fractures of the wrist w as 100%/100% fo r the first and 100% /95% for the second reader with a high interobserver agreem ent (Kappa: 0.952). Conclusion: MRI offers a high sensitivity to find radiographically occult frac tures of the scaphoid and wrist, allowing early diagnosis and early treatment, preventing patients without a fracture from overtreatment by immobilization for weeks.  In a prospective study we included 29 patients (mean age 61 years) with fractures o f the distal radius. In addition to a standard protocol the injured and the normal wrist were imaged with a DESS-3D-sequence (TR/TE/a 30/9/40). The MR diagnosis was compared and correlated with clinical scores. Results: W e diagnosed 25 ligamental injuries (12 radioscaphocapitate, 5 radiolunotriquetral, 4 scapholunate ligament ruptures and 4 injuries of the capsule of the radioulnar joint) in 15 patients. Clinical scores did not correlate significantly with the extent or localization of the injury. Conclusion: Carpal ligam entous injuries occur in 50% of distal fractures of the radius. The DESS-3D-sequence with interactive multiplanar reconstruction reliably demonstrates these lesions even in an elderly population. MR findings did not correlate with clinical scores, but ligam entous injuries together with joint asymmetry after distal fractures of the radius seem to be important causes for wrist pain and instabilities. can demonstrate very early perfusion disorders, marrow oedema and fresh necrosis of bones. Carpal bone disorders after long term exposure to vibration were investigated by these imaging technics versus microradiography and incidence was determined. Methods and Materials: R esults gained by HRCT and MRI compared with microradiography of 100 wrists o f exposed w orkers were analyzed. Results: 3 times higher incidence o f aseptic bone necrosis was detected by HRCT than by microradiography, one third o f these cases proved to be fresh bone necrosis by MRI. O steochondrosis dissecans was diagnosed by HRCT nearly 10 times more than by microradiography. Conclusion: Not only microradiography but also HRCT should be carried out at vibration exposed w orkers w ho have any wrist complaints. If there is any clinical suspect of carpal bone necrosis, MRI examination is needed. The incidence of carpal bone disorders can be more frequent am ong them than estimated till nowadays. The earlier diagnosis, the better prevention. 406 MRI of the wrist: Differential diagnosis of cystic lesions in and near the lunate M. Vahlensieck, P. Bruser; Bonn/D Purpose: To describe MRI criteria of cystic lesions within and near the lunate. Methods and Material: 16 wrists o f 13 patients with pain and radiographic depiction of cystic changes within the lunate o r clinical suspicion of a ganglioncyst were examined. The MRI protocol included coronal, sagittal and in 5 cases axial T1-and T2-weighted SE sequences (4 mm slices, 140 FOV, 256 X 256 matrix) as well as coronal fat suppressed gradient-echo-sequences (2 mm slices). Final diagnosis was confirmed by surgery (n = 6) and follow up. Results: Ganglion cysts (n = 6) were lobulated, showed septae and intraosseous extension in 4 cases. In 3 cases we found a stalk originating from the scaphoid-lunate (SL) ligam ent with SL-instability in one case. In ulnar impaction syndrome (n = 1) small cystic lesions in the lunate were surrounded by a sclerotic rim and located near the proximal ulnar surface. In Kienböck's disease (n = 3) cystic com ponents were irregular and surrounded by bone marrow edema. Nutrient vessel canals (n = 7) imaged as 1 to 3 small cystic lesions within the palm ar or dorsal subchondral region. Conclusion: MRI can aid in differential diagnosis of cystic carpal lesions. N utrient vessel canals may not be mistaken fo r pathologic cystic lesions. Carpal ganglion cysts show distinct diagnostic pattern and can cause SL instability.  Two different image recording systems, one using storage phosphor plates and one using screen/film, were com pared using an anthropomorphic breast phantom. Simulated tum ors and microcalcifications w ere used as pathology. Images were produced using one older m am m ogra phy unit (0.6 mm focal spot, no grid) and one newer unit (0.3 mm focal spot, with grid). Two anode/filter combinations, Mo/Mo and W /Rh, were evaluated fo r the newer unit. Five observers evaluated 600 images each using a modified version of ROC analysis. The detection fraction fo r the screen/film m am m ogram s from the newer unit using Mo/Mo rated best fo r tum ors (63%) and microcalcifications (86%). The corresponding values fo r the digital images were 52% and 69%, respectively. The modern unit was rated significantly better than the older, for both screen-film and digital images. The absorbed dose could be reduced to half using W/Rh instead o f Mo/Mo. The same result was achieved using no grid. Conclusion: Digital mammography using storage phosphor plates w as sig nificantly inferior to screen/film mammograms for the detection of simulated tum ors and microcalcifications, in an anthropom orphic breast phantom. The purpose was to evaluate the importance of the digital system "MAMMO 1000" (R2 Technology, Inc., USA) to increase the diagnostic quality in screening-mammography. The mammograms of 174 cases with histologically proved cancer were digitized by laserfilm-scanner (50 /¿m pixels, 12 bit depth). The processor unit analysed the mammograms in real time and marked areas of interests with signs (star for scirrhus, triangle fo r groups of microcalcifications), which were visible on mini-monitors. The staid signs with the correlation at the mammogram s were compared. Results: In 113 (65%) of the 174 cases the system marked the cancer with the correct sign (size 0 .5 1 -1 .5 cm). 43 (38%) of them were a scirrhus, 20 (17.7%) microcalcifications and 50 (44.3%) different com binations of them. In 3 (2%) cases the cancer w as not visible (invasive-lobular carcinoma, ultrasound diagnosis). 57 (33%) were not marked correctly. From these 34 (61%) were densities, 11 (20%) scirrhus, 2 (3%) microcalcifications, 7 (11%) different com binations of them , 3 (5%) other (2 with diffuse increase, 1 metastasis of kidney-cancer). Densities are not possible to mark in this program, that means, the markers were correct in 81% . 51 (89%) of the "unmarked" lesions could be diagnosed very easily, because they had a big size (2 .5 -7 cm) o r they were in an involution-breast. Only in 6 o f all cases the decision was difficult, because they were densities in high-density breasts. Conclusions: The system "MAMMO 1000" is helpful to assist in earlier detection of small breast cancers. (11) breast, one with standard monophasic com pression (MC), the other with BC (a first com pression phase with a 22.5° angled plate, followed by a progressive angle reduction). Mammographie unit: Sophie (Planmed). We considered fo r the two modalities: the evidence of pectoral muscle, the maximal distance (D) between the cutaneous profile and the posterior border of the film, as well as the subjective assessment of the studied amount of breast. Results: Pectoral muscle w as detected in 11 BC and in 4 MC mammograms. D ranged 4 .9 -1 4 .5 (9.8 ± 2.2) cm fo r BC versus 4 .7 -1 4 .5 (9.5 ± 2.2) cm S 82 fo r MC (p < 0.001, paired T test). In 34 patients D was longer with BC than with MC (differences ranged 0 .1 0 -1 .0 0 cm, 0.36 ± 0.23), in 3 was equal for both modalities, in 3 was longer with MC than with BC. In 30/40 patients, BC produced better results than MC at the subjective evaluation. BC did not cause any particular com plaint by the patients. Conclusions: BC seems to be a promising technical improvement fo r X-ray mammography. 14:30 The Skin Electrophysiological Imaging (SEI) enabled us to discover novel class of diagnostic parameters: spatio-tem poral structures (STS) of the skin electrophysiological relief (SER) -chaotic, pulsating and coherent STS (i.e.: initial and induced autowaves), particularly marked at "bioactive" zones (BZ). The aim of this pilot research was to find out some potentialities of SEI for -may be the most proper object o f its application -the breast (there are at least a dozen known BZ of the breast!). Methods and Materials: Two scanners were used: scan areas-20 x 40 (100 X 150) mm., resolution 0.4 (1.5) mm., scan time ~ 20 (120) s.; registered parameters: potential (1), module (2) and argum ent of conductivity at the kHz-(3) and mHz-bands (4). 17 subjects have been investigated. Zones of interest: palpable breast lesions and inflammations of BZ. Test influences: local mechanical and distant mm-EMF (~ 1 mW/sq. sm). Results: At ordinary areas (as well as at similar lesions of the same subject), all four parameters of healthy subjects well correlated with each other (r = 0.7 -0.9 ). Neoplasmata areas (lymphoma nodes) differed by stable central part (r = 0.8 -0 .9 ) and chaotically active border-line, particularly under specifictest influences (up to r = 0.45 per 1 min.). N eoplasm ata and inflammations had significantly different correlation between 1 -4 parameters. Inflammation differed from neoplasm first of all in its negative correlation of (1 ). At BZes, test influences revealed gradient lines of 5 -2 0 mm. long, where the induced waves propagated (speed ~ 7 mm/min, swing-up to 70% above par). The 1 -4 param eters enable us to identify main electrophysiolog ical characteristics of biotissue and, thus, make use of their well known values for various lesions. The possibility of visualizing, abnorm alities of intercellular interactions or/and of aerobic/anaerobic breathing may be of additional, if not of earlier, diagnostic value to conventional anatomical and functional imaging modalities. 14:40 413 Optical mamm ography with a breast scanner using laser light in 4 discrete wavelengths L. Götz, 0 . Schütz, S.H. Heywang-Köbrunner, A. Heinig, J. Buchmann, G. Methfessel, R.P. Spielmann; Halle/D Purpose: Optical laser light imaging with a breast scanner seems to be an interesting method for breast imaging without radiation exposure. The breast is compressed in the same projections as on X-ray mammography. The scanner sam ples amplitude and phase of 4 wavelengths in less than 2 minutes. The calculated images show bet ter contrast than earlier experiences with transillumination. 150 preoperative women have been examined. The scanner images were com pared with X-raymammography, ultrasound and MRI, if available. The breast tissue was also scanned immediately after excision. In an unblinded evaluation 90% of carcinomas (mean size 2.2 cm) could be identified. Problems concerned visualisation of small and preinvasive lesions. Specificity, positive predictive and negative predictive value concerning the exclusive evaluation o f the lesion yielded 35%, 58% and 78% respectively. When the com plete breast tissue was evaluated specificity dropped to 12%. Conclusion: Optical mammography can detect most carcinomas bigger than 1 cm. A differentiation between benign and malign lesions is still insufficient. Results: In benign breast tum ours no enhancem ent was found whereas 25 from 34 malignant tum ours showed scintigraphic enhancement. The tum our size o f not visible carcinomas ranged from 5 -1 3 mm. 4 carcinomas in situ with a size > 10 mm were not detected by scintimammography. Specifitiy and positive predictive value were 100%, sensitivity 67%, and negative predictive value was 80%. The sensitivity o f " T c m-M IBI-scintimammography seems to be limitateti by size and location of the tumour. Therefore " T c m-MIBI-scintigraphy appears not to be suited as a screening method but as a method confined to exceptional cases. 14:55 In all cases the lesion has been found with the probe both on the skin projec tion and in the parenchyma with extreme accuracy. The X-ray o f the specimen has allowed to verify the presence of the lesion and its centricity respect to the resection margins.  Out of 215 patients planned for LC, 31 were converted (14%) to OC. All patients had a sonographic examination performed within 6 months prior to surgery. The sonographic exam inations were scored without knowledge of the surgical outcome (LC or OC). The parameters looked fo r were: gallbladder size, wall thickness, num ber and size of stones, grid, echogenic bile, impaction of stones in the cystic duct and size of the common bile duct. The sonographic signs associated with a higher conversion rate were: gallbladder hydrops, 31 %; contracted gallbladder, 20% ; stone impaction, 21 %; more than 10 stones, 27%. A combination of 2 signs: gallbladder hydrops and stone impaction, 37% ; gallbladder hydrops and more than 10 stones, 100%; more than 10 stones and stone impaction, 100%. Conclusion: Sonographic signs like gallbladder hydrops, contracted gallblad der, more than 10 stones and stone impaction in the cystic duct are more often found in LC patients who eventually need conversion to OC.  We retrospectively analyzed the imaging appear ances of 10 patients with pathologically proved BCA (3 cases) or BCACA (7 cases). CT and MRI presentations were correlated with other imaging studies and pathological findings. Results: All the 7 cases of BCACA revealed multilocular cystic lesions with pap illary projection o r mural nodule. Common bile duct (CBD) and intrahepatic bile ducts (IHD) dilatation (6/7), hepatic lobe atrophy (5/7), wall calcification (4/7), hemorrhage (2/7), and IHD stones (2/7) were seen in some patients. , who had undergone liver transplantation 4 months to 5 years before, were submitted to MRC by using a non-breath-hold, fat suppressed 3D turbo spin echo sequence (TR = 3000 msec, ТЕ = 700 msec, ETL = 128). Indications fo r imaging studies included: scheduled follow -up in asym ptom atic patients (10 patients), cholangitis and abnorm al liver function tests (9 patients). For diagnostic confirmation and for therapeutical procedure PTC w as subsequently performed in 9 cases; in the 10 patients with no symptoms, clinical 6-months follow-up was performed. Results: A stenosis of the anastom osis w as present in 9 out of 19 patients and was correctly evaluated by MRC in all the cases. Intrahepatic stones were correctly detected in 2 patients. Conclusions: MRC is highly accurate in detecting late com plications (i.e. stenosis or ampullary dysfunction) in liver transplanted patients.  In 12 FBI-Dogs (age 11 -14 month, 2 6 -3 3 kg) with experimental aneurysm s endovascular stent graft treatm ent was performed using a covered nitinol stent. Aortic side branches of the aneurysm atic segment w ere patent in 6. Stents were introduced via right femoral access. Two stents w ere placed to cover the aneurysm and to overlap about 1 cm within the aneurysmal sac. Treatm ent results were documented by means of angiography and CT. Results: Aneurysms w ere effectively excluded in all cases. No leakage occurred, neither at the proximal o r distal anchorage site nor at the overlap site o f both stents. However, collateral blood flow was detected within the excluded aneurysm al sacs in cases with patent aortic side branches. Reversed blood flow was detected in lumbar arteries, inferior mesenteric artery or circumflex iliac artery and w as responsible for rest perfusion o f the aneurymal sac. In cases with occluded aortic side branches, aneurysmal sacs were completely excluded. Overlapping placement of covered nitinol stents is feasible and effective fo r endovascular treatm ent of aortic aneurysms. Aoritc side branches m aintain rest perfusion in the aneurysmal sacs and might be embolized before endovascular stent graft treatment. 14:10  Purpose: To define the clinical value of this non-surgical approach we prospectively studied endo-prostheses fo r the treatm ent of infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysms. M aterial and Methods: Two groups involving a total of 137 patients were treated. Group A (n = 8) received straight stent-grafts fo r aortic aneurysm s not involving the bifurcation. Group В (n = 129) received bifurcated nitinol stents covered with woven polyester graft material for aortic aneurysm s involving the bifurcation and common iliac arteries. For follow -up (mean 12.5 months) spiral com puted tom ography and intraarterial angiography were performed. The primary success rate with com plete exclusion of the abdominal aortic aneurysm from circulation was 87.5% fo r group A and 84% for group B. In 4 patients the procedure had to be converted to open surgical repair. Techni cal failures due to primary (n = 16) o r secondary leak (n = 6) could be managed endolum inally in 18 patients, thus resulting in a secondary success rate of 97%. Procedure-related local, remote or system ic com plications occurred in 10% of the patients. A "post-implantation syndrome" with leukocytosis and elevation o f С -reactive protein was observed in all patients. Conclusion: Endovascular treatm ent of infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm is technically feasible, not associated with major complications, and effectively excludes abdominal aortic aneurysm s from circulation.  We studied a total of 10 patients. Most of them were treated by different interventional procedures in the femoropopliteal artery. Spiral-CT-Scans were carried out using double detector technique: reconstruction interval 1.3 mm, 2.5 mm thickness, 10 mm/sec, t = 60 sec, Vol.: 60 cm, CM-applikation 30 sec before scanning, total V.: 140 ml, Flow 4 mm/sec. After processing, images were transmitted via a local network to our workstation (Silicon Graphic Indigo II). Results: In all cases virtual angioscopy could be established by the use of special explorer programs. Angioscopic simulation w as carried out in real time and by video documentation. Vascular plaques and residual stenoses, respec tively could be well visualized. Typical clinical cases will be demonstrated and correlated with the conventional angioscopic findings. Conclusion: Virtual reality angioscopy based on double detector spiral-CT is a promising and non-invasive procedure to dem onstrate vascular pathology comparable to conventional angioscopy. However, further studies have to prove the clinical impact to this new diagnostic modality. To present the results of percutaneous fenestration in patients with lower limb ischaemia following aortic dissection. Materials and Methods: W e present four cases (2 male, 2 female) with ischaemia to a lower limb as a result of com prom ise to the aortic bifurcation by an aortic dissection flap. One patient developed an aortic dissection following aortic valve surgery. A nother had an iatrogenic ilio-aortic dissection created at the time of cardiac catheterisation. The other tw o cases were spontaneous aortic dissections, one patient required surgery after fenestration fo r their type A dissection. All were treated with percutaneous fenestration with a 10 mm angioplasty balloon. The technique of fenestration will be discussed. The patients were followed up with duplex ultrasound imaging o r intravenous digital subtraction angiography. Results: All patients had initially successful fenestration. O ne died as a result of com plications following aortic surgery for a type A dissection. Two had improvement of symptoms at follow up and imaging showed patency of the fenestration. The other patient required repeat fenestration because of recurrence of critical ischaemia in one low er limb. This patient developed acute renal failure and died 2 days after the repeat fenestration. Conclusion: Percutaneous fenestration can be helpful in the m anagem ent of patients with iatrogenic or spontaneous aortic dissections com prom ising the low er limbs. Purpose: Selection of cutoff points (HU) representing "em physem a" is crucial when using com puterized quantification. W e wanted to analyze the influence o f slice thickness and reconstruction algorithm. Material and Methods: Eight healthy men were examined. Slices w ere taken at the carina, 3 cm above and 3 cm below with thicknesses of 1.5, 5 and 10 mm. Images were reconstructed with sharp, standard and smooth algorithm s. The images were analyzed using density masking. The upper limit fo r the mask was varied from -8 7 0 to -9 7 0 HU the low er w as constant at -1 0 3 0 HU. The density mask area was considered representing a percentage "em physem a" of the entire lung area. Curves were constructed com bining the percentage "emphysema" fo r each mask. Results: Slice thickness had more marked influence on the measurements than reconstruction algorithm. Using the same density mask and sharp recon struction algorithm a 15% larger area would have been considered emphyse matous with a slice thickness of 1.5 mm than with a 10 mm. Use o f a sharp S87 algorithm resulted in a 10% larger area than use o f standard o r smooth a t a slice thickness of 1.5 mm. Conclusion: Slice thickness and reconstruction algorithm must be specified when using density masking fo r scientific or clinical work. 14:10 440 Graphic presentation of distribution of em physem a using an autom atic quantitative com puter program M. Boijsen, A. Thylén, F. Nilsson, В. Bake, S. Gustavsson, U. Tylén; Göteborg/S Purpose: Before accepting patients fo r lung-volume reducing surgery the tho racic surgeon w ants to know how homogenous the em physem atous changes are and where the w orst parenchymal destruction is found. Mostly this assess ment is m ade visually from chest radiographs or computed tom ography scans supported by pulm onary function tests. A more objective and reproducable m ethod is desired. Method and Material: A com puter program "Prometheus" was developed. The program automatically calculates the percentage of emphysematous tissue within each slice, using density masking technique. As cut off point for em physem atous attenuation values -9 3 0 HU was chosen. The distribution of em physem a within each hemithorax was then graphically presented. Results: Fifteen patients with severe emphysema were assessed with com puted tom ography and pulm onary function tests before deciding whether to apply lung-volume reducing surgery or not. The automatic quantitation soft w are was used and the graphic presentation showed the difference between left and right, upper and low er parts of the lung. The results were compared with the pulm onary function tests. The graphic demonstration gave the surgeon a much better understanding o f the distribution of the diffuse emphysem a than the visual assessment. This method could be a very im portant tool in the pre-operative assessm ent of severe emphysema. Methods and Materials: Based on single self-organizing neural networks a hierarchical three-level, highly sensitive neural network was developed. GG was defined as an amorphous, extensive property with -7 5 1 HU < GG < -2 9 9 HU. The network w as trained on 10 HRCT scans with and without GG. 120 HRCT scans of 20 patients with suspected pulm onary disease were evaluated prospectively. The network's performance was checked by a radiologist. Frequency and extent of false positive and false negative (not detected) areas of GG w as estimated as percentage of the total area involved. Results: Sensitivity of GG detection by neural networks was 100%, specificity 29% , positive predictive value 83%, negative predictive value 100%. The extent o f true positive GG areas was underestimated by approx. 5% due to delim itation from denser areas (vessels, pleura). Partial volum es (vessels, pleura, diaphragm) and motion artifacts were responsible fo r the low specificity. If only areas > 50 pixels were included the specificity rose to 52%. Conclusion: Autom atic detection and quantification of GG by hierarchical neural networks is sufficiently accurate. Small areas are insignificant, typical pitfalls are partial volum es and motion. This study was designed to investigate the relationship between the am ount of air-trapping as measured on inspiratory and expiratory CT and the degree of air-flow obstruction measured by lung function testing in asthm atic patients. Previous work using a sem i-quantitative CT technique has suggested a relationship between air-trapping on C T and the am ount of airway obstruction on lung function testing. A quantitative C T technique has been devised to investigate this relationship. Methods: 20 patients with severe, chronic stable asthm a had CT scans (1.5 mm sections) on full inspiration and at end-expiration. Cross-sectional area of the lungs w as calculated using an electronic planimeter. A change in cross S88 sectional lung area was calculated by dividing the area a t end-expiration by the area a t end-inspiration and expressing it as a percentage. The asthmatic group was com pared with a group of 50 normal controls i.e. normal CT scans with normal lung function. The results were then correlated with lung function tests including FEV, and RV/TLC. The normal subjects had a mean percentage reduction in crosssectional area to 55% ± 6% i.e. area at end-expiration = 55% of area at end-inspiration. The corresponding figure fo r the asthm atic patients was a mean of 76.3% ± 7% (P < 0.001 ) with a range from 58.2% to 98.4%. In the asthm atic group there was a correlation between change in cross-sectional area as measured at C T and FEV, (P < 0.01 ). Similarly, there w as a correlation between change in cross-sectional area and RV/TLC (P < 0.01 ). Conclusions: The change in cross-sectional area of the lungs in asthmatics as measured on CT scanning correlates with the degree of airway obstruction as measured by FEVt and RV/TLC. Air-trapping is not the only factor in impaired reduction in cross-sectional area, e.g. lung elasticity, but it is a major com ponent. C T may be o f use as a quantitative tool fo r assessing the progress o f asthma and the effect of treatm ent, in addition to traditional lung function data. 14:30  : W e used HRCT images of 5 patients with UIP and 5 healthy patients. 1022 regions of interest (ROI's) w ere classified by the exam iner to be normal, em physematous, ground-glass lesion, intralobular fibrosis, vessel, or bronchus. The classes and the texture param eters calculated in the ROI's were the basis fo r the decision rule. Based on the decision rule, the entire image w as segmented by the system, assigning each pixel to a class. The classification in 1889 new, randomly selected ROI's was compared with the exam iner's diagnosis. The accuracy w as 70.7% . The probability of a correct recognition ("sensitivity") w as 68.7% -80.7% . The probability that a made classification w as correct ("predictive value") was 77.3% -88.1% fo r normal, ground glass and fibrotic regions, but only 16.2% fo r bronchi. Conclusion: Texture param eters are valid criteria to discriminate between different pulmonary tissue alterations. Autom ated tissue recognition using texture criteria can assist the quantitative assessment of HRCT images. However, the recognition of small anatom ical structures may suffer from misclassifications. 14:40 444 New HRCT sem eiotics of "mosaic pattern": C linical utility G. Sallustio, M.H. Colavito, L. Natale, T. Pirronti, P. Marano; Rome/I Purpose: To define sem eiotics o f "mosaic pattern" related to changes of ventilation/perfusion ratio. International literature proposed many models of "mosaic pattern" o r ground glass opacities, due to different physiopathologic conditions; particularly, our aim is to differentiate organic reversible alterations from hemodynamic ones. Consequently we have to analize morphology and densitometry to define perfusion o r ventilation changes, o r initial infiltrative diseases. Study Protocol: HRCT is performed in inspiration and expiration with follow ing data: 1 mm thickness, 20 mm interval, bone filter, FOV less than 30 cm, no contrast medium. Inspiratoy and expiratoy measurements are: lobar and segmentary broncus/artery ratio, mean lobar area and density if air-trapping is present; mean involved lobar area/mean contrallateral normal lobar area ratio in inspiration and expiration. During H R C T lung inspiratoy and expiratory volum es are controlled by a hand-held spirometer. Data are com pared with hemogasanalysis and functional tests: FVC, FEV1, Tiffenau index, FEF be tween 25% and 75% of FVC, FRC, RV, DLCO; with perfusion/ventilation lung SPET: quantitative analysis will be performed on region of interest correspon dent to C T areas. Patients Population: Four groups were enrolled: (1) group I: 10 smokers fo r 10 yrs with absent or mild functional impairment, with or without symptoms (cough and/or catarrh) and normal CXR. (2) group II: 10 patients with moderate functional impairment and normal CXR. (3) group III: 5 patients with suspicion of pulm onary em bolism and CXR negative fo r COPD. (4) group IV: 10 non smokers with known cardiac diseases and absent functional lung impairment, that need CT scan fo r other causes; left atrial pressure will be obtained from echo-Doppler, pulm onary artery pressure from Swan-Ganz catheter, w hile shunt fraction, if present, will be assessed by Nuclear Medicine o r MRI. Exclusion Criteria: severe lung diseases; previous pleuro-pulmonary diseases; previous cardio-pulmonary surgery. Preliminary results will be discussed. To assess the reproducibility of quantitative spirometrie gated CT lung densitometry at defined levels of inspiration in hospitalized patients. Material and Methods: On tw o consecutive days, spirometrie gated CT sec tions were obtained from tw enty hospitalized patients, at 5 cm above and 5 cm below the carina, and at 90% and 10% of the vital capacity. The first CT examination was performed by a radiologist, the second by a technician. The mean, modal and median lung density were calculated as well as the lowest and the highest 10th percentile of the frequency distribution o f CT numbers, its full width at half maximum, and the pixel index. These lung density parameters of corresponding sections of both studies were compared. Reproducibility was expressed as the standard deviation of the signed difference between results of day 1 and day 2 divided by root o f 2. Results: At 90% vital capacity, reproducibility was in both lung zones on the order of 3 -1 4 HU. At 10% vital capacity reproducibility w as worse by approximately a factor of three. Conclusion: Objective m easurement of lung density at spirometrie controlled levels of inspiration is a reproducible method in assessing pulm onary density. At 90% vital capacity the most reproducible CT lung density measurements can be obtained. Results: Most of the tracheobronchial stenoses were caused by primary lung cancer (18/22). In 4 cases stents were placed in patients suffering from bronchial carcinoid, esophageal cancer, Hodgkin's disease or metastatic cancer of the cervix. 18 o f 22 patients received additionally radiation, 9 of 22 were treated with laser ablation. In three cases a dislocation of the stent was noted, after bronchoscopic retraction a new stent could be placed. Localized bleeding occurred only once. Restenoses of three stents could be successfully dilated. No material-defect was seen. Sufficient improvement of the lumen and the respiratory situation was achieved in all cases. The mean survival time was 12 months, in tw o patients the stents are well tolerated since 45 months. Conclusion: Treatm ent of inoperable tracheobronchial stenoses with bronchialstents is a save procedure with immediate improvem ent o f the patient's pulmonary situation. 447 Controlled pneumothorax for biopsy of mediastinal lesions B.B. Wein, N. Dickgreber, R.W. Günther; Aachen/D Purpose: Access to mediastinal masses through the lung may be complicated by uncontrolled pneumothorax and can lead to pulm onary bleeding. Controlled pneumothorax prior to biopsy allow s a safe access to mediastinal masses for large bore biopsies. Materials and Methods: In 6 patients with different mediastinal masses a protective pneumothorax w as established by infusion o f 100 ml C02 and 900 ml sterile air into the pleural space through a special designed atraumatic needle. After biopsy the intrapleural gas was removed. Results: The transpleural, extrapulm onal access was easily achieved. All his tologic specimen allowed detailed diagnoses. One patient showed mediastinal bleeding through the biopsy needle which was stopped by tissue glue. This adverse effects was not due to the described method. Conclusion: Controlled protective pneum othorax allows cutting needle biop sies of mediastinal masses where aspiration cytology yields no secure specific diagnosis and provides a save approach to mediastinal lesions. Material and Methods: One hundred thirty eight CT-guided transthoracic coaxial needle biopsies of pulm onary lesions were perform ed consecutively within 30 months using aspirating (n = 118) or autom ated cutting devices (n = 20). Comparison was performed between extem poraneous, histological and combined cytological and histological results. Factors (lesion size, distance from pleura, type of needle, histological type) influencing perform ances and pneumothoraces (21%) were determ ined as single and multiple dependent variables. Results: Combined cytological and histological analysis increase perform ance (sensitivity = 85%, specificity = 100%, PPV = 100%, NPV = 62% ) compare to histology alone (75%, 100%, 100%, 50% ) and extem poraneous analysis (80%, 93% . 98%, 56%). Performances were significantly influenced by lesion size (p = 0.0003) and histological type of tum or (carcinom a versus lymphoma) (p < 0.0001) as independent variables. Multivariate analysis showed that pneumothoraces were only favored by lesion distant from the pleura. Conclusion: Combined cytology and histology significantly increases perfor mances of CT guided tranthoracic coaxial needle biopsies. Distance from the pleura is the main risk factor fo r pneumothorax. Methods: Ten patients were presenting with clinical sym ptom s 0 -7 2 hours before the investigation, and studied using a 1.5 T scanner (Siemens Vision). The diffusion weighted sequence was a steady state free precession sequence (SSFP), TR/TE = 2 2 /2 -5 ms, pixel size 1.1 x 1.1 mm, 10 averages. The bvalue as a measure for the diffusion w eighting varied from 165-59 5 sec/mm2. Conventional T1 -and T2-weighted SE-sequences were also obtained. Results: 7/10 patients with clinically confirmed TG A showed elevation of signal intensity in the medial hypocampal region unilateral, including 3/10 showed bilateral signal abnorm ality in the diffusion weighted PSFI sequence. 3/10 patients had no observable change in diffusion PSIF. All conventional T1-and T2-weighted imaging was normal in signal intensity. In patients with acute ischemic stroke the aim o f radiologists should be to identify this penumbra o r the brain area which is still accessible for acute intervention. This study was designed to evaluate which imaging modal ity, CCT, conventional MRI, e.g. T2-and proton density weighted imaging, diffusion or perfusion imaging is best suited to detect the whole extent of cerebral ischemia earliest, so that adéquat therapeutic management could be performed within a promising time window. Material and Methods: In 10 male W istar rats ischemic infarction was in duced by endovascular occlusion of the middle cerebral artery. All animals were examined in a 1.0 T whole body MR im ager (Picker, Cleveland, USA). MR and CT-Examination started within 60 minutes after vessel occlusion and were repeated every hour. A diffusion-weighted FSE-sequence was obtained to delineate size and site of the ischemic lesion. Then routine brain imaging with proton density-and T1-weighted spin-echo sequences was performed. In a representative slice at the level of the optic chiam a perfusion-weighted MRI was performed: 60 images were acquired before, during and after admin istration of the Gd-DTPA bolus injection. Immediately after the MR-protocol the anim als were examined with the CT. After the last examination, 6 hours after vessel occlusion the anim als were killed and the ischemic volum e was determ ined using a Histological staining (TTC-staining). Results: Both diffusion and perfusion weighted imaging detect the ischemic area within the first hour. T2-weighted images showed a hyperintensity ear liest after 3 hours, w hereas in T 1 -weighted images hypointensities could be detected first after 4 to 5 hours. In the C T hypodensity within the ischemic hemisphere could be seen first after 3 hours. Conclusion: O ur results show that diffusion-and perfusion weighted imaging are well suited to identify the ischemic area within 1 hour after vessel occlusion. The first changes in T2-weighted images and CT occurred both after 3 hours. Diffusion weighted imaging, however, could detect the early "cytotoxic" edema, which occurs within minutes after the onset of ischemia and perfusion weighted images could show the perfusion deficit immediately after vessel occlusion. 14:20  The aim o f this study was to compare perfusion imaging with quantitative CBF m easurem ents using the iodoantipyrine method. M aterial and Methods: In 31 rats ischemic infarction was induced by occlusion of the middle cerebral artery. Perfusion imaging was performed after 30 min to 240 min occlusion time using a T2"-w eighted FLASH-sequence. The observed signal intensities were converted into concentration-time curves. From these curves rrCBV, MTT, and rrCBF were calculated. Then ,4C iodoantipyrine/100 g body w eight w as injected intravenously to measure CBF quantitatively. A utoradiographic and MR data were com pared in identical coronal sections of the same animals. Results: RrCBF in the ischemic hemisphere was decreased to 85% of the non-ischemic hemispheric value after 30 min occlusion tim e and decreased to 41% after 180 min occlusion time. Residual blood flow in the ischemic hemisphere w as 30% less with autroradiography than the rrCBF measured with MR fo r short occlusion times (< 60 min). For occlusion times o f more than 120 min no significant differences between both methods occurred. The results show a high correlation of regional cerebral blood flow as determ ined by MR perfusion imaging and autoradiography during focal ischemia. It is concluded that MR perfusion imaging is a technique providing reliable information about perfusion. Therefore MR perfusion imaging appears to be well suited for therapy monitoring. 14:30  In 20 rats em bolic ischemia was induced by injecting blood clot suspension into the ICA. 90 minutes after occlusion, anim als were treated with saline (N = 10) and unfractionated heparin (Hoffmann-La Roche, N = 10), respectively. MR data (8 slice diffusion weighted EPI and 4 slice gradient recalled EPI) were obtained beginning 60 min after onset o f ischemia up to 180 min after occlusion using a GE CSI II 2.0 T imaging spectrometer. From these data we calculated the ADC and the cerebrovascular parameters. Results: Although there w as no significant improvem ent in perfusion after treatment, 3 out o f 10 heparin treated anim als showed a marked reduction of MTT and a significant increase in CBV. There w as no significant difference in ADC of heparin and saline treated rats. Conclusion: Multislice diffusion-and perfusion mapping yield reliable param eters fo r early diagnosis and monitoring o f cerebral ischemia. They can be used to monitor different treatm ent strategies and may help to find optimal treatm ent regimens fo r stroke. To install a highly diffusion-weighted sequence on a conventional whole body imager and to analyze its suitability fo r monitoring of focal cerebral ischemia and reperfusion. Material and Methods: W ithin a SSFP-sequence diffusion gradients were inserted in all gradient directions. This sequence was used fo r monitoring cerebral diffusion in rats following endovascular MCA occlusion. 31 rats were examined 1 5 -2 4 0 minutes after occlusion, and 37 rats were examined 0.5 h after reperfusion (occlusion times: 3 0 -3 0 0 minutes). The apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) was evaluated in user-defined regions. Results: W ithin the ischemic lesion we found a significant ADC decrease even fo r short occlusion tim es (AAD C = 12% after 15 minutes). ADC change in the ischemic region increased with increasing occlusion tim e (AAD C = 62% after 240 minutes). After reperfusion, ADC change decreased fo r short occlusion tim es to normal values, w hereas there was an increase in AADC when reperfusion was performed after long occlusion tim es (> 120 min). This study suggests that the developed sequence is capable of producing highly diffusion-weighted images without requiring a special gradient system. The sequence is potentially useful for monitoring cerebral ischemia because it allows a calculation of the ADC change. 14:45 The aim was to compare the capability of gradient-echo (GRE)-EPI, spin-echo (SE)-EPI, and stimulated-echo (STE)-EPI for perfusion imaging in a rat model o f cerebral ischemia. W e were particularly interested in image quality, contrast and susceptibility weighting of the sequences. Material and Methods: In 5 rats cerebral ischemia was induced by endovas cular MCA occlusion. MR experiments were performed on a 4.7 T Bruker Biospec 47/20. For perfusion-weighted imaging we used GRE-EPI, SE-EPI, and STE-EPI acquiring 16 four-slice datasets before and after injection of a Gd-DTPA bolus (A t = 1.4 s). Signal-to-noise-ratio (S/N) and signal-attenuationto-noise-ratio (A S/N ) were computed. Results: GRE-EPI images suffered from distortions due to susceptibility artifacts. Artifacts were widely reduced on the SE-EPI and STE-EPI series thus allowing to depict the ischemic area easily. FID-ΕΡΙ sequence exhibited the best S/N and A S/N. Although with the SE-EPI sequence the smallest signal decrease was achieved, AS/N of SE-EPI w as higher than that of STE-EPI due to the better S/N of SE-EPI. Conclusion: Our results suggest that SE-EPI is best suited fo r perfusionweighted imaging, because it allows to calculate reliable maps of the cere brovascular parameters due to minimal distortion artifacts and high S/N. GRE-EPI should only be used for perfusion measurements of homogeneous structures without abrupt changes in susceptibility.  During a bolus injection of 0.1 mmol/kg Gadolinium-DTPA a series of transversal T2*-weighted images w as recorded. A special software has been developed to calculate the relative concentration of contrast medium and fit a synthetic cun/e on a voxel by voxel basis. For each voxel the functional parameters, rCBV, peak time and rCBF can be derived from a combination of the fit parameters and displayed in a parameter map. 10 patients without and 10 patients with cerebrovascular disease were studied. Results: In patients without cerebrovascular disease rCBV-values of 2.85 ± 0.87 ml/100 g (white matter) and 5.51 ± 0.96 ml/100 g (grey matter) were measured. The mean values of rCBF were 29.2 ± 1 2 ml/100 g/min (white matter) and 55.9 ± 8.9 ml/100 g/min (grey matter). These values correspond well with PET results from literature. In patients with cerebrovascular disease the calculated rCBF is found to correlate with the results of angiography, brain-SPECT and stable Xenon-CT. Conclusion: This technique may be used fo r quantitative measurement and mapping of brain perfusion in the human brain, especially in patients with a cerebrovascular disease. 457 Quantification of regional cerebral hem odynam ics in subcortical vascular encephalopathy K.W. Neff, F. Gückel, C. Sütterlin, A. Schwartz, M. Georgi; Mannheim/D Purpose: In patients with subcortical vascular encephalopathy (SVE), demon strating typical subcortical changes in MRI with signal intensities in T2-and pd-weighted MR images, only little is known about the quantitative changes in subcortical and cortical microcirculation. The quantification of regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) and blood volum e (rCBV) was performed in 15 age-matched normal controls and 33 patients with clinical, neuropsychological and MR tom ographic proven SVE of and excluded m acroangiopathic disease. rCBF and rCBV were quantified using dynam ic susceptibility contrast-enhanced MR imaging based on series of 32 rapid T2*-weighted gradient echo images of 2 different brain sections which were simultaneously acquired during cubital vein Gd-DTPA bolus injection. Results: Significant reduction of rCBV was quantified in subcortical white matter of patients with SVE in com parison to normal controls (mean 2.24 ± 0.56 vs 3.20 ± 0.69 ml/100 g), rCBF reduction w as less than rCBV reduction (25.54 ± 5.92 vs 31.28 ± 6.32 ml/m in/100 g). rCBV and rCBF were not significant reduced in cortical grey m atter (5.56 ± 1.39 vs 6.85 ± 1.48 ml/100 g and 69.83 ± 15.19 vs 67.83 ± 13.39 m l/m in/100 g). Conclusion: Quantification of rCBF and rCBV in patients with SVE dem on strated significant reduction of subcortical microcirculation. To further characterize the vascularity of m eningiom as as an extraaxial lesion before and after partial em bolization by using MR rCBV maps. Materials and Methods: Twenty-seven exam inations of tw enty-three patients (nine partially embolized) were performed on a 1.5-T scanner (Magnetom Vision, Siemens). Conventional MR images (T1W I, T2WI, enhanced T1W I) and dynam ic susceptibility sequences were obtained. During the dynamic sequences, a bolus (0.2 mmol/kg) of gadopentetate dim eglum ine w as injected mechanically. Results: The ratio of tum or rCBV/gray m atter rCBV w as 3.01 ± 1 . 1 8 for untreated tum ors and 0.12 ± 0.09 for em bolized regions. The regional rCBV in embolized meningiomas was significantly low er than that in untreated menin giom as (t test, p < 0.05). Vital tum or tissue showed high rCBV with T1 enhancement (n = 27), o r nonvital tissue low rCBV w ithout T1 enhancement (n = 15, postembolization 9/9). However, also mismatches lackig bolus for mation despite T1-enhancem ent (6/9 postem bolized regions) w as found. 5/18 nontreated and 1/9 treated patients bled during surgery. Conclusion: Maps o f relative regional blood volum e m onitor the treatm ent effect of embolization more precisely than T1-weighted contrast enhanced imaging.  Using perfusion and diffusion MRI, acute changes in CBF, CBV, Blood Tumor Barrier (BTB) permeability and edem a w as mon itored in 6 brain tum or patients one or six hours following dexam ethasone administration. Results: Three patients had BTB breakdown prior to administration of dex amethasone. In these, BTB permeability to Gd-DTPA decreased by 4 0 -7 3 percent after dexamethasone. Five out of six patients showed decrease of CBV of normal gray matter (-5 % , p < 0.05) and of peritumoral gray matter (-1 5 % , p < 0.05) relative to normal white matter. Focal changes in peritum or gray matter CBV as large as 50% were observed within one hour of treatment. In tw o patients, the BTB permeability decreased within one hour. However, the edema, measured by the ADC coefficient of water, showed no resorption of extracellular w ater in these patients. The acute decrease in CBV and stabilization o f the microvascular endothelium to passage of small solutes occur over tim e scales consistent with the known, clinical improvement in brain tum or patients following dex am ethasone treatm ent as well as the half-lives of hypothesized substances responsible fo r these changes. Decrease in edema, however, does not seem to take place over this tim e scale.  The subjects were 16 males and 11 fem ales and their ages ranged from seven months to 16 years and the median age was 23 months. 35 MRI exam s were performed using 0.5 T im ager with axial proton density and T2 weighted images and sagittal and coronal T 1 weighted images. Result: Brain lesions responsible fo r hemiplegia could be depicted in all pa tients. Although most patients (85%) showed unilateral lesions, 15% patients had bilateral lesions. MRI features consisted of cerebral hemispheric destruc tive lesions including porencephaly and encephalom alacia (29%), periventric ular w hite m atter lesions (37%), brain infarction (11%), hydrocephalus (3%), and congenital anom aly of non-lissencephalic cortical dysplasia (18%). Gross hemiatrophy was observed am ong m ost patients (85%) with hemispheric de structive lesions and congenital anomaly, but was not observed in those with infarction and periventricular lesions. Conclusion: MRI was a useful technique fo r the evaluation of the etiology of spastic hemiplegia. There was no apparent correlations between MR features and their gestational ages o r perinatal histories. Most brain lesions seem to be o f prenatal origins. 463 CT reversal sign -A feature of irreversible brain dam age in childhood H. Schulman, L. Läufer, J. Berginer, S. Sofer, Y. Hertzanu; Beer-Sheva/IL Purpose: The C T reversal sign was first described in children with global cerebral anoxia. We evaluated the clinical features, etiology and outcome of children with reversal sign. Materials and Methods: Nineteen children, ranging in age from 1 day to 4 years, with CT reversal sign, were retrospectively analysed. Eight infants had neonatal hypothermia; three suffered from hemorrhagic shock and en cephalopathy syndrome; two had cardiorespiratory arrest; tw o Beduin new borns had traum atic delivery at home, one newborn w as delivered by Cesarean section after a road accident and the other newborn had multiple congenital anomalies Two older children had epileptic attacks (one of them suffered from congenital adrenal insufficiency). The reversal sign was defined as an early CT finding of diffuse brain edem a and necrosis with a reversal of normal density relationship of the grey and white matter, and a relatively increased density of the basal ganglia and cerebellum. It was present in all children. Three patients died. The others had severe developm ental delay and multicystic encephalomalacia on CT. The reversal sign indicates severe anoxic brain injury in child hood. It carries a poor prognosis with irreversible brain damage. It has been previously described in abused children, birth asphyxia, drowning victims, meningoencephalitis and cardiorespiratory arrest. W e present further etiolo gies such as neonatal hypothermia, hemorrhagic shock and encephalopathy syndrome, epilepsy and congenital malformations. Results: Early after the accident areas of echogenecity could be revealed as subcalotal or parenchymatous bleeding, often before the manifestation of neurological deficits while m idline-shifts were noticed in severe injuries. In chronical injuries, especially in battered-child-syndrome subcalotal fluid collections were noticed. Depending on these changes and continous followup cranial CT was performed. Detection o f fractures was possible in nearly all cases, while in three cases a depressed fracture was visualized without having been seen in convetional skull film. Conclusion: After head trauma reliable ultrasound examination of the in tracranial cavity is possible up to an age of 18 months. It allows to distinguish fresh and old injuries and helps to select the cases where C T is needed. In this age we consider ultrasound to be even more im portant than convetional skull film when there is no suspicio o f skull base fractures. Methods and Materials: 24 children at an age of 0 -1 4 were observed. Skull view, tangential screening, ultrasound, C T and three dimensional CT were performed solitaryly or in com bination. Results: Skull film and tangential view revealed the impression fracture in all cases. Celluloid ball fractures were observed only in infants. In two cases transkalottal ultrasound detected a small subdural bleeding with no signs of neurological deficit. In five cases tangential X-ray examination showed a frag ment deviation of more than double thickness o f the skull. In tw o of these children CT revealed dural laceration with one being neurologically inconspiciuous. All children with a fragm ent deviation o f less than double thickness of the skull were neurologically inconspiciuous and CT showed no dural or parenchymatous laceration. In six cases we performed three-dimensional CT which was of great value in the preoperative planning particularly in cases with extensive fractures. Conclusion: Conventional skull film is the basic examination completed by tangential X-ray view which allows to estimate the necessity for CT examination in children with neurological deficit and fo r surgical elevation depending on the fragment deviation. C T should be performed in children with neurological deficit and/or a fragment deviation of more than double thickness of the cranial vault. In extensive fractures three dimensional C T is of great value in the preoperative planning. In infants ultrasound is a valuable method for detection and follow-up o f intracranial bleedings. with Wilson disease and 2 with idiopathic copper toxicosis (Wilson like) were studied. T1 and DP/T2-weighted MRI were performed. Results: In 5 patients with non-W ilson disease T1-weighted images demon strated a bilaterally and symm etrically increased signal intensity throughout antero-inferior hypothalamus involving the medial and lateral proptic area as well as the internal capsule. Increased intensity o f the anterior pituitary gland was also seen in 2 of these patients. T2-weighted sequences demonstrated a bilateral and symmetrical hyperintensity at the level o f the caudate and putamen in 1 patient with W ilson disease, while in the 1 patient with idiopathic copper toxicosis the pattern was superimposable to that in the T 1 -weighted cases including anterior pituitary gland involvement. Conclusion: T1-weighted MRI proved helpful in revealing characteristic but not specific bilateral symmetrical hyperintensity at the level of the hypotha lamus and the pituitary gland w hich appear to be the targets o f various non-W ilson liver diseases as well as idiophatic copper toxicosis. W e were not able to determinate any clinical or biochemical correlations. On the contrary, in T2-weighted sequences the hyperintensity was restricted to the nucleus caudate and putamen in Wilson disease. The dissim ilar pattern might indicate different accumulated substances. 468 The 3D reconstruction of the fetal brain for determ ination of gestational age by MRI J.A.S. Brookes, A. McArthur, W.R. Lees; London/U K Purpose: To achieve the 3D reconstruction o f the in-situ fetal brain by MRI and correlate its appearance with gestational age. Methods and Materials: 5 MRI 3D data sets of aborted fetuses in the second and third trim ester were analysed to obtain 3D surface rendered views o f both the lateral and sagittal, midline projections. These were displayed as a moving image in two planes allowing examination o f the entire external surface of the brain. Results: Satisfactory reconstructions w ere achieved in 3 cases enabling the com parison of the reconstructions with the m acroscopic pathological appearances. The w ork of Dorovini-Zis and Dolman (1977) showed that the external convolutions of the fetal brain in the second and third trim esters cor related closely to microscopic histological developm ent and is now a standard aid to fetal necropsy. In this study, by m eans of 3D com puter reconstruction, we have been able to recreate this examination of the external surface of the brain non-invasively, in-situ and without requiring 8 days preservation before dissection. The information derived may prove o f use both in supporting the pathological perinatal necropsy and extending the information derived from the MRI perinatal examination when consent fo r necropsy is not available.  In 30 patients volum e and injection time necessary fo r first and hom ogeneous contrast enhancement in the superior Vena cava were determ ined after cubital application. Additionally 60 patients were ran dom ized into 3 groups (n = 20) receiving 40 ml, 20 ml and 0 ml of NaCI-bolus injection at 2.5 ml/s subsequent to contrast medium application. Scanning protocols were evaluated fo r duration of aortic enhancement. Results: First and hom ogeneous enhancement in the superior Vena cava occurred after 11 s (31 ml) respectively 15 s (44 ml). Injection protocols with 40 ml and 20 ml of NaCI provided a significantly longer aortic enhancement (19 s) com pared without NaCI (14 s; p < 0.05). Bolus injection of 20 ml NaCI overlapped duration of aortic enhancement fo r 2 seconds w hereas 40 ml of NaCI-bolus exceeded aortic enhancement by 7 seconds. Conclusion: Bolustracking with subsequent injection of 20 ml NaCI-bolus provides extension of maximum contrast enhancement in the aorta for 4 seconds. 14:10 The best contrast of the pelvic vessels was achieved when the third spiral-scan w as started immediately after the second spiral-scan has ended. Increasing this delay (45 s, 60 s) leads to measurably reduced contrast in the pelvic region, with a statistically significant reduction in the iliacal arteries (p < 0.05). Conclusion: For routine abdom inal and pelvic CT in spiral C T mode we recommend a start delay of 50 s after injection o f 120 ml contrast with a flow of 3.0 ml/s and a minimal possible delay (in our case: 20 s) between the liver and the lower abdomen spiral-scans to guarantee an optimal contrast in major vessels. S 94 The Bosniak criteria were used as "gold standard" to classify lesions. Two radiologists also evaluated the scans using a 5-point scale to assess lesion conspicuity. The num ber o f masses < 1.5 cm detected on CMP scans (n = 95) was significantly lesser than on NP scans (n = 184) (p < 0.01). Differences in enhancement between renal cortex and lesions were 141 ± 4 6 HU during the CMP and 129 ± 38 HU during the NP while difference between renal medulla and lesions increased from 45 ± 39 HU to 125 ± 34 HU (p < 0.01). The conspicuity score averaged 2.2 ± 0.3 fo r masses in the CMP vs 3.4 ± 0.1 for masses in the NP (p < 0.01). For lesions < 8 mm (n = 62), 36% could be characterized on CMP scans, and 64% on NP scans. For lesions 8-15 mm in maximum diameter, 57% were classified on CMP scans, and 79% on NP scans. There were significant differences in attenuation values between the different ROI circles. False-positive results (n = 8) occurred only on CMP scans because of lack of enhancement of renal medulla. Conclusion: NP scans provided greater lesion detection, better lesion visu alization, and better characterization of renal lesions < 1.5 cm than CMP scans. However, reliance on absolute CT attenuation measurements can lead to erroneous classification of cysts as neoplasms, as reflected by a number of lesions which demonstrated a decrease in attenuation of more than 10 HU between the CMP and NP. The diam eter of the ROI circle should be maximized to the diam eter o f the lesion when measuring such lesions. 14:30 473 Solid renal masses: Improved characterization with multiphasic helical CT R. Stacher, F. Kammerhuber, К. Preidler, T. Riepl, D.H. Szolar; Graz/A Purpose: Helical CT scanners now allow sequential corticomedullary phase (CMP) and nephrographic phase (NP) scans of the entire kidney to be obtained within a single breath-hold and during a single bolus injection of contrast material. The purpose of this study was to assess the potential o f thin-section helical CT imaging performed during the CMP and NP of contrast enhancement to classify solid renal masses and to correlate helical CT features obtained at CMP and NP images with pathologic findings. Materials and Methods: High-resolution helical CT o f the kidney (5-mm colli mation, 7.5-mm table feed, 4 mm-increments, 120 kVp, 292 mA) was perfomed in 52 patients (56 lesions) with solid renal m asses before and after IV bolus power injection o f 120 mL nonionic contrast material (2.5 mL/sec). Image data on size, attenuation, pattern o f contrast enhancem ent, presence and type of calcification, and cyst wall were analyzed on unenhanced and both CMP and NP scans. Differences in lesion-kidney densities and attenuation values o f re nal vein and inferior vena cava were measured. Three radiologists also used a 5-point score system to determ ine lesion visibility subjectively. Histopathology was obtained in all cases. Results: Of 56 renal masses, 45 (80% ) w ere malignant, and eleven (20%) were benign. Thirty-tw o masses (57% ) were smaller than 3.0 cm while 24 (43%) measured 3.0 cm or more in maximum diameter. Mean differences in enhancement between renal cortex and masses were 98 ± 33 HU during the CMP and 84 ± 21 HU during the NP while differences between renal medulla and masses increased from 50 ± 28 HU on CMP scans to 111 ± 30 HU on NP scans (p < 0.001). The conspicuity score averaged 2.9 ± 0.3 for masses in the CMP vs 3.5 ± 0.2 for masses in the NP (p < 0.001). Heterogeneous enhancement of masses correlated well with the presence of acellular regions (r = 0.03). Renal vein enhancement w as significantly greater during the CMP (153 ± 40 HU) than during the NP (101 ± 25 HU) (p < 0.001). Conclusion: Multiphasic thin-section helical C T improves characterization of solid renal masses. The CMP scans allow a more accurate assessment of re nal vein involvement in renal malignancies, while NP scans are advantageous in detection and classification of small solid masses. The NP should be utilized when only monophasic scanning is used to classify solid renal masses. 14:40  The combination of higher vascular and parenchymal enhance ment after injection of the isotonic agent may represent a different quality of tissue enhancement. Such an enhancem ent would be characterized more by a higher contribution of the blood pool com partm ent to absolute enhancement levels than by a contribution of the interstitial com partment. Further studies are needed to determine whether the use o f isotonic agents effects lesion conspicuity. 14:50 (5). In 22 patients a primary ovarian carcinoma was suspected and in 6 recurrent disease. Results: Peroperatively peritoneal carcinomatosis was found in 13 patients; only in 2 cases CT suggested peritoneal metastases. However, in 10/13 women CT-P indicated peritoneal spread. The 3 missed cases of carcinomato sis showed mainly flat lesions. Overall sensitivity was 15% fo r CT and 77% for CT-P. Overall specificity fo r CT was 92%, but decreased to 61% fo r CT-P. Material and Methods: Two liposomal, iodine-loaded contrast agents (BR2 and BR21, 280 and 310 mg iodine per ml, respectively) and a conventional extracellular contrast agent (iomeprol, 300 mg iodine per ml) were injected at 5 different doses (0 .5-2 .5 ml/kg body weight) as a bolus in a total of 60 healthy, male rabbits (3 -5 anim als per dose and substance). Following the injection, repeated CT exam inations were performed over a tw o-hour period (44 scans). Images were evaluated quantitatively. Results: Peak enhancement of the liver immediately after injection of BR2 or BR21 was significantly higher than that after iom eprol (p < 0.05), and reached up to +100 HU (2.5 ml/kg BR21). The effect was dose-dependent. C om pared with extracellular iomeprol, the time range of sufficient liver enhancem ent (> +50 HU) was prolonged substantially by the liposomal agents, demonstrating a plateau-like enhancement for at least tw o hours. Conclusion: BR2 and BR21 are promising liposomal contrast materials for CT providing an increased and prolonged liver enhancement. 47 7 Iodine-free liver-specific contrast m edia for com puted tom ography G. Schuhmann-Giampieri, M. Bauer, W.-R. Press, P. Muschick, S. Wagner, W. Krause; Berlin/D The study was performed to evaluate whether metal chelates of the ethoxybenzyl-DTPA (EOB-DTPA) type are useful contrast agents for Computed Tomography (CT). Materials and Methods: Nine metal ions, preferentially from the lanthanide group, were com plexed with the EOB-DTPA ligand. The C T attenuation was measured in aqueous solution in com parison to iodine. In rats acute tolerance, kinetic stability and liver accumulation was investigated fo r all metal chelates w hereas cardiovascular tolerance w as measured fo r three selected metal chelates following single intravenous injection o f 0.5 mmol metal/kg BW. For these selected chelates liver imaging was performed in VX-2 tum or bearing rabbits using a Spiral-CT at 0.7 mmol metal/kg BW. In vitro the absorption of X-rays w as higher for all metal chelates when com pared to iodine (mg metal/ml versus mg iodine/ml). In vivo the kinetic stability of the metal chelates differed widely. Acute and cardiovascular tolerance was good fo r all metal chelates tested. No difference was found regarding liver accumulation in rats. In rat liver concentrations of 1 μ mol metal/g W T were achieved corresponding to a net increase of about 16 Hounsfield Units (HU). In rabbits a net increase of 27 HU was m easured with a clear differentiation o f the tum or from the surrounding tissue. Conclusion: Metal chelates of the EOB-DTPA type seem to be efficient and well tolerated as iodine-free liver-specific contrast media fo r CT. The purpose of the study w as to evaluate the use of CT in the management of patients with unstable blunt abdominal trauma. We examined 41 patients with abdom inal traum a using noncontrast dynamic CT. In 17 patients a con trast dynam ic CT was also performed. Diagnosis was confirmed surgically in 21 patients. On CT, 25 patients had hemoperitoneum ; 13 patients had splenic, 12 hepatic, 6 pancreatic, 8 bowel and mesenteric, 12 renal, 2 vascular injuries; 7 had retroperitoneal and 2 adrenal hematomas. All but 5 lesions (3 renal, 1 pan creatic and 1 splenic), were hypodense when the C .T was performed earlier than 8 hours of the injury. Postcontrast studies (n = 17), revealed 4 splenic, 3 hepatic, 1 pancreatic, 3 renal, 1 adrenal and 2 bowel and mesenteric injuries that were not shown on noncontrast CT. Surgical confirmation (n = 21) of our C T diagnosis w as obtained in 81.81% of splenic, 66.66% of hepatic, 80% o f pancreatic, and 100% of renal, retroperitoneal and bowel and mesenteric injures. The majority of our false diagnosis (positive o r negative) was obtained with noncontrast studies. Conclusions: CT is the best method for evaluation and management of patients with unstable abdominal traum a, provided that it is available "next door" to the em ergency room. The majority of lesions appear hypodense. The contrast injection, w hen feasible, reveals hidden lesions on initial scans. 14:20 x 256, FOV 350 mm, SL thickness 8 mm, 18 SL in a breathhold of 19 see) at 1.5 Tesla using a body phased array coil. Signal characteristics in terms of signal-to-noise (S/N) and contrast-to-noise (С/N) ratios for organs and lesions w ere calculated and compared. Organ delineation, visualization of anatomical structures as well as of pathological lesions, and artifacts were qualitatively assessed by three readers and fo r the two sequences statistically compared (Student-t). Results: Regarding S/N and С/N HASTE was slightly superior to TSE imaging (p < 0. 04) fo r the liver, spleen, pancreas, and the kidneys, and for (hepatic) lesions. In about 63% o f cases, TSE showed significantly more artifacts than HASTE, mostly arising from inhomogenous, signal-intense fatty tissue o r from cardiac and vascular pulsation. HASTE was much more stable to susceptibility artifacts originating from air/soft-tissue interfaces. Conclusion: In breathhold imaging, HASTE imaging proved to be superior to TSE in T2-w eighted imaging o f the upper abdomen. One drawback might be that HASTE is not suited fo r SPIO enhanced imaging due to its stability to susceptibility. 481 Mesenteric blood flow quantification with MR imaging before and after meal: Results in healthy volunteers A. Scipioni, С. Catalano, A. Laghi, G. Suma, A. Messina, F. Assael, P. Pavone; Rome/I The aim of this w ork is to evaluate the possibility o f using the MRI fo r quantifying the mesenteric vein blood flow, that is similar, approximately, to the total intestinal blood flow. Material and Methods: Nine healthy volunteers have been studied, before and after meal, using a 0.5 T m agnet (Philips Gyroscan TS II) with high gradients power, using a phase contrast technique (PC) to measure the blood flow (TR = 33 ms, TE = 6.8 ms, FA = 30°, Matrix = 128 x 256, S1Th = 5 mm). The flow quantification is obtained using a specific software and positioning a ROI around the vassel. Results: After a meal the blood flow measurement of the superior mesenteric vein has demonstrated a tree tim es increase o f the value obtained before meal, with a progressive reduction of the blood flow in the following 60 minutes. The MR cine phase-contrast technique has been valid to quantify the flow at a mesenteric level on healthy volunteers, before and after the meal. This technique can therefore be proposed fo r a non invasive study o f patients with a suspected chronic mesenteric blood supply deficiency. 14:40 482 Contrast-enhanced 3D MRA and determ ination of flow reserve of the superior m esenteric artery T.F. Hany, M. Schmidt, A.W. Schoenenberger, J.F. Debatin; Zurich/CH Purpose: Evaluation of an MR-based m orphologic and functional assessment o f the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) in healthy volunteers during fasting and oral stimulation as a non-invasiv alternative to conventional angiography. Material and Methods: In 8 volunteers (6 f/2 m, mean age 23 y) were imaged in a 1.5 T MR system (Signa, Echospeed). Flow was quantitated in the SMA, just distal to its take-off using a breathheld segmented к -space PC acquisition (TR/TE 45°) in a plane perpendicular to the SMA. Subsequently a contrast-enhanced 3D MRA data set (TR/TE 3.9, 1.5 ms, flip 40°, 256 x 160, FOV 2 6 -3 2 cm, slicethickness 1.8 -2.2 cm, 44 coronal contiguous slices) was acquired following autom ated injection o f Gd-DTPA (o.3 mmol/kg), imaging w as performed twice: once while fasting and once following oral stimulation with a standard 475 kcal meal. For analysis average flow rate, average velocity, the diam eter o f the SMA and the visibility of the SMA divided into 3 segments (4 cm each) and its branches w as determ ined. The visibility o f the m ajor branches was characterized on a 4-point scale. Results: Before stimulation flow rates ranged from 74 to 158 ml/min (mean 111.7 ml/min), velocity 3 .9 -1 0 .7 cm /s (mean 5.1 cm/s), after stimulation mean flow rose to 468.5 ml/min (127-9 90 ml/min (p < 0.001). In all 8 volunteers the SMA was visible over the proximal 12 cm. Visibility of the m ajor branches was sufficient (2.8) before stimulation and good to excellent (3.6) following stimulation. Combined functional and m orphologic MR-based assessment of the superior mesenteric artery appears most promising. Initial clinical data will be presented. x 512, flip angle 4 5 -5 5°) was used. 20 to 40 cc of Gd-DTPA were administered manually over approxim ately 18 sec. The scanning was started with a delay o f 5 sec after beginning the injection. In 10 patients a delay of 35 sec was used fo r assessing the portal venous system. MRA was statistically compared to conventional angiography. Results: USTE MRA routinely could visualize abdominal arteries (abdominal aorta, hepatic, splenic, renal, lumbar arteries) as well as the portal venous system up to second order branches. There was an excellent correlation to conventional angiography (R = 93%). There were no limitations due to flowvoid artifacts or in-plane saturation effects. Only in a few cases (3/40) there was a degradation in image quality due to patient motion or problem s in timing the contrast bolus. Hepatobiliary system, pancreas, spleen and kidneys were evaluated and the findings of US and CT were com pared with each other. Results: Focal or diffuse fatty infiltration of the liver was seen in 10 (21%), that of the pancreas was seen in 18 (45% ) patients. Two patients with fatty liver showed pseudomasses with lobular boundaries and patchy fatty infiltration. 11 patients (23%) had periportal hyperechogenicity on US. The gallbladder was smaller than normal (m icro gall bladder) o r not visualized in 13 patients (26%). Pancreatic calcifications were present in 4 of the patients (10%) on CT. 14 patients had one of the following findings concerning the kidneys: diffuse cortical hyperechogenicity, medullary o r perimedullary punctate hyperechogenic foci, cortical cyst and nephrolithiasis. Fatty liver, gall bladder and renal findings had no relation with increased age while fatty pancreas and hyperechogenic liver were more frequent with increased age. To test feasibility o f a nonsurgical terminolateral anastom osis pre serving axial vascular patency. A sutureless end-to-side anastom osis was designed by combining one stent-graft and one stent in a Y-shaped stent-in-stent configuration. The stent graft was partially inserted into the vessel with a major extraluminal portion while the stent was com pletely inserted. Side holes in both stent and stent graft provided patency of both bypass and vascular lumen without being bridged by stent structures. In three sheep, an arteriovenous fistula between right carotid artery and left jugu lar vein was created percutaneously by performing an arterial term ino-term inal and a venous terminolateral anastom osis that were connected by a loop tube. PTA or insertion o f six different stent models into the common iliac artery were performed in general anesthesia using the transcarotid approach. The Wallstent, Palmaz stent, Strecker tantalum and Nitinol stents, Memotherm Nitinol stent and hexagonal stent were used. All the pigs were killed immediately after the procedures, and after perfusion fixation the damage to the endothelium evaluated by scanning electron microscopy. The part of the arteries treated using PTA had been completely denuded of endothelium. The endothelium was more dam aged after insertion of the balloon-expandable stents and the stents with more holes in the mesh. Most preserved endothelium was seen after insertion of the self-expandable stent with large holes and a little shorter in expansion. Conclusion: Insertion of the self-expandable stents with large holes in the mesh without previous PTA causes less dam age than PTA or insertion of balloon expandable stents than stents with small holes in the mesh. and included Doppler ultrasound at 1 ,3 ,6 ,1 2 , and 24 months and angiography at 6 months. Results: Immediate technical success was achieved in 96%. The anklebrachial index im proved in average from 0.43 to 0.82 after the intervention. Primary and secondary patency rate at 6 months follow-up were 56% and 68% respectively. Restenoses occurred at the margins of the stent-graft in 24% . Following the intervention tw o thirds of the patients experienced local pain and fever. Conclusion: D espite high technical success rate o f stent-graft treatm ent in patients with long distance occlusions of fem oropopliteal arteries, long-term patency rates are poor. Local pain and fever following graft placement may be related to inflam matory reactions against the graft. 14:25 M ethods and Materials: 15 pelvic UCNS (9.8 ± 1.4 mm diameter, 55 ± 20.2 mm length) in 12 patients and 20 CNS (4 pelvic, 17 femoral stents, 6.6 ± 1.7 diameter, 64.6 ± 28.6 mm length) in 14 patients were evaluated with IVUS at 13.4 ± 7.2 (UCNS) and 10.6 ± 5.9 (CNS) months after implantation. Maximum stenosis and area of neointim a formation were measured. Qualitative analysis o f plaque com position and lesion topography were also assessed. Results: Maximum stenoses of 14.8 ± 8.8% in UCNS and 45.7 ± 26.5% in CNS (p < 0.01) were found. Maximum plaque area was 9.2 ± 6.9 mm2 (UCNS) and 26.6 ± 16.2 mm2 (CNS) (p < 0.01). Neointimal plaques were predom inately soft and eccentric in both stent types. Conclusion: IVUS revealed larger plaque areas and higher graded stenoses in covered nitinol stents w hen com pared to uncovered nitinol stents. Eccentric soft lesions are preferred in both stent types. 14:45 , 12 o f them as an elective procedure and 2 o f them in an emergency situation. The aneurysm s were located in the pelvic arteries (n = 7), in the groin (n = 2), in the subclavian artery (n = 1) in the fem oro-popliteal arteries (n = 4). 11 aneurysm s were of atherosclerotic origin 3 aneurysm s were related to local inflammation. Results: Transfemoral (n = 12), transbrachial (n = 1), and transpopliteal (n = 1) endovascular exclusion was successfully perform ed in 13 o f 14 patients. 1 patient with a huge iliac aneurysm required surgical repair because of dislodgement of the stent graft after deployment. All Aneurysms were completely excluded as proven by post-procedural angiogram s and color Doppler US and helical C T in the follow-up examinations. During the observation period of 4 to 32 months 2 patients with graft thrombosis located in the groin and in the popliteal artery were observed. Early results indicate that endolum inal repair of arterial aneurysms is a promising alternative treatm ent to surgery. Major advantages are low mor bidity and rapid recovery of the patients. A new approach to inflammatory aneurysms-exclusion by endoluminal treatm ent seems to be possible. In small calibre vessels stent throm bosis due to neointimal hyperplasia with consecu tive lumen obstruction at the end of the graft remains a problem to be solved in the future. To investigate the histologic findings of previously described perivas cular reactions against Dacron-covered Cragg endoprostheses using a swine model. Material and Methods: 8 carotid aneurysm s in 8 fem ale swines were treated with Dacron-covered Cragg endoprostheses (Cragg Endopro System, Min-Tee, Bahamas). One untreated carotid aneurysm served as a control for histologic examination. After sacrificing the anim als 5 /<m paraffin sections were obtained and stained with hematoxin-eosin and Elastica van Gieson solution. Results: Histologic evaluation of the treated arteries revealed fibroblasts, hemosiderin deposits, calcification, and neovascularization. An inflammatory reaction with granulocytes was seen both in the vessel lumen and in the vessel wall along the Dacron cover. In 3 cases, inflammatory reaction was severe, in 2 cases moderate, and in 3 cases mild. A foreign body reaction with polynuclear giant cells lining the Dacron cover was seen in all specimens. The untreated control vessel showed no inflammatory reaction. The biocompatibility of Dacron-covered Cragg endoprostheses seems to be limited by an inflam matory reaction which may be caused by the Dacron cover. The degree of stenosis on DSA and IVUS were com pared for each location. Morphological features of the stents and stenoses were also assessed. R esults: 23 (DSA) versus 8 (IVUS) stents were found without stenoses. 21 stenoses (DSA; < 25%: n = 8, < 50%: n = 7, < 75%: n = 4, < 99% : n = 2) versus 36 stenoses (IVUS; < 25% : n = 20, < 50% : n = 10, < 75%: n = 3, < 99%: n = 3) were assessed. In average, DSA underestimated the grade of stenoses by 15.2 ± 6.8% compared to IVUS (p < 0.01). A good correlation was found between DSA and IVUS in the detection of concentric or eccentric stenoses > 25%. IVUS revealed incomplete stem-expansion in 10 cases versus 3 cases on DSA. Conclusions: DSA underestimates stenoses in stents and stent grafts. IVUS is superior to DSA in the detection of incomplete stent-expansion. instrumental pattern of acute respiratory insufficiency and signs from minimal to severe of non cardiogenic alveolar edema on chest Xray underw ent CT standard examination in the first 2 -7 days of symptomatology. Eight of them underwent a second examination after 5 -1 5 days. Diagnostic signs of ARDS and presence o r not of pleural effusion were evaluated. Afterward, on each scan of the examinations areas of lung parenchym a with Hounsfield Unit (HU) values between -5 0 0 and -1 0 0 0 HU were measured and on the basis of them total volum es of areated lung parenchyma and their percentages were calculated with our method (Radiol Med 90: 41 0-41 7, 1995) slightly modified. Then were studied the correlations between prognosis and the presence o r not of pleural effusion and with the variations in well aereated lung parenchyma percentages. Results: At first examination in 10 cases diagnosis, underestim ated with chest Xray, was made with CT; the mean percentage o f well aereated lung parenchyma was 34.56%. A good correlation (p < 0.05) was founded between the absence of fluid effusion, "dry lung" , and bad prognosis (9 of 11 pts., 81.7% ) and between its presence, "w et lung" , and good prognosis (4 pts. of 5, 80%). Another good correlation (p < 0.05) was between the increase of percentage of well-aereated lung parenchyma and the good prognosis in pts. with double control. The aim o f this study was to evaluate the CT sequelae of AR DS but particularly, their functional significance. Methods and Materials: HRCT images of 19 patients (12 male, 7 fem ale; mean age = 40.7 ± 1 9 years) were evaluated by tw o observers. Scans were scored for the extent o f decreased attenuation, coarse reticular pat tern, ground-glass opacification, emphysem a and bronchial abnormalities. M orphological-functional relationships were examined. Results: A reticular pattern was the most common single abnorm ality (n = 17), was sited anteriorly in 13/17 cases (76%), and w as more extensive in the middle lobe and lingula than in either upper or low er lobes (p < 0.005, p < 0.007 respectively). A reticular pattern was positively related to the ratio o f residual volume to total lung capacity (RV/TLC) (p = 0.001) but negatively correlated with gas transfer (p = 0.05) and forced vital capacity (p = 0.03). A ground-glass pattern (n = 9) was also positively correlated with RV/TLC (p = 0.005). Decreased attenuation (n = 14), em physem a (n = 5), and bronchial abnorm alities (n = 26) were not functionally significant on m ultivariate analysis. In ARDS survivors, a reticular pattern is the most com m on CT feature. This pattern is associated with air-trapping with functional characteris tics usually associated with em physema. The anterior distribution may reflect the more pronounced effects of barotraum a to the non-dependent lung in acute ARDS. 14:20  In 58 intensive care patients with suspected ARDS, CT was carried out by applying continuous 10 mm slices and additional 2 mm HR scans in breath hold. The images were separately analysed fo r a variety of defined criteria by three experienced readers who were blinded fo r clinical informations. CT diagnosis w as compared with the clinical diagnosis. Results: 26 of the 58 patient fulfilled the clinical criteria of ARDS following the lung injury score. The C T sign best correlated with the diagnosis w as a ventro dorsal gradient of parenchymal density with ground glass opacities. HR-CT was significantly superior to conventional CT in depicting this sign especially in cases of discrete changes. Peribronchovascular thickening, pneum othorax or pleural effusion have not been found to be significantly correlated with ARDS diagnosis in this study. Overall diagnostic accuracy was 90% fo r HR-CT vs 84% fo r conventional CT. Conclusion: HR-CT as additional procedure improved the diagnostic value of CT especially in early stages of ARDS in which appropriate therapeutic management is most effective. To describe two cases of extensive barotrauma with spinal involve ment following severe asthm atic attacks without evidence of traumatic and/or ventilator-induced pulm onary Injury. Methods and Materials: Two acutely distressed patients with history of previ ous severe asthm a attacks were admitted. No blunt o r penetrating traum a was present in both cases. Clinical conditions and radiographic findings suggested preliminary C T evaluation that revealed extensive presence of extra-alveolar gas a t interstitial, subcutaneous and mediastinal levels (barotrauma) with unsuspected rachls involvement. Results: Barotrauma is a potentially lethal com plication of mechanical venti lation w hereas severe asthm a is considered in this setting only a predisposing condition. Occurrence of barotrauma in the absence of mechanical ventilation is very rarely seen and reported as well as that of pneumorachis, always related of basilar skull fracture and spinal instrumentation. Pneumorachis fol lowing asthma-induced barotraum a represents a never previously reported com plication of asthma, whose occurrence is probably related to subtle air mi gration via thoracic nerve root sleeves and/or disruption of pleural/meningeal planes. Conclusion: High degree of suspicion must be paid in the management of asthm atic patients in the presence o f acute respiratory distress. As reported here, asthma-induced barotrauma and related com plications (pneumorachis) m ust be suspected and thus promptly diagnosed by means of CT evalua tion, even in the absence of mechanical ventilation and/or traumatic chest injury. 14:55 Results: 64 thoracostom y tubes were evaluated. Malpositioning was found in 26 cases (40%). One tube was found in the chest wall and 25 were found intrapulm onary o r wraped in parenchyma. Only th e chest wall malposition was detected on a plain radiograph as well. A persistent pneum othorax was found in 12 cases of malpositioned tubes. Conclusion: Malpositioning of thoracostom y tubes occurs with a high fre quency when tubes are placed under emergency room conditions. Single plain chest radiographs frequently do not detect malpositioned tubes. CT is superior to plain film chest radiography in the evaluation o f thoracostomy tube placement. Tube replacem ent can be effectively guided by CT. Results: We could include 7 patients (5 male, 2 fem ale, mean age 35 years). All had pneumothoraces which were persistent inspite o f suction drainage. 6 patients had a pneumomediastinum on conventional chest X-rays. In 5 patients one additional hint to the diagnosis w as the cervical emphysema, recognized on lateral views of the cervical spine. Contrast media enhanced thoracic CT were obtained in all cases and showed additional atelectases and lung contusions in 4 patients. The tracheal rupture could only be proven by bronchoscopy, w hich w as acquired in all patients. Conclusion: Tracheal rupture due to blunt chest traum a occurs rarely. Keyfindings were all provided by conventional chest X-ray, a sensitive additional diagnostic tool is CT. The diagnosis could only be proven by bronchoscopy, which is m andatory in all suspicious cases and remains gold standard. In a retrospective study of 15 patients we compared em piric size determ ination of DLT by experienced anaesthesiologists with the size determ ined by 3D SCT. 25 patients were examined prospectively and 3D-reconstructions of the tracheobronchial tree were generated from routine preoperative SCT. 3D SCT of different sized DLTs were acquired with standardized magnification factors. They were superimposed on patients' tracheobronchial trees by interactive com puter simulation or tem plate to deter mine the size of the adequate DLT. C T determ inations were clinically controlled by endoscopy, cuff volum e and blood gas parameters. Results: 3D SCT reliably visualized trachea, main, and upper lobe bronchi. In the retrospective study the CT-determined DLTs differed from the anaes thesiologists choice in 4/15 patients. In 3 of them intraoperative management problem s had occurred. In prospective group 24/25 DLTs matched perfectly. The cuff volum e was always in the optimal range. The blood gas parameters S 1 0 0 were significantly better than in the retrospective group. There was a lower incidence of intraoperative management problems. Conclusion: Preanaesthetic 3D SC T of the tracheobronchial tree should be used to select adequate DLTs, and to reduce com plications and intraoperative management problem s in one-lung-ventilation. Progress with regard to non-invasive imaging of the cardiovascular system has not been limited to a single modality. Instead we have seen the introduction of ultrasound contrast media vastly expanding the clinical utility of duplex sonog raphy, as well as the availability of progressively faster spiral CT scanners allowing depiction of w ider vascular territories in greater detail. Finally we have witnessed the emergence of ultrafast, contrast-enhanced 3D MR angiographic techniques, which permit the depiction of an entire vascular territory within a convenient breathhold lasting less than 30 sec. Following a brief discussion of the theoretical concepts, upon which the three non-invasive cardiovascular imaging modalities are based, this presentation will launch into a detailed, comparative discussion focussing on three vascular territories: the thoracic aorta, the abdominal aorta and its branches with particular em phasis on the renal arteries, and finally the pelvic arteries. Advantages and disadvantages of each of the relevant non-invasive imaging modalities will be illustrated based on various vascular pathologies. In addition, different image postprocessing techniques will be illustrated. The presentation hopes to provide a more thorough understanding of the technical basis, clinical indications as well as limitations of alternative noninvasive modalities for imaging o f the cardiovascular system. Increasingly sophisticated procedures in imaging and interventional tech niques demand optimised imaging methods and equipment. The laboratory equipment's need to provide flexibility and safety to handle any invasive imaging method and intervention. Angiography is the main invasive imaging technique for diagnostic and inter ventional radiology. The decision regarding equipment m ust take into consid eration reliability and ease of use fo r the physician as well as patient's safety, including stringent aseptic technique and equipm ent capabilities regarding monitoring and emergency. Interventional radiology laboratories generate high ambient scatter and leakage doses. The presentation will review the radiation safety problem s fo r operators and patients and how to reduce the doses to acceptable limits. CT is the standard form of imaging guidance fo r needle biopsy and interven tional techniques of the bones: applications and techniques will be described. Problems inherent in C T angiography will also be discussed. Ultrasound has emerged as another m ajor imaging guidance of many inter ventional procedures and has proven to be easy, economical and safe. The use o f intravascular US will be briefly discussed. Finally a look to the future will include MR interventional techniques. Beside a dedicated design o f the MR unit, especially MR imaging-com patible tools are under development. Children present with a variety of lower limb abnorm alities during growth. Some o f these are congenital and are related to skeletal dysplasias. Most, however, are acquired lesions during growth. The clinical presentation of these conditions, such as Perthes' disease, occult traum a and athletic in juries, will be discussed, together with the radiological investigations and their appropriateness. The com monest symptom com plex in relation to the lower limb is clinical pre sentation with hip or knee pain, or a limp. The causes vary quite considerably, depending upon the presenting age. For example, hip pain in a child between the age of two and five is likely to be idiopathic synovitis or Legge-Calve-Perthes' disease, w hereas in the older child it is much more likely to be occult athletic injury or some other pathology such as arthritis. During the presentation, the radiological approach to these conditions will be discussed, together with the indications fo r involving special imaging techniques and further interventional procedures. Disorders of lower extremities in the newborn and infant include dysplasia and congenital deformities. The most common of these are deform ities o f the foot and congenital displacement o f the hip joint. A num ber o f measurements and stability tests including examination a t sonography, C T and MR imaging are involved in the assessment of these diseases. 3D CT a t low radiation may be valuable in the assessment of foot deform ities and at the follow up after surgery. Malignant tum ors of bone and soft tissue are rare conditions but their location most com monly within the low er extremities. More common are benign tum ors and tum or like conditions as well as acute osteom yelitis and chronic multifocal osteomyelitis. The conventional radiograms are our most important means in the differential diagnosis between these conditions, MR being important at the pre-operative work-up of the patients but also being specific at certain conditions. The presentation include an overview of conditions, w hich include synovitis of the joints and their characteristics at radiography, sonography and MR and will include septic arthritis, chronic juvenile arthritis and reactive arthritis. Since m alignant tum ors show usually high vascularization, one could hope to obtain a higher accuracy in the diagnosis of breast lesions by combining grey scale sonography and flow analysis. W e will discuss the different patterns of vascularization in m alignant and benign breast lesions using color Doppler sonography. Criteria fo r a "tumoral vascular pattern" are: low resistance arterial flow (shunts), high systolic peak, more than three feeding arteries, tortuosity. False positives are: dysplasia, hormonal treatment, pregnancy, lactation, traum a and infectious disorders. False negatives are: small or squirrhous carcinoma in postmenopausal women and necrotic carcinomas. In addition, we will briefly discuss the result o f ou r study correlating the presence of vessels inside the lesion with histology: presence of vessels had a sensitivity of 85% and a specificity of 43% for carcinomas, 55% and 28% for fibroadenom as. Finally, w e will present some particular cases where Doppler analysis proved to be useful in the daily practice. In conclusion, the correlation o f the morphological sonographic features with physical examination and mammographie findings permit usually an accurate diagnosis o f breast lesions. Doppler analysis of atypical o r small abnormalities may add confidence fo r benignity or malignancy but however, this should not delay fine needle aspiration o r core biopsy. CT has recently developed as a welcom ed additional tool for demonstrating small intestinal tumors, either in a primary or a secondary role. It may detect unsuspected disease and localize it within the small bowel or elucidate further lesions depicted by enteroclysis, based on its ability to identify mural and extra luminal com ponents of neoplastic disease, including lymph nodes, mesenteric or peritoneal involvement. Such findings may affect clinical management in a significant percentage of patients. Radiologists should become aware o f these applications which added to clinical data will improve diagnostic acum en, leading to early detection and improved survival in such patients. Preoperative diagnosis of primary small intestinal neoplasm s can be a chal lenge fo r both clinicians and radiologists. Adenocarcinom a appears to be the most common neoplasm of the small intestine. It is a solitary lesion mostly located proximally. Radiological appearances reflect the pattern of growth and include annular constricting lesions, filling defects, polypoid or ulcer ated masses, o r a com bination of these. Primary small intestinal lymphoma will present with a w ide spectrum of features, including multiple intraluminal polypoid filling defects, broadbased ulceration, aneurysm al dilatation, luminal narrowing with mucosal destruction, a large excavated mass and fistula for mation. A combination of different signs is seen in 10 -4 0 % o f cases. The radiological features of a carcinoid tum or m irror the stage that the pathological process has reached a t presentation. These include solitary or multiple in tram ural o r intraluminal filling defects, thickening of the valvulae conniventes, sharp angulation o r kinking, a stellate arrangem ent of intestinal loops or a secondary mesenteric mass, associated with radiating linear soft tissue strands. Benign small intestinal neoplasm s will usually appear as solitary or multi ple, sharply dem arkated, sessile o r pedunculated, intraluminal filling defects. Leiomyomas and neurofibrom as may also appear with an extraluminal or dumb-bel type of growth. The ability to accurately image these neoplasms represents a m ajor improvem ent in their diagnosis and management. There are numerous indications fo r central venous catheter insertions and these have increased considerably over the last decade. W hereas previously the majority of the long-term devices were inserted by surgeons, there has been a tendency in many centres fo r the procedure to be performed radiologically. There are several reasons fo r this including shorter procedure times and lower complication rates. In addition, especially in those patients who have undergone previous central venous catheter insertion, patency of the peripheral and central veins can be easily confirmed by ultrasound or contrast venography prior to attempted catheterization. In those individuals in whom the more usual venous accesses are occluded, other techniques (for example a translumbar puncture o f the inferior vena cava) may be performed under radiological guidance. Radiologists are in an ideal position to provide a full venous access service; many of the early and late com plications of these central venous catheters such as occlusion, catheter breakage and venous thrombosis may be man aged by using radiogical techniques. This presentation will review the techniques of central venous catheterization via the more usual, as well as the less com mon, venous access routes. The potential complications related to central venous catheters and their management will also be discussed. The main indications fo r venous stenting in ma lignant disease are symptomatic obstruction o f the superior V. cava and brachiocephalic veins in the SVC syndrome and its counterpart the IVC syn drome. Patients to be treated usually already have had maximum tolerance radiation therapy, chemo-therapy or suffer from tum ors which respond purely to these regimens. Because o f the encouraging results endovascular stents are increasingly used even before radiation-or chemo-therapy are started to rapidly improve the patient's symptoms. For the SVC stent diam eters of 14 to 16 mm and 10 to 14 mm fo r the brachio-cephalic veins are sufficient. Larger stents of 20 to 30 mm diam eter are required fo r the IVC. Results and conclusions: A significant improvem ent with com plete relief of the V. cava syndrome can be expected in 70 to 100%. Especially shortness of breath, cyanosis and feeling o f pressure in the head is relieved within hours whereas edema of head, neck and extremities usually take 1 to 2 days (in the lower extremities this may take several days). In ou r own experience with more than 30 patients total relief of sym ptom s was achieved in 86% with an additional 7% with a partial relief until death (93% good to excellent results). Longterm patency usually lies in the range of 85% and more, however, due to tum or progression additional stents may have to be implanted. Stent placement is the method of choice in an malignant obstruction w hich may not be treated curatively by other means. The most frequent causes for benign obstruction of the V. cava and the brachiocephalic veins are mediastinal fibrosis and postthrombotic sequellae of central venous catheters. Brachiocephalic vein stenosis is also found in up to 20% of patients with hemodialysis access fistulas. Obstructions of the large femoral veins and the pelvic veins are usually secondary to deep vein thrombosis o r surgery and trauma. The May-Thurner-syndrome is a further cause fo r pelvic vein stenosis, usually on the left and preferably involving the fem ale sex. All these entities are excellent indications fo r stent treatment. Results and conclusions: Initial success after stent treatm ent fo r benign obstruction of the V. cava, brachiocephalic and pelvic veins can be expected in 80-100% . Long time patency rate has been excellent in our own experience, particularly for pelvic vein obstruction (100%, mean follow up 34 months). Also in the literature, though few longtime follow-up reports are available, high longtime patency rates in the V. cava and the iliofemoral veins are reported. Patients treated fo r brachiocephalic vein stenosis in hemodialysis fistulas show very good initial results, however recurrent stenosis has to be expected in 6 0 -8 0 % o f the cases. These patients have to be closely followed since retreatment with simple balloon dilatation gives very satisfactory results. Both spiral and high resolution (HR) C T techniques can be used in com bination fo r good assessment of large and small airway diseases. Spiral scanning with thin collimation is able to improve the detection, evaluation of extent, and char acterization of bronchial stenosis. It may orientate the endoscopist and serve as a guide for the taking o f a biopsy specimen. Its role in evaluating congen ital abnorm alities of the airways, and bronchopleural and bronchoesophagial fistula will be illustrated. Although HRCT is the widely accepted technique fo r diagnosing bronchiecta sis, spiral scanning can improve the diagnostic accuracy of CT in assessing the presence and extent of bronchiectasis. This is particularly appreciated in patients considered fo r surgery o r in case of interpretation difficulties on HRCT scans. HRCT remains the imaging modality of choice for evaluating small airway disease. Interpreted in the appropriate clinical context, the CT findings can be helpful in suggesting the presence of bronchiolitis. Expiratory air trapping is probably the most sensitive finding. Small centrilobular opacities reflect bronchiolar and peribronchial inflammatory changes that are potentially reversible. Mosaic perfusion is a finding of constrictive bronchiolitis due to bronchiolar or peribronchiolar irreversible fibrosis. In the last decade, several studies have suggested the possible role of CT in the quantification of pulm onary em physem a but m ost o f these studies used conventional CT and were based on visual scoring. Autom atic objective procedures which are truly quantitative and are applicable to HR C T have been made recently available but macroscopic as well as microscopic com parisons were needed to validate these techniques. The course will review how we have established that the relative area of lung occupied on HRCT scans by attenuation values low er than -950 HU is a valid measurement of macroscopic as well as microscopic em physem a. Com parisons between CT quantification, pulm onary function tests, macroscopic and microscopic measurements will be discussed. These com parisons will show how CT quantification can be integrated with pulm onary function studies and what is their values. In addition, it will be shown w hy expiratory CT is not as accurate as inspiratory CT fo r quantifying pulm onary em physem a and probably reflects air trapping more than reduction in the alveolar wall surface. Finally, the possible roles of age and hyperinflation will be presented. M odern imaging techniques have influenced and are still influencing the way brain tum ors are treated. Although tum or detection and differentiation from other lesions remains important, imaging data are increasingly used for surgical and radiation therapy planning, even intraoperative navigation. G eneral phenom enology: W hen single features are considered, brain tumors m ay be indistinguishable from other, non-neoplastic brain lesions. If multiple features are considered, however, this differentiation is com monly possible. Intrinsic tum or features com monly reflected by changes on CT or MRI in clude cellularity and other cell specifics, regressive changes (necrosis, fatty degeneration) and intratumoral hemorrhage. Peritum oral changes induced by the neoplasm include vasogenic edema and microinvasion, breakdown of the blood-brain-barrier, space-occupying effects and abnorm alities of bone. Radiologic classification: In principle, brain tum ors may be differentiated according to their location relative to the brain surface. In that case, intraaxial (true cerebral) neoplasm s are distinguished from extraaxial (extracerebral) neoplasms. True brain tum ors (m ostly gliomas) tend to have a w orser outcome than extracerebral tum ors (mostly m eningiomas and neurinomas). If tumors are differentiated by intracranial com partment, we distinguish supratentorial tum ors from intratentorial ones. Frequently, tum ors of the sella region and base of skull are separated from tum ors located closer to the skull vault. Radiologic diagnosis and pathology: Today, the most important imaging m odalities used in tum or diagnosis and follow -up are CT and MRI. MRI is particularly desirable because o f its high contrast resolution and multiplanar capability. Also, much of the vascular information needed for differential diagnosis or surgical planning is provided by conventional MRI plus MRangiography. MR-spectroscopy (particularly as 1 H-spectroscopy) is gaining in significance, as it provides metabolic data that help to differentiate or grade tum ors; the sam e is true fo r positron emission tom ography (PET). Ultrasound plays a role only in newborns/infants and during surgery. Conventional cerebral angiography m ay still be useful to determ ine the tum or type or the degree of vascularity. Angiographic techniques are also the basis of interventional procedures, such as preoperative devascularisation of highly vascular tumors (e.g. certain meningeomas, juvenile angiofibromas, and chemodectomas). If suitable imaging data are combined and analyzed, tum or type and tum or grade can be predicted fairly reliably. N euronavigation: In large centers such as ours, neuroimaging data are increasingly used fo r stereotaxy and intraoperative navigation. Brain tum or surgery may even be done inside an MR-unit o f the open design. Intraand immediate postoperative neuroim aging (while skull and dura are still open) may show tum or rests that need to be resected. Surgery can thus be made more radical and at the sam e time more safe. W ith respect to safety, functional MRI is also likely to aid significantly. Exactly knowing the location of functionally im portant brain structures relative to the tum or improves surgical planning immensely. Sequelae of treatm ent and tum or recurrence: In gliomas, specifically glioblas tom as, the am ount of residual tum or greatly affects outcome. W ith the avail ability of m orphologic imaging, the sequelae of surgery can be described in detail, including com plications such as hemorrhage and infarction. Differen tiation o f tum or necrosis from recurrent tum or requires functional imaging, though. M ost commonly, PET is used in this situation, but dynamic-functional form s of MRI, such as perfusion and diffusion techniques, may be able to provide the same information in the near future. The last decade MR imaging has been introduced as a new diagnostic tool in the pelvis. Computed tom ography is valuable, but many reports have shown the superiority o f MR imaging. Furthermore, this technique is undergoing rapid improvement due to technical developm ents. In this course the role of MR imaging fo r the m anagem ent o f carcinom a o f the urinary bladder and benign diseases of the fem ale pelvis is reviewed and illustrated. Important factors fo r optimal MR imaging will be shown. N ew developm ents such as threedimensional, dynamic, and fast-spin echo sequences and the use of contrast agents, o f endorectal and phased array coil imaging are discussed. Finally, the clinical value of MR imaging in staging bladder carcinom a and in showing benign conditions in the fem ale pelvis such as congenital abnormalities, adenomyosis, leiomyomas, and obstetrics is assessed, and com pared with sonography, and CT. Learning objectives: After attending this course, participants will be able to optimize MR images of the urinary bladder and the fem ale pelvis, by selecting the appropriate pulse sequences and surface coils, and using MR contrast agents in the right way. They will be able to identify bladder carcinoma and benign female pelvic pathology on MR images and know the clinical relevance of this technique. Finally they will fully understand future developm ents in this field of MR imaging. Purpose: It is intended to provide an overview of MR imaging applications and techniques o f the fem ale pelvis. Preoperative knowledge of deep myométrial invasion of an endometrial carcinom a will alert surgeons to the necessity of lymph node dissection, rather than sampling, and invasion of cervical stroma by cervical carcinoma will require a radical rather than sim ple hysterectomy. Imaging is im portant in staging the disease, w ith em phasis on myométrial and cervical stromal invasion and lymph node status. MR imaging has proved superior to both CT and ultrasound in the identification of tum or size, location, depth of stromal invasion, parametrial invasion, and loco-regional extent. MR imaging is the method of choice fo r planning radiotherapy and provides the best information for differentiating postoperative scar from recurrent tumor. C T and MR imaging proved to be versatile imaging modalities for charac terization of prim ary ovarian neoplasms. W ith both modalities, tum or size, wall thickness, presence of vegetations and solid structures are criteria for lesion characterization. However, C T remains the primary imaging modality for presurgical staging o f the whole abdomen and pelvis. Learning objective: To get acquainted with the normal appearance of the fem ale pelvis on MR images and to understand the potential impact of imaging on patient management in cases of endometrial, cervical and ovarian cancer. A city-wide PACS system allows sharing of medical images between the hospitals, the cancer clinic and medical research units. The images from the CT and MRI scanners are "pushed" to a central archive upon completion of the study. Selected ultrasound and all nuclear medicine studies are also scheduled to be archived in the same way. A password protected web brow ser with image enhancement capabilities allows physicians to review studies via Internet connections on cheaper, lower resolution, monitors than those available in the Medical Imaging Departments. A teaching file has been initiated at the LA R G 'net web site that is mirrored in Amsterdam and software has been developed that allows residents to submit case studies from a web browser client. 525 State-of-the-art in teleradiology: Teleconsulting and telereporting D. Caramella; Pisa/I Teleradiology is the medical activity that makes use o f com puters and digital networks to reduce the limitations imposed by the physical distance between radiologists and between radiologist and referring physician. In this course the main clinical applications of teleradiology will be presented, distinguishing between intra-institutional teleradiology (that involves more units belonging to the same departm ent or to the same hospital) and inter-institutional tel eradiology (more classically aimed at primary interpretation and subspecialty consultation). W hether it takes place at an intra-institutional level or at a wider level involving several hospitals and imaging centers, teleradiology is now being successfully used to solve actual clinical problems. The aim can be the fast and effective com munication o f the examination results to the referring physician o r the access to subspecialty consultation or image databases for increasing the confidence o f radiological diagnoses. At any rate, teleradiology has now moved from the preliminary stage of feasibility studies and research projects to attain the status o f an established clinical practice. The main challenge ahead is to make an effective use of Internet, whose edu cational possibilities have been already proved, and which may also become the future backbone fo r the exchange of multimedia medical information on a regional as well as international level. 1 6 :0 0 -1 7 :3 0 R oom I Ш 0 715 TIPS liver with special reference to several rhéologie, morphologic, functional and biochemical parameters. Our analysis is based on a study in 100 consecutive cases. Material and Methods: evaluation and assessm ent of the follow ing param e ters before and within a 30-day post TIPSS period: portosystem ic gradient; morphologic delineation o f the portal circulation; invasive scintigraphic deter mination of the portal perfusion fraction (PPF) and the total liver perfusion (GLP); transcatheter intraarterial flow change measurement; serum levels of albumin and bilirubin; assessment of hepatic encephalopathy by appropriate testing; assessment o f recurrent variceal bleeding. Analysis o f the long-term results is made on the total cohort group of more than 300 patients. Results: by TIPSS variceal feeding w as widely reduced; as assessed mor phologically and Theologically portal liver perfusion w as significantly lowered. However, there was immediate onset o f com pensated liver perfusion by in creased arterial inflow. Total liver perfusion was not significantly altered. In TIPSS portal decompression was readily achieved with reduction o f the por tosystem ic gradient from an average o f 24 mm Hg to 10.5 mm Hg. In our series we could not dem onstrate an increased incidence of hepatic encephalopa thy during the 30-day post TIPSS period. Bilirubin levels were significantly increased after TIPSS from 2.45 to 2.61 mg/dl (p = 0.0067), while albumin levels were not altered. Early mortality w as 4% and early re-bleeding rate 3%, respectively. The 30-month occlusion rate w as 2%. How ever during the first 2 years a well organized shunt surveillance program w as m andatory including sonographic and portographic controls. In Child's A patients a 95% 1 -year re-intervention rate was recorded. In Child's С this w as only 45%. Technical success has generally been > 95%. Many procedural com plications have been described with an overall rate of about 10% and most of them can be m anaged with standard endovascular techniques. The 2 most com monly encountered secondary com plications are encephalopa thy and delayed occlusion o f the stent. Encephalopathy occurs in 10 -2 0 % of cases and is usually easily controlled by medical treatm ent. Persistant en cephalopathy can however be treated either by an em bolization of the shunt, or rather by a TIPS-reducer. Secondary stent obstructions is reported to oc cur between 17-50% , with an average incidence of shunt com prom ise at 6 months of 25 -3 5 % . During the first month, occlusions are always caused by a throm bosis occurring in 9 to 13% of cases and due to a technical defect (prosthesis shortening, insufficient shunt caliber, m ajor angulation...). A fter the first month, occlusions are usually due to an excessive intimai hyperplasia the mechanism of which is still incom pletely cleared up. W hatever their cause, these occlusions can be treated percutaneously in different ways. Practical information on these techniques and indications will be detailed. The best technical aspects of performing TIPS procedures will be dem on strated in detail, with a com bination o f brief slide and video content. Tech niques of jugular puncture, creation of the track between the hepatic vein and the portal vein, will be dem onstrated, as well as stent deploym ent. Emphasis will be placed on the "how to " aspects of technique. com parison o f examination techniques at different hospitals and to provide a practical approach to improving patient protection. This has been done successfully fo r conventional radiology already and will have an enforced importance fo r CT, since it is recognised as a high dose modality. Various dose descriptors are in use to define reference doses fo r CT ex posures. The com puted tom ography dose index can in a normalised and weighted form (nCTDIw ) describe to standard head o r body phantom the absorbed dose from a single slice and this description can easily be extended to cover the absorbed dose fo r a com plete examination by the reference dose quantity dose-length product: D L P = Σ, nCTDIw · T ■ N · C, where i represents each scan sequence form ing part of an examination, and N is the num ber of slices of width T and radiographic exposure С in each sequence. General aspects of CT-dosimetry will be discussed in detail based on optimised physical image quality parameters and exam ples from different types of CT exam inations performed by different CT-systems will be given fo r reference dose levels as the 3rd quartile of doses registered as DLP values and will be com pared with calculated effective doses fo r the sam e examinations. A.G. Jurik; A rhus/D K C T has become a m ajor source of exposure to diagnostic X-rays and is therefore an im portant topic in the radiation protection of patients. It is nec essary to analyse and optimise the dose values and the number of slices for each examination protocol. Analyses of this type demand anatomical image quality criteria for determ ination of the dose necessary for optimal diagnostic image quality. Our experiences with the elaboration of such criteria and testing their value as part o f quality assurance will be discussed. The results have influenced the diagnostic criteria which will be recommended in the coming W orking D ocum ent Quality Criteria fo r Computed Tomography, EUR 16262. The content of this docum ent will be reviewed. The lungs are am ong the most prom inent target organs fo r metastatic disease. Frequently, lung metastases originate from cancers of the head and neck, breast, stomach, pancreas, kidney, bladder, the male and fem ale genitouri nary tract, and sarcomas. Pulmonary m etastases may appears as pulmonary nodules, lymphangitic carcinomatosis, endobronchial tum ors, and pleural in volvement. Plain chest radiography is typically the modality used fo r detection and posttherapeutic monitoring of lung metastases; however, the use of CT fo r these purposes is becoming more frequent. Currently, spiral CT appears to be the m ost sensitive imaging technique in the identification of metastases because it detects a higher num ber of pulm onary nodules com pared to other techniques. The role of the radiologist involves the identification o f metastatic disease, determ ination o f the differential diagnosis, monitoring the response to therapy, and the use of invasive procedures w hen the differential diagno sis indicates the need for biopsy and histopathologic proof. The radiologist m ust be aware of the im pact of the diagnosis on patient management and should be fam iliar with oncologic strategies, as well as the term inology used to characterize tum or response. In the future, the role of imaging may ex pand further because o f increased sensitivity in lesion detection, increased specificity in lesion (tissue) characterization using MR imaging, and reduced radiation exposure. Metastatic disease to the liver is an im portant disease from the diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic points o f view. Different imaging modalities such as ultrasonography, com puted tom ography, scintigraphy, and magnetic resonance imaging have been used fo r detection, characterization, therapy planning, and follow-up of this disease with variable degrees of success and failure. This review handles the problem s that face the different imaging modalities in diagnosis of liver metastases in view of the pathological background o f the disease. It also discusses the indications, strong points, and shortcom ings of each of the imaging modalities in diagnosis of metastases, and surveys the recent efforts done to improve their perform ance through the optimization of quality control and in the innovations in the field o f contrast agents. Finally a protocol is suggested for the clinical m anagem ent o f patients with liver metastases to optim ize cost-effectiveness of the imaging modalities in this era o f multi-modality approach in diagnostic imaging. The radiological management of patients with skeletal metastases entails detection, metastatic site description and radiologically guided biopsy for morphological typing and diagnosis. Regarding sensitivity and the ease in performing surveys of the whole skeleton, radionuclide bone scintigraphy still is the first choice in routine follow up of asym ptom atic patients with disease metastatic to the skeleton. A negative scan has to be reevaluated with other findings, with em phasis on the possibility of a false negative result. Screening fo r metastases in patients with local symptoms o r pain is best accomplished by a com bination o f radiography and MRI. MRI is helpful in differentating between malignant, benign and nonneoplastic lesions. Due to overlap in MRI-characteristics, bone biopsy som etimes is essential for correct diagnosis. Bone biopsy and aspiration cytology has proven highly accurate in diagnosing bone lesions. The procedure involves low risk to the patient. O nce a suspected metastatic lesion is detected, irrespective of modality, the morphological diagnosis determ ines the appropriate work-up imaging according to the therapy alternatives. The integration of multimodality imaging in assessment of skeletal metastases S 106 is complex and requires multidisciplinary co-operation in order to optimize screening and management o f these patients. The increasing availability of open-configuration magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) system s has induced a growing interest in the application of minimally invasive procedures. W hile the concept o f MR-monitoring and guidance of such procedures is not new, the techniques by which they are accomplished are in turn producing new methods and instrumentation to meet the expanding demands of increasingly com plex interventions. W hile creating this interventional MR environment, careful attention to details involving patient safety and instrument-related effects is essential. Anesthesia equipment and monitoring devices m ust be carefully calibrated. The design, manufacture and testing of instrumentation reliability must be considered an ongoing process. Various considerations regarding MR-compatibility of instrumentation will be discussed. An array of available MR-instrumentation, including needles, vari ous surgical instruments, laparoscopic devices, an operative microscope, as well as trackable catheters and guidewires equipped with novel coil designs will be presented. Solutions to problem s associated with the integration of thermal therapy devices, including laser, RF-ablation and cryo-therapy will be illustrated. The initial clinical experience with an open-configuration 0.5 T magnet (Signa SP, GEMS) will be summarized. As an introduction to the clinical radiology of diseases o f the chest in child hood, the anatomical and functional differences between lungs o f the infant and those o f the adult will be discussed. Technical aspects of chest radiog raphy and some normal variants will be illustrated. Congenital abnormalities including cystic adenomatoid malformation, bronchial atresia, bronchogenic cysts and pulm onary sequestrations will be discussed. The manifestations of acute bacterial and viral chest infections will be illustrated and the con tinuing importance of tuberculosis will be stressed. Complications of chest infections such as bronchiolitis obliterans, bronchiectasis, pleural effusions and empyemas will be discussed. Mucoviscidosis, HIV infection and interstitial disease of the lungs, foreign bodies, the common tum ours and the radiological appearance o f asthma will also be included in the presentation.  The plain-film, CT and MRI-findings in spinal and pelvic trauma will be analyzed and the diagnostic accuracy as well as costeffectiveness aspects will be discussed. Reports in radiological literature and own experiences will be presented. Plain film radiography is the basic technique fo r imaging of spinal and pelvic trauma. Digital radiography techniques are especially useful in traumatized patients rendering diagnostic image quality in almost all cases. CT is extremely useful for the precise classification of spinal and pelvic trauma, when plain film radiography is am biguous. Stability of acetabular and vertebral fractures as well as S l-joint lesions can be precisely evaluated. MRI gives valuable information in patients with neurologic deficits following spinal trauma, deterioration of neurological function in the early and late posttraumatic phase and fo r the detection o f occult soft-tissue and bony injury of the pelvis and proximal femur. Conclusion: For radiological diagnosis of spinal and pelvic trauma, a tailored approach is recommended, which has to take into consideration the clinical status of the patient, the trauma mechanism and the availability of imaging techniques. Recently, MRI proved useful for the detection of occult fractures and contusions of the bone marrow. (NHS) at that tim e m eant that 18 Regional quality assurance centres and 4 teaching centres could be established to supervise the introduction of the programme into each regional and district locality. Most centres were functioning by 1990 and under the control of a clinical director. Since that time however, the NHS has been restructured and hospitals and screening units how operate as independent Trusts and the "ring fenced" special money fo r Breast Screening has been inco-operated into the general running expenses of these Trusts. Local Comm issioning Authorities now decide priorities in health care and are responsible fo r the purchase of breast screening from the local Trusts. The quality assurance structure with the production o f guidelines, setting o f standards and the monitoring of performance has however survived the re-structuring and is still controlled centrally. Difficulties can arise when increasing requirements o f the Central Quality Assurance Committees are not o r cannot be funded by the local purchases of health care. The problem o f breast screening having to com pete with other health care priorities fo r local funds is made more acute by the rapidly increasing numbers o f women eligible fo r breast screening as a result o f the post w ar "baby boom" women w ho are now reaching the age of 50 years. The evolution of the m anagem ent of the UK programme from its onset to the present time will be discussed and extensively illustrated. Helical C T has improved the ability of C T to evaluate the entire abdomen, and MR is rapidly improving. In some cases there is a clear com petition between these modalities. In other, they are complementary. In this lecture, we will review the technical milestones fo r a correct C T and MR examination; including CT helix and MR sequences parameters. Then, we will try to see the main fields o f application of CT, as com pared with MR results, including upper abdominal area and general abdominal examination. Finally, we will move through the recent improvements of MR, featuring MR cholangiopancreatography, abdominal MR angiography, detection and characterization of liver masses, examination of the pancreas. As a conclusion, we will try to determine cases clearly identified as CT or MR dedicated and cases in which the correct decision remains to be elucidated. Historically MR of the upper abdomen has received a large attention by researchers, but the applications in true clinical practice have been always limited. However, very recently a number of innovations have made MR of the upper abdomen the most interesting and expanding field in clinical MR. The use of high grandient strengths and the possibility to com pletely solve motion artifacts with respiratory com pensation, fat suppression and breath hold technique allow s to obtain high quality images of the upper abdomen with com mercial equipments. The main applications that will be discussed during the presentation including the following: (1) MR of the liver. The application of newer contrast agents improve the diagnostic yield of MRI in detection of focal liver lesions (2) MR Cholangiopancreatography. This is the most im portant recent devel opm ent of MRI, allowing the definition of the biliary tree with an accuracy superior to that of i.v. Cholangiography. It may substitute completely the diagnostic role of ER CR MRCP can also be very effective in diagnosing chronic alteration of the pancreatic duct. (3) MR of the Pancreas. The high contrast resolution of MRI allows depiction of also very small lesions of the pancreas, despite the low er spatial resolution vs. CT. Its indications are in the evaluation of islet cell tum ors, but also the MR diagnosis of pancreatic carcinoma is receiving attention, thanks to the added value provided by MRCP. (4) MR angiography. The evaluation of the vascular system using newer techniques, such as the contrast enhanced dynam ic study, is gaining more applications, also in the detection of alterations involving the vessels of the upper abdomen. Chairperson: L. HORVATH (Pécs/H) 543 Evaluation of the vascular system of the chest R. Rienmüller; Graz/A The vascular system of the chest consist of the system ic (mediastinal), cardiac and pulm onary arteries and veins and o f the lym phatic vessel system. Until recently the diagnostic imaging procedures were mainly directed to recognition o f vessel dilatation, stenosis, dissection, thrombosis, rupture and malformation. W hen visualized, calcified wall processes were discribed to be atnerosclerotic, posttraumatic, postinflamm atory o r of system ic origin. The final diagnosis of the above mentioned disorders w as based on medical history, physical examination, the applied imaging m ethods as chest X-ray, angiography and C T with long exposure time and on surgical or patnoanatomic findings. Presently following developm ents may be observed: (a) The interventional radiological procedures are used additionally to or instead of surgery or they represent com pletly new form s of treatment. They are applied with increasing frequency not only to impaire reduced function, but also to prevent or to minimize possible dysfunction of various organs or systems. (b) The need fo r outcome studies in radiology becomes evident. The results of these outcom e studies are mainly influenced by the quality of the therapeutic procedures an by the quality of the diagnostic evaluation. The quality of the diagnostic evaluation of the vascular system of the chest, which is the main content of this course is based on: (1) Established imaging methods as chest X-ray, angiographic studies and conventional CT. W ith СТА surgical neck, diam eter and extension of the aneurysm and stenotic pathology aortic branches can be clearly defined. СТА is also very helpful in evaluating the extent of intimai dissection flap and origin of a branch vessel from the true o r false lumen. SCTA fo r assessing RAS appears to be more than a promise. Depiction of ostial stenosis may be even better with SCTA than conventional angiography. Imaging vascular stent is possible with СТА that is able to offers detailed informations about patency, relationship of the stent with arterial wall and with origin of aortic branches. Follow-up of endovascular graft include searching for patency, distribution o f CM and perigraft flow. Recently we are investigating the possibilities of SCTA to correctly image TIPS stent. MRA is currently em ployed in the abdomen mainly fo r venous applications. Portal hypertension, portal thrombosis, neoplastic involvement, IVC pathology and other indications will be discussed. Determination of the puncture site, exact trajectory planning is followed by the intervention. Follow up chest radiographs 2 and 4 hours after the intervention are mandatory to detect pneum othorax which can be easily treated by the radiologist with thoracocentesis o r 9F chest tube drainage. Results: A sensitivity from 85% to 98% and a specifity from 56% to 100% may be achieved. Major com plications are pneumothorax (1 0-42 % ) and hemoptysis (1-10% ). Other com plication like air em bolism and needle tract seeding are absolutely rare. CT is not only important to rule out hemorrhage, but recognition o f the recently described early CT-signs of hemispheric stroke (3 -4 hours p.i.) or demonstration of the hyperdense middle cerebral artery are im portant aspects for therapy decisions and prognosis. The evolution of an infarcted area and the time dependent effects of contrast-enhancem ent have to be known for correct interpretation of CT-o r MR-images. MRI gives additional information in infarction of the brainstem, in purely cortical infarction (on contrast-enhanced studies) and in the differential diagnosis e.g. of cerebral sinus thrombosis. The promising potentials o f "diffusion imaging" fo r early o f brain infarcts together with improved MR-angiography may change the diagnostic and therapeutic strategy in acute stroke in the future. 548 Imaging of intracranial hemorrhage G. Wilms; Leuven/B From the moment that blood extravasates from the blood vessels, a very typ ical sequence of pathological and biochemical processes take place. These involve thrombosis, clot retraction, red blood cell lysis, and form ation o f a vascularized wall containing macrophages. Simultaneously hem oglobin de naturates with subsequent formation of blood degradation products such as desoxyhemoglobin, m ethem oglobin and finally hemosederin and ferritin. On CT scan a hematoma appears initially hyperdense with progressive de crease of the attenuation over time. Chronic hem orrhage is hypodense com pared to brain. On MRI a very typical sequence o f changes is seen that is different on T1 and T2 weighted images. On T1 weighted images the sequence is isointense, followed by centripetal hyperintensity and finally hypointensity. On T2 weighted images the sequence is hyperintense, hypo-intense, centripetal hyperintense and finally strong hypointense in the hyperacute, acute, subacute and chronic stage respectively. Besides trauma, the m ost frequent causes o f intracranial hemorrhage are hypertension, aneurysm and vascular malformations and in neonates, the germinal matrix hemorrhages associated with prematurity. Amyloid angiopathy, embolic stroke, coagulopathies, drug abuse and tum or are less common causes of intracranial hemorrhage. Uncommon causes are venous infarction, eclampsia, and infectious conditions such as endocarditis with septic emboli, vasculitis and encephalitis. Radiology has an im portant role to play in the diagnosis of non-accidental injury. The role o f the radiologist in relation to the musculoskeletal abnorm alities is the detection of skeletal injury, be it overt o r occult, dating o f this injury in an effort to assist the investigation, and a judgem ent to be made by the radiologist as to w hether the injury is compatible with the clinical history provided. It is im portant that radiologists are fam iliar with the bony lesions of non accidental injury, so that these are not overlooked, and lead to failure to protect the child. The skeletal injuries of non-accidental injury will be explored from these viewpoints and discussion will take place regarding the timing and the types of radiographs that are required and when further imaging is indicated. In addition, the limitations o f the radiological input will be discussed. (1) Nephropathies: D oppler helps in distinguishing between renal and prerenal acute renal failure and between chronic vasculo-interstitial disorders and purely glom erular diseases basing on changes o f spectral waveforms. (2) Renal obstruction: Presence of increased vascular impedance helps differ entiating sim ple pelvic dilatation from excretory obstruction. Although the methods used in em bolization vary to some extent according to the vascular territory being embolized, there are several points common to all of them which are particularly important. The m ajority of these are techniques which aim to avoid the most com monly reported (and potentially most serious) complication of occlusion o f adjacent normal vessels and non-target organ infarction. (1) In no other area o f interventional radiology is experience with selective and super-selective vessel catheterization techniques more important. Improper catheter placement will result in a failed embolization and the possible occlusion of a contiguous normal vascular territory. (2) Embolic material m ust always be introduced under continuous fluoroscopic guidance to ensure that there is no reflux o f the injected agent from the vessel being embolized. (3) Non-opaque em bolic agents must always be mixed with a contrast agent so that they are visible during injection. (4) Frequent contrast injections should be made between small aliquots of embolic material so that the progress of the procedure is continuously monitored. (5) A thorough knowledge of the norm al and the possible variant vascular anatom y of the area to be em bolized is required. In this workshop various em bolization techniques used fo r a number of different indications will be discussed with the use of video presentations. Arterial em bolization is a very important modality fo r the treatm ent of several conditions: tum ors, AV shunts, AV malformations, as well as fo r bleeding control. The em bolizing material changes accordingly to the pathology to be treated and to the speed o f blood flow,. Very often, a high flow vascular lesion should be approached by retrograde venous em bolization. In addition to solid materials fo r em bolization (Ivalon, Gel-foam, coils, etc.) there are several sclerosing agents or em bolizing liquid agents which could be injected either for sclerosing AV malformations o r fo r the em bolization of hepatic tumors in combination with chemo-therapeutic agents. Chemoembolization has been very effective in the treatm ent of hepatic tumors, since it determines an elongation o f life expectancy in those patients with nonresectable diffuse hepato-cellular carcinoma. Injections of alcohol into the vascular tre e-w hile it can produce prodigious results-m ay also cause extensive dam ages to the surrounding structures or to the nerves; its use should therefore be very considered and performed only by very experienced operators. The standard MRI measurement sequences for clinical examinations are spin echo sequences, which needs several minutes for the data acquisition. For faster data acquisition, a värity of fast imaging sequences were developed in the last years, which include gradient echo sequences, turbo spin echo sequences, echo-planar sequences and a lot o f com binations of these tech niques. Different magnetization preparation techniques can be used prior to the imaging sequence in order to modify the image contrast. All fast imaging techniques can be described by the obtainable spatial reso lution, the image contrast fo r selected tissues and the sensitivity to additional parameters like flow, chemical shift and field inhomogeneities. The lecture will give an overview o f the imaging techniques, their physical principle and their features and constraints. Helpful tools for the characterization of sequences are the к -space description of data acquisition and the course of longitudinal and transversal magnetization during the measurement. These tools will be described and applied to the different imaging techniques. In the last several years an increasing number of techniques on the base of gradient echo (GE), turbo spin echo (TSE) and echo planar imaging (EPI) sequences have been developed to speed up examination and to shorten scan time in MRI. In general this fast MRI techniques have not succeded to increase patient throughput but are very successfully offering new diagnostic possibilities fo r structural and functional imaging of the brain and the body. Therefore GE and TSE sequences are meanwhile fully integrated in clinical imaging protocols, while the use EPI sequences is due to the advanced technical requirements still restricted to owners of an elaborated equipment. In this course the clinical application of fast MRI techniques fo r a refined examination of the brain and their profound contribution to basic neuroimaging research will be covered. Special attention will be given to the advantages, draw backs and limitations o f the different fast MRI techniques in comparison to the normal spin echo performance. The course will start with the use of GE, TSE, and EPI sequences for the diagnosis of normal brain maturation, stroke, and circumscribed brain lesions, will than proceed to diffusion and perfusion imaging, and final discuss different aspects of functional imaging during different activation tasks in normal and diseased brain. In this review em phasis will be placed on strategies fo r imaging in the follow-up of cancer patients and the information derived from current imaging techniques will be described with particular reference to com puted tom ography and magnetic resonance imaging. H.l. Libshitz; Houston, TX/USA Radiation therapy causes changes in a treated malignancy and in the sur rounding normal tissues that must be included in the radiation fields. A w are ness of the unexpected appearance of these changes frequently permits differ entiating them from superimposed infection, recurrent malignancy, radiationinduced tumors, and the changes that go beyond the expected norm, the true complications of radiation therapy. Radiation therapy changes are a function of the volume of tissue treated, the shape of the field, the total dose and how it was delivered, the duration of time from com pletion of therapy and the effect of other therapies. It must be appreciated that the tim ing of changes varies in the different organs. Acute radiation pneumonitis is generally seen approxim ately 2 months after completion of radiotherapy. Radiation pericarditis is generally not seen until 6 to 9 months after therapy. Radiation-induced sarcomas do not develop on average until 10 to 15 years after radiation therapy. An overview of expected findings in the lungs, heart, gastrointestinal tract, genitourinary tract, and bones will be presented and features that distinguish these from recurrence and radiation-induced com plications discussed. Computed radiography (CR) using photostim ulable phosphor plates (PSPs) facilitates some aspects o f radiography due to the greater latitude of PSPs com pared with film/screen, eg. ward exposures o f sick patients, the presence of plaster of Paris or neck collars. CR is also a demanding m odality requiring the correct selection o f organ code, an understanding of prief rules, meticulous attention to coning and centring, grid use, avoidance of over-exposure. Some understanding of the physics of PACS and CR helps users achieve the best radiographic results from these technologies. Tuesday A m eans of effective quality control to audit rejected soft copy images is essential. Radiographers' working practices change with PACS. Soft copy images must be rapidly verified after acquisition fo r them to appear rapidly on relevant PACS worklists. Images must be satisfactorily arranged, orientated, annotated and windowed by the radiographer in the first instance. W orkload is lightened in som e areas by PACS, eg. in CT time is no longer spent making hard copies. CT m ediastinal and lung w indow s are toggled by a single keystroke. This part of the course will deal with: (1) Im plementing a CR at the radiology satellite in the casualty care de partment: image production, adaptations in radiographic techniques, dose effects and work organization changes fo r radiographers and the impact of a HIS/RIS-PACS interface (2) Im plementing a thorax CR unit which includes a dose effect study (3) Im plementing a CR study in the central radiology departm ent which in cludes also a dose effect study (4) Im plementing a DR (based on image inte nsifies) in the urodigestive radiology department (5) A flow study of conventional archiving versus PACS in the field o f or thopaedic surgery (6) The use of PACS fo r com puter assisted treatm ents in neurosurgery and radiotherapy. recently Magnetic Resonance (MR) reserved for second line methods. The use of IVU has decreased but urography remains valuable to give a rapid overview of the whole urinary tract, to show detailed pelvicalyceal and ureteric anatomy and to detect and localise calculi. The ability of Ultrasound to characterise tissue makes it a sensitive detector of pelvicalyceal dilatation and enables it to show parenchymal structure and to characterise masses as cystic or solid. Ultrasound shows small renal masses missed by IVU and demonstrates the peri-nephric space. W ith Doppler techniques renal blood flow can be detected and characterised. CT is particularly helpful in detecting small renal masses, in characterising com plex renal masses and in staging tumours. It is used to examine the retro-peritoneum to detect lucent calculi and to assess major and penetrating renal injuries and severe renal infection. Image resolution with modern MR allow s accurate mass characterisation and tum our staging when irradiation and iodinated contrast medium must be avoided. MR angiography of the renal vessels shows great promise. After the first exam inations of the urinary tract in 1896, many radiological procedures (diagnostic and interventional) to investigate the bladder, the urethra, and the reproductive system in both sexes have developed. W hile cystoscopy is the "golden standard" in the evaluation of the urinary bladder, the prim ary imaging modality is now ultrasound in most countries. Cystography remains the prim ary tool fo r evaluation of reflux, and in com bi nation with videofluoroscopy functional aspects o f the emptying process can be evaluated. C T and MR are also valuable in many situations, especially in the management of tumours. Urinary reservoirs or conduits are usually best studied by m eans of "loopography", and their effect on the upper urinary tract is best evaluated with i.v. urography. Urethrography can be performed retrograde or antegrade in both sexes. The procedure is used fo r evaluation of strictures, diverticula, tum ors, trauma, and congenital anomalies. The primary radiological examination of the prostate, both in benign and malignant diseases is now ultrasound, with MR and CT as useful adjunct examinations. Several interventional procedures is under developm ent for benign hyperplasia. Scrotal pathology is primarily evaluated with ultrasound. The investigation of erectile dysfunction usually starts with ultrasound and Doppler, and may proceed to cavernosography and penile arteriography. Transvaginal ultrasound is now the first imaging examination for female pelvic pathology, but C T and MR is useful, especially fo r imaging tumours. Hysterosalpingography is still used to rule out tubar occlusion as reason for infertility, and can be combined with recanalisation procedures. Logistics o f imaging are not absolute, but provincial. W hat ever is best done in one place, may not be optimal in another. Not every place is ideally equipped with personnel and machinery. For many, just US and conventional radiography may be immediately available and C T o r MR may be at mediated reach only. W ith US alone, one will use it to its limits. Yet, CT and/or MR may be the instruments of choice to solve a given clinical problem. Also, protocols of therapeutic procedures may differ from place to place. History, clinical findings and specific questions should be given and acknowledged. (A) Trauma: A preliminary radiograph of the abdom en in supine position is advised. Skeletal lesions, free air, mass effect and more may be diagnosed, guide and enhance the subsequent US. Crucial questions to be answered by US are: Is there free fluid? Is an organic lesion visible? Free fluid is likely to be seen behind/around the bladder, in the Morrison pouch, under the diaphragm, between intestinal loops, i.e. in the dependent free spaces of the body. Little free fluid is not specific and may not be related to trauma. A moderate to massive am ount of free fluid is likely to be blood and much less likely to be urine o r bile. A hemorrhagic collection may be slightly echogenic; sedimentation may be observed. Localisation of free fluid within the peritoneal cavity or retroperitoneum may be possible; respiratory motion of anatom ic structures may belp in the distinction. Disturbance or changes of echogenicity within a parenchymal organ typically indicate contusion, fracture or rupture. Such changes may appear only after hours or days. Subcapsular hemorrhage may be present in hepatic, splenic o r renal lesions. Hemorrhage within the bowel wall, especially duodenum, may mimiek a solid mass; it should change echogenicity within days. Preserved perfusion o f the kidneys can be demonstrated by Doppler techniques. Demonstration of intact main renal vessels is helpful in the decision not to operate. In numerous instances, CT will confirm or exclude injuries seen or suspected by US and yield additional and precise information, including injuries of the skeleton. CT may be the first and only modality to image abdominal trauma, especially in severe cases or in conditions of polytrauma. (B) Tumor: The preliminary radiograph is indispensable and will inform on "bone, stone, gas and mass" (i.e. skeleton, calcifications, gas pat tern/localisation, and mass effects). The aim of US is to show the location, origin, definition and the echo-quality o f a mass (i.e. solid, cystic, mixed, in trinsic calcifications, vasculature), its architecture (simple, complex), its direct effects on adjacent structures and its possible indirect effects on multiple and/or distant organ systems. Associated findings such as abnorm al lymphnodes, ascites, functional abnormality o f a specific organ system may be demonstrated. US is unique in making use of respiratory motion in order to show a mass to be located intra-or retroperitoneally, its separation from an adjacent organ (e.g. distinction between adrenal and kindey, right adrenal S 114 and liver; involvement of the peritoneum o r abdominal wall, etc.). Doppler sonography may be used fo r evaluation of vascular dynamics as well as to show the course of blood vessels anatomically. MR is especially valuable or may be indispensable in the evaluation o f neuroblastom a with involvement of the spinal canal, in replacing angiography for hepatic tum ors and in pelvic lesions, especially in girls. CT is used alternatively and, in many institutions, as the method o f choice fo r renal tumors. (C) Infection/inflammation: A preliminary abdom inal radiograph is useful. The findings are usually non-specific, often suggesting disturbance o f bowel motility, sometimes showing a fecolith, occasionally suggesting pneumonia at the (left) lung base. More o r less characteristic findings have been de scribed for appendicitis, C rohn's disease, colitis, cholecystitis, pancreatitis, pyelonephritis, cystitis, adnexitis, pelvic inflam matory disease and abscess as well as numerous non-specific findings such as ascites, lymphadenopathy, intestinal hyperperistalsis, and others. Prominent periportal echoes are com mon in acute inflammatory disease o f the gastrointestinal tract, but may also be seen in severe system ic disease, in a state of high fever and after blunt abdominal trauma. This phenomenon may indicate some state of reduced mesentero-hepatic blood flow. Doppler technology has become an integral part in the evaluation o f a child's inflammatory abdomen by US. Computed tom ography is the best im aging modality fo r studying paediatric abdominal trauma. It is time-efficient and cost-effective in light o f the informa tion provided which aids the surgeon in deciding the treatment, which in most cases will be conservative. Indications for use are history of abdom inal trauma and clinical and/or labora tory findings suggestive of intra-abdom inal injuries. Children must be haemodynamically stable before CT. Technique: W ith conventional CT: Contiguous 1 cm-thick slices from the diaphragm to the pubis. All scans are done with dynamic scanning and bolusinjection, with 2 -3 cc/kg of non-ionic contrast. No preliminary unenhanced exam is performed. Oral contrast is recommended, but not routine. If pelvic trauma is suspected, all slices below the umbilicus are performed 10-15 minutes after i. v. contrast injection. Bladder catheters should be clamped. With the helical technique, 5 or 10 mm slice thickness (depending on the patient's age), a pitch of 1.5 and a contrast dose between 1 and 1.5 cc/kg, usually injected at the rate of 1 cc/sec are used. The exam is started 60 sec after the initiation of i.v. contrast administration. When it takes less than 40 sec to inject contrast, the exam begins 10 sec after the end of the injection. Ultrasonography is the preferred and m ost com monly used screening proce dure for the evaluation of abdominal masses in children. Tum or characteristics (solid, cystic, calcifications) are readily detected. The origin of the mass is usually well delineated with ultrasonography, frequently much more accurately than with CT, particularly with large right sided abdominal masses. CT may further define the extent of disease; however, excellent contrast-filling of the bowel and bolus intravenous contrast enhancement are necessary for proper evaluation. MR readily detects the tum or and extent of involvement of surrounding struc tures and blood vessels. With neuroblastom a, extension into the spinal canal as well as bone marrow involvement are easily identified. Coronal im ag ing allows evaluation of distant disease. This information is obtained in a noninvasive fashion and without exposure to radiation. MR is the imaging procedure of choice fo r evaluation of neuroblastoma. (1) Is there any role fo r US in the etiological diagnosis of inflammatory digestive disease? The answer is yes. Parietal hyperhemic thickening is a constant finding, but it is transmural in Crohn's disease, submucosal in infectious ileocolitis and rather mucosal in neutropenic colitis. (2) Is there any role fo r US in the diagnosis of a bowel ischemia? The answer is yes. Occlusion has different echographic patterns w hether there is obstruction or strangulation. US also allows an easy diagnosis of bowel malrotation with volvulus. (3) Is there any role fo r US in the appreciation o f the ischem ic bowel damage? The answer is yes. The use of color Doppler in intussusception, necrotizing enterocolitis and ischemic colitis o f hem olytic uremic syndrome allow s a reliable evaluation of the degree of bowel ischemia o r necrosis. (4) Can US change the therapeutic m anagement? The answ er is yes. Since bowel survival depends on the emergency of surgery, the role and the importance o f an early precise diagnosis of bowel ischemia are evident. Flow in FA w as present in most cases. In malignant tum ors, a significant difference in Rl (at least 0.2) was found between flow inside the tum or and the vessels in the immediate surroundings; in 97% of the cases there was no end-diastolic flow in the vessels inside the tumor. An im portant diastolic flow was seen in the vessels around the lesion, with a Rl of 0.78 or lower. In FA, we found a sim ilar flow in and around the lesion, with im portant diastolic flow. The difference in Rl between flow in and around a lesion, and the absence of end diastolic flow are highly characteristic findings fo r malignancy. 569 Vascularity as a param eter to m easure the therapeutic efficacy in breast inflammation G. Rizzatto; Gorizia/I Acute breast inflammations are usually treated before undergoing an imaging examination. Mammograms are often postponed because of their poor quality in the acute phase. In all these cases it has been already demonstrated that sonography may be useful just in the early phase. It shows the extent of inflammation, can dem onstrate focal alterations such as abscesses and offers a valuable aid to m onitor the process up to resolution. In 18 patients we used color Doppler as a param eter to measure the efficacy of both therapy (large spectrum antibiotics plus antiinflam m atories) and US guided drainage. Drainage was performed w henever a fluid collection have been demonstrated. W e always used a gentle com pression to avoid reduction of vascularity; the same Doppler param eters were alw ays set fo r the same patient; 1 0 -1 3 MHz linear arrays with Doppler frequency of 7 MHz were used (AU4-Esaote). W e have found that the reduction o f vascularity is a valuable prognostic factor fo r a positive final outcome (p < 0.001). In some cases relapsing vascularity suggested more aggressive therapy. The specificity o f color Doppler suggests its larger use to valúate the extent of inflammation and to plan therapy in order to spare more expensive and traum atic surgery. (1) can tum orvessels be detected with C olor Doppler sonography (CDS) reliably over a period of time? (2) can CDS give more information about architecture of tum or vessels? (3) can hem odynam ic changes during radiotherapy be measured? Method: CDS was performed up )o 8 times on mammary carcinoma grown on fem ale mices with a linear transducer (10 Mhz broad-bandscanner-6 hz Doppler frequency). W e com pared a non-radiated group of 4 mices towards a radiated group of 5 mices (total of 20 Gy). Doppler-parameters were maximal systolic velocity (PSV), minimal diastolic velocity (MDV) and resistance index (Rl). Results: We were able to follow up tum orvessels with a diam eter o f 1.5 mm to 0.5 mm in each examination. W e detected abnorm al vascular architecture (arterial trifurcation) Doppler waves suggesting artrio-venous-shunting. Con tinuous increase of PSV and MDV, decrease of Rl during radiation with a better detection of arterial and venous vessels. Conclusion:new generation of ultrasound-equipm ent allow s detection of smallest vessels, CDS could be a cost effective method to quantify hemody namic changes in different types of tum or treatments. To determ ine the value of В-m ode US, ultrasonographic texture analysis and color-D oppler in the evaluation of response to preoperative chem otherapy in locally advanced breast cancer. Material and Methods: 28 patients underwent periodical assessment of tu mor size, volum e, В-mode appearance, texture and vascularization prior to onset of therapy and at the end of every second treatm ent cycle until ther apy is com pleted or abandoned. В-m ode appearance includes assessment o f tum or configuration, margins, echogeneity, homogeneity, absorption, refrac tion, elasticity. Tum or architecture is analysed by statistical pattern recognition techniques using following parameters: mean grey level, standard devia tion, signal to noise ratio, mean gradient, contrast, entropy, correlation from the cooccurrence-matrix. Vascularity displayed on color-Doppler is scored by vessel count and com puter assisted quantification and evaluated as trend throughout each course of treatment. In 75% o f treatm ent cycles a reduction in tum or size occurred correlating with a decrease in vascularisation. Changes in vascularity could be assessed in every patient. Texture analysis showed a reduction of mean grey level, standard deviation and entropy, probably due to therapy induced tum or necrosis. Conclusion: В-mode US, texture analysis and color-Doppler imaging can help predict the response o f breast cancer to medical treatment. Doppler and power Doppler imaging study with and without use of an ultrasound contrast agent S. Filimonow, Ch. Madeja, S. Mutze, K.-J. Winzer, В. Hamm; Berlin/D Purpose: A prospective study was perform ed to com pare the value of PD to color Doppler (CD) with and/or without use of a microbubble ultrasonic contrast agent (UCA) in the differentiation o f breast tum ors and in establishing associa tions with the presence of axillary lymph node m etastases in breast carinoma. Methods and Materials: W e exam ined 129 patients using CD and PD sonog raphy (7 .5-1 0 MHz array, 4.5 MHz Doppler). Maxim al and minimal velocities (Vmax, Vmin), Rl and PI were calculated. In 30 patients we additionally de term ined the num ber of blood vessels before and after application o f the UCA (Levovist®). All lesions were operated on, staged, and graded. Blood supply, tum or grades, and presence of axillary lymph node metastases were compared. Results: 88 patients had breast carcinom a and 41 benign lesions. 28 patients carcinoma grade (G) 1, 42 had G2, 13 had G3, and 5 had carcinoma in situ. Malignant tum ors showed a significantly increased flow velocity compared to benign lesions (m ean Vmax and mean Rl = 57.3 cm /sec and 0.74 in G3; 23.6 cm/sec and 0.75 in G2; 16.7 cm/sec and 0.7 in G3; and 11.3 cm/sec and 0.65 in benign lesions). CD did not detect blood flow in 47 tum ors -35 benign ones and 12 m alignant ones (6 G1, 4 G2, 3 carcinom a in situ). After UCA, demonstration of the num ber o f blood vessels, w as improved in 21 cases. The presence o f lymph node metastases showed a positive association (p < 0.01 ) with tum or flow velocities and tum or grades. Conclusion: CD and PD play com plem entary roles in the diagnostic as sessm ent o f breast cancer, their specificity is equal. Additional use of UCA increases the num ber of intratumoral vessels detected. The value of the UCA in the differentiation of malignant and benign tum ors will be discussed. Color pixel density (CPD) and mean color value (MCV) were measured before and after i.v. application of Levovist to evaluate the increase in signal intensity, the contrast transit tim e and potential additional information to differential diagnosis. Histologic proof w as obtained in all cases. Results: After contrast media administration cancers displayed a characteristic vascular pattern of neovascularisation. CPD and MCV were significantly higher in carcinomas than in benign conditions. C arcinom as showed a shorter time to maximum signal intensity and a longer duration of enhancem ent than benign lesions. Conclusion: Computer-assisted quantitative evaluation of breast tum ors after i.v. injection of Levovist may increase the diagnostic confidence and improve the sensitivity of US in the detection o f tum ors and its specificity in differenti ating benign lesions from carcinomas. 575 Im provem ent of differentiation in color Doppler m easurements breast lesions by the ultrasound contrast agent " Levovist'' M. Fleck, C. Marx, T. Graubner, W. A. Kaiser; Jena/D Purpose: It was the aim o f the study to evaluate the advantage of the contrast agent " Levovist" fo r color Doppler sonography in malignant and benign breast lesions. Material and Methods: 35 patients (23 carcinomas, 12 benign lesions) were examined before and after bolus injection o f the contrast agent "Levovist'' (2.5 g/patient). All patients had a basic color Doppler examination under visual control in Doppler mode, power mode and simultaneous video recording (SVHS). Signals were analysed by a visual analog score from 1 (low) to 5 (high signals). The intensity of the Doppler signals, the changes in the vascular patterns, and the timing of the transit of the contrast agent bolus were measured. Correlations between lesions and both tum or size and histology of the tum or were performed. Results: "Levovist" increased the intensity of the Doppler signals significantly. Results in power mode are slightly better com pared to normal color Doppler S 116 mode. Transit time was not significantly different in malignant and benign masses (22.9 ± 2.5 cs. 19.7 ± 2.0 sec.). The cancers showed characteristic vascular morphologic features and a striking increase of vascular signals in the peritumoral area of 6 mm. A fter "Levovist" injection the color Doppler signal increased significantly in carcinomas from score 1.9 ± 0.1 to score 3.4 ± 0.3. In benign lesions this increase w as not significant (before "Levovist": score 1.5 + 0.4; after: score 1.9 + 0.3). The intensity, of US signals in the surrounding of both malignant and benign tum ors was relatively low and not different in malignant and benign masses. Conclusions: Our findings indicate that microbubble contrast agents for color Doppler US may enable an accurate differentiation of benign masses from carcinomas. 576 Comparison of CARI-breast-sonography (clinical amplitude/velocity reconstructive im aging techniques) and conventional ultrasound examining unselected patients C. Marx, B. Schütze, T. Graubner, M. Fleck, W.A. Kaiser; Jena/D Purpose: To differentiate breast lesions in tw o com pression views using CAFtlsonography and comparing CARI-sonography with conventional ultrasound. Material and Methods: 33 breast lesions were examined with breast ultra sound and CARI-technique and correlated with histopathology. The mean size of the tum ors was between 0 .5 -4 .0 cm. CARI-sonography uses mammographyidentical positioning, the breast is compressed between tw o plexiglas plates (thickness: 8 mm), a stainless steel plate placed underneath the breath serves as reference reflector. A linear-array transducer (7.5 MHz, Sonoline versa pro, Siemens) was used for conventional ultrasound and CARI-sonography. The size of each lesion and the am ount of elevation of the reference-line was measured in craniocaudal and mediolateral view. Later ratios (mediolateral diameters (summation o f craniocaudal diam eters plus am ount of elevation) were calculated. Results: All 33 lesions were detected by B-mode. 3 lesions were false positive by В-mode (sensitivity 100% specificity 81%). CARI-sonography described 7 lesions as false positive (sensitivity 100%, specificity 67%). Conclusions: Conventional В-mode ultrasound was better in detecting breast lesions than CARI-sonography. CARI-sonography may help to characterize lesions additionally. 577 Evaluation of intraductal breast lesions with high-resolution sonography: Com parison with galactography W. Buchberger, P. Springer, A. Dessl, K. Unsinn, A. Stöger, A. Chemelli; Innsbruck/A Purpose: was to assess the value o f high-resolution sonography in intraductal or mainly intraductal breast lesions. Methods and Materials: 83 patients with nipple discharge or mammographie findings suspicious for intraductal abnorm alities were examined with galactog raphy and sonography, using a 10 Mhz transducer. Results: 29 papillomas, 4 papillomatoses, 9 DCIS and 2 invasive ductal carcinomas were confirmed by biopsy. Sonography was equivalent to galac tography in 62 cases. 5 DCIS were diagnosed with sonography alone; in another 12 cases, sonography was superior in showing the full extent of intraductal abnormality. 2 small papillomas were overlooked by sonography, and 2 findings were false positive. Conclusion: High-resolution sonography is considered a valuable additional modality for the assessment of intraductal breast pathology. This new procedure can be performed simultaneously with X-ray mammog raphy without decompression o f the breast. However, because o f different projections (mammography with divergent ray path and ultrasound with paral lel ray path), lesions are not com pletely matched in location. The present study was performed to exactly superimpose lesion projection at mammography and ultrasound. Materials and Methods: The examination unit com prises a mammograph combined with an automatically guided 5-MHz linear ultrasound transducer, a conventional ultrasound device and a w orkstation fo r processing o f the ultrasound images. Sonographically and radiographically visible labels on the bottom surface of the upper com pression plate and the top surface of the film cassette holder (coupling by a water-filled elastic container) served to establish a matrix fo r the com bined examination. The positions of these labels on mammograms and ultrasound images were used to com pute grids for mammograms and sonographic scout images, which allowed clear assignm ent of the lesion in relation to its position on mammograms. The feasibility o f this combined examination was tested in patient studies. Results: The above-described procedure makes it possible to match radiographic and sonographic findings. Conclusion: The efforts presented here aim at a direct digital superimposition of mammograms and sonographic summation im ages fo r more clearly identi fying pathologic alterations. Our results suggest that this aim can be achieved by appropriate correction of either of the tw o images. In 300 preoperative or prebiopsy patients mammography, autom ated CARI-ultrasound and conventional ultrasound and palpation were com pared with histologic results. CARI-US (Sens./Spec.: 88% /69% ) was better than pal pation (80%/74%), at least com parable to conventional-US (87% /65% ) and complementary to mammography (96%/37%). Conclusion: Excellent standardisation and easy evaluation make it interesting for w ider use and possibly as a supplem ent fo r palpation. Further experience is necessary. This project is supported by Dt. Krebshilfe. Results: The FPI does not discriminate between acute or chronic small bowel disease. Patients with functional disorders (e.g. constipation, irritabel bowel syndrom e) showed significant higher FPI-scores in the items "strain", "physical com plaints" , "excitability" and "emotionality" and low er scores in the items "perform ance and efficiency" and "life contentm ent" . Concerning intraluminal pressure and motility group A and group В differed partial significantly from group C. Patients with C rohn's disease showed a decreased motility and high intraluminal pressure, while motility in patients with functional disorders was raised. Conclusion: T he personality profile (FPI) of patients without radiomorpholigic abnorm alities of the small bowel correlates with changes in the small bowel motility ("intestinal hurry") and intraluminal pressure. Further investigation is necessary to elucidate the coherences between disease, functional impair ment, motility and intraluminal pressure. (14) and large bowel (11). G radient echo, T1-weighted, MR coronal and axial scans (8 mm slice) were obtained before and after Gd-DTPA i.v. administration using a breath-hold technique. Results: Sites of inflam matory involvement were identified at the MRI scans in 17/25 patients; negative findings were observed in eight patients with involvement of either the jejunum (3) o r the proximal ileum (5). In five out of the 17 patients with positive MR findings, wall thickening w as observed also in tracts where no abnorm alities of mucosal profile were evident at the barium studies. Seven patients had com plications such as fistulae (5) Two contiguous acquisitions in the coronal plane allowed coverage from the aortic bifurcation to the middle thigh (popliteal trifurcation), each lasting 30 to 34 seconds. Subsequently, DSA was performed in all patients. Results: Contrast-enhanced MRA resulted in superb enhancement of the pelvic and peripheral arteries (signal-to-noise ratio 10.9 ± 3.1). MRA correctly depicted all significant stenoses (> 50% ) o r occlusions of iliac arteries. Angiographic correlation revealed an 100% sensitivity and 59.9% specificity for grading of stenosis (< 50% , 50 -6 9 % , 7 0 -99% ) o r occlusion of fem oral and politeal arteries, respectively. In 27 patients with bypass grafts, MRA agreed with the results o f DSA in 24 patients (89%). Conclusion: Bolus-enhanced MRA appears to be a very promising noninvasive screening method fo r fast evaluation of peripheral vascular occlusive disease. The reduction in imaging tim e may justify the additional costs of high-dose contrast material. Results: In all patients the arterial tree from the aortic bifurcation to the trifurcation could be visualized. 112 lesions were detected by MRA. Sensitivity was 96% , specificity was 92%. 62 lesions were classified as high grade or occlusion and reevaluated. In this category sensitivity was 100% and specificity was 96%. Correlation fo r occlusion length was 0.97. The com bination of 2DPC-MRA with triggered 2DTOF-MRA detects stenotic lesions in the low er extremity arterial system with high sen sitivity and specificity. W hile 2DPC -M R A provides a good overview, triggered 2DTOF-M RA yields necessary information for the interventional procedure. 11:00 5 9 5 Is colour-coded Doppler sonography able to replace angiography in occlusive vascular disease o f the lower extrem ity? P. Hendrickx, U. Roth; H annover/D Purpose: To find out w henever C olour-Coded Doppler Sonography (CCDS) may replace transarteria! angiography (TA) in lower limb occlusive vascular disease. In a double-blind trial both procedures were com pared using a com puter score system. The low er limb arteries o f 55 patients with severe arteriosclerosis were divided and 1142 segments were defined, 700 of them with atheromatous plaques, 260 with stenoses, 204 with occlu sions and 6 with aneurysms. The diagnostic quality of CCDS only w as com parable to that o f TA in superficial segments (common fem oral, profunda fem oris, proximal superficial fem oral and popliteal arteries). Due to the excellent accessibility of these vessels more pathological changes were found and degree of stenosis was better estimated by CCDS. Deeper-seated vessels (abdom inal aorta, pelvic, distal superficial fem oral and low er leg arteries) were less accessible for direct CCDS. Most pathological changes however could be diagnosed indirectly by spectral analysis. in comparison to 2D-tim e-of-flight (TOF) and phase-contrast (PC) tech niques. Materials and Methods: MR angiogram s and digital subtraction angiograms (DSA) of 27 patients, aged 3 4 -6 2 years (mean, 51 years) were prospectively evaluated in malfunctioning hemodialysis fistulae (n = 19) and grafts (n = 8). MR angiography was performed on a 1.0-T superconducting imager (Philips NT 10) with the use of a rectangular surface coil. A gadoliniumenhanced 3D-turbo-field-echo MRA sequence (TR/TE 15/4.0, 40° flip angle, 1-mm section thickness, 0:30 min imaging time) was compared to 2D-TOF MRA (17/6.4/60°, 3:38 min imaging time) and 3D-PC MRA (12/6/15°, 50 cm/sec velocity encoding, 4:10 min imaging time) by using DSA as the standard of reference. Results: Contrast-enhanced MRA correctly depicted and categorized hemodynamically significant stenoses > 50% (n = 61) or occlusions (n = 2) of dialysis fistulae and grafts (sensitivity 100%; specificity 97%) and pseudoa neurysms (n = 4). All stenoses > 50% w ere overestimated and categorized as occlusions on both 2D-TOF and 3D-PC-M RA (sensitivity 100%; specificity 24% and 35%, respectively). Conclusion: Gadolinium -enhanced MRA appears to be a very promising noninvasive screening method for detecting m alfunctioning hemodialysis shunts. 597 Accurate diagnosis of coronary artery restenosis after angioplasty by three-dimensional MR im aging with fa t saturation and navigator echo M.F. M ü lle r1, M. Fleisch1, H. G oe bel1, R. K roeker2; 1 Bern/CH, 2 Erlangen/D Purpose: To compare the value of magnetic resonance coronary angiography (MRA) with conventional contrast angiography in the assessment of restenosis after percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA). Materials and Methods: 22 patients underwent MRA and coronary angiogra phy within 4 hours, 3 to 6 months after successful PTCA. The pulse sequence was a cardiac-triggered, single-slab 3D gradient-echo sequence, employing a spin-echo navigator echo measurement to track the variation of the diaphragm during the scan. Scan parameters: TFVTE = 7.4/3.6 ms, resolution = 1.95 X 0.98 X 2.0 mm, acquisitions = 5 -6 . The following artery segments were included in this prospective study: proximal and middle left anterior descend ing, diagnoal branch, proximal left circumflex, marginal branch, proximal and middle right coronary artery. The segments were classified as being normal or having a stenosis o f less than 20% and as having a stenosis of 20 -5 0 % or more than 50%. The overall sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy fo r detecting a significant restenosis by MRA was 90%, 97%, and 96% , respectively. Conclusion: MRA identified stenosis correctly within the coronary arteries and may bi used as a screening test fo r detecting restenosis after PTCA. Sensitivity and specificity are higher com pared to exercise tests or scintigraphy. Purpose: Determination o f optimal bolus duration, and contrast timing for ultrafast 3D MRA of the renal arteries. Optim al bolus duration w as evaluated in a flow phan tom simulating an arterial and a venous segm ent seperated by a simulated capillary phase lasting 3 s. Over a 28 s 3D SPGR acquisition (TR/TE 3.9/2 ms, 40°, 44 sections) contrast (Gd-DTPA, 0.3 mm ol/kg) administration was reduced in 2-sec intervals from full к -space coverage (28 s) to coverage of only the last 8 s of the acquisition. Optimal coverage w as determ ined based on maximal arterial with minimal venous signal. To determ ine the contrast travel time from the antecubital injection site to the target region, sagittal multiphase gradient echo images (Т Р Я Е 6.5/1.5 ms, flip 60°, 10 mm section), transecting the abdominal aorta were acquired following intravenous test-bolus injection (4 ml Gd-DTPA). Contrast was administered using an autom ated injector (Medrad). Contrast arrival tim es were correlated with age, weight and heart rate in 30 patients referred for ultrafast 3D MRA of the abdom inal arterial vessels. Results: Optimal arterial signal with minimal venous contrast enhancem ent is obtained when the bolus covers the last 60% of the data acquisition (1 6 -1 8 seconds). There was no direct correlation between age, body weight and heart rate and the test-bolus parameters. W ith proper timing, excellent visualisation o f the renal arteries was achieved in all 30 patients. For optimal results, contrast should be present over only part of к -space. The high variation in bolus kinetics mandates a tailored approach to contrast administration fo r optimal ultrafast 3D MRA image quality. S 121 The purpose of the study w as to com pare fiberoptic and virtual endoscopy in patients with lung masses fo r detection o f tum or masses, stenosis and artifacts within the virtual endoscopy. M aterials and Methods: 30 patients were examined both with fiberoptic and virtual endoscopy. Collimation was 2.5 and 5 mm/pitch 1/increment 1.5 and 2.5 mm /120 kv/200 mAs fo r whole lung examination during a single-breathhold scan with a Double-Detector-Helical-CT (Elscint Twin). Real-Time Virtual endoscopy was performed with standard software-tools (Silicon-Graphics-Explorer) and standard hardware (Silicon-Graphics-lndigo2-High Im pact). Views w ere com pared with corresponding fiberoptic views. Criteria were detection of tum ors, stenosis, occlusion, impression by extraluminal masses and artifacts. All results were com pared to surgical findings. Results: Virtual endoscopy showed all tumors, stenosis and occlusions of main airways. C om pared to fiberoptic examinations it is less accurate accord ing to impressions (60%). In all cases it w as possible to pass the stenosis and examine peripheral airways. Artifacts -imitating stenosis -were caused by heart pulsation (30%), secretion (13%) and breathing (16%) which were only detectable in the axial scans. Combined views of multiplanar reconstructed images and virtual endoscopy were superior to detect extraluminal causes of impressions. Conclusion: Real-time Virtual endoscopy is a useful tool fo r preoperative, noninvasive exam ination of the airways but it is limited by spatial resolution (2 .5 -5 mm) and artifacts. Pulmonary nodules were divided into four groups according to their size: I) nodules < 5 mm, II) nodules 6 -1 0 mm, III) nodules 11 -20 mm, IV) nodules > 21 mm. Interpreters also assigned a lesion conspicuity score of pulmonary nodules on a 4-point scale. Film-based viewing of images from a laser printer was performed with a lightbox. Four weeks later, cine viewing was performed on a commercially available workstation. Results: A total num ber o f 266 nodules w as detected with cine viewing while 237 nodules were seen with film -based viewing. A significantly higher fraction rate of nodules < 5 mm in size was found with cine presentation (n = 106) than with film (n = 81) (p < 0.005). Cine viewing (n = 105) allowed a higher detection rate of nodules 6 -1 0 mm in size than film -based viewing (n = 101). The mean conspicuity score of nodules w as 2.9 ± 0.2 with cine viewing versus 2.4 ± 0.2 with film based viewing (p < 0.005). Cine viewing o f helical C T scans increases the detection rate of pulm onary nodules < 1 0 mm in size. The value is greatest in patients with pulm onary nodules 5 < mm in size. 606 Optim al spiral CT reconstruction param eters for the detection of pulmonary nodules K. Neumann, F. Stöblen, R. Langer; Essen/D Purpose: To evaluate optimal image reconstruction param eters in spiral lung CT fo r the detection of pulm onary nodules. Materials and Methods: From a breathhold spiral CT of the thorax (Somatom Plus S, Siemens AG, Germany; collimation 10 mm; pitch 1) performed in twenty-five patients with suspected pulm onary metastases a 10 cm section cephalad to the diaphragm was reconstructed with different increments, al gorithms, and window /center settings. The num ber o f detectable nodules and the confidence of their identification were randomized evaluated by four radiologists. Results: Increments of 5 mm or less and the 180J-algorithm yielded the highest detection rates fo r pulm onary nodules. The confidence o f nodule identification was quoted best fo r the high resolution algorithm, a broad window setting and increments o f 5 mm o r more. Conclusion: For the assessment of pulm onary nodules image reconstruction of spiral lung CT (10 mm beam collimation) should be done with a high resolution 180°-algorithm, a 5 mm increment, and a broad window. Results: The cine display did not affect the sensitivity but significantly de creased the false positive ratings (16% versus 23% , 26% , and 27% , p < 0.1). The sensitivity was independent of effective slice thickness but significantly decreased (p < 0.01) with non-overlapping image reconstruction (41% versus 54% and 56% To evaluate the impact o f thin-collimation spiral C T on the assess ment of diffuse lung disease in com parison with high-resolution CT (HRCT). Materials and methods: Sixty-four consecutive patients with known o r sus pected diffuse lung disease underwent both H R C T (1-mm-collimation scans at 10-mm intervals from the lung apices to the bases) and spiral CT (1-mmcollimation, pitch 1, 6-sec scanning time). Three separate sets o f spiral CT scans were obtained at the level of the aortic arch, carina, and 2 cm above the diaphragm. Each set of spiral CT scans and the corresponding HRCT section were independently evaluated by 2 chest radiologists fo r the presence and extent o f bronchiectasis, honeycombing, ground-glass, nodular and linear opacities. Image quality was also assessed. Results: Parenchymal abnorm alities were present in 48 patients. HR C T and spiral CT provided similar information in patients with honeycom bing (n = 14), ground-glass attenuation (n = 6), and linear opacities (n = 12). Spiral CT proved to be superior in depicting bronchiectasis in 20/24 (83%) patients, and nodular opacities in 8/9 (88%) patients. Motion artifacts were more com monly seen on HRCT than on spiral CT scans (16 versus 10 patients). Slightly increased image noise w as observed on spiral C T scans in 4 cases. Conclusions: Limited thin-collimation spiral C T scans in addition to HRCT m ay be valuable in selected cases, especially in patients with bronchiectasis and subtle nodular patterns. Purpose: Variation o f the MR-signal in the brain related to cardiac and respiratoy activity were examined using a echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence with a high tem poral resolution. Method: At a com mercial 1.5 T whole body system, an EPI-sequence with a measurement time of 107 ms fo r a 64*64 image matrix was developed, which allows the acquisition of 1024 images in 107 s. In addition the cardiac pulse and the respiration was monitored. M easurement w ere performed in an axial slice through the aqueduct. In order to increase signal from spins entering the slice from outside during the measurement, a pulse angle of 90° was used. The signal of the time series was analyzed in selected brain regions. In addition, images were rearranged according to their tim e delay to the ecg-pulse. By this, signal change of the w hole image within one cardiac cycle could be evaluated in the cine mode. Results: No significant signal variations due to cardiac o r respiratory activity was found in normal brain tissue. In arteries and veins one signal maximum was found 100 ms and 700 ms after the peripheral measured pulse signal, respectivly. In the CSF within the aqueduct tw o signal maxima could be ob served, which indicated a bidirectional m ovem ent within one cardiac cycle. The first maximum of the aquaeduct signal disappeared during inspiration, dem on strating a unbalanced flow through the aqueduct in this respiratory phase. Conclusion: With EPI sequences the signal variations in the brain in ac cordance to the cardiac and respiratory activity can be studied without any triggering of measurements. In a acqusition time of only one m inute inform a tion for the analysis o f CSF pulsations can be obtained. This m easurement technique can be added to patients exam inations with only m inor tim e con sumption. To evaluate functional differences of these structures we have performed a study by com paring imaginary and real voluntary hand movements. Methods and Materials: fMRI data of the whole brain were acquired with a com mercial whole body 1.5 Tesla tom ograph (Siemens Vision®) using a multislice echo planar imaging sequence (EPI) with 27 axial slices (4 mm slice thickness, 1 mm gap, 128*96 matrix, 260*162 mm FOV, TE 66 ms, TR 1.8 ms ct 90°, acquisition tim e 4 sec). Sequential real and imaginary hand movements w ere performed by 10 volunteers (5 male and 5 fem ale, 1 9 -4 0 years). Imagined movem ents were trained to avoid motoric output by EMG control and a personal assessm ent of scaling the intensity. Statistical evaluation of the fMRI data was done by calculation of z-values and a comparison of activated pixels within M1, PM, SMA and cerebellum. Results: Imagined movem ents show lower activation in M1 than the executed movements. In addition during imaginary movements the cerebellar activity was dim inished but revealed great individual differences. Conclusions: W hole brain fMRI is useful to assess functional activity of the whole central m otor system and it seems to be feasible to evaluate different steps during planning and execution of voluntary actions. The ipsilateral coactivation of the corresponding area w as < 2%. No significant differences between right-and left-handed subjects were found in the primary motor area. Musicians had a significantly larger area of activation in this region but no significant changes with a more com plex paradigm. The paradigm com plexity was related to changes in SMA and prem otor area. W ith foot movement, the primary m otor area was larger in ballet dancers com pared to normals. Results and Discussion: The num ber of activated pixels and the relative signal enhancement of the activated brain volum e ( ± one SD), obtained from correlation analysis and averaged over three repeats, are given in the Table: Copenhagen 66 ± 14.5 pixel 4.6 ± 0.7 (%) Heidelberg 69 ± 11.5 pixel 5.4 ± 0.6 (%) Vienna___________ 81 ±__5.6 pixel_____ 5.2 ± 0.2 (%)__________________________________ Location and size of the activated areas is anatom ically and physiologically correct and, despite studying different subjects, very consistent in all sites. This study shows that (i) international m ulticenter studies in fMRI are feasible, S 124 (ii) using similar hardware and a strict protocol, quantitative com parison of fMRI data from different MR-systems and subjects is possible, however, (iii) To determ ine the cortical m otor hand area in patients suffering brain tumors in the pre-/postcentral and central location, fMRI was carried out subsequently at surgery. Methods and Materials: 16 right-handed patients (10 females, 6 men, mean age 58.1 years) had to carry out repetitive hand movements with the dominant right as well as the left hand side. All tum ors were histologically proven (Astrocytoma W HO 3 (n = 3), glioblastom a W HO 4 (n = 6), meningioma (n = 4) and each 1 angioma, actinomycosis and metastases). In 10 participants, the space-occupying lesions were located close to the precentral, in 4 cases to the postcentral and in 2 subjects inbetween the central region. The fMRI was performed by use of a conventional MRI scanner (SIEMENS Vision, Erlangen, Germany) using EPI technique (TR 1.68 ms, TE 64 ms, FOV 220 mm, matrix 114*128, 14 slices). Results: In all subjects, opening and closing of the hand leads to a significant increase of the MR signal, therefore the m otor area could be clearly defined in all participants. Best signal detection could be performed, if there was only a mild shift due to the space occupying lesion, more diffuse signal intensity was seen in case o f a more infiltrating neoplasm. In all subjects, the increase in signal intensity was correlated to the coincidence of time of the onset and end of the m otor task. Conclusions: Functional imaging helps to identify the m otor strip at surgery and will be of further interest in com puted assisted surgery. 618 Functional MRI in patients with brain tum ours in or near the sensorimotor cortex C. Fellner1, J. S chlaier1, P. H e ld 1, F. Fellner2, A. B raw anski1, S. Feuerbach1 ; 1 R egensburg/D, 2 Erlangen-Nürnberg/D Purpose: To evaluate the applicability o f functional MRI (fMRI) to preoperative imaging in patients with brain tum ours in o r near the sensorim otor cortex. Methods and Materials: 16 patients with brain tum ours in or near the senso rimotor cortex were included in this study, 7 of them showed a hemiparesis. Preoperative MRI including fMRI was performed at 1.5 T. The task consisted of clenching and spreading of the hand contralateral to the tum our location. Quality of subtraction images (activation -rest), t-maps, and time course of signal intensity in activated regions were evaluated visually on a scale between 1 and 5. Statistical analysis included the M ann-W hitney test (p < 0.05). Results: In 7 patients the tum our was located outside, in 9 patients adjacent or within the sensorimotor cortex. Edema was present in 14 patients -outside or adjacent to the sensorim otor cortex (n = 7) o r within it (n = 7). At least 75% of the fMRI studies were graded as satisfactory (or better), none of them had to be rejected completely. Our preliminary results showed no statistically significant differences for: presence or absence o f hemiparesis: location of tum our or edema within or near the sensorimotor cortex. Conclusion: fMRI of the sensorim otor cortex can be integrated into preoper ative MRI in patients with brain tumours. Results: Excretory urography is first choice technique fo r an approach to these four clinical urologie situations: lithiasis, obstruction, hem aturia and recurrent infection and it is also essential in some other situations (uretheric iatro genic trauma, follow-up of bladder resected tum ors, invasion from colorectal carcinoma, etc). (1) Excretory urography is still an essential technique fo r the study o f the urinary tract, mainly the excretory part, and in a clever com bination with the other imaging techniques it allow s an accurate diagnosis.  In 78 patients admitted with renal colic, spiral CT, US and IVU were performed to dem onstrate urinary stones and other relevant pathologies. Patients were then followed-up and stone passage or removal, and the course of clinical symptoms were noted. The value of these modalities were statistically compared using the criteria of direct stone dem onstration as well as indirect supportive findings. Results: Forty-four patients were proved to have ureteral stones based on stone passage or removal. Seventeen patients were considered not to have ureteral stones based on failure to recover a stone, disappearance of symptoms, and diagnoses unrelated to stone disease. Spiral CT w as found to be the most useful method in the demonstration of ureteral stones with a sensitivity of 94%. Reformatted images clearly depicted the intraureteral location of stones in most cases. Spiral CT showed renal calculi in 18 patients, US in 5 and IVU in 7. Conclusions: Noncontrast axial and reformatted spiral C T images were found superior to US and IVU in the depiction of ureteral and renal calculi. Reformatted images can be a good alternative to IVU in problem atic cases. Tuesday T1-w eighted 3D-FFE-sequence up to 120 minutes after i.v.-injection of the gadolinium bloodpool prototype WIN 22181. Results: In the first 15 minutes following injection, the urographie effect was predom inantly poor. 105 minutes after application, excellent visualization of the entire collecting system w as evident in 4 pigs, while incomplete but satisfactory demonstration persisted in 3 anim als. A fter additional low dose Furosemide administration in one case, further distension of the urinary tract was rapidly achieved w hich increased image quality effectively. Signal measurements within the norm al renal parenchyma revealed a gradual decrease o f the initial distinct enhancement. Conclusion: In the animal experiment, contrast-enhanced MRU allows de tailed visualization of nonobstructed urinary tracts, while information about renal perfusion and excretory function are obtained simultaneously. However, application of a diuretic and ureteral com pression seem to be necessary to prevent unpractical examination duration that results from the prolonged physiological clearance o f the bloodpool agent. cium is usually straightforward. On ultrasonography, however, a cystic lesion containing calcium may arouse the suspicion of malignancy which then needs further evaluation by CT. As there are very few descriptions of this lesion on CT, we wish to present the C T findings of pyelocalyceal diverticula containing milk of calcium in 5 patients. The diverticulum was an incidental finding in 2 pa tients, a malignant lesion w as suspected in 1 and the diagnosis was suggested by ultrasonography in the other 2. Three repeated scans to the kidney area were performed in every patient: an unenhanced scan, an early post-contrast scan and a delayed scan. Results: Unenhanced scans demonstrated a dense, round lesion in 2, a cavity with a fluid-fluid level with calcific material in the lower part in another 2 and crescent-shaped calcific material in the inferior margin o f a cystic lesion in the fifth. All lesions were situated in the parenchyma adjacent to a calyx. Early post-contrast scans showed slight enhancement of the clear fluid in the upper part in 3, creating on delayed scans either a fluid-fluid level o r total opacification of the diverticulum. Conclusion: Pyelocalyceal diverticula containing milk of calcium present on CT as a partially calcified renal mass. Slight opacification soon after injection may be mistaken fo r enhancement arousing suspicion of a tumor. However, a delayed scan will demonstrate a densely opacified cyst filled with contrast from the collecting system which is virtually pathognom onic of the lesion.  The primary patency was 7 months. The reintervention rate was highest in childs's A and В patients with a 100% reintervention rate after two years. After one o r more reinterventions, the mean secondary patency w as 29 months. A fter the first reintervention, no significant differences in patency was found fo r the different child's classes. Patency following additional stenting of the draining vein was 10 months, after shunt PTA the average patency w as 5 months only. Discussion: Alm ost all patients with child's A or В class require at least one reintervention during follow-up. This reintervention normally consists of an uncomplicated redilatation of the shunt o r additional stent placement. With regular follow-up, a secondary patency of TIPSS of 8 0 -9 0 % after 3 years can be achieved. through a transjugular approach. In the other patient, a transhepatic approach was also needed. Results: Three patients died at 2 days (unsuccessful TIPS), 11 days and 4 m onths after the procedure. In three patients an orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) was carried out with good clinical results. In 3 patients a rethrombosis (2 partial and 1 com plete) was detected during the follow-up, in tw o of them the throm bus was observed in the surgical (OLT) procedure (one month after TIPS). Results: In membranous w ebs the procedure consisted in its recanalization and balloon (BD) dilatation by a fem oral, jugular or transhepatic approach; one patient required several (six) redilatations. In one patient a TIPS procedure was also perform ed before OLT. Post-OLT stenoses were treated with BD and metallic stenting. Hepatic vein stenoses were successfully treated with metallic prostheses. The extrinsic com pression of the cava was controlled with the placement of a metallic stent before OLT. We present a RIS-PACS system, which we call APARADI (Adm inistration of Patients in Radiology and Digital Imaging) and which has been developed directly from the needs o f the radiologist and his technicians. The RIS is MS-W INDOW S based, running on a network, like Novell (Client/Server), TCP/IP and others. The PACS runs on UNIX-workstations, using an ATM o r fast Ethernet network. Using this equipm ent we developed the follow ing tools: electronic patient m anagem ent by MS-W INDOW S based appointm ent pad; input of patient data by chipcard; working plans fo r the different examination rooms with registration o f the momentary status o f the exam ination (planned, w ork in progress, examined, dictated, etc.); transfer and retransfer o f images to PACS; electronic medical report; input of clinical data also hand-written by electronic notebook; speech recording with and without speech processing, using exam specific text-modules; exam specific diagnostic helps like anatom ic diagram s and organ specific differential-diagnosis; electronic signature on S 129 Tuesday the reports; electronic accountancy, in Germany officially approved by the Kassenärztliche Bundesvereinigung Cologne. The system has proved to be a very practical and econom ic realisation of film less radiology. 643 A model fo r changing from outdated analogue radiology to a digital hospital campus V. Fiedler; Krefeld/D Purpose: Rapid inter-departmental communication and economical image archiving are imperative fo r today's hospital. For this reason, while modernizing our Radiology D epartment in the autumn of 1995, we installed a Picture Archiving and Comm unication System in our 1200 bed hospital. M ethods and Materials: W ith the SIENET-PACS, our Radiology has been fully digital fo r 18 m onths; all exam inations with the exception o f mammography are now reported from high-quality monitors and stored in digital archives. Results: Digital image networking technology provides us with better util isation of equipment, higher diagnostic quality and guarantees trouble-free image distribution to the clinical departments, which are located throughout our hospital campus. Furthermore, the Klinikum Krefeld provides radiological expertise to affiliated hospitals connected via public lines. Conclusion: On the basis of empirical data, we have determ ined that the im plem entation o f such system s has been medically beneficial and cost-effective, with far-reaching, positive consequences fo r physicians, radiographers, clerks and patients during routine use. The increasing utilization and image quality of US equipment along with growing patient loads require more efficient system s fo r documentation and archiving. W e report on ou r experiences of the first three months fol lowing the installation of a new com puter based system fo r the storage and m anagem ent of image data and reports on a num ber o f 900 patients. Materials and Methods: The documentation system used is ALIUItraPACS, which consists of a networked software package running on standard personal computers. Images are digitized from the US video output using a frame grabber and archived to W ORM discs. Image capture via DICOM-3 is also possible. Results: T he availability of images fo r demonstration or fo r reference during subsequent exam inations is significantly increased. Revision of patient reports is easy. The high image quality is useful fo r research and teaching. A WWW interface provides access to images and reports from office PCs. Data ex change with other PACS system s is possible. Approximately five weeks were required fo r the staff to adapt to the new system. Only large institutions can likely afford the high initial costs. Conclusion: Digital documentation system s fo r US offer advantages in the daily departm ental routine, e.g. reducing time required fo r patient management. . Recognition accuracy and duration of dictation as well as correction time were recorded and compared in each system. The recognition accuracy was achieved by counting correctly recognized words relatively to the total am ount of words. Results: Both system s started with a mean accuracy o f about 90%. Depending from adaptation process o f the system, reports were used to expand the representation of speech, syntax and vocabulary of the system. A fter a training period the recognition accuracy improved to 99%. Both systems require about 2.5-fold of the conventional dictation time. The IPDS requires even more time due to the stop-and-go-speech necessary for word-separation. Differences due to specific characteristics of both system s will be presented. Conclusion: Digital voice recognition will be a part of the daily routine work of a physician. It is handable after a hard tim e of system's training. Then recognition rates o f more than 99% as reached by conventional dictation m ethods can also be achieved digitally. The display o f digital plain film radiographs is becoming increasingly more popular, particularly with the advent of CR and PACS systems. This opens up the possibility o f com puterised teaching material/sessions and case conferencing systems. For medium to large teaching/conferencing sessions the display o f the images on a large screen projector is required. The aim of the project was to assess the suitability of a high quality large screen video projector for use with digitised plain film radiographs. Methods and Materials: Fifty plain film X-R ays of various pathologies were digitised at 2 К x 2 К resolution and 12 bits pixel depth. These were displayed on the large screen projector (Electrohom e 2 К x 2 К projector). A panel o f consultant radiologists were asked to report on the projected images. The adjustment o f w indow level and width on the displayed image was utilised as w ere other image processing functions such as edge enhancement, zooming, etc. A num ber of weeks later the original plain film s were reported. The initial results show that such a large screen overhead projector is not capable o f displaying images at a quality that is required fo r prim ary diagnosis, particularly of subtle abnormalities. However, the image quality does seem adequate fo r presentation at large conference presentations and teaching sessions. localizations can be obtained. A com plete or incomplete chemoembolization may also be monitored by means of C 0 2 microbubbles. Materials and Methods: W e studied 76 patients with biopsied hepatocellular carcinoma. The echographic contrast media consisted of C 0 2 microbubbles produced by sonication of 5 ml C 0 2 added to 5 ml saline and 2.5 ml of the patients blood. Ultrasound studies took place before, during and after injection of C 0 2 microbubbles into the hepatic artery through a catheter previously introduced. These patients were treated with chemoembolization and LUF stain was estimated 3 weeks after with CT. All patients were previously studied with US and CT of the liver and 14 with MR. These findings were compared with the results of C 0 2 echoangiography. Results: In 49 cases echographic В-Mode signals are improved allowing a better evaluation o f detection and spatial resolution of hepatic tum ors: size, borders, spreading and satellite localizations. Eight small tum ors, previously undetected with plain US, were shown. There has not been a supplemental information favourable fo r alternative treatm ents such as surgery or alcoholiza tion because in these 8 patients US, CT and MR showed always multinodules. No improved echo Doppler findings were possible during C 0 2 injection, related to the dazzling effect. Three weeks after chemoembolization, C T (48 patients) showed an intensive LUF stain in those tum ors that had a high increase of echogenicity after C 02.  The num ber of depicted HCCs and their satellites as well as their contrast were significantly higher fo r protocol В than fo r A. The inversion in contrast between the tw o scans was significantly more pronounced fo r protocol В in comparison to protocol A. In the arterial phase protocol В depicted 22/22 primary and 32/37 satellite tum ors com pared to protocol A, which detected only 18/20 primary and 11/24 satellite tum ors relative to MRI. The delineation o f HCCs by CT is very dependent on the scan-performance. High injection rates (> 1.4 g iodine/sec) along with bolussynchronisized scanning improves the accurracy. However MRI with SPIO was superior to CT in tum or detection. Methods and Materials: 20 patients with pathologically verified head and neck tum ors (8 malignant and 12 benign tum ors) were studied with an 0.1 T MR imager. T ip dispersion effect (ED^p) was defined as 1 -(intensity with lower locking field am plitude/intensity with higher locking field amplitude). The spin lock effects and magnetization transfer effects fo r tum ors were also calculated. The T ip dispersion effects were higher fo r m alignant than benign tum ors (p = 0.002, t-test). W ith ED¡sP, 0.14 as the threshold, sensitivity for detecting a malignant tum or was 88% , specificity 67% and accuracy 75%. W e found a strong correlation between T i p dispersion effects and spin lock effects and between T i p dispersion effects and m agnetization transfer effects (r = 0.87, p < 0.001 and r = 0.88, p < 0.001, respectively). were examined with MRI (T1 -weighted pre-Zpostcontrast spin-echo sequences and T2-weighted spin-echo-and fast spin-echo sequences; 1.5 T system). Plain films were also available. Qualitative image analysis included evalu ation of signal intensity, enhancement, homogeneity, type of lesion, cortical abnormality and periosteal reaction. Results: Signal characteristics and enhancement revealed no differences. Lymphomas were significantly more often hom ogeneous (47%; Ewing sar coma 20%; osteosarcoma 6%), showed significantly less frequent cortical abnormality (60%; Ewing sarcoma 87%; osteosarcom a 100%), com plete pen etration (13%, Ewing sarcoma 67% ; osteosarcom a 87%), focal destruction (13%; Ewing sarcoma 40% ; osteosarcom a 81%) and com plete destruction (0%; Ewing sarcoma 13%; osteosarcom a 19%) and the patients were signifi cantly older (cut off point 30 y). Primary lymphoma o f bone is characterized by minimal cortical changes despite an accom panying soft tissue mass in a patient over 30 years of age. Results: Gadolinium -enhanced MR imaging patterns of small chondrom a and chondrosarcoma were classified as follows, 1) peripheral enhancem ent (6 enchondrom as and 2 chondrosarcomas), 2) septal enhancem ent (4 enchon dromas and 3 chondrosarcomas), 3) spotted enhancem ent with shading (4 enchondrom as), and 4) total enhancement (2 enchondrom as, 1 periosteal chondroma, and 2 chondrosarcoma). Peripheral enhancem ent, septal en hancement and total enhancement were seen in both chondrom as and chon drosarcomas. However, com bination of peripheral enhancement and spotted enhancement with shading was only seen in enchondromas. A com bination of peripheral enhancem ent and spotted enhance ment with shading is thought as a finding strongly indicating enchondrom a, and this finding is a differential point from chondrosarcoma. 673  Eighteen patients with solid tum or o r plasm ocytom a were examined by using a 1,5-T Siemens Vision. TSE T 1 -and T2-w eighted im ages as well as inversion recovery (TIRM) were analyzed prior to C hem other apy, during aplasia and during repopulation. The regions exam ined were the lumbar spine. Our results were correlated with iliac crest biopsies, granulocyte counts and labelling index fo r plasmocytomas. We observed during aplasia in 12 of 18 cases a marked increase in w ater signal intensity on the TIRM sequences with corresponding slight signal decrease on the TSE-T1 images. In three cases, we observed a hom ogeneous reversed pattern. The remaining three cases showed an inhom ogeneous signal change in both w ater and fat sensitive sequences. Up to the third month a consistent decrease in signal intensity of bone marrow ensued in 14 out of 18 patients. Conclusion: An elevated water signal intensity of bone m arrow is known to correlate with increased cellularity. Our observations during aplasia therefore run contrary to expectations. Reasons explaining this phenom enon include extracellular edem a and liberation of cytoplasm following cytolysis after HDC. Results: Doppler spectra was provided in eleven of the lesions (6 malignant, 5 benign). The difference between vascularity detected by Doppler US of two groups w as found statistically significant (p = 0.01). In 50% ( Results: There were many sim ilar characteristics both fo r SBC and ABC, but MRI showed in all ABC in T1 a hypo-and in T2 a hyperintense signal, whereas 12% of the SBC demonstrated a varying signal pattern. 5 ABC received Gd and all 5 cases enhanced. 15 SBC were examined with Gd and 1/3 did not show any Gd-enhancem ent. Fluid-fluid levels were seen in 50% of the ABC com pared to 6% of the SBC. Overall the host bone was enlarged in 80% of the ABC, w hereas 50% o f the SBC were not. C T was essential fo r demonstrating thin bony structures, i.e. septa were found more frequently in SBC. Conclusion: 1.) There is no specific signal pattern fo r bone cysts, but MRI offers additional information (fluid-fluid levels, Gd enhancement etc). 2.) There are indications to differentiate SBC from ABC. 3.) X-ray remains the basic tool, CT is essential for calcified structures and scintigraphy has little value. Purpose: To describe MR appearance, natural evolution and to make histo logic correlation in a large series of prim ary and recurrent desmoids. M aterials and Methods: In the European Study on MR Imaging of Soft Tissue Tum ors' (initiated at the ECR 1993) 28 desm oids were compiled. Both in primary (n = 18) and recurrent (n = 10) desmoids, several parameters (e.g. location, size, com partm ental distribution, shape, am ount and distribution of low signal intensity (SI) areas, margins, spread, bone involvement, S i's, homogeneity, enhancem ent degree and pattern) were scored on MR images. Two cases were followed with MR imaging over more than six years. Results: Desmoids are mostly located in the muscles of shoulder and hip gir dle, are often fusiform with partially ill defined margins and may be multicentric with variable am ounts o f non enhancing low SI areas. Rare subcutaneous desm oids have a more stellar appearance. Spontaneous evolution is charac terized by an increase of low SI areas. There is a non proportional relationship between cellularity and SI on T2-weighted images. No obvious difference is seen neither in cellularity nor in overall SI on T2-weighted images by comparing recurrent with primary desmoids. Conclusion: MR findings in a series of 28 desmoids, MR follow-up in 5 patients and similarity of primary and recurrent lesions as well on histology as on MR imaging aid in understanding the natural evolution of desmoids and raise the question whether secondary lesions are recurrences or asynchronous primary lesions. These concepts may change the therapeutic (surgical versus non surgical) strategy of desmoid tumors. The most evident clinical signs of aging at skeletal level include loss o f height and kyphosis, due to progressive w edging of vertebral bodies. On the other hand it is largely docum ented that BMD decreases with age. Aim: of this study is to investigate the correlation between BMD and the sum of vertebral body heights from T4 to L5 by morphometry. Methods: in 163 women (age range 3 9 -7 4 years), 76 premenopausal (age range 3 9 -5 4 years) and 87 postmenopausal (age range 4 6 -7 4 years) were taken lateral radiographs of the thoracic and lumbar spine and BMD of the lumbar spine by dual-energy X-rays absorptiom etry (DXA) using a QDR-2000 (Hologic, Inc, USA). Vertebral morphometry was performed by means a com puterized image analysis system (NIM, Verona, Italy) which allows to digitalize the images and to calculate the vertebral heights, their ratios and the sum of the vertebral bodies heights (T4-L5) namely the anterior, middle and posterior spine deform ity indexes (AHs, MHs and PHs). Results: AHs, MHs and PHs significantly correlate with BMD; the correlation is stronger between BMD vs AHs (r = 0.8, p < 0.0001) respect BMD vs S 1 3 6 MHs (г = 0.75, p < 0.0001) and BMD vs PHs (г = 0.76, p < 0.0001). The correlation between BMD and AH s is higher in postmenopausal compared to premenopausal women (r = 0.87 vs r = 0.54, p < 0.0001). A significant inverse correlation of both BMD and AHs with age is observed (r = -0 .7 8 and r = -0 .4 7 , p < 0.0001, respectively). Both BMD and AHs correlate with years since menopause; the correlation is higher fo r AHs com pared to BMD (r = -0 .4 7 , p < 0.001 vs r = -0 .2 7 , p < 0.05).  Axial CT-data-sets were obtained from 10 human cadaveric hips (age between 30 to 80 years). The data-sets were transferred to a SUN-Sparc-Station with installed CEMAX-3D-Software. After calculation of six defined density ranges (HU < 200, 2 0 0 -3 9 9 HU, 4 0 0 -5 9 9 HU, 6 0 0 -799 HU, 8 0 0 -9 9 9 HU and > 1000 HU) 3D CT-reconstructions were carried out. These various density grades were visualized using a false colour map. Different transluminescence and opacity of each zone during volum e rendering allowed to visualize zones of different bone density in the 3D-im age. Results: In all specim ens a similar distribution of the cortical mineralization w as found. The resulting colour images dem onstrate regions of higher m in eralization in normal cortical bone. The distribution found w as identical to the anatom ically known density distribution of the hip. W e saw a high correlation between the bone density distribution in our images and the distribution of stress as demonstrated in the photoelastic stress model. To present an integrated diagnostic approach for MR-mammography com bining high spatial resolution static imaging with high temporal resolution dynam ic imaging, with autom ated data processing and standardized analysis in an efficient and reproducible concept. Methods and Materials: Automated contrast media adm inistration, standard ized imaging, autom ated analysis of dynam ic studies with quantitative as sessm ent utilizing data reduction techniques and color overlays, standardized documentation and evaluation criteria were developed. This approach was prospectively docum ented and only patients with histologically confirmed find ings were included in the evaluation. A total of 318 patients were evaluated. To assess reproducibility, a m ulti-reader analysis w as performed. The diagnostic accuracy showed no significant variation regarding patient age, extent o f breast parenchyma o r extend o f overall contrast en hancement in breast parenchyma. Significant differences were found regard ing lesion size, wich is due to difference in invasiveness and vascularisation of the tumor. Invasive carcinomas are detected with a sensitivity o f 92% , noninvasive with 50% . Benign lesions were detected with a specificity of 96%. The test of reliability showed no differences by repeated evaluation or different readers on the same level o f experience. Conclusion: An integrated concept with a standardized imaging procedure and analysis utilizing quantitative, functional and morphologic information allows a reproducible MRM. This approach enables a reader-independent high specificity, which has been a m ajor limitation in MRM. To explore the association between dynamic MR characteristics and histopathological prognostic factors of invasive breast cancer. Methods and Materials: 53 women with prim ary invasive breast cancer un derw ent dynam ic contrast-enhanced breast MR imaging. Region-of-interest (ROI) analysis w as performed on synthetic images obtained by kinetic mod elling of the dynam ic data. For each tumour, operator-defined, large ROIs and com puter-defined, 9-pixel ROIs were selected. The relative increase in mean ROI pixel intensity was expressed in the form of enhancement ra tios. Univariate and m ultivariate analyses were performed to explore the association of these ratios with standard histologic factors, including tumour size, histopathological classification, histologic grade, presence of extensive in situ com ponent and lymphovascular invasion, multifocal disease, and axillary lymph node status. Results: All enhancement ratios showed significant differences between node positive and node-negative tum ours (P < 0.002). However, autom ated ROI ratios showed less overlap between node-positive and node-negative carcino mas than large ROI ratios did. A strongly significant association was observed between all autom ated ROI enhancement ratios and histologic grade (P < 0.001). Based on stepwise multiple regression analysis, node status and histologic grade were the only histopathological factors with a significant independent effect on the enhancement characteristics. Conclusion: There is a strong association between dynam ic MR characteris tics and two im portant prognostic markers of invasive breast cancer, namely, axillary node status and histologic grade. This may allow MR imaging to be used in preoperative predictions o f tum our behaviour and biological activity. To assess the value of delayed gadolinium -enhanced MR imaging in differentiation between breast carcinoma and fibroadenom a. M aterialand Methods: At 1.5 T, 55 women with 83 breast lesions (55 breast carcinomas and 28 fibroadenom as) were prospectively examined by dynamic gadolinium -enhanced MR imaging using T1-weighted gradient-echo sequence. The imaging protocol included early imaging every 90 sec during the first six minutes followed by delayed imaging every 10 min up to one hour after injection of Gd-DTPA (0.2 mmol/kg). Qualitative and quantitative analysis of the center and periphery of lesions was performed. Results: On dynamic gadolinium -enhanced images, all lesions showed en hancement on the 90-sec images. On delayed images, decrease in signal intensity of the periphery and retension o f the contrast agent in the center (peripheral washout) was seen in 28 carcinom as and in none of the fibroade nomas. Simultaneous w ashout of the center and periphery was seen in 27 carcinomas and in all fibroadenom as. Centripetal w ashout had a specificity of 100%, a sensitivity of 51%, fo r diagnosis of breast carcinoma. Conclusion: Delayed centripetal w ashout is a specific sign of malignancy on gadolinium -enhanced MR imaging o f the breast, w hich further helps the differentiation between breast carcinoma and fibroadenom a. in consensus mode. Tum or center, tum or periphery, and surrounding breast tissue w ere evaluated. The initial results show a low correlation between proliferation and capillary markers (coefficency of correlation (CC) > 0.4). There is also a correlation between the enhancem ent in the first measurement p.i. and the slope o f enhancem ent (CC > -0 .5 ). No correlation has been found between MRM enhancem ent data and immunostaining. Conclusion: Our data suggest to delete the concept of capillary density as a major contributing factor of enhancement. Additional permeability factors and interstitial markers will have to be studied. Material and Methods: 136 women with suspected breast lesions were ex am ined at 1.5 T using double breast coil. Three-dimensional T1-weighted gradient-echo sequence was performed before and 9 0 ,1 8 0 , 270, and 360 sec after Gd-DTPA injection. MR angiography of both breasts was obtained by im age subtraction and maximum intensity projection in three orthogonal planes. Difference in vascularity between the tw o breasts was evaluated by three independent readers blinded to the diagnosis. To eliminate bias, enhancing lesions and corresponding contralateral sites were masked by round pieces of paper. Statistical analysis was done by the Chi-square test. The cases included 85 women with malignancy (81 invasive duct carcinomas, 1 inflam matory carcinoma, 1 lobular carcinoma, 2 lymphomas), 21 with benign lesions (11 fibroadenom as, 2 granulomas, 6 proliferative mastopathies, 2 papillomas), and 30 normal women. Unilaterally increased vascularity w as observed in 67 patients (50 invasive duct carcinomas, 1 lobular carcinoma, 2 fibroadenom as, 1 granuloma, and 7 normal women on the same side of the increased vascularity and 3 invasive duct carcinomas, 1 inflam matory carcinoma, 1 fibroadenom a, and 1 papilloma on the opposite side of the increased vascularity). Significant association between malignant breast neoplasm and ipsilateral increased vascularity (p < 0.001) was observed.  In a prospective study we only examined breast tum ours (13 carcinomas, 11 fibroadenom as) with visible blood flow in CDS examination within and up to a distance of 5 mm from the tumour. We measured maximum and minimum blood flow velocity, resistance index and mean pulsatility index of the tum our vessels. Additionally we performed dy namic M RI-mamm ography (1.5 T; T1-weighted Flash-2D sequences; contrast medium: GD-DTPA). We calculated tw o param eters to quantify the different enhancem ent curves o f benign and malignant tumours: A (intensity of the 1st minute after contrast medium injection in percent of the intensity before injection) and В (intensity o f the 1st minute in percent of the intensity 5 minutes after injection). To perform MRI of the surgical specim en T1-and T2-weighted SE-sequences were performed with the use of the orbit coil. The position and plane of slices were adjusted to the preexisting in vivo situation. In all patients 20 ml of Gd-DTPA w as injected during operation, just before resection of the tumor. Results: MRI of specimen showed a good correlation with the in vivo MRM. As expected, Gd-DTPA w as visible in the specim en. Histologic findings and MR appearance of the specimens showed a good correlation between tumor size, multifocality, macroscopic appearance, excision margins, lymphangiosis, tum or necrosis, and tum or vitality. In carcinomas, a contrast enhancement was seen in the invasive tum or nodules w hereas in in situ carcinomas no contrast enhancement was detected. In fibroadenom as, parts with epithelial hyperplasia showed a strong contrast enhancement. Occult insulinomas are small pancreasadenom as that remain unde tectable at ultrasonography (US), com putertom ography (CT), m agnetic reso nance imaging (MRI) and angiography. Objective is to determ ine the sensitivity of calcium stimulation in localizing these small secreting tum ors to region of the pancreas. To stimulate the release of insulin, calcium gluconate (0.015-0.025 meq Ca++/kg) was selectively injected into the arteries supplying the pancreas in 5 patients. Prior to calcium injection and 30, 60, 90 and 120 seconds after, 5 ml sam ples of blood were obtained from the right hepatic vein. Insulin levels were then determ ined by mean of radioimm unoassays. A twofold increase in insulin level in the venous sam ple after 60 seconds localized the insulinoma to the region of the pancreas supplied by the selectively injected artery. ganic hyperglycaemia, 0.45 mmol of Ca++ was injected into the gastroduode nal, superior mesenteric, proprial hepatic, proximal and distal splenic artery. Insulin levels were measured in sam ples taken from the right hepatic vein before and 30, 60, 90, 120, 180 and 300 seconds after Ca++ injection. Results: Less than 2-fold, 2-to 4-fold and more than 4-fold insulin gradients indicated respectively normal tissue, collateral and direct tum or supply. AS VS localized all the adenom as of the pancreatic head and body and 2 out o f 4 adenom as of the tail correctly, as confirmed by surgery. Two adenomas of the pancreatic tail were erroneously localized to the body segment, but the fault was rectified by the angiography. In one patient with a negative ASVS and w ithout exploration, the diagnosis of an insulinoma was revised. Conclusions: ASVS is the most accurate method for the preoperative local ization of insulinomas. To determ ine whether spiral CT scans performed during full inspira tion and expiration can help detect chest wall invasion by lung cancer. Materials and Methods: Twenty-three patients (64.1 ± 8.8 yrs) with peripheral bronchogenic carcinoma abutting the chest wall were prospectively included in the study. Two spiral CT acquisitions (5-mm thickness, 1:1 pitch, 3-mm interval reconstruction) through the neoplasm were performed during suspended in spiration and expiration. C hest wall invasion was first assessed on inspiratory scans according to the following criteria: obtuse angle between the tum or and the chest wall, > 3 cm contact, pleural thickening, extrapleural fat obliteration. Inspiratory and expiratory scans were then evaluated and changes in the lo cation of the tum or relative to the chest wall were assessed on corresponding scans. All patients underwent surgical resection of the tum or and CT findings were compared with pathologic findings. Results: At surgery chest wall invasion was present in 6/23 pts. Inspiratory scans showed 83.3% sensitivity when tw o criteria were combined, although the specificity w as only 35.3% (6/17 pts.) with an overall accuracy of 47.8%. Inspiratory/expiratory scans showed the same sensitivity (83.3% -5/6 pts.), but reached a higher specificity (82.4% -14/17 pts.) with an overall accuracy of 82.6% (p < 0.01). Conclusions: Combined inspiratory and expiratory spiral CT scans can im prove the accuracy of C T in predicting neoplastic chest wall invasion. 715 Capsular and extracapsular lymph node infiltration by lung cancer studied by CT G. Macis, T. Pirronti, C. Bock, P. Marano; Rome/I CT in lymph node staging of lung cancer is now established at about 80% with 20% false positives and 20% false negatives. In our opinion this is due to the single parameter examined, the size, as threshold fo r the differentiation of pathologic from normal lymph nodes. Other significant m orphologic features should also be considered. To this purpose, based on Berg's intuitions (1965), who after surgical excision of lung cancer observed a marked difference in 5-year survival of patients with intranodal involvement (43%) as com pared to those with extracapsular spread (4.3%), we have analyzed the CT findings of this lymphatic diffusion: (1) disease located within the nodes: frequently enlarged lymph nodes of homogeneous hyperdensity and with well-defined and regular margins from adjacent fat; (2) capsular lymph node infiltration: hyperdense, thin rim o r presence of nodularity-discontinuity in the rim; (3) extracapsular spread: thick hyperdense, irregular, ill-defined rim; fine hy perdense strands in the adjacent fat; adhesion to or infiltration into adjacent structures. These aspects were defined and retrospectively searched for in a specific group of patients operation for stage N0, N1, N2 lung cancer. W e have started a prospective study on the new patients undergoing surgery to assess the role of these signs in N staging. Results are still preliminary. 716 Screening for small asym ptom atic bronchogenic carcinom a with low-dose spiral-CT of the chest S. Diederich, H. Lenzen, M. Eameri, N. Roos, RE. Peters; Mdnster/D Purpose: To assess the findings obtained with low-dose C T of the chest in heavy smokers and analyse the role of additional thin-section low-dose C T of pulmonary nodules. Materials and Methods: 51 heavy smokers (minimum tobacco consumption: 30 pack years) with no previous history of m alignancy underwent unenhanced low-dose Spiral-CT of the chest (120 kVp, 50 mAs, slice thickness: 5 mm, Pitch 2, Image reconstruction: 5 mm). If pulm onary nodules were identified an additional thin-section (slice thickness: 1.5 to 3 mm) low-dose study of the lesion w as performed. Results: In 31/51 individuals (65%) no pulm onary nodules were observed. In 12/51 (23%) solitary nodules (size: < 5 mm: 11, 6 -1 0 mm: 1) were found, two of which (< 5 mm) exhibited homogenous calcification. In 6/51 (12%) multiple nodules (2 -8, total: 21, size: 2 -8 mm) were identified, one o f which showed homogenous calcification. Additional thin-section CT in 16 individuals with soft tissue density lesions revealed homogenous calcification in tw o nodules (< 5 mm). Conclusion: Low-dose CT of the lung did not dem onstrate pulm onary nodules in 65% of heavy smokers examined. Assuming that homogenous calcification represents benign nodules bronchogenic carcinoma could be excluded in 72% of individuals. Soft tissue density nodules requiring further follow -up were present in 28% of cases. 718 Com puted tom ography angiography of the pulm onary arteries in patients with bronchial carcinoma F. Stöblen, К. Neumann, A. Scholz, W. Eberhardt, S. Seeber, R. Langer; Essen/D Purpose: Aim of the study was to evaluate C T angiography fo r the visualiza tion of the tum or extent with respect to the infiltration of the pulm onary arteries prior tum orstage orientated neoadjuvant therapy in patients with bronchial carcinoma. Methods and Materials: 26 patients with bronchial carcinom a were exam ined with contrast enhanced spiral C T after bolustracking (collim ation 2 mm, Somatom Plus 4, Siemens AG, Germany). Cine mode, surface shaded dis play (SSD) and maximum intensity projection (MIP) reconstructions of the pulm onary arteries and the tum ors were generated. Restaging during therapy was performed in 11 patients. Results: All reconstruction m odes showed tum or infiltration into the pulmonary arteries in all examinations, but the diagnostic confidence was quoted best for the cross-sectional images evaluated in cine mode. Post chem otherapy ex am inations in 5 patients demonstrated reperfusion of prior subtotally occluded arteries. Conclusion: CT angiography of the pulm onary arteries in patients with bronchial carcinoma may help to assess vessel infiltration and may there fore be used fo r pre-and post-therapeutic staging in modern stage orientated therapy regimens. Besides CT, the conventional X-ray examination of chest and bron choscopy were curried out in the patients. W hile estim ating the mediastinum organs and structures, it was considered their relation with prim ary tum or and lymph nodes as well, which were admitted to be metastasis. W hen defining the m etastasis of intrathoracic lymph nodes we took into consideration the following criteria: the tum or localization, hystology type, the form o f growth, com plication with atelectasis o r decay of the tum or, pulm onologic diseases, the size of intrathoracic lymph nodes. Results: CT has its advantage as com pare with conventional X-ray and bronchoscopy in establishing peribronchial spread o f the tumor. Sensitivity, specificity and accurance of CT accounted fo r 88.4%, 61.1% and 80.3% respectively. Sensitivity of C T accounted fo r 79.4% in defining the invasion of mediastinum organs and structures, specificity 83.1% and accurance 81.25%. Taking into consideration clinico-anatom ic criteria sensitivity, specificity and accurance of CT came up to 83.7% 53.8% and 83.95%. Conclusion: CT is a high sensitive method in preoperation period fo r estim at ing intrathoracic extension of central lung cancer. Measuring electrophysiological signals in MRI is difficult as gradients, high frequency (RF) pulses and the main magnetic field (B0) have a strong influence on the outcom e of the signal. The aim of this study was to implement a method to monitore electronystagmography (ENG) and electroencephalography (EEG) in a MR-system while the system is at rest and during the acquisition o f fast MRI-sequences. Materials and Methods: Seven healthy subjects were exam ined on a whole body imager (1.5 T, Siemens) with a circular polarized head coil. Imaging was performed with fast FLASH-sequences (fast low angle shot). ENG and EEG measurements w ere taken simultaneously while the MRI sequences were acquired. The transducer was placed behind the head coil in the MR-system and an optical wire was used for signal transm ission to a com puter outside the MR-system. Results: ENG and EEG signals were obtained in the MR-system in all subjects. Even with fast FLASH-sequences it was possible to detect the signal adequately. There was no change of the ENG curve inside the MRI during rest o r while a sequence w as running as com pared to the signal outside the MR-system. The EEG signal inside the m agnet was also comparable to the signal outside the MRI. Purpose: Recent studies of regional cerebral blood flow have indicated, that alcohol changes the information processing of afferent stimuli. Our study was designed to address the question, if functional MRI can dem onstrate an influ ence of alcohol on the distribution of activation during a neuropsychological task. Methods and Materials: 13 right handed healthy volunteers were included. The measurements were made during a sober and an inebriated session (1 g alcohol/kg body weight). Imaging was performed on a 1.5 T MR-scanner using a standard head-coil. A single-slice T2*-weighted GE-sequence was used for functional imaging (TR 100 ms, TE 50 ms, a 40, slice thickness 10 mm, FOV 230, 256 X 256). A total of 40 images was measured with periodic stimulation (alternating 5 images rest and 5 images with stimulation). For stimulation we used the PC-version of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test. Postprocessing was done at an external workstation (Sun Sparc 20). The fMRI data sets were spatial Gaussian filtered and motion corrected. Then the correlation coefficients were calculated and overlaid to the corresponding anatomical image. To create a com posite map of all single experiments the correlation maps were normated. Than for each pixel the mean correlation coefficient was calculated and overlaid to the corresponding normalised averaged anatomical image. Results: Increases in signal intensity that coincided with the test performance were observed with a preponderance of the right prefrontal area among sober condition. Activation was also in the mesial frontal cortex; a minor activation was detectable in the anterior part of the cinguli and in central regions (medial thalami nuclei) and in the tem poral lobe. After alcohol intake the activation in the frontal region was distributed bilaterally. W e found more activation in the anterior part of the cinguli. An additional activated area was the hippocampal region. Discussion: Analysing the effects of alcohol on the distribution of activation during a neuropsychological task, we found the more symmetrical response in frontal areas after alcohol intake as due to both, an increase in the left and a decrease in the right hemisphere response. The increase in the anterior cinguli most likely involves motivational and em otional mechanisms. The newly activated area in the hippocampal region following alcohol may be caused by a reduced influence o f the inhibition caused by enzymatic (GABAergic) mechanisms. Purpose: the evaluation of fM RI strategies and neural responses determined by a sound stimulation. FMRI allows a high spatial and tem poral resolution of the activation, a correct intrahem ispheric distinction between primary and sec ondary acoustic cortex and a precise mapping o f their involvement. Moreover, by means of special postprocessing aids, it is also possible to put in evi dence signal variations in brainstem nuclei, whose activation was completely unknown with previous imaging methods. Methods and Materials: the present study has been conducted on 21 healthy young volunteers with normal audiometrie results, by means of an highfield (1.5 T) MR unit (M agnetom Vision). The images underwent multiple statistical evaluation. Three different acoustic stimuli were used: white noise, a continuous 5 0 0 ,1 0 0 0 and 1500 Hz sinus tone, and a 1000 Hz pulsed sinus tone. Results: the functional activation determ ined a 5 to 10% signal increase. The activation mainly interested the primary auditory cortex and the insulae. Interestingly a significative but incostant (11/21) difference between the two hemispheres was also observed. The application o f a more sensible postpro cessing methods, the correlation analysis, on the guide of internally generated waveforms derived from the primary acoustic cortex, allowed the authors to detect the activation of auditory brainstem nuclei. Conclusion: the application of fMRI to the study o f the auditory system , due to the precise characterization of applied stimuli; a tonotopical analysis and an evaluation of brainstem auditory responses are also allowed. 727 fMRI study of the saccadic eye m ovem ents-related brain activation F. Di S a lle 1, A. Di C ostanzo1, G. T ortora1, Ο. S antopaolo1, L. B ru n e se 1, H. H acker2, F. S m altino1; 1 Naples/I, 2 Frankfurt/D Purpose: the functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fM RI) of the brain structures which control saccadic eye movem ents in humans. The difficulty of this topic araises from the presence of eye m ovem ents-induced EPI arti facts, which usually are of strong evidence and obviously show the highest correlation with the stimulation periodicity. Subjects and Methods: 15 healthy volunteers underwent exam ination by a I.5 T unit while performing visually guided and m emory-guided saccades and antisaccades. The EPI protocol consisted in gradient-recalled echo ac quisitions. The EPI images entered a statistical image analysis protocol with multiple evaluation (z-score, t-test, correlation). Particular post-processing strategies are described to avoid SEM related artifacts. The cortical regions generally associated with SEM control showed a significative signal increase during activation. A clear activation of the frontal and supplementary eye fields, the prefrontal, posterior parietal, parieto temporal and striate and extra-striate cortex was found. Slight or no differences were found between saccade tasks, with considerable spatial interindividual heterogeneity. In com parison with electrical stimulations and PET studies, fMRI provides higher spatial resolution, without radiation hazard, and gives the opportunity to study single subjects. fMRI provides further indication for an exact localization of cortical localization of saccadic control. Tuesday intensity time courses and stimulus protocol. Resulting maps of correlation coefficients are thresholded and superimposed onto corresponding spin echo images. Results: All subjects show a task-related activation within ipsilateral region of anterior cerebellum with an overlapping of sensory revealed representation areas and region defined by m otor performance. Conclusion: Rank correlation is found to be a robust method to identify sensory and finger movement related activation areas in human cerebellum with T2* weighted fMRI. Our results correspond to the findings at higher magnetic field strengths. The biochemical changes due to Alzheimer's disease (AD) in both white and gray matter were investigated to study the role of myo-lnositol (m l) and N-Acetyl-Aspartate (NAA) as markers in AD. Subjects and Methods: Thirteen patients (age range: 6 2 -8 3 years) fulfilling the NINCDS-ADRDA criteria for probable Alzheimer's disease were studied. The degree o f cognitive impairment was evaluated by Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE). Seven subjects (age range: 5 1 -9 2 years) free of neu ropsychiatrie disorders were studied as control group (C). Volume of interest was selected in both gray (temporal region) and white (frontal region) matter. STEAM pulse sequence was applied with TE = 35 ms, TR = 2600 ms. Results and Discussion: In gray and white matter NAA/ml was significantly different (t test). Particularly in gray matter it w as p < 0.001, without any overlap, and in white matter was p = 0.01. The Cluster Analysis (K-means clustering algorithm ) in the ml-NAA gray matter domain shows three clusters. All control subjects w ere in one cluster. The AD patients were included in tw o clusters (Cluster 1 and Cluster 2). These clusters also differ by MMSE: C luster 1 had a mean MMSE value (< MMSE > ) equal to 17.1 and the Cluster 2 < MMSE> = 10. It is interesting to note that the mean values of ml in C luster 1 and 2 are very similar (4.33 and 4.21) while the values of NAA are substantially different (6.76 and 5.53). This suggests that proceeding to more severe cognitive im pairm ent (Cluster 2) there is only a variation in NAA while the level o f ml remains unchanged. To detect these and other substances with high accuracy we have designed a sequence for localized Ή spectroscopy with a very short echo time. Methods: A STEAM-sequence with TE 5 ms was developed on a 1.5 T wholebody imager (Vision, Siemens) with actively shielded gradients (25 mT/m). For control the voxel were also measured with a spin-echo sequence of 135 ms TE. In 10 volunteers we examined the parietooccipital grey/white matter and the cerebellar vermis (TR = 1.5 s, voxelsize 2x2x2 cm, AC = 128). Additionally 42 adults were investigated with various diseases of the CNS (16 = hepatic encephalopathy (HE), 4 = AIDS, 12 = tumour, 10 = alcoholism) and 16 children with neurological developm ent disorders. All spectroscopy examinations were com bined with conventional diagnostic imaging consiting of T 1 and T2 weighted images in axial and sagittal orientation. Results: All spectra with TE 5 ms showed an improved signal to noise ratio. Spectra with TE 135 ms demonstrated known changes in NAA and Cho. Lactate was detectable in 6 o f 16 children. Spectra with TE 5 ms showed additional changes in ml and Glx. Lipid signals were also visible between 0 -2.2 ppm, which varied in different diseases. In HE the changes o f ml and Glx were close related to the severity of the disease. In 2/4 m eningiomas alanin was seen and Cho elevated. Glioblastoma revealed characteristic changes like positive aliphatic lipid signals and reduced other metabolites. Patients with alcohol abuse showed a reduction in NAA, Cho, ml and a slight increase in Glx. Discussion: Localized Ή MRS with TE 5 ms is a real improvement in clinical spectroscopy of the brain and has the advantage to detect substances like ml and Glx. The application of sequences with short TE therefore permits additional information's in various diseases o f the brain. It may also allow a further classification and therapy monitoring in certain CNS diseases like HE and AIDS. had unilateral interictal and ictal EEG abnorm ities, w hereas 10 patients had bilateral independent spikes, seizures, or both. The study protocol involved high spatial resolution CSI, quantification of T2-relaxation times and volumetric assessment of both tem poral lobes. The results in with TLE were compared with findings in 25 healthy volunteers. The data of CSI, T2-relaxometry and MR-volumetry were further assessed in reference to EEG and intraoperative electrodes. Results: CSI results show that the epileptogenic region is characterized by an abnormal pattern of lower N-acetylasperate (NAA) level and higher or unchanged Cholin (Cho) level. NAA/Cho is thus the most sensitive (85%) and specific (87%) and reliable quantitative index fo r the determ ination of abnormal areas of the temporal lobes in reference to EEG test results. T2-relaxometry and MR-volumetry are less sensitive (74% and 80%) and less specific (67% and 54%). Conclusion: Naa/Cho is a high sensitive and very specific m arker for localizing the epileptogenic region in TLE. Purpose of this workshop is to present w hat each (pediatric) radiologist should know: epidemiologic data and a comprehensive definition o f constipation, eti ological and pathogenetic concepts of constipation, anatomy, physiology and pathophysiology of the ano-rectum, potential imaging modalities and indica tions, technique, findings, pitfalls and limitations of the most im portant imaging modalities -barium enema and defecography, the diagnostic relevance of other diagnostic modalities including biopsy-techniques, and to give an an swer to the above mentioned central question. Conclusion: The answer is, there is still a place fo r diagnostic imaging in children with (chronic) constipation. The reason is that all diagnostic modalities including biopsy have their limitations and are suboptimal. Only by putting together the results o f the different modalities and the clinical information an adequate diagnostic accuracy and reliability fo r planning treatm ent will result. But imaging should be limited to a minority of cases. It is one of the central goals of this w orkshop to give a rational approach whom, when and how to image. This course will review the role o f contrast agents in MR imaging (MRI) with an em phasis on newer MR agents such as new extracellular markers, blood pool agents, and target-specific contrast agents. New form ulations designed fo r extracellular fluid space distribution and blood barrier imaging will be reviewed. Results of dynamic imaging using these agents in com bination with fast and ultrafast MR imaging techniques will be discussed and com pared to results obtained with Gd-DTPA and Gd-DOTA. New er agents under developm ent with biodistributions other than the classical extracellular fluid space will be described. These include agents fo r blood volume and perfusion imaging, as well as superparam agnetic iron oxide compounds, and hepatobiliary agents. After a review of the fundam ental biological behaviors and a classification of these new agents, the different aspects of their clinical use will be discussed including improved detection of cancer and tissue characterization, as well as the assessment of cardiovascular disease, and functional imaging. rate of these com plications varies from 0 to 70%, most of them have no or little clinical significance fo r the patient and the acute mortality rate fo r filter insertion remains less 1 %. The main indications fo r venous stenting in ma lignant disease are symptomatic obstruction of the superior V. cava and brachiocephalic veins in the SVC syndrome and its counterpart the IVC syn drome. Patients to be treated usually already have had maximum tolerance radiation therapy, chemo-therapy o r suffer from tum ors which respond purely to these regimens. Because of the encouraging results endovascular stents are increasingly used even before radiation-or chemo-therapy are started to rapidly improve the patient's symptoms.. For the SVC stent diam eters of 14 to 16 mm and 10 to 14 mm fo r the brachio-cephalic veins are sufficient. Larger stents o f 20 to 30 mm diam eter are required fo r the IVC. Results and conclusions: A significant improvement with com plete relief of the V. cava syndrome can be expected in 70 to 100%. Especially shortness of breath, cyanosis and feeling of pressure in the head is relieved within hours w hereas edema o f head, neck and extremities usually take 1 to 2 days (in the lower extremities this may take several days). In our own experience with more than 30 patients total relief o f symptoms was achieved in 86% with an additional 7% with a partial relief until death (93% good to excellent results). Longterm patency usually lies in the range of 85% and more, however, due to tum or progression additional stents may have to be implanted. Stent placem ent is the method of choice in all malignant obstruction which may not be treated curatively by other means. The main interest of neck node imaging is in the clinically negative neck in pa tients with squamous cell carcinomas o f the head and neck. In these patients, negative imaging findings increase the likelyhood that this side of the neck is free of tum or and does not need treatment. In the clinically positive neck the main interest lies in assessing operability and thus invasion of vital structures. As the detection of minimal metastatic disease is concerned, imaging modali ties such as CT, MRI and US are hampered by their limitation o f distinguishing benign from metastatic lymph nodes. However, as MRI techniques evolve and C T resolution increases the accuracy of both techniques will increase. On the other hand, US guides aspiration can give cytologic evidence of benign or malignant cells within small lymph nodes and is a safe and easy technique. All imaging techniques have a limited accuracy and until now only few clinicians rely on imaging findings. In our opinion however, the reduction o f the risk of occult metastases by an accurate assessm ent with use of US guided aspira tion cytology warrants a wait and see policy in a significant number o f head and neck cancer patients. Since real time imaging of eye movement is necessary to investigate dynamic disorders, the purpose of our study was to introduce a fast MRI technique to investigate eye movement. Materials and Methods: Five healthy volunteers and five patients suffering from nystagmus on deviation were examined with fast MRI while holding different gaze positions, reading a defined text to demonstrate saccadic movements and maximal endpoint position to cause nystagmus when present. MRI w as performed on a 1.5 T equipm ent (Siemens). Spin-density weighted 2D-FLASH (fast low angle shot) sequence was used with a tem poral resolution o f six images per second. During MRI an ENG (elctronystagmogram) was performed in order to correlate MRI-findings. Results: In all cases we were able to delineate eye m ovem ent with fluoro scopic MRI. Anatomic and functional information could be obtained simultane ously with MRI and ENG fo r the first time. The nystagmus on deviation was visualized in those subjects, in which the frequency of eye motion was smaller then six per second. This imaging ability has the potential to be a significant contribution in the planning of eye surgery and in the selection and implementation of therapy fo r eye m ovem ent disorders. short period during movement of the eyes. Transverse m ovem ent is shown for both eyes together and sagital movement is recorded fo r each eye separately. All images are then transferred to a cine-loop video recording which can be demonstrated as a movie. Excellent signal-to-noise ratio is achieved by this fast echo sequence and great anatomical detail is seen. Results: 5 Patients with TAO are analysed using dynam ic video-MRI of the eyes. The enlargement of extra-ocular eye muscles and increase o f retrobulbar fat tissue are clearly shown on the static images. Apart from this, stretching of the optic nerve in patients with exophthalm os is shown by dynamic video-MRI to contribute to the restricted movement. This can not be seen on the static images. W e present this in a dynam ic video-demonstration of patients compared to healthy volunteers. Conclusion: Dynamic video-MRI is a new excellent method to show the different causes of restricted eye-movement in patients with TAO. Apart from muscle-enlargement and the increase of retro-bulbar fat tissue, stretching of the optic nerve contributes to this restriction. This dynamic video-MRI technique can also be used to analyse other patients with restricted eyemovement. To evaluate the sensitivity of ultrasonographic am plitude colour Doppler imaging (ACDI) fo r visualizing low-velocity blood flows in small tortu ous vessels of the normal human eye. Methods and Materials: ACDI scans were performed with linear array probes at 6 -1 2 MHz using a Diasonics Gatew ay ultrasound scanner with ophthalmic acoustic output intensities. Scanning was done through acoustic coupling gel sheets over closed eyelids on the normal eyes of 10 human subjects. Results: Minor vessels could be more readily detected with ACDI than conventional frequency-shift colour Doppler imaging (GDI). Intraretinal blood flow could be traced to long segments of the central retinal artery and vein. Segments of the ophthalm ic artery, ophthalm ic veins, posterior ciliary arteries, and orbital vessels could be located. The tortuousity and branching of vessels could be seen, although entire vascular trees could not since they are entirely non-coplanar. Conclusion: W hile GDI may detect some long segments of blood flow in the eye and orbit, ACDI is more sensitive and can more easily follow the course of tortuous and branching ophthalm ic vessels in a single image frame. Methods and Materials: W e studied 30 patients affected by myopia. They were included into 3 different groups according to the different myopia degree. In all patients we pointed out the Peak Velocity (PV) and the Resistive Index (R l) by using a 7.5 MHz probe. Results: W e found out a PV decrease adn a Rl increase with statistic significance at the level of Ophtalmie Artery and P.L. Ciliary Arteries. These variations are more significant in the most serious myopia degrees. Conclusions: O ur series show a significative (p < 0.001) decrease in blood flow in the P.L. Ciliary arteries, expecially in serious myopia, that could be involved in the atrophic damage at the bulbar posterior pole, usually observed in these patients.  Results: Retinal detachm ent was diagnosed both by US and MRI definitely. On T1 weighted images all tum ours showed higher signal intensity than both vitreous and slightly lower than brain tissue. Both US and MR images ab extrascleral extension was suspected, but histopathology did not confirm it in one case US did not show extraocular extension but MR indicated indicated it. Histopathology confirmed the extension. Conclusions: Variations in the MRI appearance of uveal MMs may be dependent on their histological differences. However MRI is a useful tool in the evaluation of uveal MM, caution is highly advisable in diagnosing form MR images alone. Close collaboration between radiologist and ophthalm ologist ist required. The mucosa from the oesophagus to the second part of the duodenum is easily reached by modern endoscopes. Direct visualisation, coupled with the facility to obtain cells fo r cytology, tissue for histology and tissue fo r enzyme testing in the detection Helicobacter pylori, makes endoscopy a powerful diagnostic modality. Although double contrast barium radiology approaches the sensitivity of endoscopy fo r mucosal lesions, the appearances are often not sufficiently specific to allow definitive diagnosis without biopsy. The greatest value of barium radiology is in the investigation of m otility disorders. Thus the role of the radiologist in the structured, multidisciplinary approach to the investigation and treatment of swallowing disorders is fundam ental. Moreover, radiology can be invaluable in establishing the extent, morphology and functional significance of lesions such as strictures, diverticula, webs and fistulae, sometimes providing clinicians with a valuable anatomical map prior to surgery. Non-ionic contrast radiology is the mainstay in the investigation of suspected perforation and in the post-operative evaluation of resection anastam oses of oesophagus, stomach and duodenum. For lesions which involve layers deep to the mucosa, endoscopic ultrasound is superior to all other modalities in the definition of the depth and extent of abnormality and in the appreciation o f locally involved lymph nodes. Due to relatively poor resolution of local invasion and differentiation of involved lymph nodes, CT cannot accurately stage oesophageal and gastric tumours but can separate out those patients who have unresectable lesions o r distant metastases and thus spare them unnecessary explorative surgery. MRI has yet to establish superiority over CT in this field, except in the detection of hepatic metastases. Over the last 20 years there has been a significant reduction o f bariumsulfate (double contrast) investigations of the Gl-tract, w hich is still progressing to this day. This is due to the tremendous strides of endoscopy, the radiologist's pre occupation with high-technology (new advances in cross-sectional imaging), through which much of the diagnostic territory has been ceded to endoscopists by default. Endoscopy provides excellent detail of the mucosa and has the advantage of biopsy, but is more invasive and expensive and neither endoscopy nor barium studies are infallible. In an era o f increasing cost consciousness and reduced financial resources, it is im portant to analyze cost-effectiveness on the effect of endoscopical/radiological investigations on outcome. Accompanying the decrease o f barium studies of the Gl-tract there has been a shift nation-wide from single contrast to a higher proportion of double contrast examinations, although these still account for few er than 50% of all barium studies in Europe. The state-of-the-art double contrast enema -which is the current standard examination of the colon -will be reevaluated and compared with endoscopic findings. Due to recent developm ents o f enteroscopy (proximal enteroscopy, sonde push enteroscopy) it is of utmost importance to perform state-of-the-art sm all bowel radiology to com pete with enteroscopy in the future; otherwise the bright lights from enteroscopy will rapidly illuminate the dark corners o f the small intestine, leaving no place fo r radiology. Digital image intensifier radiography of the small bowel is em erging and replac ing conventional radiography, at least partially. Therefore great responsibility is on the radiologist when doing such a study. This contribution will em phasize the unique role of the state-of-the-art enteroclysis study -the main morphologic method to examine the small intestineand will provide an update o f the possibilities. Disc herniation and spinal stenosis are diagnosed using CT o r MRI. It is im por tant to differentiate disc protrusion from disc herniation and free sequestration in which nucleus pulposus tissue is dislocated posteriorly to the anulus fibrosus. The exact effect of the dislocated disc tissue upon the nerval structures has to be determined. The diagnosis of spinal stenosis is not dependent on the absolute diameters of the spinal canal but on the remaining subarachnoid space. Significant spinal stenosis is present w hen no subarachnoid space is visible on CT, heavily T2-weighted axial MRI o r on CT follow ing myelography. Differential diagnosis o f erosive osteochondritis and infectious spondylitis may be difficult. On plain film s erosions and destructions are found in both. Bone scans are positive either and differential diagnosis is com plicated by similar MRI appearances with bone marrow edem a and enhancem ent in the disc space. On MRI bone marrow edem a in infectious spondylitis is more severe than in patients with erosive osteochondritis and often reaches the opposite endplate on STIR images. The low signal intensity cortical endplate is preserved on T1 -weighted unenhanced images in degenerative processes but destroyed in infectious disease to a different degree. Epidural, soft tissue and disc space abscesses can be found only in infectious spondylitis.  Digital mammography offers numerous advantages com pared with conven tional film-screen mammography. Detection and diagnosis of breast cancer can be improved, not only by a high and constant image quality but also by the use of dedicated im age-processing param eters and integration of com puter-aided detection-and diagnosis soft-ware. New digital detectors will offer virtually instant im age access which can be im portant fo r patient m anage ment and throughput. Digital mammography units integrated with FACS will improve image management and, especially for screening, significantly reduce costs. W ith telemammography, isolated and rural areas will be accessible to radiology experts located off site. Despite these advantages there are only a few digital full-area mammography units in clinical practice today, m ost of them in Europe and Japan (full frame digital mammography devices are not m arketed com mercially in the United States due to CDRH/FDA regulations) One im portant reason is the belief that a limited spatial resolution negatively effects detection and diagnosis o f cancer although a num ber o f studies have shown results com parable to film-screen mammography. Other limitations are the lack of dedicated mammography work-stations/monitors and high costs. S151 758 В. Com puter-assisted analysis Ü. Bick; Münster/D Next to the clinical breast exam, screening mammography has become the m ost im portant factor in early breast cancer detection. With screening mam mography, it is possible to detect a large proportion of small, non-palpable cancers with a long-term survival of more than 90%. However, correct inter pretation of mammogram s is a difficult and challenging task and it has been shown that in up to 30% of cases, early mammographie signs of malignancy are overlooked or misinterpreted by the human observer. Sensitivity may be improved by double reading, but implementation o f this procedure in clinical practice is tim e-consum ing and costly. W ithin the last few years, several com puter schemes have been developed to assist the radiologist in the mammographie detection o f breast cancer. Signs of breast cancer like microcalcifications and masses are automatically detected by these algorithm s. The com puter results are then presented to the human reader as a diagnostic aid. This may alert the reader to a suspicious area in the mammogram, w hich otherwise might have been missed. The presentation will give an overview o f the different techniques involved in the automatic analysis o f digital m ammographie images and discuss the current status and future applications of com puter-aided diagnosis in mam mography. This course will review techniques for imaging liver masses with C T and MR, focusing on m ethods fo r lesion detection and characterization. Dr. Baron will review strategies to detect liver masses emphasizing СТ/MR contrast techniques. A rational approach to understanding principles o f liver and tumor contrast enhancem ent will help explain why, when, and how to deliver contrast material fo r helical liver C T and MR imaging. An em phasis will be placed on principles of liver physiology and blood flow as well as effects of contrast materials on tum ors. The registrants should gain an understanding of arterial and portal venous phases o f contrast enhancem ent following intravenous infusions which is now possible with dynamic MR imaging and helical CT. Pitfalls in arterial phase imaging in detecting liver masses will also be stressed. Dr. Rumm eny will outline the strategy fo r tissue characterization of liver tumors. The role of conventional and new CT techniques including spiral CT will be reviewed. The relative perform ance of conventional, fast and ultrafast MRI techniques in characterizing liver lesions will be discussed. The role of extracellar markers like iodinated contrast agents fo r CT and Gadolinium based agents fo r MRI will be reviewed in conjunction with fast im aging techniques. An em phasis will also be placed on understanding optimized use of tissue-specific MR contrast media, such as hepatobiliary and reticuloendothelial cell specific agents. The relative performance of these studies (and US and scintigraphy) will be compared. Learning objective: To develop the rationale fo r optimizing CT and MR for detection and characterization o f liver lesions, and to recommend diagnostic imaging algorithm s fo r this task. The first clinical application of vascular metallic stents was performed in 1986. Since then, this new endovascular therapeutic method has taken more and more role, becoming the most important technic with balloon angioplasty for percutaneous treatm ent of vascular diseases. Among its indications, renal and fem oral arteries raise to some discussions. The use for subclavian and carotid arteries is more uncommon. Renal artery stenting is currently an interesting com plementary method to renal PTRA. It is possible to use the main kind o f stents available today: Palmaz, Strecker, Wallstent and others. Misplacement can occur mainly with the wallstent and the Strecker's stent but com plications are uncommon. The long term primary patency is about 75% , but it must be considered that the main indications are post-PTRA bad results. The indications range between 5 to 10% of overall PTRA. W e have to consider stents placem ent when the immediate post-PTRA result is insufficient according to the following criterias: residual stenosis supe rior to 30% associated with persisting pressure gradient superior to 20 mmHg. Others indications are: more than tw o post-PTRA recurrences, spontaneous iatrogenic o r traum atic renal artery dissection. It remains some discussion concerning ostial stenosis, due to the frequent insufficient post-PTRA result. The use of fem oro-popliteal artery stenting has strikingly decreased the last years due to the high rate of mid-term stenosis o r occlusion. Indeed the long term prim ary patency is inferior to 50% . The poorest results are mostly gotten in case of long lesions, with small caliber arteries and bad run-off. So, most of the main groups recommend the use of fem oro-popliteal artery stenting only in case of post-PTA immediate failures with threatening of acute ischemia of the limb. Some groups evaluate percutaneous grafts (covered metallic stent) as an endolum inal by-pass in case of long lesion of the fem oro-popliteal axis. It's earlier to assert that this new kind of stent could improve the long-term results of fem oro-popliteal artery stenting, but endolum inal grafts could be useful, as in others territories, in uncommon cases of popliteal aneurysms. The indications o f stenting fo r supra aortic arteries are alw ays in discussion. The diagnosis and pretherapeutic evaluation of cerebral AVM's is based on the complementary application o f multiplanar T1-and T2-weighted MRI for topographic classification and brain parenchyma evaluation, 3D-MRI with sur face rendering fo r detection of the various vascular components of the AVM and selective as well superselective DSA fo r the angioarchitectural analy sis of the AVM. From this data along with the clinical presentation of the patient decisions regarding the indication fo r one or several treatm ent modali ties (embolization, microsurgery, radiosurgery) are derived. The endovascular treatment of cerebral AVM's plays a central role in the overall management of these patients. Depending on the location, topography, size, angioarchitecture and clinical presentation, em bolization is em ployed either as a curative or as a preoperative/preradiosurgical or as a palliative therapeutic modality. In a consecutive series of 364 patients which underw ent em bolization in 672 sessions in the time period between 1986 and 1995 com plete obliteration of the AVM has shown on at least 3 months follow up MRI and angiography w as achieved in 40% of the cases with a morbidity rate o f 4% and a mortality rate of 2% . This relatively high com plete obliteration rate was achieved due to an improved understanding of the specific location of the nidus o f the AVM in relation to its angioarchitecture. Based on this, a correlative topographicangioarchitectural classification system for cerebral AVM w as introduced and applied in all cases of this series. In addition, technological im provem ents and particularly multim icrocatheter approched to the nidus of the AVM contributed to these results. 765 Interventional neuroradiology In the pediatric population P. Lasjaunias; Le Krem lin-Bicêtre/F The clinical, diagnostic and therapeutic challenge of vascular lesions are different according to neonates, infants o r children. Interventional Neuroradi ology will best manage these lesions in these populations, recognize the best moment to treat them ("optimal therapeutic window" ). The natural history of the disease is actually well known. VGAMs are often diagnosed in utero. W hen one suspects a VGAM, angiography should not be performed in first intention. C T and/or MR should be rapidly made: they will often precise the supply to the malformation. Endovascular treatm ent through arterial route and em bolization with NBC A (Histoacryl*) represents the best way to treat these lesions and to obtain satisfactory clinical results. C erebral arteriovenous m alform ations (С AVMs) are different anatomical and nosological entities. T heir action on the brain parenchyma may therefore be more precocious and more severe, with rapidly evolving hydrovenous disorders leading to the "melting brain syndrom e" . Dural arteriovenous shunts (DAVSs  767 Im aging Strategies in juvenile chronic arthritis G. Sebag; P aris/F 8:30-10:00 Room I Selection of the appropriate sequence of imaging studies fo r a given child and a given diagnostic problem has become a com plex undertaking. Investigations have to be tailored to the individual need of the child with Juvenile Chronic Arthritis (JCA) and a knowledge of the relative values o f available imaging techniques is mandatory. C onventional radiography is always the initial imaging step used to localize and to define the nature o f a lesion. Therefore most o f all, plain film s allow active exclusion of other causes. Furthermore, conventional radiographs allow grouping to the various arthritides and staging of disease progression. Ultrasound is very sensitive in the detection o f joint effusion, especially in the hip, and guides fluid aspiration. Ultrasound and Doppler can be used fo r the evaluation o f synovial hypertrophy and activity. Arthrography and to a certain extent nuclear studies have been replaced by MRI. C ontrast enhanced MRI is the most sensitive modality to determ ine whether an arthritic condition is present but, usually does not assist in establishing a specific diagnosis. MRI determ ines accurately the activity o f disease and the extent of articular damage. Finally, MRI is of m ajor importance in the evaluation of response to local therapy and the detection o f complications. The num ber of different gadolinium chelates on the market and in preclinical and clinical research is perm anently increasing. More than four different intravenous com pounds are available fo r daily routine. All of them are safe com pounds with non-specific applications. Considering their relaxivities and biodistribution, the clinical dosage o f these com pounds lies around 0.1 mil limole/kg body weight. Attem pts are made to further decrease the injected dose through an enhancem ent of the relaxivities of the complexes. Theory describes some pathways to achieve this goal but subtle features o f the molec ular dynam ics such as the rate of the exchange of w ater limit the increase. To improve their diagnostic value which possibly requires higher doses, some concern has appeared about the osm olality of the formulations. The latest two products of the first generation o f these contrast agents are non/ionic and low osmolar. Because of their low m olecular weight and hydrophilicity, the com pounds o f the first generation are non-specific markers of the extravascular/extracellular space. Increased organ/specificity w as reached by increasing the affinity of the com plexes fo r membrane receptors and/or plasm a proteins, com bining hepatocyte specificity with plasm a kinetics similar to that of first generation gadolinium agents. Specific markers of the intravascular domain, potentially useful fo r MR angiography and perfusion assessment are devel oped by synthesis of macromolecular paramagnetic system s deriving from gadolinium com plexes. The field o f interventional biliary radiology is rapidly evolving. The skills of percutaneous biliary drainage, balloon dilation, and stent placement are now basic requirements fo r all interventional radiologist. Among the recent advances in interventional biliary radiology we can include the use of metallic stents in malignat strictures, percutaneous cholangioscopy, which can be used to perform lithotripsy and biopsy, and the introduction of combined radiological/endoscopic procedures. These techniques will be presented in the format of a "Video presentation". Clinical cases that can be encountered in common practice will be shown and discussed. The different possible and alternative solutions to common problem s will be presented and critically analyzed. Emphasis is put on selection and use of materials fo r interventional radiology, and m anagem ent o f technical problem s encountered during the different procedures. This session will describe multiple approaches to com plex biliary intervention in m alignant disease. The use of bilateral stents fo r periportal obstruction versus stenting a single left o r right side will be detailed. Combination procedures with endoscopists as well as com plicated cases and follow -up results will be given. The general concepts and importance o f radiologic intervention in periportal disease as well as com plications and problem s with percutaneous stent placement will be em phasized. If possible, a videotape detailing a complicated biliary procedure will be shown, with audience participation and com ments allowed.  The continuous improvem ent of these imaging techniques has allowed precise diagnosis of diseases of the eye and orbit. After description o f the available techniques of examination, with emphasis on CT, MR and angiography, and dem onstration of the normal anatomy, the authors will focus on four main topics: tum ors, vascular abnormalities, trauma and inflammations. For tumors, trauma and inflammation the respective role of CT and MR will be discussed. The impact o f interventional angiography in vascular lesions will be illustrated. Methods and Materials: Twenty-nine nodules at the jugulodigastric region (15 to 54 mm in size) from 28 patients were examined with CDUS. Inclusion criterion was an uncertain parotid origin at gray-scale US (7 .5 -1 3 MHz). Nodules were classified as intra-or extraglandular according to origin of their supplying vessels: those receiving intraparotid vessels were assumed to be intraglandular, those accepting vessels from neck spaces were extraglandular. The pathologic diagnosis of each nodule was obtained at biopsy. Results: At biopsy, 18/29 nodules were from parotid, including both benign (n = 16) and malignant (n = 2) hystotypes; the others were neck masses, including branchial cysts (n = 2) and benign (n = 4) or malignant (n = 5) lymph nodes. In all but two cases, C DUS showed a discrete vasculature supplying the nodules. Among the intraparotid nodules, 15 had vessels com ing exclusively from the gland; 2 had vessels o f indeterm inate source, and one, malignant, received multiple vessels from both gland and neck spaces. Extraparotid nodules accepted vessels com ing only from the neck spaces. Conclusion: CDUS can help to assess the intra-o r extraparotid nature of jugulodigastric nodules o f uncertain origin. To determine whether high-resolution power D oppler imaging might enable differentiation of benign from m alignant cervical lymphadenopathy. Materials and Methods: Forty cervical lym phadenopaties in 33 untreated patients were prospectively examined with high-frequency (10 MHz) power Doppler imaging and subsequently submitted to percutaneous biopsy (n = 31) or surgical excision (n = 9). The distribution o f nodal size w as not significantly different fo r benign and malignant nodes. Lymph node vascularity w as graded on a four-step analog scale of 0 to +++ and classified as either peripheral or hilar, depending on the distribution of vessels. Results: Histology revealed 22 m alignant lymph nodes (16 metastatic nodes and 6 nodes with prim ary lymphatic malignancies) and 18 benign (reactive) lymph nodes. Benign lym phadenopaties showed a low er grade of vascularity than did malignant lymphadenopaties. Eleven (79% ) of 14 hypovascular nodes classified as 0 (n = 5) and + (n = 9) were benign. Conversely, 11 (92%) of 12 nodes labeled as +++ were malignant. Detection o f peripheral flow significantly correlated (P < 0.01) with malignant nodes. No differences w ere observed between primary and secondary nodal malignancies. Results: 54 of the 468 histologically examined lymph node groups were positive, w hereas 414 were negative. FDG-PET and CT had a sensitivity for all lymph node groups o f 73% and 68% and a specificity o f 99% and 97%, respectively. The sensitivity fo r the subdigastric lymph node groups was 87% with both FDG-PET and CT, and the specificity w as 90% and 84%, respectively. There was no statistically significant difference between the results of FDG-PET and CT with respect to the detection of lymph node metastases. Conclusions: FDG-PET has a similar sensitivity for the detection of lymph node metastases as CT, the false negative rate remaining above 10%. were supertentorial in location. The majority (86% ) showed iso-or high density in com parison with the gray matter in pre-contrast studies. All lesions turned to be high-density with peri-focal edem a in post-contrast C T imaging. Patients with multiple lesions, severe perifocal edem a and high grade large cell lymphoma showed poorer prognosis. The spectrum of CT imaging com bined with clinicopathological findings can be of value in predicting the prognosis in patients afflicted with prim ary brain lymphoma. T unit, and T1-weighted, T2-weighted, and proton density-weighted images were obtained using spin echo or fast spin echo sequences. Results: Tumor masses were present in seven with leukemia (acute lym phoblastic leukemia, 4; acute myeloblastic leukemia, 1 ; acute promyelocytic leukemia 1 ; acute monocytic leukemia 1), and in tw o with malignant lymphoma. On the C T scan, tum or m asses were hyperdense with contrast enhancement. On the MR images, their signals were variable. In all of nine patients, tumor masses were contiguous with a meningeal surface. Postcontrast T1-weighted images were valuable in dem onstrating meningeal infiltration. Intracerebral mass was seen in one patient. Tumoral hemorrhage w as found in two pa tients. Conclusion: CNS leukemic and lym phom atous masses are characteristically contiguous with a meningeal surface. MR imaging is valuable in demonstrating meningeal infiltration. Material and Methods: Forty-two HIV positive patients with recent neuro logical symptoms underwent brain enhanced-C T and MR imaging (T2 and T1-weighted SE images, before and after gadolinium administration were ob tained). For each examination, a double-blind analysis was performed, and one or tw o diagnosis were proposed. The final diagnosis was obtained by clinical, biological, histological data, and/or follow up. Results: In 28 cases (67%), CT and MR imaging were equally effective for the diagnosis o f CNS disease. In 4 cases (9.5%), CT and MR imaging findings were irrelevant. In only tw o cases (5%), C T w as normal w hereas MR imaging gave a correct diagnosis (CMV ventriculitis in one patient and cocaine vasculitis in the other one). In the remaining 8 cases (19%), C T and MR imaging were normal o r disclosed a brain atrophy, and neurologic symptoms were related to extra-CNS causes. Conclusion: In most cases, C T brain scan is sufficient for initial evaluation of neurologically symptomatic HIV-infected patients. MR imaging should only be performed in selected patients with discrepancies between clinical data and CT findings. To correlate brain lesions in sport divers detected by MRI with the presence of a PFO to establish an individual risk estimation in sport diving. Methods and Materials: 87 sport divers with a minimum of 160 compressed air dives were investigated by cranial MRI fo r the presence of brain lesions and by transcranial Doppler sonography (TCD, "bubble-test") for the presence of a PFO. The number of brain lesions was determ ined by tw o neuroradiologists blinded to the result of TCD. Results: A PFO w as found in 25 divers. MRI detected 41 brain lesions in 11 divers. There were 34 brain lesions in 4 divers with PFO and 7 brain lesions in 7 divers without PFO. The difference between the groups was statistically significant (t-test, p = 0.015). A PFO is probably the decisive risk factor fo r the developm ent of brain lesions during sport diving. Probable pathomechanism: During decom pression a PFO enables venous gas bubbles to enter the arterial system and cause arterial gas embolism. Sport divers should be tested fo r the presence of PFO to enable them to adapt their diving behaviour to the increased risk in the presence o f a PFO.  Focal cerebral ischemia was induced in 68 rats using an endovascular occlusion technique of the MCA. Decom pressive craniectom y was performed in 48 animals: 4 hours, 12 hours, 24 hours and 36 hours after vessel occlusion in 12 anim als each. Twenty anim als were not treated by decompressive craniectom y (control group). W e used infarct volum e at day 7 and neurological performance at study endpoints. Results: Mortality in the nontreated group was 35% . None of the animals treated by decompressive craniectom y died. Neurology w as significantly better in all animals treated by decompressive craniectomy, regardless of whether treated early o r late. Neurology and infarction size was significantly better in the animals treated very early by decompressive craniectom y (4 hours) after endovascular MCA occlusion (p < 0.01), while surgery perform ed at later time points did not significantly reduce infarction size. Conclusion: Our results suggest that decompressive craniectom y fo r cere bral ischemia reduces mortality, and significantly improves outcom e. W hen performed early after vessel occlusion craniectom y reduces infarction size in rats. New imaging techniques, i.e. perfusion and diffusion weighted magnetic resonance imaging, could allow to gauge aggressive treatm ent options before life-threatening brain swelling and herniation occur. Criteria Grade 4). Initial and follow -up angiography were examined by 2 radiologists fo r the presence of intracerebral aneurysms. A total of 7 patients (7%) demonstrated aneurysms, 2 having multiple aneurysms. 5 out of the 7 patients had saccular aneurysm (s) occurring at a recognised site, i.e. Circle of W illis/m iddle cerebral artery bifurcation. In all these patients at least one aneurysm was associated with an AVM arterial feeder. 2 patients demonstrated aneurysm s occurring on AVM feeders but which were "atypical" in position. (1 saccular, 1 fusiform). Results:> Follow-up angiography demonstrated that the saccular aneurysms in recognised sites were unchanged in size following successful AVM treat ment. The 2 aneurysm s at "atypical" sites resolved following AVM obliteration. Imaging is o f limited relevance for making a definite diagnosis in diffuse liver disease, with the exception of fatty infiltration and iron overload. Radiologic procedures, however, are well suited fo r demonstration of com plica tions o f diffuse liver disease (eg, liver cirrhosis and portal hypertension). Great effort has been made in the last years to optimize imaging strategies in focal liver disease. Nevertheless, lesion detection as well as differential diagnosis som etimes are problem atic. The following questions will be discussed: (1) Do basic procedures (US, conventional CT, dynamic CT, plain MRI, dy namic MRI) still play a role in the diagnostic work-up of liver tumors? (2) Is there a need fo r a replacem ent by advanced techniques (spiral CT, spiral СТАР, MRI with liver-directed contrast agents, intraoperative US)? (3) W hen is image-directed biopsy indicated? (4) Is there any clinical potential o f new techniques like contrast-media en hanced color duplex ultrasound, power Doppler ultrasound or MR spec troscopy?. For imaging of the gallbladder a n d bile ducts there is still a widespread use of US, CT and conventional Cholangiographie techniques. MR cholangiography is a very promising modality fo r the non-invasive evaluation of the biliary tract. In the course an up-to-date discussion o f traditional versus new procedures including cholangioscopy and intraluminal US will presented. The course will discuss how to apply the spectrum of available imaging tech niques fo r pancreatic diseases. Areas where imaging techniques have made a major impact in the patient work-up and management will be highlighted. The course will be centered around disease categories and walk the partic ipants through a discussion of current imaging algorithm s suited for these disease categories. Disease categories will include developm ental disorders, trauma, inflam matory disease, and neoplastic disease. Imaging techniques will also cover intraductal/intravasal ultrasound, helical-CT, and advanced MRI techniques. (1) To review typical imaging features of pancreatic disease. (2) To fam iliarize attendere with current limitations of imaging techniques. (3) To propose guidelines fo r the workup of pancreatic disease. (1) free intraperitoneal gas, abnorm al intraluminal bowel gas, intramural gas, pathologic gas collections associated with the portal vein system, the biliary tract, the urinary tract, or the retroperitoneal spaces in general; (2) mass o r fluid collections, displacem ent of organs or bowel loops; (3) abnormal calcifications and/or calculi, foreign bodies; (4) skeletal pathology. Comm on causes in acute abdomen include acute appendicitis, cholecystitis, intestinal obstruction, paralytic ileus, perforation o f hollow viscus, and pancre atitis. In many instances conventional radiographs prove to be insufficient to establish a firm diagnosis. Ultrasonography (US) and com puted tomography (CT) can greatly improve the diagnostic accuracy and often obviate organspecific studies such as excretory urography or angiography. US can provide rapid morphologic evaluation o f liver, spleen, pancreas, and kidney. Graded com pression US is valuable in the diagnosis of acute appendicitis. Because o f the frequent paralytic ileus, large areas of the abdom en are inaccessible for US evaluation owing to interposed gas. Therefore, CT has a more useful role, unless the signs and symptoms are highly indicative of a specific disease process such as acute cholecystitis or renal colic. C T is better in defining the changes associated with com plicated appendicitis o r pancreatitis and in detecting abscesses in the retroperitoneum and between bowel loops. CT is also considered to be very useful fo r determ ining the cause of intestinal obstruction and fo r patient management in ischemic bowel disease. Female infertility can be explored by many imaging modalities and chromola paroscopy. Hysterosalpingography (HSG) continues to be, in routine practice, a mainstay in the diagnosis of uterine and tubal causes of infertility. Today the radiologist may encounter infertile couple not only in the X-rays room, but in the interventional room, the ultrasound o r the MRI department. Transvaginal ultrasound (TVS) can show disorders as ovarian tum ors and some congenital disorders. It remains unuseful for minimal endometriosis and pelvic adhesions. Hystero-contrast sonography is a new US technic fo r evaluation of the uterine wall and cavity. It may be also employed to evaluate tubal patency with a high rate accuracy. MRI provides a precise information about the fem ale anatomy and contributes to evaluate congenital disorders and myometrium with its high contrast level. Depending on those results chromolaparoscopy could be per formed later. Selective fallopian tube catheterization has been rediscovered recently. It is a successful technique that is extremely useful in the treatment of tubal obstruction. But the main question remains: are those techniques useful with the recent developments of biological progress in the treatm ent of infertile couples. 795 Focus on clinical problems R.K. Goswamy; London/UK Conventional tests for investigating infertility include endocrine tests, postcoital test and laparoscopy and dye test, fo r the fem ale partner, and a semen analysis for the male partner. This paper describes the use o f vaginal ultrasound in the diagnosis and m anagem ent of fem ale infertility and outlines the advantage of vaginal ultrasound being performed as a routine part of infertility investigations, prior to lapascopy and dye test. Vaginal ultrasound can now replace the digital pelvic examination as an initial screen for all female infertility patients. It is im portant to perform this at the right time of the menstrual cycle and we advise one vaginal ultrasound scan performed between day 10 and 12 of the menstrual cycle. It is possible to assess follicle growth in the ovaries, time the post-coital test, and also assess endometrial/intrauterine abnorm alities that may be contributing factors to infertility. Tubal problems, such as hydrosalpinges, can be diagnosed at the initial screen. Clinical managm ent of tubal, ovarian or uterine abnormalities diagnosed can then be planned well in advance and after a full discussion with the patient. (1) Intrauterine abnormalities: Abnormalities such as endometrial polyps, synechiae, endometritis, uterine septae and submucous fibroids can be treated at therapeutic hysteroscopy at the time of the initial diagnostic laparoscopy in many cases. (2) Tubal abnormalities: It is possible to use ultrasound contrast medium to assess tubal patency and also it is possible to perform lapascopic or hysteroscopic tubal surgery depending on these findings. Therapeutic procedures could therefore be com bined with the diagnostic laparoscopy. The first hysterosalpingogram may have been performed only fifteen years after Roentgen discovered medical X-rays. It is a standard test which nonethe less figures prominently in the modern decision-making fo r more than 300,000 infertile couples in the United States alone. The application of angiographic techniques to this old-fashioned test has revo lutionized diagnosis and treatm ent o f proximal tubal obstruction. Results from worldwide centers have shown that nonsurgical recanalization of proximally obstructed tubes can be accomplished in about 90% of patients using a variety of catheter techniques. Pregnancy rate in a population w ho w as recommended fo r tubal microsurgery o r in vitro fertilization because o f well-documented, isolated proximal tubal obstruction, but who underwent catheter tubal recanalization instead without any other therapy, was 58% by one year and all pregnancies were intrauterine. In a population where the cause of infertility is less well-defined and where additional tubal disease may be present, one would expect a lower short-term pregnancy rate, about 30 -4 0 % , and about 10% ectopic pregnancies. The American Fertility Society has recommended that patients w ho have prox imal tubal obstruction undergo selective salpingography and tubal recanaliza tion prior to the more invasive and costly treatm ents that were used in the past. 797 Ultrasound in infertility: The use of a "pivotal scan" incorporating hystero contrast sonography (HyCoSy) to investigate infertility Т.Н. Bourne, P. Schwärzier, К. Shah; London/U K Background: Fallopian tube disease remains a major cause of infertility for couples. The current "gold standard" of laparoscopy fo r assessing tubal pa tency is invasive and may be associated with delay. The use o f a simple outpatient test in this context would be of benefit. The developm ent of ultra sound contrast agents has enabled the use of transvaginal ultrasonography to reliably outline the endometrial cavity and Fallopian tubes. The technique is well tolerated as an outpatient and takes about 15 to 20 minutes to perform. At the same examination details of ovarian morphology and function can also be derived. Results: There have been 8 m ajor clinical studies involving over 1,880 patients. The mean tim e o f the examination was 11 minutes (range 4 -3 0 ), and the mean volum e of Echovist used 12 mis (range 4 -3 0 mis). The technique was well tolerated, only 7% of patients report severe pain, and 5% other adverse effects (nausea, syncope o r bleeding). Only 2 cases o f PID were reported. Hycosy com pares favourably with other reference techniques for assessing tubal patency. Compared to laparoscopy the sensitivity fo r patent tubes was 88%, specificity 59% , PPV 85%, NPV 67% . In com parison to HSG the sensitivity for patent tubes was 86%, specificity 84%, PPV 96% , NPV 58%. Discussion: Hycosy offers a relatively non-invasive test of tubal patency that can be performed in any outpatient environm ent. It has the potential to be carried out at an early stage of the algorithm to investigate the infertile couple and so may lead to more rapid efficient treatment. The added information available about ovarian morphology and function m eans th a t there is the potential to use ultrasonography in a pivotal role at the time of the initial consultation, enabling treatm ent to be planned more efficiently. Along with ultrasound and selective tubal catheterization, magnetic resonance imaging now plays a m ajor role in the work up o f an infertility. On the female side a pregnancy will require a normal ovulation, meaning a normal pituitary gland and normal ovaries. After conception has occurred in the fallopian tube, nidation and developm ent of the em bryo requires a normal sized and shaped uterus. This talk will focus on the technical aspects of MRI in the fem ale pelvis, and on its impact in pathologic conditions impairing fertility: dysovulations (polycystic ovarian disease, endometriosis, pituitary disorders) and uterine pathology (fibromas, mullerian m a lform a tions,...). Signal intensities o f articular structures were measured and contrastto-noise (С/N ) ratios were calculated. Each knee was subdivided into ten cartilage surfaces. From a total o f 188 (3D ERI sequence) and 198 (3D GE se quence) cartilage surfaces, 73 and 79 histologic specimens could be obtained and used fo r analysis. MR grading of cartilage lesions on both sequences was based on a five grade classification scheme and compared to histologic grading. The fat-suppressed 3D ERI sequence provided high С/N between cartilage and subchondral bone similar to fat-suppressed 3D GE sequence. C ontrast to noise between cartilage and effusion was significantly lower on the 3D ERI sequence due to higher signal intensity of fluid. MR grading of cartilage abnorm alities using fat-suppressed 3D ERI and 3D GE sequence correlated well with histologic grading. In 69 o f 73 (94.5% ) histologically proved locations and 76 of 79 (96.2% ) locations fat-suppressed 3D ERI and 3D GE sequence and histologic grading agreed within one grade. The gradings were identical in 38/73 (52.1% ) and in 46/79 (58.3%) cases, respectively. The difference between the sensitivities w as statistically not significant. The fat-suppressed 3D ERI sequence is comparable to fatsuppressed 3D GE sequence in the noninvasive evaluation of cartilage abnor malities but reduces scan time by a factor of four. Two radiologists independently interpreted the images and both made two interpretations independently in every patient based upon standard MRI and reconstructed images respectively. Results: The accuracy rates for evaluating the status fo r the medial and lateral meniscus were 79% and 94% respectively. The figure for the anterior cruciate ligam ent was 94% when arthroscopy w as considered the gold standard. In a total of 19 patients neither MRI nor arthroscopy detected any lesion. There were no differences in diagnostic perform ance between the two MRItechniques except for a potential 10 minutes reduction in examination time using the reconstruction sequences. Conclusion: Low-field MRI can be applied as a first line diagnostic exam ination in patients with suspected internal derangem ent of the knee and a substantial num ber of negative diagnostic arthroscopes can be avoided. S 1 6 0 Conclusion: Soft tissue abnorm alities are common in OA. Joint effusion, the most frequent observation here, has been shown in other joints to correlate with symptoms. Symptomatic OA patients should be evaluated with MR imaging to define the co-existing soft tissue changes which may explain their symptoms. 806 Anterior knee pain in the athletes: MRI evaluation of the "superior apex syndrom e" with a "dedicated" system L. Zugaro, G. Cariello, R. Maurizi Enrici, C. Masciocchi; L'A quila/l Purpose: Aim of this study was to retrospectively evaluate athletes with clinical signs of anterior knee pain Methods and Materials: For this study 11 patients were considered. In all cases, MRI examination w as performed with a dedicated system using Spin-Echo T1-and T2-weighted sequences on axial and sagittal planes, and slice thickness of 4 -5 mm. Results: Even if MRI examination did not show any specific pathological sign, at the level of the superior portion o f Hoffa's body the presence o f an altered signal intensity area was observed. This area was cause of impingement at the level of fem oro-patellar joint, as kinem atic MRI evaluation well demonstrated, and we defined this condition as "superior apex syndrome". Moreover, the arthroscopy performed in all cases, confirm ed as unique finding the presence of Hoffa's superior apex thickening. In conclusion, some anterior knee pain conditions can be due to impingement of the superior portion of Hoffa's body with femoro-patellar joint, and MRI is the only diagnostic technique which allows to demonstrate this quite important painful syndrome. To study the detectability and the appearance of the vermiform appendix with ultrasound in asym ptom atic adults. A prospective study of 300 patients, w ho were selected without regard to age, sex and weight, was performed. W e tried to visualize the appendix with a 3.5 MHz annular array and a 5 MHz linear array transducer. Results: In 63% of the patients the appendix w as clearly visualized. The main reasons for non-detectability were obesity with insufficient ultrasound penetration (38%) and the coecum laying in pelvical o r atypical position (24%). In 31% no cause was identifiable, and we therefore assum ed that the appendix could lay often behind the coecum. The sonographic image showed an aperistaltic target originating at the coecum and blind ending. In 42% the appendix w as ovoid in transverse section. In 32% the transverse section appeared round and in 26% both form s were found within one appendix. Intraluminal gas was visible in 86%. The mean transverse diam eter w as 5.2 mm (min. 3 mm, max. 13 mm) and in 76% the transverse diam eter w as lower than 6 mm. The aim of the study was to assess the value o f sonography in detecting the normal and abnorm al appendix. Material and Methods: 710 patients with clinically equivocal diagnosis for appendicitis were evaluated using graded com pression sonography. The com pressibility of appendix and, in particular, its maxim al wall thickness (normal: < 3 mm) were used as the primary US criteria to determ ine the status of appendix. In patients who were visualized with sonographically either abnor-S161 mal or normal appendix and underwent appendectomy (n = 130), surgical and histopathogical findings were used to correlate US findings; in patients who did not have surgery the standard of reference was the clinical consensus based on follow-up.  Retrospectively we have analyzed ingestion of 78 foreign bodies in 42 patients (age 1 5 -7 2 years) admitted to the Emergency Department. A fter obtaining a short history and basic vital parameters plain abdominal X-ray was performed. In addition chest X-ray's were done when esophageal foreign bodies were suspected. Conservative, endoscopic or surgical management was then defined depending on size of foreign body, patients symptoms and signs. Results: 67 foreign bodies (86%) passed the gastrointestinal tract sponta neously without complications. Even foreign bodies with a length of 13.5 cm appeared in the feces spontaneously. Nine (11%) were removed endoscop ically, and only tw o (3%) required surgery. There were no gastrointestinal perforations. Conclusions: Using our guidelines more than 80% of adults with foreign body ingestion can be managed safely as outpatients by m eans of conser vative treatment. Endoscopic or surgical removal is only indicated in rare circum stances (bleeding, obstruction, prolonged passage). (6), jejunum (4), ileum (3), appendix (4) and colon (14). The cause was peptic ulcer (5), traum a (2), iatrogenic (5), foreign body (3), carcinoma (6), Crohn disease (3), appendicitis (4) and diverticulitis (7). There were 27 true positive and 8 false negative CT diagnoses. Conclusion: CT is a valuable method in the diagnosis of AT perforation. The diagnosis can be established rapidly, without patient preparation and with a high degree of specificity. ; inhomogeneous, n = 11 (7 VS, 1 match/6 mismatches; 1 US, neg; 1 PA, neg); undetermined n = 2 (1 VS, pos). Altogether, in 29 patients pulmonary em boli were proven; anticoagulant therapy was given to these patients and 6 others (31%). II: 170 patients, 70 male/100 fem ale, mean age 57.2 (range 2 3 -9 2 yrs). Pulmonary perfusion scans were negative in 67 patients (39%). 103 scans were positive and classified as: subsegmentai, n = 13 (8 VS, 3 m atches/5 mismatches; 4 US, all neg; 1 PA, neg); segmental, n = 10 (8 VS, 1 match/7 mismatches; 1 US, neg); inhomogeneous, n = 10 (5 VS, 4 matches/1 mismatch; 1 US, neg); undetermined, n = 70 (47 VS, 20 matches/27 mismatches; 18 US, 2 pos/16 neg; 4 PA, all neg). Altogether, in 9 patients pulm onary em boli were proven; anticoagulant therapy w as given to these patients and 44 others (51%). The presence o f respiratory motion degraded image quality such that only 57/48% 53% of segmental vessels were fully seen in the 160/192 data sets respectively. Reflecting the impact of relative motion, upper lobe vessels w ere less effected than lower lobe pulm onary arteries (p < 0.001). 160 matrix (bh o r n-bh) scans revealed higher C/N-ratios within segmental vessels (p < 0.001 ). Conclusion: 18 and 24 sec. bh 3D pulm onary M R-angiogram s allow full assessment of the pulm onary arterial tree to the subsegm entai level. Bh reduced spatial resolution imaging is vastly superior to non-bh high resolution acquisitions.  The sensitivity of vessel segm ent involvement was 92% fo r DSV, 96% for MRV, and 71% for CT; specificity was 95% for DSV, 100% for MRV, and 98% fo r CT; accuracy w as 95% fo r DSV, 99% for MRV, and 90% for CT. Conclusion: MRV is more accurate than DSV and CT fo r planning stent placem ent in m alignant central venous obstruction, and correlation with selec tive catheter contrast venography w as excellent. This was mainly due to the m ultiplaner imaging capabilities of MRV. Particularly tum or involvement and differentiation between com pression/infiltration or thrombosis of the vessel by tum or are more accurate with MRV than DSV and CT. Making therapeutic decisions upon the findings of DSV and/or CT alone could lead to wrong patient management. patients. All had massive leg swelling. In 4 pts intraoperative DBA and DSA 1 day after surgery, respectively, showed an iliac venous spur as reason for thrombosis. All but one pts were treated by transfem oral stent implantation. Stent placement w as associated with PTA in all cases. All patients were followed up by clinical examination and colour-duplex sonography a t regular three months intervals. Results: All pts were com pletely free o f symptoms within 24 to 48 hours after treatment. There were no procedure-related complications. Median follow-up was 15 months (1 m onth to 6 years). Cumulative primary one year (two year) patency was 79% (67%). Secondary one year (two year) patency w as 100%. Conclusion: Percutaneous stentimplantation in case of postthrombotic il iofemoral venous stenoses o r iliac venous spur is a safe and effective pro cedure. By consequent follow -up and early re-intervention high long-term patency rates can be obtained. To study patients affected by Sarcoidosis with High-Resolution CT in order to evaluate diagnostic accuracy com pared to conventional radiological findings (chest radiograph). Materials and Methods: From July 1994 to April 1 9 9 6 ,1 4 patients (8 fem ales and 6 males, mean age 45 years), underwent 29 H.R.C.T. examination, in var ious phase o f the disease, to evaluate the grade and extension of pulm onary Sarcoidosis. Diagnosis of sarcoidosis was established based on clinical, sero logical and BAL findings. The H.R.C.T. examinations were evaluated searching for the following findings: hilar and mediastinal nodal involvement, thickening o r irregularity of the broncovascular bundle, intraparenchym al nodules, septal lines, ground-glass opacities and parenchymal consolidation, pleural thicken ing, fibrosis with architectural distortion. To each of this sign a score was given ranging from 0 to 3, reflecting the affected volum e: 0 -no involvement, 1-up to 33%, 2-up to 66%, 3-more than 66% . The interstitial signs of disease activity were evaluated not considering nodal involvement alone or patients with pulmonary fibrosis. The score so obtained, ranging from 1 to 9, allowed a further classification into three groups: mild (score 1 -3); m oderate (score 4 -6 ) and severe disease (score 7 -9 ). The attention was focused on the first tw o groups to verify correlation with subtle X-R ay chest findings. The 29 H.R.C.T. observations were divided into three categories: negative o r only lymphoadenopathy (5 cases), pulm onary involvem ent with o r without lymphonodes and without groud glass opacities o r fibrosis (18 cases); advanced pulm onary disease with sign of fibrosis and architectural distortion (6 cases). According to method section, we scored the main group o f 18 observations with pulm onary abnormalities: 12 observations had a score between 1 and 3; 2 observations had a score between 4 and 7; 4 observations had a score between 7 to 9. The X-Ray chest study o f each of these H.R.C.T. observation was independently exam inated using the ILO classification of thoracic sarcoidosis and looking fo r clear pulm onary involvement. Four of the X-Ray chest of the first tw o H.R.C.T. groups (14 observations) were positive fo r pulm onary involvement, while all 4 chest radiographs of the third group were pathological. Conclusions: In mild to and moderate pulm onary sarcoidosis H.R.C.T. is more sensitive, com pared with conventional radiology, to detect subtle initial signs of pulm onary disease, allowing an earlier and more precise quantification of the disease. To determine the prevalence of lung changes distribution, a retrospective study o f patients with histologicaly proven sarcoidosis type 1 (lym phadenopathy only on radiograph) was undertaken. 68 high-resolution com puted tom ography (HRCT) studies were revived. Two radiologists independently evaluated the HRCT scans fo r predom inance segmental opacities distribution. HRCT detected abnorm alities in lung parenchyma in 32 patients with type 1 sarcoidosis. Micronodular opacities were seen in 29 cases, and they isolated changes in 23 cases. Other abnorm alities were linear opacities-septal lines (n = 11), ground-glass opacities (n = 8 To standardize the discre tion of nodal group involvement in sar coidosis using ATS lymph node mapping scheme and to evaluate quantitatively lymph node enlargem ent by means of CT. Methods and Materials: Conventional chest CT scans of forty-two patients with confirmed pulm onary sarcoidosis of recent onset were reviewed, focusing on a) topographic classification of enlarged lymph nodes according to ATS mapping system b) m easurement o f the maximum short axis fo r each nodal group. Results: A) Mediastinal lym phadenopathy was present in 88% of the patients. The most frequently involved nodal groups were: 4R (right low er paratracheal) 79% , group 7 (subcarinal) 67%, group 5 (aortopulmonary) 64%, 11R/11L (hi lar) 61 %. Lym phadenopathy was observed in atypical locations such as group 14 and internal mammary nodes. No recognisable pattern of nodal group com bination w as confirmed, neither a consistent relation between sites of lymphadenopathy and features o f parenchymal involvement. B) The maximum and the mean values of short axis for the various nodal groups were respec tively: 2R -* 2.8 cm and 1.6 cm, 2L -» 2 cm and 1.5 cm, 4R -> 2.2 cm and 1.5 cm, 4 L -* 2 cm and 1.4 cm, group 5 -*■ 2 cm and 1.2 cm, group 6 -> 1.3 cm and 1.2 cm, group 7 -> 4 cm and 2 cm, group 8 -» 2.5 cm and 1.8 cm, 10R -* 2.2 cm and 1.5 cm, 10L -*■ 1.8 cm and 1.2 cm, 11R 2 cm and 1.5 cm, 11L -» 2 cm and 1.4 cm, group 14 -* 2 cm and 1.1 cm. Conclusion: ATS mapping scheme could serve as a standard lymph node classification system in sarcoidosis, ensuring uniformity and comparability of studies. Lymph node enlargement, greater than 2.8 cm should not favour the diagnosis of sarcoidosis and might be of value in narrowing the differential diagnosis of mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Purpose: To determ ine w hether a correlation exists between pulmonary function and both frontal chest radiograph and high-resolution CT findings in patients with pulm onary alveolar proteinosis (PAP). Materials and Methods: Seven patients with PAP were studied on 25 occa sions using high-resolution C T (n = 21), frontal chest radiographs (n = 19), and pulm onary function tests (n = 25). Visual estimates on the extent, degree, and overall severity of lung opacification and reticulation were determ ined for plain radiographs and high-resolution CT, and were correlated with pulmonary function tests (PFT). Results: On high-resolution CT, the severity of ground glass opacity corre lated significantly with the presence of a restrictive ventilatory defect, reduced diffusing capacity, and hypoxemia (p < 0.01). The extent o f ground glass and reticular opacities correlated better with PFT than did the degree of opacificaton. Chest radiographic findings correlated well with restrictive ventilatory defect and diffusing capacity and hypoxemia (p < 0.05). Conclusion: In patients with PAP, high-resolution CT and plain radiographic findings correlate with pulm onary function and are of potential use in follow-up. 833 Diffuse pulm onary hem orrhage in ANCA+ vasculitides: Role of im aging in the acute phase R. Maroldi, G. Battaglia, P. Maculotti, D. Farina, A. Chiesa; Brescia/I Purpose: To evaluate the role of imaging in the early detection of diffuse pulm onary hemorrhage in ANCA positive patients. Methods and Materials: Chest X-ray findings were com pared with CO diffu sion test in 42 suspected episodes of hemorrhage in 33 ANCA+ patients. In all cases a follow up w as carried out both with CO diffusion test and conventional chest X-Ray. In eleven cases HRCT was performed. Results: CO diffusion test and chest X-ray were concordant in 28/42 cases (18 positive, 10 negative); in 11/42 a negative X-ray was followed by a positive diffusion test (anyway, in 7/11 the result of the test w as slightly higher than average and quickly normalized). In all these patients HRCT demonstrated lung abnorm alities (ground glass opacities, interstitial thickening) suggesting alveolar and interstitial bleeding. Only in 3/42 cases the radiological examina tion w as positive o r suggestive while CO test resulted negative (nevertheless, all these patients had a previous recent hemorrhage). Sensitivity fo r chest X-ray was 81.8%, while specificity w as 85%. In spite o f the limited population examined, chest X-ray appears to be a reliable tool in the early diagnosis of diffuse pulm onary hemorrhage. W hen negative chest X-ray does not correlate to the clinical findings and CO uptake, HRCT provides more accurate information.  In 32 patients with PSS the degree o f LF was evaluated by HRCT and graded using the following score: I = no LF (n = 11), II = interlobular thickening restricted to the low er lung (n = 11), and III = extensive LF with honeycom bing (n = 10). All patients underwent right heart catheterization to determ ine PAP. Results: In group I and II no patient had a pulm onary hypertension at rest, while 4 patients (36.4%) in I and 7 patients (63.6% ) in II had an elevated PAP at exercise. All patients with extensive LF (III) presented with elevated PAP at exercise, 4 patients (40%) had definitely elevated PAP at rest. The presence of pulm onary hypertension w as not related to sex, age or duration of disease. Conclusion: W e conclude that in patients with no detectable fibrotic changes pulmonary hypertension is secondary to vascular changes. The correlation of pulmonary hypertension in mild or extensive LF suggests either a dependent developm ent or an additional hemodynamic effect to vascular changes. The concurrence of non-neoplastic pulm onary lymphocytic infiltration with amyloid deposition has been reported in the pathological literature. However, the distinctive high-resolution CT (HRCT) features in PLH associated with amyloid deposition have not previously been documented. Methods and Materials: Interest in the pathological-radiological features of a patient with proven PLH, amyloid and concurrent Sjogren's syndrome led to a review of our pathological database for other sim ilar cases. Two further cases were docum ented and the clinical, HRCT and pathological findings in three patients are discussed. Results: A history of progressive exertional dyspnoea was present in all three cases. Sjogren's syndrome was a feature in tw o patients. Obstructive lung function indices were present in all cases. All patients were life-long non-smokers. Chest radiography showed bilateral bizarre-shaped opacities; HRCT confirmed that many of the nodules were calcified and non-cavitating. A striking feature was the dem onstration of multiple bilateral thin-walled cysts, some of which abutted nodules. In one case, a pattern of "mosaic attenuation", attributed to small airways obstruction, was also demonstrated. Conclusion: The HRCT abnorm alities of the three cases described were sufficiently distinctive to allow differentiation from other causes of pulmonary cysts and nodules on CT. The aetiology of cysts in the cases described was not clear but has been ascribed to a "check-valve" mechanism by previous authors. The Authors have studied with HRCT of the lungs, 46 patients with multisystem ic Langherans' Cell Histiocitosis, histologically proved in the skeleton and skin. Mean age: 9 years. Male/female ratio: 5 /1 . All CT exams were made with a high resolution alghoritm and thin scans (1.5 mm) performed at the apex, middle and low er pulm onary fields. All patients, were studied with thorax plain radiograph and spyrom etric tests. CT S 166 parameters fo r lung involvement: -interstitial reticular thickening, -nodular changes (1 -5 mm), -cystic lesions (1 -1 0 mm); honeycom bing appearence,ground-glass appearance. In 50% o f patients (24 of 46) there were CT signs o f lung pathology (cystic lesions: 28%, nodular lesions: 23% , reticular thickening: 22%, cystic and nodu lar lesions: 18%, honeycom bing appearance: 7%, ground-glass appearance: 2%. Only in 10%: grossly signs o f interstitial pathology on plain films; in all pts functional tests were negative. HRCT is the best diagnostic modality in evalua tion of children with suspected pulmonary Langherans' Cell Histiocitosis; it has demonstrated high sensibility and specificity in identify also small pulm onary lesions not visualized on plain radiograph and without clinical manifestations.  Thirteen formalin fixed spinal cord specimens, ob tained from the cervical cord of 10 MS patients and 3 controls, were imaged at 4.7 T. Contiguous axial proton-density (PD) weighted, 1 mm thick slices were obtained with a pixelsize of 80 д т 2. Also, images were obtained with increasing T2-weighting, and with increasing T1-weighting. Results: PD-weighted images showed the spinal cord with superb contrast and detail. Increasing T1-o r T2-weighting did not improve contrast o r image quality. No abnorm alities were found in control specimens. In all MS speci mens, areas o f increased signal intensity (SI) were seen. They were mostly wedge-shaped and located in the lateral w hite matter. However, grey matter was also affected in all cases. In 5 o f 10 cases abnorm alities were contiguous throughout the specimen. These abnorm alities had higher SI than did focal areas. 2D tim e-of-flight (TOF) axial sequence without and with superior saturation pulse was performed when presumed nerve roots enhancement occurred. A control group of twenty patients underw ent a sim ilar protocol. Results: 50% of symptomatic patients showed presumed nerve roots e n hancement, with no pain side-correlation in 45.5% . The presumed root e n hancement was always detected on TOF sequences, disappearing in 96% after superior saturation pulse. True nerve root enhancem ent was seen only in one patient affected by spinal dural fistula. The FRE was detected in 4 patients. 45% o f asymptomatic patients showed sim ilar findings. In 7 cases, FRE w as detected on the first entry-slice. Conclusion: According to our results, presumed radicular enhancem ent in symptomatic and asym ptom atic patients seem s to be generally related to great radicular veins. W e suggest 2D TO F sequences should be added to the standard lum bar MRI protocol when spinal roots enhancem ent in symptomatic patients has to be investigated. Results: MR demonstrated patchy areas of increased signal intensity in the white-m atter tracts on T2-weighted images in all cases, in each case corresponding to an area of the cord believed to be clinically involved (1 cervical and dorsal tract, 1 cervical tract alone and 1 dorsal tract alone). Conclusion: MRI has proved to be reliable in the detection of intramedullary lesions due to decompression accident that were previously undetectable by other neuroim aging methods. Further MRI has proved to be useful to make decision on how to structure a prompt hyperbaric treatment. Results: In 7 of 10 patients with dilated veins in the X-ray myelography, MRI and DSA confirmed a AVM in the thoracic spine. In three patients MRI and DSA only could identify dilated veins in the thoracolum bar region caused by severe spinal stenoses. In one female patient DSA had be repeated twice to identify an AVM, w hereas high resolution MRI using a 3D-CISS scheme was able to detect all spinal dural arteriovenous malformation. Conclusion: Flow com pensated high resolution MRI using a 3D-CISS se quence is useful in the selection of patients with AVM. The sensitivity of the MR method is higher com pared with conventional X-ray myelography and com parable with DSA. Results: Thoracal spine was involved in 11 cases w hereas lumbar spine was involved in 9 cases and cervical spine in 5 cases. Paraspinal and epidural abscess formation were seen in 95% o f all cases. Of these, patients with thoracal and cervical involvement presented with neurologic symptoms. In approximately 65% of all cases, pulm onary tuberculosis was present as well. Discussion: Extrapulmonary tuberculosis occurs in approxim ately 10 -25% of cases. Spine is one o f the most frequent locations. Symptoms and signs may be unspesific and the course of the disease is usually creeping. Neurologic findings may predominate, particularly in cervical or thoracal involvement. Determining the precise localization and extention of the paraspinal and epidural abscesses is crucial for planning of the operation. MR should be the imaging modality of choice for these patients.  In a prospective study 24 patients with biopsy proved prostate cancer were exam ined with a 1.5 T MR-system (Siemens Magnetom Vision) before radical prostatectomy. W ith both coils a turbo-spin-echosequence (TR = 5000, TE = 132 ms) w as used to obtain T2-weighted images throughout the prostate and seminal vesicles in axial and coronal orientations. MR-findings were correlated with histopatholocial findings by one reader. Results: Overall image quality was best with the cp-phased-array coil. Artifacts in phase-encoding-direction were a reason for reduced image quality with the endorectal coil. Tumor spread through the prostate capsule and invasion o f the seminal vesicles were slightly better recognized with the endorectal coil. The phased-array technique was superior to endorectal imaging in dem onstrating cancer in the anterior gland and in the apex. Using the endorectal coil a second com plem entary examination with the body-array coil was necessary for lymph node staging. Conclusions: MR-imaging with a cp-phased-array coil offers advantages in comparison to the endorectal coil, as sim plier coil m anagement, sufficient staging results, reduced image artifacts and shorter exam ination time. The endorectal coil should be reserved for younger patients, who should undergo nerve sparing prostate surgery. bolus Gd-DTPA in 16 patients with biopsy proven prostate cancer with no previous treatm ent were performed. Corresponding T2W images were re viewed independently by 2 radiologists to identify the presence and location o f normal peripheral zone (PZ. 14), BPH (7) and m alignant tum our (13). ROI analysis from enhanced FLASH images using in-house software to measure enhancem ent param eters (m ean gradient, maximal amplitude and washout) were correlated with anatom ical information from T2W images. Results: Significant differences were noted between normal PZ and malignant tum our with respect to mean gradient (p = 0.006) and washout (p = 0.012), but not with respect to maxim al am plitude of enhancement. No difference in any enhancem ent param eters between BPH and tum our were found. Conclusions: Discrimination o f malignant tum our from normal peripheral zone is possible using quantitative enhancement parameters, but not between carcinom a and BPH. Benign vs. malignant disease were better separated by PSA corrected and PSAD-PZ (p = 0.0091 and p = 0.0021 resp.) than by PSA (p = 0.035). Conclusion: Elevated PSA-corrected and PSAD-PZ levels are better predic tors o f m alignancy than elevated PSA. 854 The role o f various predictive factors in optim izing the perform ances of endorectal MRI in the staging of prostatic carcinoma H.G. K h a n 1·2, J.L. P ariente2, С. D em inière2, H. T rilla ud2, M. Le G uillou2, P. B allanger2, N. G renier2; 1 Geneva/CH, 2 Bordeaux/F Objective: To determ ine which param eters could be predictive of optimal perform ance fo r staging prostatic carcinom a with endorectal MRI (ERMRI). Methods: 68 patients (spectrum o f age 5 0 -7 2 y, mean 68 y) with biopsy proven prostate carcinom a (PC) underwent ERMRI prior to radical prostate ctomy. A 1.5 T MR unit w as used. T1w images in the axial plane, and T2w images in the three orthogonal planes were obtained. The MRI criteria of capsular and seminal vesicle invasion were correlated with histology. Blind retrospective analysis by two radiologists and consensus was obtained. Lev els o f perform ance were then correlated to digital rectal examination (DRE) to blood PSA levels, and the Gleason score. Macroscopic and microscopic invasion were not differentiated. The sensitivities for T2-T3 distinction for reader 1, reader 2 and consensus varied between 66 .6-8 6% . The specificities varied between 5 7 .9 -73.7%. Accuracy was globally similar at 72%. (k = 0.1971; weighted к = 0.3043). The correlation of the performances of MRI with rectal examination, blood PSA levels, and Gleason score will be discussed. Conclusion: Endorectal MRI has the best specificity for the subgroup of patients with a negative DRE, low PSA level and low combined Gleason score. Significant interobservor variability was noted. Six sextant biopsies were performed 2 to 4 weeks prior to MRI. Core cancer length, ratio between core cancer length and total core length, as well as the number of positive biopsies were calculated. All patients underwent radical prostatectomy. Results: At pathological examination, 33 patients had a confined tum or and 20 a non confined tumor. MRI showed a 45% sensitivity and a 93% specificity fo r predicting extra prostatic tum or spread. To obtain a com parable specificity with biopsies, the cutoff value of the 3 studied param eters was 36 mm, 70% and more than 3 positive biopsies (mean 5 ± 0.7)) with a sensitivity of 25, 15, and 55% respectively. Combination o f MRI and system atic biopsies yielded a sensitivity of 70% and a specificity of 88%. LITT followed a programme of decreasing power settings (20 W -7 W). Each prostatic lobe was irradiated from a t least one optical fibre position. Results: Average pretherapeutic prostate volum e was 68.6 ml (reprotucibility ± 5%). Laser optical fibres were always clearly demarcated in the prostatic tissue, and endoscopic positioning could be opim ized, particularly in difficult areas near the prostatic capsule, base, and apex. Signal intensity changes S 170 of 20 -25% on T1-weighted images obtained during LITT energy application were observed with two different laser system s operating at 1,064 nm and 830 nm. Posttherapeutic changes could be followed up over more than 6 months. The purpose of this study was to evaluate laser induced changes in the prostate using endorectal MRI. Imaging findings were correlated to wholemount specimen. Methods: In 8 patients with prostate carcinoma, VLAP was performed during lymphonodectomy. Radical prostatectomy w as performed 4 -9 days (mean 6.9 days) following VLAP. All patients underwent endorectal MRI before VLAP and again between 12 to 24 hours prior to surgery. Imaging findings were correlated to macroscopic and histologic whole-m ount specimen. Results: Benign liver lesions showed a significant signal loss (PSIL) in proton density-weighted images (p < 0.05), w hereas malignant liver lesions showed almost no (p > 0.05) (Wilcoxon test). FNH-nodules and adenom as revealed a decrease of signal using AMI-25-enhanced T2-weighted images. Lesions changed from isointensity unenhanced to moderate hyperintensity in contrastenhanced T1-weighted scans. Adenomas presented a contrast-enhancing capsule in T2-weighted AMI-25-enhanced MRI. A hypointense signal was documented fo r hemangiomas unenhanced changing to hyperintensity in T1weighted AMI-25-enhanced scans. Malignant liver lesions w ere hyperintense using unenhanced and contrast-enhanced scans. M etastases due to colorectal cancer revealed a hyperintense rim enhancem ent in T1-w eighted AMI-25enhanced scans. Conclusion: AMI-25-enhanced MRI is an effective imaging tool fo r differential diagnosis of focal liver lesions using T2-and T1-w eighted sequences to define lesion specific enhancement of benign versus malignant liver lesions. Material and Methods: Twenty-five patients with focal liver lesions underwent T2-weighted turbospin-echo MR im aging using fat suppression before and after intravenous administration of Resovist (0.9 ml in patients with body weight from 35 to < 60 kg, 1.4 ml in patients > 60 kg). Mean signal intensity (SI) of unenhanced and enhanced MR imaging was measured. Results: SI of normal liver tissue and spleen decreased after administration of RESOVIST with mean decreases o f -5 7 ± 15% and -4 5 ± 16%, respectively. SI of hemangiomas (n = 14) and benign liver tum ors (n = 3) decreased with mean decreases of -3 5 ± 11%, -4 6 ± 10%. All malignant liver lesions (n = 8) showed no enhancement. The difference o f SI changes between malignant and benign lesions and/or hemangiomas induced by RESOVIST w ere statis tically different (p < 0.05), w hereas SI changes between hem angiom as and benign tum ors were not statistically different. Benign lesions showed similar enhancement pattern as com pared to normal liver tissue. No statistically sig nificant difference in SI changes was demonstrated using T2-TSE without and with fa t suppression. Interobserver variability fo r SI measurements in normal liver tissue was 31 ± 0.5% and fo r focal liver lesions 4.7 ± 0.5%. Conclusion: RES-enhanced (RESOVIST). MR imaging enables noninvasive differential diagnosis in benign and m alignant liver tum ors on both T2-TSE and fat suppressed T2-TSE sequences.  M ethods and Materials: T2-weighted FSE (TR 4600 msec, TE 83/165 msec, 8 mm sections, 2 mm gap, 17 sections in 6 min/31 sec, cranial and caudal presaturation) scans were obtained in 44 consented patients with focal liver lesions before and 15 min following injection of Resovist (0.9 ml < 60 kg bodyweight and 1.4 ml > 60 kg bodyweight; Schering AG). Signal changes were qualitatively and quantitatively analyzed by three independent readers to define enhancem ent features o f focal liver lesions fo r lesion characterization. Results: Hepatocellular carcinom as (n = 4) and liver metastases (n = 22) did not show lesion enhancem ent. All hemangiomas (10/10) demonstrated a ho m ogeneous signal decrease on T2-weighted FSE scans. Other benign lesions with lesion enhancement were focal nodular hyperplasias (4/4) and regenera tive nodules. Liver cysts and abscesses did not show lesion enhancement. Conclusion: Lesion enhancem ent of hemangiomas, focal nodular hyper plasias, and regenerative nodules following iv. injection of Resovist as a R ES-specific SPIO provides additional information for liver lesion characteri zation. Initially, both substances displayed equivalent maximum signal-to-noise (S/N)ratio. In the FeO-BPA group, the half maximum S/N-ratio was reached 150 min. following injection, while this interval was significantly shorter using the Gd-polymer: approx. 70 min. Particularly regarding hepatic vessels, best contrast-to-noise ratio was obtained on FeO-BPA-enhanced images, which differed distinctly from the Gd-group. Tumor-to-liver contrast-to-noise (С/N) ratios were calculated on unenhanced and SPIO-enhanced images. The num ber of lesions was evaluated in each sequence. Results: SPIO has marked effects on S/N ratio o f normal liver tissue. The signal loss in liver parenchym a w as 60 -70% , w hereas in malignant lesions only a minimal change could be measured. The increase of tum or-to-liver С/N ratio was significant in all malignant liver lesions. The detectability of lesions on SPIO-enhanced images was improved by 28% in the slightly T2weighted sequence (Т В2030Я Е 45) and by 22% in the T2-weighted sequence (TR2030/TE90). Especially the num ber of detectable foci smaller than 1 cm increased. Conclusions: SPIO is an effective contrast agent for the detection of focal hepatic lesions. For characterization unenhanced T 1 -and T2-weighted images are undispensable, nevertheless the specificity still needs to be improved. New imaging techniques such as ultrafast sequences will bring further advances in image quality and demarcation o f vascular structures versus small lesions. Methods and Materials: Images of 592 patients with suspected focal liver lesions from 17 MR-centres were evaluated by 4 off-site independent radiol ogists. The independent evaluation included lesion counts and determination of the level of the lesion conspicuity, quality o f lesion delineation, and grading of confidence in lesion detection and diagnosis. In 147 cases the diagnosis of liver lesions was proven histologically. In 117 cases MnDPDP enhanced MRI images were com pared to contrast enhanced C T (CECT). Results: Post-MnDPDP images of the liver allowed detection of more lesions (p < 0.0001), increased confidence for detection (p < 0.0001), improved lesion conspicuity (p < 0 .0001) and increased confidence in the diagnosis of the lesion (p < 0.0001) compared to unenhanced T1W and T2W images. Comparing MnDPDP enhanced MR images to CECT, MRI was significantly better fo r lesion characterization, but not for detection. Based on lesion histology, independent investigators made a correct diagnosis on the pre-MnDPDP images in 59% of lesions and in 66% o f lesions on the post-MnDPDP images. Conclusion: M n-DPDP increases significantly the ability to detect focal liver lesions with MRI, and helps significantly to characterize those lesions. The increased implementation of mammographie screening along with the rapid advances in digital and com puter technology have created an increased interest in com puter aided diagnosis (CAD). CAD can serve as a "second opinion" that the radiologist can take into consideration in making the final interpretation. To improve the positive predictive value and decrease the false negative rate of screen-film mammography, a mammographie CAD system has been developed to assist the radiologist in the diagnosis. The aim o f the study is to assess the physical characteristics of the lesions that can be classified using this CAD and its effect on the accuracy of mammographie interpretation in clinical settings. The mammographie images obtained with a con ventional film-screen system were digitized using a CCD scanner, allowing to obtain 256 gray levels and pixel 20 д т wide. Different phantom simulating lesions of variable dimension and contrast were used in order to estimate the physical limits of CAD interpretation with its different elaboration tools (filtering, histogram equalization, pseudo-color, dynam ic zoom, adaptive non-linear gray scale reconstruction, etc.). The same lesions were interpreted in the usual manner by an experienced team of radiologists and a com parison among the phantom, CAD and radiologists data was performed. Results: CAD and in particular com puterized image enhancem ent dem on strated details not seen on the original mammogram. The specificiy of the mammogram was found to be increased more than three tim es with the ad ditional use of the CAD system and a ROC curve w as obtained to show this improvement. The results in this small group of phantom images suggest that computerized enhancement and quantitative analysis of conventional mam mogram s can assist the radiology to improve diagnostic accuracy. Additional studies, including long term follow -up of large series of patients, are recom mended in order to determ ine the future clinical role o f m ammographie CAD.  Results: Because o f a denoising effect, the wavelet com pression sometimes improves the DP for small FP rates. For fixed compression ratios the DP on w avelet com pressed mammogram s is consistently better than that of JPEG. Results: Bayes Theorem has frequently been used to determine the prob ability of malignancy of a solitary pulmonary nodule. Determination of this probability using Bayes Theorem requires knowledge of the joint probability of occurrence of many subject (e.g. age, smoking history) and nodule (e.g. size, edge, calcification) variâtes. The fundam ental requirement fo r the estimation of these joint probabilities is a knowledge database of the joint occurrence of these many subject and nodule variâtes which is enormous and usually not obtainable. To simplify the task of estimating these joint probabilities, assumptions are made as to independence o f the occurrence of these vari âtes (e.g. that age is independent of smoking history, nodule size and edge characteristics, etc) as this permits the multiplication of univariate probabilities to determ ine the joint probabilities. Conclusions: Bayes Theorem , while a reasonable conceptual model, is not an appropriate m athem atical model for the actual estimation of the probability of malignancy. Alternative m athem atical models, such as the logistic regression function, are more appropriate as they do not require the assumption of independence, even allowing fo r nonlinear relationships between the fact variâtes. Estimation of the logistic regression coefficients is straightforward and requires a smaller knowledge data base as few er parameters must be estimated. M ethods and Materials: From a longitudinal study of 10 relapsing-remitting MS patients (0.5-T; 5-mm slice; matrix 2562) we selected 15 T1-weighted images (T1-WI) fo r a total of 22 Gd-enhanced lesions and 15 T2-weighted images (T2-W I) for a total o f 42 lesions. The images were random ly presented to 3 radiologists who repeated the growing region (GR) segmentation 3 times; two-way analysis of variance ("fixed effect" model) was used. One radiologist performed the measure o f 47 lesions on Gd-enhanced-T1 -W l and 49 on T2-WI with both GR and standard manual contouring (MC) method; one-way analysis of variance w as used. Results: T 1 -W l intraobserver variability 3.8 pixels (3.7% of the total variability), T2-W I intraobserver variability 5.9 pixels (2.1% ). The interrater variability was significant (p = 0.02) but appraised about 1 pixel fo r T1-W I, non-significant for T2-W I. Compared to MC, GR is afflicted by a less variance both fo r T1-W I (p < 0.01) and fo r T2-W I (p < 0.01 Results: 48/54 (89%) surgically and histopathologically proven liver lesions were detected with b-CT and 52/54 (96% ) with СТАР. All missed lesions were colorectal metastases and had a diam eter < 1 cm. W ith b-C T no false-positive lesions were seen, whereas 5 lesions detected by СТАР were not confirmed at surgery. Perfusion artifacts were only present in СТАР. All benign lesions > 1 cm were classified correctly with both modalities. Two benign lesions < 1 cm were misinterpreted in СТАР as metastases. Conclusion: Biphasic spiral C T of the liver has a higher specificity than СТАР, but double spiral СТАР remains the most sensitive CT modality in preoperative liver imaging.  A total o f 437 liver leasions (81 patients) were studied with four-phase helical CT. All 81 patients were examined primarily with oral contrast medium, then nonionic contrast material (300 mg iodine/mL) was administered intravenously by using a power injector at a flow rate of 3 mL per second fo r 30 to 40 seconds. The scan delay was 25 seconds fo r the arterial phase, 80 seconds fo r the portal venouse phase and 150 seconds for the parenchymal phase. Section thickness was 8 mm with, an the pitch was 1.5. The diam eter of the lesions was below 10 mm in 10%, betwen 10 and 20 mm in 40% and above 20 mm in 50% of the cases. The detection o f liver lesions had a sensitivity of 58% in the oral contrast study, the sensitivity for the arterial phase was 72% , for the portal venous phase 89% and the parenchyma tous phase 78% . None of the 437 lesions w as detected in all four phases. The portal venous phase has the highest sensitivity fo r the detection of liver lesions. For hypervascularized lesions the arterial phase is necessary. Additional inform ation w as gained with oral phase (especially in low vascularized lesions). In our opinion a four-phase study in CT ist optimal for detection and characterisation of liver lesions. Klatskin tum ors prospectively underw ent three-phasic helical CT: before and 20-seconds and 90-seconds after administration of 120 ml non ionic contrast material at 3 ml/sec. CT was performed with 3-mm collimation, 4.5-mm/sec table feed and 3-mm increments. CT findings w ere correlated with surgical extent of tum or as well as pathologic findings. Results: In all patients the tum or w as demonstrated with helical CT. A tapered infiltrating stenotic tum or w as identified in seven patients, a bulky exophytic tum or was seen in five patients. In eight patients the CT-findings deemed unresectability, which w as surgical o r pathological proved. CT-findings revealed potentially resectable tum ors in four patients although, a t surgery only one had curative resection and the others had a palliative resection. Conclusion: Three-phase helical CT is effective in diagnosis and stag ing of Klatskin tumors, although fo r the evaluation of arterial and bile duct involvement further examinations are necessary. . Images were read by 3 blinded radiologists and ranked on a scale of 1 to 5 (1 being best) with respect to high and low contrast resolution, artifacts, and overall image quality. Image noise w as determ ined by 3 ROIs drawn in muscle tissue (standard deviation over mean). Results were statistically analyzed using the W ilcoxon test. Results: Images with 20 mA showed significantly higher noise than high dose images (p < 0.001). Using film s photographed with bone window and level settings (1700/300), no difference w as notable in high contrast resolution (mean LD: 2.1; HD: 2.0, p > 0.4) and artifacts (p > 0.4), and differences in overall image quality were not significant (p > 0.1). Conclusion: 20 mAs per slice suffices fo r detail resolution of the paranasal sinuses and should be used fo r dose reduction. The raw data of SACT were reconstructed with different thicknesses and increments (5/5, 3/3, 3/1.5 and 2/1.5 mm). All data of SACT were post processed with coronal reformation, 3D and VR by OmniPro and Explorer software packages, respectively. Results: The ostiomeatal com plex (CM C) could be clearly shown in 87.3%, 85.7%, and 82.6% o f observed structures by coronal scan, coronal reformation and 3D-cut, respectively. In displaying fine structures as CMC with different thicknesses/increments of SACT, the image quality of 3D and VR is the best with 1.3/1.0 mm and the poorest with 5/5 mm. Conclusion: 3D-cut and coronal reform ation could clearly display the struc tures of CMC and paranasal sinuses. By using thin slices and small increments of SACT, image quality and display ability in 3D and coronal reformation are comparable with coronal scan.  18 patients with an evolving ORN were studied. 6 patients presented an early ORN (mean delay: 6.5 months), 12 patients with a delayed ORN (mean delay: 5 years). Imaging workup comprised a panorex, an IV C T (with dentaC T and 3D reconstruction in 11 cases), a MR study, without and with gadolinium injection. Results: CT was optimal to show lysis of the mandibulary cortex. DentaCT was especially useful fo r detecting lysis of the basilar ridge. T1W MR images were optimal to display extension in the medullary bone. MR showed three major drawbacks: 1 ) it could not differentiate intramedullary ORN from routine dental infection; 2) it could not differentiate acute ORN from tum or relapse, owing to nonspecific contrast enhancem ent in the soft tissues; 3) it could not predict the outcom e of ORN.  In 20 patients a conventional dacryocystography was performed. In 11/20 patients a CT-dacryocystography and in 9/20 patients a MR-dacryocystography after administration of a gadolinium -solution for eye drops were performed additionally. Results: Using CT-dacryocystography all stenoses w ere localized exactly. In 4 patients, where total occlusion of the nasolacrim al duct was suspected by conventional dacryocystography, CT-dacryocystography revealed that there was only a stenosis. With M R-dacryocystography proximal stenoses of the nasolacrimal duct system were localized as exact as with conventional dacry ocystography. In 2 patients, w here total occlusion w as suspected in MRdacryocystography, conventional dacryocystography revealed that there was only a stenosis. Conclusions: Using CT-dacryocystography localization, degree and etiology of stenoses can be determ ined more reliably than with conventional dacryocys tography. Specifity of MR-dacryocystography is low er than that of conventional dacryocystography. Nevertheless, because o f the absent radiation exposure we use MR-dacryocystography for screening young patients with epiphora of unknown cause. The incidence o f tuberculosis in refugees and the homeless is of concern. Screening using chest radiography can lead to loss o f clients to follow up when there is a delay in obtaining a radiologist's report. A radiographer-led screening and referral service offered during chest clinic hours is reported. Materials and Methods: Single PA chest radiographs were taken o f each person at day centres, hostels, and night shelters in London. If the radiographer considered active disease to be present the patient was referred immediately to a chest clinic. The radiographer's assessment was subsequently correlated with a radiologists report. Results: In nine months, 1076 subjects were radiographed. Thirty nine (4%) were referred directly to clinics. Of these fo u r w ere confirmed to have active tuberculosis, eight are undiagnosed at present, four refused follow up, two had carcinom a and tw o died. Nineteen w ere discharged after investigations excluded active disease. Of those considered normal by the radiographer, seven were recalled for additional views after radiological review. One was found to have active tuberculosis. In three active disease was excluded and three were lost to follow up. Conclusion: Radiographer screening is an effective method of screening for tuberculosis and helps com pliance in this chaotic population. 898 Accuracy of radiographers' reports in accident and em ergency exam inations of the skeletal system K. Piper, A. Paterson; C anterbury/UK Purpose: This paper reports on the results of the first accredited programme in the UK which aim s to prepare radiographers to report on traum a examinations o f the skeletal system. Method and Materials: 100 exam inations were used following a one year postgraduate programme o f study to assess the competence o f the radiog raphers involved. Appendicular and axial exam inations were included and all examinations were reported independently by three consultant radiologists. Examinations were included if there was agreem ent between the radiolog ical reports (prevalence o f abnorm al exam inations = 37% ). Radiographers identified if the radiographic appearances were considered to be normal or abnormal, and written com m ents provided. Accuracy, sensitivity and specificity rates were calculated. Pre-test/post-test com parisons were also made. Results: Accuracy at the end of the postgraduate programme was > 95%. Sensitivity and specificity, 94.9% and 95.5% respectively. Accuracy for the control group was 91% dem onstrating a significant difference in all three performance measures used (p = 0.02). Initial findings in a study of over 6000 examinations, suggest that 95% com petence rates are being maintained after completion of the programme. Final results of this study will be also presented. Conclusion: Radiological workloads and the num ber o f interventional proce dures are rapidly increasing and this study suggests that radiographers, after completion of an accredited programme, could provide valuable assistance in the plain film reporting of traum a examinations of the skeletal system. Methods and Materials: W e studied, in a year, 3640 paediatric patients aged 1 day -14 years. All examinations were conducted on a digital spot fluorography system Gilardoni DRS Spot connected to a Telegil SL digit remote-controlled diagnostic X-ray stand. The system is dedicated to the acquisition of dynamic digital images in fast tem poral sequences with continuous photon flow (25 images x sec) and with pulsed flow with the emission o f single or serial high photon flow impulses. The exam inations carried out include: contrast gastrointestinal and genitourinary radiology, and direct radiology of the air ways. Results: The system offers a series o f advantages: imaging post-processing, fast storage and retrieval o f images, real tim e image display, reduction in film consumption, variable field of view, relative dose reduction, no cassette handling, etc. The disadvantages include: low spatial resolution, small fields of view. Conclusions: T he experience obtained over several months of working with digital fluorography on paediatric patients had led us to confirm the diagnostic efficiency of digital fluorography in all contrast exam inations and its technical flexibility. In this respect a change of attitude is required to radiographers who have to combine their "classic" knowledge with the culture of the optimization of the diagnostic images in order to maximize the information. 1 1 -1 5 year) . For pelvis radiographs DAP varies from 0.004 (0-1 year) to 1.2 Gy.cm2 (1 1-15 year), fo r PA o r AP chest exam inations from 0.005 (0-1 year) to 0.014 Gy.cm2 (6 -1 0 year) and fo r LAT chest examinations from 0.007 (0-1 year) to 0.020 Gy.cm2 (6 -1 0 year). Effective doses are in the range 0 .4 -2 .4 mSv fo r MCU and in the range 0 .0 1-0 .02 mSv fo r PA o r AP chest, 0 .0 1-0 .02 range fo r LAT chest and 0 .0 1 -0 .3 m Sv for pelvis radiographs. Conclusion: It will be encouraged that measurements o f DAP are performed at other Dutch hospitals as a follow up to this intra-hospital dose survey. This will enable a subsequent evaluation o f potential dose reduction in paediatric radiology through com parison of radiographic techniques and DAP. 902 Analysis of reject films as a part of quality assurance in diagnostic radiology G. Lewentat, K. Bohndorf; Augsburg/D Purpose: Analysis of reject films from a large radiological departm ent under the following aspects: How big is the waste of film s? W here are the sources of error? W hat are possible means of quality assurance? Material and Methods: Over 9 months, separated in 3 quarters, 14570 reject film s were analysed and assigned in 4 categories (" positioning", "exposure", "reject films due to patients" and "others" ). In addition they were classified according to the respective parts of the body. The influence of a "study-effect" was quantified by the analysis before and after information of staff. The reject film rate correlated with all taken radiographs was 9 .0 -13.2% in that period, of these the rate o f mistaken X-rays (X-rays taken, but useless fo r diagnosis because of their bad quality) was between 54.2 and 57.5%. Within this category the main sources o f error were positioning (55%) and exposure (34%). Surprisingly, the technical film w aste am ounted to 42 .5-4 5.8% (not developed o r preexposed films, X-rays of phantom s etc.). To evaluate w hether present guidelines for patient information according to GCP result in unnecessary concern by the patients. tw o contrast media, Visipaque and Omnipaque, with regard to possible dose reduction in urography, w as performed at the Department of Radiology, Esbjerg Central Hospital, Denmark. The potential patients were informed about the trial by written material forw arded to their residences approximately 14 days before the examination, and by oral information for 20 minutes upon the examination day. The written information was designed according to Danish authorities' current guidelines, w hich are directed by GCP guidelines. During the first months o f practical performance, the patient inclusion rate was markedly low er than expected. A questionnaire w as therefore designed to investigate the reasons fo r the individual patient choosing not to participate in the trial. After routine urography, the patients were requested by one of the staff m em bers to give their reasons fo r not participating in the trial. Nordstar) by the sam e radiographer. All patients received written and oral information about the examination, but no specific information about possible adverse events. The first 15-months 479 patients were asked, after examina tion: " Did you feel anything in relation to injection?". If yes, the patient was asked to specify the kind of event. The subsequent 11-m onths 384 patients were exam ined the same way but without interview. Result: Only 9 patients (1%) reported adverse events (all belonged to the interviewed group). In 8 cases the event, such as nausea, metal taste, face warm th, lasted < 5 min. None of 121 patients receiving triple-dose reported an adverse event. The frequency o f reported adverse events depends on whether information is obtained by active questioning, at least when adverse events are mild. The venues always changed and the elders am ong us still recall the carefully selected beautiful cities. At a certain point in time -in the mid-eighties -many representatives of industry but also from am ong our own ranks felt that the time had com e to change the image of the European Congresses. It was proposed that the intervals between the Congresses be shortened and the venue always remain the same. I was personally involved in these discussions because at that tim e I happened to be the Chairman of the Section for Radiodiagnostics within the European Radiological Society. This was also the reason why I w as asked to prepare these new developments. The 1991 C ongress in Vienna w as the first of this "new type". This innovative structure called fo r an attendant publication containing im portant contributions and data related to the Congresses. Together with the Springer Publishing House I founded " European Radiology". It w as indeed a venture but it seems to have succeeded. At any rate, it has in the meantime been widely accepted by such US sources as Index medicus, etc. The Congresses and the publication have become a significant factor within the setting o f "European Radiology" . However, this importance could multiply if in Europe we had at least a fraction of the units that prevails in this sector as in the United States. Unfortunately we are still miles away from this goal. It must be ou r aim to achieve more unity and cooperation. If we fail in so doing, frustration is likely to set in. W hat usually defines the diagnostic strategies in pulm onary em bolism is the association of, on one side, a non invasive and non specific test (V/Q scan) to, on the other side, an invasive and specific test (pulmonary angiography). W e need a specific, sensitive, non invasive and reproducible diagnostic test. From a practical viewpoint, spiral C T angiography is able to assess the diagnosis in the majority of patients provided optimal acquisition, injection and reconstruction param eters are used. This flow sensitive method, in opposition to pulmonary angiography, can be performed in the majority of acute hospitals. It is not operator dependent. By using a pitch of 5/3 the diagnosis can be confidently obtained down to the segmental level. The advantages of a 0.75 second per rotation includes a longer z/axis coverage o r a thinner collimation. Both are of interest to reach the subsegmentai level in the near future. A larger evaluation is needed but m ost of the current publications in the literature agree with the prominent clinical im pact o f the state of the art spiral CT angiography as a first intention procedure. Precise staging is the key to rational m anagem ent of bronchial carcinoma. A large benefit in CT-surgical correlations is expected with spiral CT using 2 to 3 mm thin sections routinely. Direct carcinomatous extension to the superior vena cava, the adjacent pulm onary artery o r vein may lead to modification of the surgical treatment planning. In estimation o f the benefits drawn from neoad juvant chemotherapy, strictly com parative performances of spiral acquisition, injection and reconstruction techniques are m andatory fo r precise measure ments and quantification of the response. Endobronchial treatm ents require an optimal knowledge o f both endo and peribronchial extension of the tumor. Planar reformations oriented perpendicular to the diseased bronchus may help the choice between high dose or low dose radiation techniques. Fused images combining planar reform ation and isodoses can also help calculate the radiation dose to surrounding vessels and prevent m ajor hemoptysis. What can we expect in the near future? The concept of using spiral C T as a physiologic tool has just appeared. It can offer a large field of investigation. These CT-physiologic correlations demand dram atic reduction in scan times per revolution. The use o f two-dim ensional detectors in the form of multiples arrays or image plates may be a solution. Another aim has to be isotropic spatial resolution fo r which two-dimensional detectors may again be viewed as the technical basis. Advanced com puter technology and image processing techniques will allow autom ated segmentation, integration of anatomy, physi ology and present and future rendering techniques, simulation, planning and guidance of therapeutic or diagnostic interventions. Virtual endoscopy is still far from routine applications but it bridges the gap between cross sectional imaging and actual endoscopy. It can abbreviate, direct, influence the need for, o r replace an actual bronchoscopy. Virtual angioscopy may also become fascinating spiral CT applications. Further improvem ents in ventilation and perfusion measurements are also expected. where spiral CT perform ance led to decisive improvements and to new applications. W e will give a technical review of the present state of the art and will discuss potential future developm ents, as for example the possibilities for (1) improved image quality due to higher scan speed and improved volume reconstruction algorithms; (2) dedicated cardiac reconstructions; (3) reduction of dose by anatom y-adapted mA-modulation and other tech niques; (4) automated triggering of scans upon contrast bolus arrival; (5) new and advanced applications, primarily dynamic studies of ventilation and perfusion, autom ated search for and autom ated classification o f lung nodules, and quantitative analysis of lung density and structure; (6) improvements tow ards isotropic resolution, i.e., above all improved spatial resolution in the z-direction; (7) faster volume scans, with the com plete thorax scanned in a single breathhold with thin slices. Several advances have been made just recently and will be illustrated by clinical examples. 910 Spiral CT of pulmonary em bolism M. Rémy-Jardin, J. Rémy; Lille/F With variable symptoms and a nonspecific radiographic appearance, pul monary embolism is a frequent and often undiagnosed cause of mortality and morbidity fo r which the availability o f an accurate, noninvasive screening examination is highly desirable. Until recently, various noninvasive im ag ing procedures have been used to detect pulmonary embolism, including ventilation-perfusion scanning, magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and conven tional computed tom ography (CT). The nonspecificity of ventilation-perfusion imaging and the respective limitations of conventional C T and MR imaging provide an explanation why pulm onary angiography remains the usual stan dard in the detection of pulm onary embolism. However, this procedure carries a significant incidence o f morbidity and mortality which justifies the current need for an accurate and noninvasive diagnostic modality. Recent improvement in scanner technology has led to the introduction of spiral CT and ultrafast CT and, to date, several investigators have already evaluated the role of these newly developed C T technologies in the recognition of central pulmonary emboli. W hatever the new CT technique used, an accurate detec tion of central pulmonary em bolism requires an optimal vascular opacification in order to demonstrate the presence of vascular signs o f pulm onary throm boembolism. The purpose o f this lecture is to review the practical approach of pulm onary embolism on spiral CT scans with special em phasis on the protocol parameters and the scan interpretation. Spiral CT is the cross-sectional imaging technique o f choice fo r the pre operative assessment of the intra-thoracic extent of bronchial carcinoma. Before discussing the specific attributes of spiral CT in this context, it is necessary to consider what information is needed fo r surgeons to perform a successful resection. The scanning protocol used should always be tailored to provide relevant answers to the questions posed by surgeons. Technical factors that contribute to an optimal scanning protocol fo r the staging of bronchial carcinoma will be discussed. The acquisition of continuous volume data permits detailed three dimensional reconstructions of the bronchial tree, but w hether this ancillary information has any impact on the clinical staging o f bronchial carcinoma or adds significantly to the conventional assessment o f trans-axial CT sections has not been shown. The unequivocal benefits o f com plete and continuous anatomical dem onstration by spiral C T include the a) precise delineation o f the tum our mass and its relationship to vital structures and the chest wall, b) superior detection of pulm onary nodules e.g. synchronous lesion, c) improved demonstration o f adrenal anatomy, d) serendipitous findings e.g. pulm onary em bolism and e) exact volum etric mea surement o f the tum our mass in inoperable cases selected fo r endobronchial brachytherapy. Results: All ruptures were diagnosed, but the degree of the rupture was frequently underestimated because in m ost cases dynamic testing w as not performed. A fter surgical repair Achilles tendons showed the typical findings with partial regression over months and years. In patients with achillodynia pathologic changes of the tendon or the surrounding tissues could be differentiated. Conclusion: U ltrasonography is a sensitive m ethod to dem onstrate pathoanatom y of the Achilles tendon. Dynamic testing in real time should be perform ed in order to assess accurately the continuity of the Achilles tendon.  Images were com pared with corresponding histologic sections and with those o f normal human ligam ents w hich could be easily identified basing on course and anatom ic relationships. 30 trauma patients and 25 controls were examined with 10 MHz sonography. A specific attempt was made to image the talo-fibular and talo-calcanear ligaments. MR and surgery were used to confirm pathologic results. Results: In vitro, ligaments had hyperechoic pattern with elongated internal echoes and m arked acoustic shadowing. A fibrillar pattern was not observed. The calcaneo-fibular and both anterior and posterior talo-fibular ligaments could be seen in controls, with corresponding structure. Traumatic lesions of 14 anterior talo-fibular and 2 calcaneo-fibular ligaments were diagnosed. There were tw o false negatives. Additional findings included soft tissue edema in alm ost all cases and capsular lesions in 6. Using MRI as the gold standard US showed 50% sensitivity and 100% specificity fo r retrocalcaneal bursa involvement and lacked sensitivity for superficial bursitis. Conclusion: Achilles tendon involvement in SpA is not only a disease of the enthesis but also of the adjacent bursae. 14:30 915 Im pingem ent syndrom e of the ankle in athletes using MRI dedicated equipm ent (Artoscan) C. Faletti, N. De Stefano, В. Severin; Turin/I Purpose: chronic ankle pain in soccer players, above all on a professional level, is frequently related to joint instability. In some cases the repetitiveness of athletic gesture is brought to exasperating levels with following "overuse" of articular structures and chronic phlogistic reactions, tissue hypertrophy and then impingem ent syndrome in joint biomechanics. Our w ork wants to improve the conventional X-ray diagnostic protocol using in addiction an MRI dedicated equipm ent (Artoscan) fo r better identification of relationship between this syndrome and painful symptomatology. Methods and Materials: 9 young athletes with various degree of inversion ankle sprains accom pained by persistent pain underwent both standard X-ray and MRI examinations. tibio-talar joint impingem ent syndrome were submitted to MRI study using a "dedicated" system (Artoscan, Esaote, Italy). In all cases SE T1 and T2, and GE T2 weighted images on axial, sagittal and coronal scan planes were used. Slice thickness was of 1 -3 mm. and FOV of 11 cm. All patients underwent arthroscopic control after MRI evaluation. Results: MRI diagnosis was: 4 cases of anterior TTJ impingem ent syndrome; 3 cases of inferior tibio-peroneal ligament tear with synovial hypertrophy at this level ("meniscoid syndrome"); 2 cases were negative. Arthroscopy confirmed MRI results but in the 2 cases, with negative MRI study, it demonstrated 1 case of "meniscoid syndrome" and 1 case of anterior TTJ impingem ent syndrome. In conclusion, the results of o u r study confirm that MRI has high diagnostic accuracy in the evaluation of TTJ im pingem ent syndrome.  This study consists o f 33 patients with chronic ankle instability and 10 control subjects without any symptoms. Radiographic stress tests of talocrural and subtalar joints were carried out using a hinged device and a 4 0 c Broden view. Fluoroscopy w as used fo r correct positioning. The examination w as performed stepwise. In the first step both feet were inverted starting from neutral position and in the second step actual inversion stress was applied. Views were obtained centred on the subtalar joint with 30 degrees angulation latero-medially with 40 degrees caudocranially. The measurements were made directly on the radiographs at the talocrural and subtalar joints both after inversion stress as well as increased inversion stress. Results: There was statistically significant difference o f talar tilt between feet of symptomatic and asym ptom atic subjects in patients with lateral instability complaints. W ith increase in the force used fo r inversion stress no significant difference w as found in talocalcaneal shift or subtalar tilt. There was however a significant increase in talar tilt at the talocrural joint of symptomatic feet compared to asym ptom atic feet. Stepwise dynam ic examination fo r chronic ankle instability may well be the method of choice to define abnorm alities of the talocrural and subtalar joints. Results: Severe fractures with extensive osteolysis occurred in mild trauma and without any signs of infection. Accompanying algodystrophy was frequent. Spontaneous evolution was severe but prognosis of these fractures treated by surgery was poorer than spontaneous evolution alone. Conclusion: Knowledge o f spontaneous evolution is important because surgery should be avoided because of its poorer prognosis, the absence of infection and a basically neurological mechanism o f the lesion.  We used a perm anent low field (0.2 T) MR equipment dedicated to the study of limbs. W e studied 85 patients with clinical symptoms at the forefoot. All patients were studied using SE T1 and T2, G.E and STIR sequences. In 43 patients we administered intravenous contrast medium (Gd-DTPA) at 2 mmol/kg. Results: Nodules at digit neurovascular com plex were found in 22 patients (Civinini Morton neuroma). No other alterations of soft tissues were present (16 patients). In 13 patients other sites in the space between the metatarsal head were interested by the pathology, even though these were non specific. In 19 patients there was a wide sclerosis of perineural connective tissue without evidence o f primitive nervous involvement. Moreover, we documented different pathologies such as bursities, synovial cyst, inflam matory involvement of flexor tendons, osteochondral lesions and tendon degeneration. The great num ber of anatomical details and the wide range of study make MR images highly useful both in the surgical and medical planning of metatarsal pathologies. In the evaluation of metatarsal pathologies an important role may be played by dedicated magnets. Purpose: A European four centre study was performed to com pare breast MRI with state of the art mammography, using histology as the gold standard. Three different doses were employed to determ ine the optim al dose and extend the safety profile of ProHance (gadoteridol) Bracco. Methods and Materials: 84 patients (previously exam ined by mammography), scheduled to undergo surgery leading to a definitive histological diagnosis, were enrolled. Patients received a contrast enhanced MRI examination with either 0.1, 0.2 or 0.3 mmol/kg P ro H a n ce -. Diagnostic efficacy w as assessed by the investigators and tw o blinded readers by com paring each technique with histology. Adverse events and vital signs were recorded. Results: Sensitivity w as slightly low er than the com bined diagnosis (from mammography, ultrasound and cytology), but additional information provided by MR changed management in 7% and was used in treating 32% of patients. A dose of 0.2 o r 0.3 mmol/kg was more effective than 0.1 mmol/kg. Six non-serious adverse events were reported. All patients recovered fully. Conclusion: ProHance® is a safe and effective contrast medium for breast MRI. Although sensitivity w as slightly lower than fo r mammography, a dose o f 0.2 mmol/kg ProHance® provided additional information which impacted on patient management. In addition the enhancem ent behaviour of normal and dysplastic breast tissue with respect to the menstrual was evaluated in another 100 patients, who had been exam ined once. Results: One third of the patients with significant enhancement in normal or proliferative breast tissue showed significantly less contrast enhancement in the first part of the menstruation cycle. In another third we found only slightly less contrast enhancement. In one third there w as diagnostically relevant change of the contrast enhancem ent during the menstruation cycle. Conclusion: Therefore we recommend to perform contrast enhanced MRI of the breast generally in the first half of the menstruation cycle (day 5-10). Purpose: Routinely, dynam ic T1 weighted sequences ± KM-application are used for the MR investigation of the female breast. In addition, T2-weighted sequences are em ployed to detect cysts or cystic parts o f solid lesions. Over the last years, new T2-w eighted sequences with and without fat suppression have been developed. The aim of this study was to compare different T2 weighted sequences fo r detection of breast cysts. P a tie n ts an d Methods: 20 women (age 1 8 -6 4 yrs.) with sonographically proven breast cysts were investigated with 6 different sequences: TSE, UTSE (TR = 4000/TE = 125), TSE and UTSE with SPIR (TR = 4500Л"Е = 120), and GRASE with and without SPIR(TR = 4000/TE = 120), on a 1.5 T unit (Philips Gyroscan NT1.5 T). Images were reviewed independently by tw o radiologists fo r the num ber of detectable lesions and their characteristics: size, shape, margins, and hom ogeneity as well as fo r presence of artifacts. All parameters were graded on a 0 -3 score. In addition, S/N and lesion contrast ratios were calculated. Results: Cysts were better delineated by sequences with fat suppression, w here TSE-SPIR and UTSE-SPIR proved to be slightly superior to GRASE-SPIR. More cysts could be identified, they could be better differentiated from the surrounding tissue. However, TSE and UTSE sequences scored better as to resolution of anatom ical detail, S/N, and presence o f artifacts. Results: 150 patients with silicon implants after mastectom y have been examined. Later than 6 mos. postoperatively enhancement within the scar tissue was usually insignificant. Problems occurred in 8 patients with focally enhancing granulomas and in 9 patients with diffuse enhancement due to reactive-inflamm atory changes, but could in 50% o f the cases be solved by follow-up. 9/10 recurrences enhanced strongly, 1/10 moderately and 2/10 delayed. 4 of them and 3 cases o f multifocality w ere only detected by MRI. Conclusion: C.e. MRI proves a very valuable tool fo r those patients with silicon implants after mastectomy, w ho present with diagnostic problem s or increased risk for recurrence. Material and Methods: Thirty-four patients with clinically confirmed mammary carcinoma were examined at MRM using a T1-weighted GRE sequence (Flash 3D, ТЕ 5 ms, TR 12 ms, PA 25°) precontrast and 1, 2, 3, and 8 min. following i.v. application of 0.15 mmol/kg b.w. Gd-DTPA and a T2-weighted SE sequence. Morphologic criteria and the dynam ic contrast medium behavior of the tum ors were evaluated. Results: MRM showed a 100% sensitivity and diagnostic accuracy in the detection of mammary carcinomas. Additionally, three unexpected contralat eral carcinomas were discovered. In 26 patients, there was a multifocal or multicentric tum or process. In 24 patients, peritumoral edema was visualized, which corresponded histologically in 21 patients with lymphangiosis and in three with an inflammatory peritumoral reason. Conclusion: Because of ist high sensitivity in the diagnosis of multifocal disease and o f contralateral carcinomas, MRM would seem to represent a useful addition to preoperative diagnostic procedures, since it may lead to a reduction in the recurrence rate and hence improve the prognosis. The potential benefit to the patient and its cost-efficiency, however, remain to be clarified. (55), percutaneous microhistology (11) and at least 12 months of fol low up (47). These studies were performed with super-conductive magnets (1 T) with dedicated coils, FLASH 3D axial sequences of 1 minute with a thickness equal to 3.8 mm before and after i.v. Gd-DTPA, digital subtraction of images and a quantitative valutation of the signal intensity over time in the interested zones. Then the perceptual increase of the signal intensity (PISI) after Gd-DTPA over time was calculated corresponding to the limit below which only the benign lesions were present and to the one over which only malignant lesions were present. Finally the diagnostic efficency was studied. The most significants PISI, as a cut off value, was indicated in the first minute corresponding to 40%, below this limit there were no malignant lesions (38 benign lesions of the 65, and of the com pressive 113 lesions). Using this cut off the methodology has shown in the identification of the malignant lesions a sensibility of 100% and a negative predicted value (NPV) of 100%. Computation of parameter images based on a pixel-by-pixel evaluation has the potential to overcome the problem s which are known from ROI-analysis. Large and medium sized vessels can show enhancem ent pattern during the contrast agent inflow which can mimic contrast agent uptake in small lesions. Since false-positive diagnosis of multicentric lesions have major impact on further therapy regimes this has to be considered. Performing a MR-angiography in addition to the dynamic scan, a determ ination of vessels and a more accurate interpretation of the calculated param eter image can be achieved. Material and Methods: Imaging was perform ed on a 1.5 T MR unit (GY-ROSCAN ACSII). For data acquisition, we used a T1-w eighted dynamic 3D-FFE sequence (TR/TE = 14.7/6.9 ms, а = 30°, FOV = 220 mm, TH K = 3 mm, 30 slices). A bolus of 0.1 mm ol/kg Gd-DTPA was administered via an existing infusion tube. MRA was performed with a 3D-FFE phase-contrast technique (TR/TE = 20/12 ms, a = 20 , FOV = 220 mm, TH K = 1.5 mm, 60 slices, peak velocity = 15 cm/s). Image processing was done on a dedicated workstation.  We reviewed the records o f 77 patients w ho had a TR U S for a clinically suspected rectal mass. TR U S is perform ed in the axial plane with a 7 MHz endocavitary transducer. Depth o f tum or invasion was staged by a modified TNM system. Patients were excluded from analysis if they had prior surgery and were being evaluated fo r recurrence, had a non rectal prim ary tumor, had radiation therapy prior to surgery o r if surgical or pathological correlation was not available. Results: TRUS accurately distinguished patients with TO, T1, or T2 tum ors from patients with T3 or T4 lesions in 39 o f 43 cases (91% accuracy) with primary neoplasm s who have surgical confirmation o f staging. Based on these findings patients had transanal excision, low anterior resection, or abdominoperineal resection. Conclusion: In many institutions the distinction between T2 and T3 lesions is the determining factor between conservative sphincter sparing surgery and more aggressive surgery fo r low rectal tumors. W e conclude that TR U S is a highly accurate technique for staging depth o f tum or invasion into the rectal wall and should be considered the test of choice fo r this purpose. 14:10 935 Preoperative evaluation of rectum carcinom a using rectal endosonography and CT V. Sokolow, A. Bilenko, O. Sokolow, S. Didortchuk, G. Rosgkovskaya; Odessa/UKR Purpose: The aim of the study was to assess the accuracy o f C T and endosonografy fo r preoperative staging o f rectal cancer. Methods and Materials: Sixty-five patients were studied with CT "Somatom CRX" by "Siemens" and rectal endosonografy ("Aloca SSD-630"). The follow ing data were recorded: 1) prim ary tum or characteristics (length, thickness, extent of maximum circum ferential involvement); 2) lymphnode characteristics S 185 (total num ber o f nodes seen, size o f the lägest node, imaging appearance such as calcifications, clustering, discrete or matted appearance). Results: Rectal endosonography had an accuracy 84% and predicted perirec tal spread with sensivity 92% and specificity -76%, w hereas the corresponding figures fo r C T were 76% , 87% and 63%. These findings show that rectal en dosonography is more efficient that CT in staging local tum or The accuracy for assessm ent of nodal involvement was 67% fo r endosonography and 65% fo r CT. Rectal endosonography is to be preferred to CT for preoperative assessment o f local tum ors spread w hereas both imaging modalities seem too unreliable in assessment o f nodal metastases to be used in the planning of treatment. 14:15 936 Unfortunately not all the patients, especially those with advanced disease can stand an endorectal examination or the tum or is not com pletely visualized by endorectal device. The aim of the study is to evaluate the accuracy of MR in staging rectal cancer using phased-array external coil. Methods and Materials: 18 consecutive patients with established diagnosis of rectal cancer were evaluated with MR at 1.5 T using phased array external coil with SE T1 (TR = 500 msec.; TE = 1 0 -2 0 msec.; Matrix = 256 x 512) and FSE T2 sequences 5 mm thick with respiratory triggering (TR = 3 respiratory cycles; TE eff. = 102 msec; ETL = 12 -16). All the patients underwent surgery. The pathological findings were com pared with the results of MR findings. Results: Among the 18 patients at histology 4 were classified as pT2, 13 as pT3 and 1 as pT4; 10 were pNO, 5 pN1 and 3 pN2. MR correctly staged 13 pT3 and 1 pT4; 2 pT2 were correctly staged while 2 pT2 patients were considered T3 by MR imaging. Accuracy was 88.8% . In the evaluation of nodal involvement, accuracy w as 61%. Conclusion: MR with external body coils is useful in staging rectal can cer especially in advanced disease when endorectal examinations can be uncomfortable for patients. The evaluation of nodal involvement is still difficult.  The efficacy of these both methods was evaluated in nineteen patients with supposed residual o r recurrent rectal neoplasms. Endorectal MR imaging was performed using a 1.5 tesla Magnetom. In addition to that transrectal US (7.5 or 10-MHz transducer) was used. Results: In 7 patients with rectal adenom a after electro-laser resection, 6 patients with rectal carcinoma stage pT1 after transanal resection, 3 pa tients with rectal carcinom a stage pT2 and 3 patients with rectal carcinoma stage pT3 after hyperthermic radiochem otherapy the following results were obtained during the postsurgical o r posttherapeutical follow -up with respect to histopathological evaluation: exact staging in 78% with EMRI) and 54% in TUS, overstaging in 10.5% (EMRI) and 15% (TUS). Conclusion: Endorectal contrast-enhanced MRI appears to be very promising for accurate posttherapeutical staging of rectal cancer and helpful in the diagnosis of recurrence and residual rectal tumors. It w as supplied with liquid nitrogen with a pressure up to 5 bar. The probe was inserted percutaneously into the liver of 10 rabbits. Freezing procedure was monitored with a high resolution surface coil on a 1.5 Tesla imager (Philips, The Netherlands) by gradient echo sequence. The cryoprobe enabled artefact-free MR imaging of iceball formation during freezing o f the rabbit liver. Its freezing capacity was com parable to conventional nitrous oxide-supplied probes. After 1 minute of freezing, the maximum iceball form ation at the tip was on average 11 mm of diameter. MR imaging of the freezing procedure showed good correlation of the iceball extension to previous experiments, performed by surgery. No bleeding com plications were observed during and after the freezing procedure. Histologic examination 7 days after cryotherapy showed liver lesions with the same size as iceball form ation during freezing procedure. The new designed laser application set (Somatex, Berlin, Germany) consists of a MR com patible puncturing needle with a tetrag onal sharpening, a guidewire, a 7 French sheath, a thermostable protection catheter, which is m anufactured from teflon, and a mandrin. There are marks on the sheath, which allow an exact interventional positioning of the sheath. The protection catheter has a spike end, which allows in com bination with adapted mandrin a repositioning of the system. 30 in vitro and 450 in vivo applications were performed on patients with liver metastases. In vitro experiments proved that the protection catheter was ther mostable up to 440 С С and allowed transmission of laser light. The presented laser application set allowed an exact in vivo positioning of the laser applicator in the liver lesions using ultrasound (n = 5), CT (n = 440), and MRI (n = 5). The spike end and the marks allowed an optimal positioning of this teflon protection catheter. No com plications at all occurred during the 35 in vivo applications using this set. In case of a developing hot spot, the application set allowed an immediate removal o f the laser applications. The specially designed MR laser application set allows a fast and safe positioning of the laser applicator for minimal invasive laser induced therm otherapy and allow s ist use is highly recommended to increase the safety o f the patients. . For tissue ablation solid, non-perfused (npe) as well as saline perfused (pe) electrodes with 1 cm tip exposure were utilized. Lesions were generated 'in vivo' in porcine muscle. For each type of electrode, ablations were performed with different techniques (continuous or intermittent) and duration (3/6/9 min). T1-w GRE images (TR/TE 20/10 ms, flip 60-, image update every 2.5 s) were acquired every 60 s fo r 15 s during RF-heating (intermittent) or following tissue ablation (continuous). Lesion size seen during MR-monitoring was com pared to macroscopic findings. Results: Lesion size induced by npe increased with time duration to a max imum diam eter of 1.8 cm (9 min). Intermittend energy deposition resulted in non significant smaller lesion sizes. Perfused electrodes generated significant larger lesions (max. 2.6 cm). MR monitoring during energy application was accurate for npe (r = 0.89) but hampered by artifacts fo r the cooled pe. Conclusion: M R-m onitoring of npe RF effects is feasible in an 0.5 T interven tional MR environm ent using a fast T 1 -w GRE. The PE allow s for an increased volume of coagulation necrosis. Temperature sensitivity of MR sequences will need to be increased to allow full visualization of pe tissue effects. imaging catheter (Schneider AG, Bülach). A guide wire with a receiver coil mounted on its tip was used fo r active tracking to position the imaging catheter in the area of interest. Imaging was performed in an open configuration interventional 0.5 T MR system (SIGNA MRT, GE). For intravascular imaging T1 vs. T2-W SE images were acquired. Images were analysed with regard to maximum wall thickness, size and shape of plaques. In the in vivo pig experiment the catheter was placed at the site o f interest using MR-tracking. Results: The imaging catheter w as successfully placed in the region of interest using active MR Tracking. Intravascular imaging provided high quality images of atherosclerotic pathology of the entire vessel circum ference achieving an in plane resolution of 230 x 310 μΐπ. Number, location and size of the plaques correlated well with histopathologic findings. Atherosclerotic plaque showed signal loss in the obtained images and could be differentiated from vessel wall. In vivo experiment confirmed the feasability of intravascular MR imaging of vessel walls. Conclusion: Intravascular imaging appears to be a potent method for imaging arterial vessel pathology. It thus com pliments the concept o f interventional angiography, based upon a com bination of non-invasive morphologic and functional vascular imaging with active tracking of catheters and guide wires. To evaluate the applicability of LoLo, a single-shot turbo spin echo method yielding zoomed high-resolution subsecond images fo r interventional MR procedures. A single shot zoomed-imaging turbo spin echo se quence was used. This sequence applies the 180 -pulses orthogonally to the initial 90°-puls; thereby foldover artefacts are avoided allowing small field of views. The slice position could be changed interactively on the fly during the procedure. Using a special phantom the image artefacts o f biopsy needles were compared to those of gradient echo images. The following interventional MR-procedures were performed: 6 biopsies with different needles, 1 injection of corticosteroid into a ganglionic cyst. The LoLo sequence creates less susceptibility artefacts than gradient echo methods. T2-weighted images with an in plane resolution of 1 mm x 1 mm could be achieved in 600 ms. Biopsy procedures were easily performed and needle tip localization enabled us to savely inject corticosteroids in one ganglionic cyst. The LoLo sequence yields fast high resolution images with a T2-weighted contrast. The small susceptibility artefact inherent to this spin echo sequence proved valuable fo r interventional MR procedures. with CF were investigated with repeated CT-scans (2 mm slice thickness, 1 cm gap, high resolution reconstruction algorithm ) (n = 124) over a period of 4 years. On CTscans, pulmonary changes [bronchiectasies, bronchial wall thickening, mucus plugging, bullae, airtrapping/emphysema and consolidation] were analyzed and scored (Bhalla score) by 2 radiologists. Follow-up scores were compared with the initial score. CT-scores were correlated with pulm onary function tests, and clinical status (IgG levels and Shwachm an score). All tests fo r each patient w ere com pleted within tw o weeks. Results: The mean overall CT-score of the first C T exam ination was 8.5 ± 4.4 (range 0-21 ). CT-scans demonstrated a slow but progressive deterioration of the score (after 1 year: 0.8 ± 1.2, after 2 years: 2.5 ± 2 and after 3 years: 3.5 ± 1.7). Changes o f overall CT-score were attributable to mucus plugging in (n = 31), airtrapping in (n = 24) and brochiectasis in (n = 18) patients. There was significant (p < 0.0001) correlation between the evolution of the CT-scores, pulm onary function tests (r = 0.67) and the clinical status [Shwachm an score (r = 0.5), IgG (r = 0.7)]. Purpose: Improvement of early detection of pneum onia in febrile neutropenic patients. Evaluation of time gain using high resolution com puted tom ography (HRCT) when chest X-ray (CXR) is unremarkable. Methods and Materials: Patients (n = 87) were neutropenic and febrile longer than 2 days due to chem otherapy (126 investigations). If CXR showed no pneumonia, HRCT was performed. In case of suspicious findings a bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) w as suggested. Micro-organism s were derived from BAL (n = 21), routine sputum culture (n = 7), CT-guided biopsy, or surgery (n = 2). Results: 70/126 (56% ) HRCT were suspicious fo r pneumonia. Micro-organisms w ere detected in 30 cases (43%). In 19 of these cases empirical treatm ent was insufficient, 11 had already been treated sufficiently. CXR revealed infiltrates within 6 days in 22 cases, in 7 additional cases after 6 days (median 5 d, range 1 -2 2 d). In cases with insuspicious HR C T (56/126), CXR revealed an infiltrate during follow -up in 7/56 cases (13%). Only 2/56 occurred during the first 6 days (4%) (median 11 d, range 5 -5 0 d) (p < 0.0003). Probability fo r an infiltrate 6 days after suspicious HRCT is 40% , 4% if HRCT is insuspicious. Normal CXR should be followed by an HRCT at the same day. 14:35 9 5 7 Pulm onary infection in the hematological patients caused by aspergillus P. Göblyös, E. Pitlik; Budapest/H The most com m on illnesses in the pulmonological and hematological depart ments are: aspergillom a, allergic bronchopulm onary aspergillosis, extrinsic allergic alveolitis, superficial bronchopulm onary aspergillosis, and its pleural complication, the form of hem atogenous dissemination and chronic necrose, and the aspergillosis of paranasal sinuses. W e can observe the invasive form s o f aspergillosis in a decisive majority of patients with leukemia and other serious immunocompromising disease, or in hematological patients, treated with aggressive chemotherapy. Therefore, in our Institute, we meet especially often the serious form s of aspergillosis. In the last five years we have observed 97 cases of aspergillomatosis, but by suitable treatm ent the decisive majority of our patients recovered. The present paper shows the clinical course of the invasive lung aspergillosis by case demonstrations, the characteristic diagnostic change of the radiologi cal picture, the m odes of treatm ent and the possibility of prophylaxis. (14). In 41 patients (46.1%) HRCT accurately excluded the presence of primary pneumonia. Infiltrative tuberculosis w as found in 17 patients, lung ab scess in 9, infarction in 5, bronchiectasis in 4, bronchioloalveolar carcinoma in 4, invasive aspergillosis in 2. C orrect diagnosis was made in 69 cases (90.7%). HRCT proved to be more accurate then X-ray examination in assessing local air-space disease. Conclusion: HRCT is useful diagnostic tool fo r patients with nonresolved pneumonia. tilatory defect. Chest radiographs showed no apparent abnorm al findings in most (27/29) cases except fo r the 2 patients with BOOP. The most common of CT findings were bronchial wall thickening (15) and bronchial dilatation (15), followed by centrilobular dot (13), peripheral branching structure (13), and air trapping o r mosaic perfusion (10). Ground glass density was only found in 8 out of 14 patients with severely obstructive ventilatory impairment. Of these patients, 2 were proved to have BOOP as evidenced by open lung biopsy. The HRCT findings o f lung injury caused by SA were compatible with BO. BOOP was noticed occasionally. HRCT is of clinical useful in detecting lung injury caused by SA. . W e evaluated CT (n = 15) and MRI (n = 9) appearance of pericardial effusion, pericardial thickening and associated findings such as pulmonary tuberculosis, lymph node enlargement, and pleural effusion. Results: In all patients, there is thickened pericardium over 3 mm which was enhanced after contrast enhancement. Septated and loculated appearance was noted in 13 of 21 cases. There were pleural effusions in 17 cases and associated active pulmonary tuberculosis in nine cases. Mediastinal lymph node enlargement was noted in eight cases. Inflammatory change of epicardial o r pericardial fat was not noted in any case. In eight cases with MRI, pericardial effusion showed low signal intensity in T 1 -weighted and T2-weighted images of MR. In one case with focal loculation, high signal intensity in T2-weighted MR image of pericardial effusion was noted. Recent studies have shown that these hypointense lesions correlate with clinical disability. W e investigated the histopathologic correlate of hypointense lesions, using postmortem MR imaging of fresh brain material. Methods and Material: Postmortem unfixed whole brains from 5 multiple sclerosis cases, obtained within 24 hours after death, were scanned directly after removal with T1 and T2-weighted SE sequences. Nineteen lesions were identified on T2-weighted SE MR images, and corresponding tissue blocks were stained with hematoxylin-eosin, Klüver-Barrera and Bodian. On the T 1 -weighted images, degree o f hypointensity was scored 0 (isointense to normal appearing white matter), 1 (mild to moderate hypointense) or 2 (severe hypointense). Cellularity of the lesion, fibrillary gliosis, the presence of reactive astrocytes and thinly myelinated axons were graded from 0 to 3. Degree o f 'matrix destruction' w as graded from 0 (same density as NAWM) to 3 (severe structure loss). Degree o f axonal loss w as estim ated in com parison with NAWM and expressed as a residual percentage. Results: Degree of hypointensity on T1-weighted SE im ages correlated sig nificantly with 1) degree of 'matrix destruction' (r = 0.66; p = 0.002) and 2) percentage of residual axons (r = -0 .7 0 ; p = 0.001 ). In hypointense lesions seen on T1-weighted MR images sub stantial structural loss is present, which may explain the good correlation be tw een these hypointense lesions and disability in vivo. Therefore, hypointense lesions may serve as a surrogate m arker of persistent deficit in MS patients. Material and Methods: 21 MS patients were included from 4 sites. MR imaging w as first performed using 0.1 mm ol/kg gadolinium (single dose), and after 2 4 -7 2 hours using 0.3 mmol/kg gadolinium (triple dose). T2 FSE, T1 SE with/without MTC images were obtained before contrast, and T1 SE with MTC (single dose) or conventional T1 SE imaging (triple dose), 5, 17, and 29 minutes after gadolinium adm inistration. All scans were blinded and scored in a random order. Results: Significantly more enhancing lesions (59 versus 32) w ere detected on the triple dose scans at all time points (p < 0.02). The num ber o f "active" scans increased from 10 to 15, using triple dose gadolinium (p < 0.03). The level of agreem ent on detected lesions between readers w as significantly higher for S191 triple dose scans (p < 0.01 ) Contrast ratio's were higher (1.38 versus 1.26) on triple dose scans (p < 0.01 ), while the size of lesions increased significantly (31 versus 23 mm2 ; p < 0.01). Conclusion: Triple dose gadolinium is more effective than single dose gadolin ium with MTC in detecting enhancing MS lesions and more reproducible.  In order to evaluate the reliability of low-field MRI, we exam ined 10 patients with MS, using a 0.2 T magnet unit (Magnetom OPEN, Siemens) in com parison to a 1.5 T system (Magnetom SP 63, Siemens). All patients underwent MRI investigations within tw o hours, each consisting of axial and sagittal proton-density and T2-weighted images. Lesions in the supratentorial w hite matter and corpus callosum and those in the brainstem and cerebellum were separately counted. Additional the lesions were classified to their size. Results: All patients showed more lesions at high-field-MRI. At 1.5 Tesla altogether 241 lesions were counted. This are significantly more than at 0.2 Tesla with 181 lesions. Regarding supra-and infratentorial lesions separately, w e found significantly more lesions at 1.5 Tesla. But in none o f our patients the diagnosis of MS was missed at 0.2 Tesla. Conclusion: High-field-strength MRI has to be favourite in patients with clinically suspected MS. Low-field-strength MRI can be used in follow-up investigations. 14:45 Methods and Materials: 10 patients with clinically definite relapsing-remitting MS underwent monthly brain 0.5-T MR imaging for 1 0 -1 2 months in the pretreatment period, followed by 1 0 -1 4 months during C o p i treatment. Addi tional baseline data for 1 4 -1 6 months were available fo r 6 o f the 10 patients. Slightly T2-w eighted and Gd-enhanced T1-weighted images were evaluated blinded to the scan date, using a dedicated sem i-automatic "growing region" segm entation software. Results: We observed an over 50% reduction of the num ber of both enhancing lesions per scan (2.48 versus 1.12) and new enhancing lesions per scan (2.20 versus 0.92, p = 0.004, Mantel-Haenszel test). The mean enhancing area of S 192 the single lesion was very similar before and after treatm ent (13.6 ± 2.4 and 14.4 ж 2.21 mm2). The total lesion load on T2-weighted images showed a 14% increase during the year before starting the treatm ent and only 2% increase at the end of the treatm ent year, a trend not reaching statistical significance. Conclusions: Although regression to the mean must be taken into account, these data provide support the positive results o f previous only clinical trials and suggest that C o p i acts by inhibition o f blood brain barrier breakdown. 974 Unsupervised assessm ent of brain atrophy in dem entia of the Alzheimer's type A. Brunetti, M. Quarantelli, E.M. Covelli, E. Tedeschi, A. Ciarmiello, G. Milan, A. Postiglione, В. Alfano, M. Salvatore; Naples/I Purpose: Assessment of brain atrophy in patients with dementia of the Alzheimer's type (DAT) with an unsupervised autom ated segmentation tech nique based on multispectral images of relaxation rates and proton density, calculated from pairs o f spin-echo sequences. Materials and Methods: Conventional spin echo MR studies (1.5 T), covering the entire brain were performed in 50 normal subjects (age range 16 -76) and in 8 patients with suspected DAT (age range 56 -6 4 ). A 3D spectrum o f the tissue voxels was generated fo r segmentation of gray matter, w hite matter and cerebro-spinal fluid, and used calculation of their fractional volum es (fGM, fWM and fCSF, respectively) (Alfano В. et al., MRM, Nov 1996 In Press). Results: Expected age-related changes of fGM (-1 .3 1 % y e a r-1 ) and fCSF (+1.55% · year-1 ) were observed in normal subjects. 7/8 DAT patients showed fCSF values above the age-adjusted normal range, while fGM and fW M values were significantly reduced in 5/8 and 6/8 patients. Average changes in the DAT group were: +104.8 fo r fCSF, -1 7 .9 % fo r fW M and -1 4 .0 % fGM. Conclusion: Brain atrophy can be quantitatively assessed in patients with DAT using a multispectral relaxometric segm entation approach. Purpose: To document the spectrum of MRI abnorm alities in patients after closed head trauma. Materials and Methods: MRI findings were recorded in 50 patients after craniocerebral traum a (37 men; 13 women; age range: 15 -68 years). MRI was performed between 3 months and 14 years after trauma. Standard MR examinations of the brain a t 1.5 T were supplem ented with dual echo GRE images. In selected patients, additional MR imaging was performed at 0.2 T, with a GRE sequence with a ТЕ o f 80 ms. Comparison was made with CT scans. Results: Common MRI findings after closed head injury included: diffuse axonal injury (DAI) lesions (n = 34), cortical brain contusions (21 patients), gliosis (n = 17), hydrocephalus (n = 8), atrophy (n = 26). FLASH images were more sensitive in showing punctate hemosiderin deposits, revealing 64% (ТЕ = 15 ms) to 82% (ТЕ = 35 ms) more DAI lesions than corresponding TSE images. DAI lesions occurred at the cerebral cortico-m edullary junction (n = 34), corpus callosum (n = 8), dorsolateral brainstem (n = 3). In 9 patients with severe clinical and neuropsychological impairment, DAI w as the only abnormality demonstrated by MRI. In the follow -up of patients after closed head injury, MRI should be preferred over CT. W hen the patient's neuropsychiatrie status is w orse than predicted from routine C T o r MRI data, GRE imaging must be perform ed to docum ent remote DAI. The sensitivity of MRI fo r the detection o f DAI depends on the pulse sequence, choice of TE, and magnet field strength. The aim of this study was to investigate how much the effective dose to the child could be reduced when adding Cu filter in the beam fo r a colon examination performed at 102 kV and if this dose reduction could be achieved without endangering the image quality needed for accurate diagnosis. Organ doses to an anthropomorphic phantom simulating a 1 year old child was measured using TLD for assessment of the effective dose and this value was compared to the energy imparted obtained from kerm a-area product m easure ments. Since it is most probably low contrast objects that will be affected by an increase in X-ray energy, the image quality w as evaluated with phantoms containing low contrast objects, one of them filled with iodine contrast medium fo r measurements of signal-to-noise ratio. A clinical evaluation including 15 patients was performed by using the added filtration for one exposure fo r com parison with the image quality of the same projection without added filtration. This com parison was done by visual grading. Effective dose for a com plete examination can be decreased 44% fo r a male and 41 % for a female child and the reduction in energy im parted is 77% . Image quality in the sense of contrast-detail resolution and S/N ratio measured with phantoms is marginally impaired by the added Cu filtration while however the evaluation of the clinical images did not show any significant deterioration of image quality.  In a prospective study between 1993-96 a consecu tive series o f 6 children (age 0 -1 6 , mean 5.3 years) with thoracic lymphan giom a (n = 5) and hemangioma (n = 1) underwent multiplanar Gd-DTPA enhanced MRI (n = 9) and MRA (n = 4) fo r vessel involvement. Studies were reviewed jointly by two observers and one senior radiologist blinded to the final diagnosis. Lym phangiom as were proven histologically. Results: All tum ors (n = 6 ) were hyperintense on T2 weighted images, in T1 they were inhom ogeneous and slightly hyperintense (n = 6 ) com pared to the surrounding tissue. After administration of Gd-DTPA all tum ors showed a higher enhancem ent than the adjacent soft tissue (n = 6 ), in lymphangiomas it w as less and more inhom ogeneous than in the hemangioma. Multiple foci were detected in the patient with hemangioma. In MRA a widening of the SVC up to 7 cm was found in a patient with lymphangioma. In follow up studies (n = 3) during interferon therapy MRI allowed an exact monitoring o f tum or regression. Conclusion: In pediatric patients with thoracic hemangioma or lymphangioma MRI and MRA can exactly visualize tum or extent and vessel involvement for an adequate operative therapy planning. 14:35 981 Ultrasonographic study of mediastinal lym ph node involvem ent in children infected and ill from tuberculosis X. Serres, L. Inaraja, Q. Bosch, J.L. Simón, X. Pruna, F. Vilar, V. Garriga, E. Gallardo; Granollers/E Purpose: Mediastinal lymph node involvement of tuberculous origin is more frequent in children. Ultrasonography provides complementary information to that obtained by chest X-ray. The aim of this study is to present preliminary findings, regarding the ultrasonographic contribution in evaluating the presence o f m ediastinal lymph nodes In infected and in ill patients. The mediastinum was studied in 89 patients aged between 0 and 14 years of age. Suprasternal and parasternal ultrasonographic access routes were used. The control group consisted of 34 patients, the infected group of 38, and the group with proved pulm onary disease consisted of 17 patients. Lymph node involvement was 15%, 50% and 80% respectively. Differences were statistically significant (p < 0.05). Conclusion: Detection o f lymph nodes enables monitorization of the response to treatm ent and may possibly modify pharmacologic treatm ent and course of the disease in patients with a positive tuberculinic reaction and normal chest X-ray. 982 Ultrasonographic study of m ediastinal lymph node involvem ent in children with pneumonia X. Serres, L. Inaraja, Q. Bosch, X. Godina, X. Pruna, F. Vilar, V. Garriga, E. Gallardo; Granollers/E Purpose: Mediastinal lymph node involvement in pneumonic processes has not been clearly established due to limitations of the chest X-ray examination and radioprotection criteria in CT utilization. The aim o f this study is to present the preliminary echographic findings in the detection of mediastinal lymph nodes in children with bacterial pneumonia. Methods and Material: W e analyzed the ultrasound procedures of the medi astinum performed in 56 patients: 34 control subjects and 22 with pneumonia. Lymph nodes o f all sizes were evaluated. The presence of lymph nodes was 15% in the control group and 77% in the pneumonia group. Differences were statistically significant. All lymph nodes identified in controls were less than 8 mm. except fo r one o f 15 mm. All lymph nodes in the pneum onia group were larger than 8 mm. except three of smaller size (7 mm). The detection o f mediastinal lymph nodes in pneumonia provides information regarding the nature and the evolution of this entity. W e discuss the size range which would enable us to evaluate mediastinal lymph node involvement as either normal or pathologic. The aim of this study was to dem onstrate the spectrum of morpho logic and functional pulmonary abnorm alities in children surviving BPD. Materials and Methods: 12 survivors of BPD (8 m, 4 f; mean age 5.2 y) and 12 age matched controls were examined with chest X-ray (CX) and HRCT. Two radiologists analyzed CX and HRCT findings. Radiological changes were correlated with pulm onary function tests. Tests fo r each patient were com pleted within one week. In one case, radiological changes were compared to histological findings. Results: C X showed flattening of the diaphragm (n = 9), hyperexpansion (n = 8 ), hyperlucent areas (n = 8), linear opacities (n = 8 ) and atelectases (n = 3). Changes were equally distributed over both lungs. Bronchiectasis and cardiomegaly were not seen on CX. 4 BPD patients and the age matched control group had normal CX. 10/12 BPD patients had abnorm al findings at HRCT such as triangular subpleural opacities (n = 10), hypoattenuated areas (n = 9), linear opacities (n = 7), atelectasis (n = 3), pleural thickening (n = 2) and bronchiectasis (n = 1). In general, HRCT findings were equally distributed over both lungs, only linear opacities were seen more often on the left lung. Abnormal findings at HRCT correlated well with decreases in FEV1, MEF50, MEF25, TGV% TLC, RV%TLC. Neither parenchymal abnormalities nor pulm onary dysfunctions were seen in the normal control group. Conclusion: Most children who had BPD in infancy have sequelae seen on CX and HRCT, and abnorm al pulm onary function tests. Late pulmonary findings of BPD are better visualized on H R C T than on CX. These findings could reflect obstructive emphysem a due to small-airway obstruction with altered ventilation as well as areas of fibrosis and atelectasis. Glenn shunt or Fontan procedure may be associated with abnorm al pulmonary blood flow patterns and the developm ent o f pulm onary arteriovenous fistulae. Methods: This study assessed the pulm onary and total body blood flow utiliz ing the microsphere technique by sequential injection of Tc-99m microspheres into an upper and lower limb vein and performing conventional lung imaging in 4 projections and anterior and posterior total body scans in 47 patients with either Glenn shunt and/or Fontan procedure. The right-to-left shunt volume was quantitated by calculating a brain + kidneys/lungs ratio and com pared to values additionally calculated from the total body scans. Results: In 31/47 patients the blood from the superior vena cava w as pref erentially drained into the right lung (range 70 to 84%). The inferior venous system was distributed equally between both lungs. The mean right-to-leftshunt-volume was 23.9% when injected into the upper vein system and 46.8% when applied into the lower vein system. Conclusion: Lung perfusion scintigraphy is of great assistance to detect abnormal pulm onary blood flow patterns and to assess right-to-left-shuntvolume in children after Glenn o r Fontan procedure. Results: indications included mediastinal mass, airway stenosis, congenital anomalies and search fo r pulm onary metastases. Most frequent findings were benign thymic enlargement (n = 26), neurogenic tum ors (n = 6 ), atelectasis (n = 8), inflammatory changes (n = 9), tracheo-bronchial stenosis (n = 10) and thoracic anomalies (n = 12). In 6 neonates CT indication was based on prenatal or immediate postnatal detection of thoracic disorders such as pul monary sequestration, lymphangioma, atypical pulm onary vein transposition and pulmonary agenesia. 20 cases were negative. Conclusions: helical C T is quick and safe for the examination o f non cooperating small children. Rapid acquisition allows fo r excellent delineation of vascular structures and airways. Due to the reduction of motion-artefacts and the good quality o f multiplanar renderings, the diagnostic value was sufficient even in problem atic cases. The easier performance and availability of helical CT to MRI may make it the modality of choice in the diagnostic workup of thoracic disorders in the youngest age group. Material and Methods: PION as example for small particle size (37 nm) and DDM128 as exam ple fo r large particle size (80 nm) both reticuloendothelial system -directed agents, were com pared fo r liver enhancement in an experi mental model o f radiation-induced liver injury. A single x-irradiation exposure varied from 1 0 -6 0 Gy w as delivered to one side of the liver in 39 rats. T2w eighted spin-echo MR imaging was performed 3 days after x-irradiation at 30 minutes post-contrast. Results: Using the RES-directed PION, the normal, non-irradiated portion of the liver decreased in signal intensity with a maximum negative enhancement o f -66%, while the irradiated portion o f the liver decreased in signal intensity by -2 4 % . Signal intensity decline of irradiated liver tissue using PION was dose dependent, being more pronounced with lower radiation exposure. The difference in signal intensity between irradiated and non-irradiated portions w as also statistically different using DDM128 at 60 Gy (p < 0.05). At lower doses the difference in signal intensity between irradiated and non-irradiated portions w as not statistically different. Conclusion: Sensitivity of liver enhancement with RES-directed agents is size dependent. The sm aller particle (PION) is more sensitive fo r the detection of radiation-induced hepatitis than the larger particle (DDM128). The relative in sensitivity of DDM128 enhancem ent for diffuse liver injury maybe clinically ad vantageous fo r detecting focal lesions in the presence o f diffuse hepatic injury. Material and Methods: PION, a reticuloendothelial system-directed agent, and PION-ASF, a hepatocellular-directed agent, were com pared for time dependent liver enhancem ent in an experimental model of radiation-induced liver injury. Results: Using the RES-directed PION, the normal, non-irradiated portion of the liver decreased in signal intensity with a mean negative enhancement of -6 6 %, w hile the irradiated portion (60 Gy three days before imaging) of the liver decreased in signal intensity by -2 4 % , significantly less (p < 0.05). Signal intensity changes in irradiated liver tissue using PION were dose dependent, being more pronounced with lower radiation exposure. The difference in signal intensity changes induced by PION-ASF between irradiated and non-irradiated liver were not statistically different, but signal intensity decreased with a mean negative enhancem ent o f -8 0 % . Conclusion: Liver enhancement with the RES-directed PION is more sensitive fo r the detection of radiation-induced hepatitis than hepatocyte-directed PION-ASF. The insensitivity of PION-ASF enhancement fo r diffuse liver injury may be clinically advantageous fo r detecting focal lesions in the presence of diffuse hepatic injury. Methods: N -ethyl-N-nitrosurea, a potent carcinogen, was administered to 30 Sprague Dawley rats, inducing breast tum ors of varying pathology, benign through highly malignant. Pre-and dynamic post-contrast 3D-SPGR imaging was performed with Gd-DTPA (0.1 mmol Gd/kg) and again with Albumin-[Gd-DTPAjao (0.03 mmol Gd/kg) at a 24 hour interval. Using a two-compartment, bi-directional kinetic model permeability surface area products (PS) were calculated fo r each tum or and each contrast agent. PS values were correlated with histopathology. Results: Using the macromolecular contrast medium the tum or capillary permeabilities (PS) were significantly lower in benign than in malignant breast tum ors. No correlation between calculated PS and tum or grade was observed using Gd-DTPA. Conclusion: Breast tum or histologic grade is better defined with macromolec ular contrast medium enhancement than with Gd-DTPA. Tum or permeability, estimated by MRI, may permit clinical grading of breast tum ors and improved diagnostic specificity. To develop a gadolinium chelate fo r MR Angiography that does not quickly extravasate but is subject to fast elimination. Methods and Materials: A polym eric cascade type com plex (Gadomer-17) with an apparent molecular weight o f 30 kDa was synthesized and used fo r further studies as an aqueous form ulation (0.5 mol/l). The relaxivity was determ ined in water and plasm a at 0.47 T (Minispec, Bruker). The tissue distribution and excretion after intravenous injection of 0.1 mmol/kg was quantified in rats. The intravenous acute tolerance (LD 50) was studied in the same species. Imaging was performed in rats and rabbits at 2 T (SISCO) and at 1.5 T (M agnetom Vision) with standard fast 3D MRA techniques. Results: Gadom er-17 displays a T , relaxivity of 17.3 and 18.7 L m m o h ' s -1 in water and plasma, respectively. In the first minutes after injection the agent distributes exclusively in the blood space without significant diffusion into the extravascular space. Thereafter, a fast renal elimination o f the non-metabolized polym er takes place. Within 24 hours the m ajority o f the agent leaves the or ganism without significant retention in tissue. Much better angiograms (higher S/N, practically no enhancement of the parenchyma) at doses three to six tim es low er than GdDTPA are obtained. The arterial phase is clearly displayed during the first pass without venous overlap. The new agent greatly improves vascular visualization as com pared to current CE angiography. Because of its low dose, fast and complete elimination, the polym er may be especially beneficial for diagnosis of periph eral arterial diseases. 15:00 995 MR lym phography with ultrasmall iron oxide particles in patients with urologie and pelvic cancer C. R o y 1, M.F. B e ilin 1, K. K in k e l1, E. C h a llie r1, S. Z a im 1, C. S aussine2, F. R ichard1, D. Jacq m in2; 1 S trasbourg/F,2 Paris/F Purpose: To assess the safety and efficacy of superparam agnetic iron oxide contrast agent (AMI-227-Sinerem) fo r the detection of lymph node metastases of urologie and pelvic cancers. Methods and Materials: 30 patients were studied at 1.5 T (n = 16) or 0.5 T (n = 14), before and 24 hours after administration of ΑΜ Ι-227-Sínerem (1.7 mg of iron/kg). Comparative pre and postcontrast images were obtained with a 7-days interval and T1, T2-weighted images. W e evaluated the number and location of nodes, their architecture, and changes in signal intensity (SI). MR findings were compared with results of pathologic studies, including Peris staining of histological sections. Results: No serious side-effects were recorded. Most normal nodes showed contrast uptake, with a subsequent decrease in SI on T2-weighted images (n = 16). The SI remained unchanged in 5 normal nodes. Peris staining was positive in all but 5 benign nodes. None of the metastatic nodes (n = 24) showed a postcontrast decrease in SI. Peris staining was negative o r minimal in metastatic nodes. Nodal architecture w as nonspecific. Conclusion: AMI-227-Sinerem is well tolerated and may be useful fo r distin guishing between benign and metastatic lymph nodes. Imaging was performed with spin-echo (T 1-and T2-weighted) and gradient-echo (T 1 -weighted) tech niques before and after administration of either 1200 or 2400 mg of FAC. Vital parameters and adverse events were recorded and laboratory tests were performed. Efficacy regarding organ distension, contrast distribution and bowel opacification was evaluated and improvement in diagnostic confidence was analysed. Results: For both concentrations no serious adverse events were seen. Minor side effects were noted in 23% of the patients with significant difference between the dose levels. Moderate or marked improvement of distension of the stomach was yielded in 86%, of the duodenum in 67% and of the jejunum in 46%. Sufficient or com plete contrast distribution in the upper GI-tract was achieved in the majority of cases with both concentrations. Opacification was best on GE-sequences being marked or moderate in 84% of the patients. Overall the diagnostic confidence in defining o r excluding disease was improved in 52% of the cases. Altogether the higher dose tended to yield better results for all contrast assessment parameters. Conclusions: At tw o different dose levels FAC is a safe and effective oral contrast agent for MR Imaging of the upper abdomen. The higher dose was superior in contrast assessment param eters w hereas the low er dose produced fewer side effects. Methods and Materials: 28 women with urinary incontinence o r prolapse of pelvic organs were exam ined with ultrafast dynam ic MR imaging. Bead-chain cystourethrography (n = 18), colpocystorectography (n = 10) and sonogra phy were performed in all cases. All patients were studied on a 1.0 Tesla Magnetom-Expert scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). W e used the HASTE-sequence for dynamic imaging. This sequence required only a 2second acquisition time making it possible to image the bladder, urethra, and the pelvic organs with graded increase from relaxed state to maxim al pelvic strain. Results: All relevant findings (25 cystoceles, 14 rectoceles, 3 enteroceles, 6 vaginal prolapses, 4 uterine prolapses) could be demonstrated on MRI. Diagnostic information gained from dynam ic MRI w as superior to that of conventional X-ray imaging in 6 cases as im portant findings were missed (rectoceles, vaginal prolapse, enteroceles) if only a cystogram was performed. Additional advantage w as gained by depicting soft tissues revealing uterus descents. Methods and Materials: From January to August 1996, 10 patients candi dates to diagnostic or surgical laparoscopy fo r infertility o f more than one-year duration, were preoperatively submitted to HSG. An expert radiologist eval uated radiological findings (mucosal folds, tubal course and calibre, patency, contrast media spillage into the peritoneum); and a single surgeon, blinded to the preoperative HSG results, evaluated pelvic findings and the ampullary mucosa. Results: Eighteen tubes have been compared, two patients having had monolateral salpingectomy. C oncordance between pathological HSG and LS was o f 75% (6/8 tubes); only in tw o cases HSG and LS disagreed (radiological false diagnosis o f tubal obstruction). Concordance between normal HSG and LS w as only of 40% (4/10 tubes): HSG missed ampullary lumen adhesion (4 cases) and am pullary diverticula (2 cases). Conclusions: From these preliminary results, HSG correlates with endoscopy especially on pathological findings, percentage of concordance being higher in ou r series (75%) than in others (40%). HSG is less accurate than LS in the assessm ent of normal tube morphology, with possible high rate o f false negative findings (60% in ou r study). 1003 Ultrasonographic evaluation o f fallopian tube patency: Saline serum or ultrasound contrast medium? Y. R obe rt1, F. B oughène2, N. P errot2, С. H e n n e q u in ', J.L. L e ro y1, J.M. A ntoin e2, H. M orris2, P. B uno uf2; 1 Lille/F, 2 Paris/F Purpose: To compare the efficacy of I nf oson hysterosalpingo-sonography (HSS) to saline HSS both in relation to X-ray hysterosalpingography (HSG) in determining correctly fallopian tube patency. Methods and Materials: 23 patients (mean age 33.3 years), referred fo r hypofertility evaluation with HSG, underwent В mode (n-23) ultasonography with Saline (n = 12) o r Infoson (n = 11) intra-uterine injection after randomization. Patency criteria was contrast flow com ing from the tube into the peritoneal cavity in the ovarian vicinity. Saline (7 ml/injection) and Infoson (2 -4 ml + 1-5 ml Saline) injection was performed through balloon catheter (Ackrad 5F). HSG was performed for all patients after ultrasound at the same delay and con sidered as the reference method. To com pare the ability to correctly classify the tubal patency between the 2 groups, a sequential stastistical analysis was used. Methods and Materials: 9 patients with clinical and ultrasonographic suspi cion of adnexal mass were submitted to MRI examination of the pelvis. 0.5 T superconductive unit with body coil and SE T 1-weighted -before and after i.v. administration of Gadolinium-DTPA in 7/9 patients-and FSE T2-weighted sequences on the three spatial planes were performed. Surgical proof was obtained in all cases. Results: In 4/9 the abscess was bilateral, in 5/9 unilateral; 2/9 had used IUD; regular edges of the adnexal mass were present in all cases as well as parietal convolution; air-fluid level was observed in 1 case and fluid-fluid level in 2/9; linear strands in the peritoneum were present in 9/9; ascites in 3/9; in no patient lymphadenopathy was encountered. MRI allowed a correct diagnosis o f tubo-ovarian abscess in 9/9 patients. Conclusion: MRI thanks to multiplanarity that allow s to recognize the detour of the tubes and em ploym ent o f contrast media that allowed to exclude the presence of solid vascularized masses proved to be an useful tool in establishing the diagnosis of tubo-ovarian abscess that can be misleading for the aspecific symptoms at presentation. 1005 Ovarian derm oid cysts and teratom as: MR findings with conventional and fat-suppression sequences C. Zuiani, E. Quaia, S. Meduri, A. Rigamonti, M. Bazzocchi; Udine/I The authors classify the different MRI patterns of the ovarian der moid cysts and teratom as in the conventional and fat-suppression sequences. Materials and Methods: Twenty-four patients with a total o f 26 ovarian der moid cysts (2 bilateral) and 2 patients with ovarian teratom a have been studied by a MRI 1 T system, a body coil and TSE T1 W (TR 700, TE 12), TSE T2 W (TR 4000, ТЕ 90) and fat-suppression (FAT-SAT) SE T1 W (TR 500, TE 15) sequences. The diagnosis was confirmed by surgery and laparoscopy in every patient. Four categories o f lesions have been found: (1) Homogeneous type with fatty content (10 dermoid cysts, < 4 cm) which was completely suppressed by FAT-SAT; the fat w as isointense in T1 W and hyperintense in T2 W sequences compared to subcutaneous. (2) Dishom ogeneous type with a constant inclusion (8 dermoid cysts, < 7 cm), hypointense in T1 W and incompletely suppressed by FAT-SAT sequences; the fat was isointense in T1 W and in T2 W sequences com pared to subcutaneous. (3) Dishomogeneous type with fat-fluid level (6 dermoid cysts, < 7 cm) and incom pletely suppressed by FAT-SAT; the fat appears isointense In T1 W and hyperintense in T2 W sequences com pared to subcutaneous. (4) Dishom ogeneous type with hypointense in T1 and hyperintense in T2 inclusions (2 teratom as, > 7 cm) and incom pletely suppressed by FAT-SAT; the fat appears hyperintense in T2 W sequences com pared to subcutaneous. Conclusions: Dermoid cysts pattern in MRI is various but always systematizable. The volumetric criterion is the only one that allows to suspect the 1 4 : 0 0 -1 5 :3 0 teratomatous degeneration. Materials and Methods: 94 pregnant wom en clinically diagnosed as post-date pregnancy were regularly monitored with DopplerVelocity wave-form recording of umbilical arteries. Results were correlated with obstetric intervention rates, umbilical cord artery PH and gases and short term neonatal morbidity. 15 Our results showed that cases with abnormal Doppler umbilical artery velocity had higher incidence of operative delivery and neonatal intensive care admission at birth. There was a significant risk of acidosis and hypoxia in cases with absent or reversed end diastolic flow as indicated by significant changes of umbilical artery PH, P 02, P C 02, base deficit and bicarbonates. A significant low 1-and 5-minutes A pgar score was also recorded. The mean cord recorded artery PH w as significantly lower if the am niotic fluid was meconium stained. No perinatal death was reported throughout the study. Conclusions: Doppler study of the umbilical artery blood flow is an important criteria during assessment of post-date pregnancies. Cases with absent or reversed end diastolic flow are much more liable fo r fetal acisosis and as phyxia, thus early obstetric interference will improve fetal outcome. Surrogate measures fo r fetal damage seem to be improved when clinicians have access to Doppler Ultrasound assessments. To determine the value of endovaginal color and duplex Sonography in the early diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy (E.P.) in women at high risk and to correlate the sonographic findings with serum drawn for measurement of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and progesterone levels. M aterialsand Methods: During a 2 1/2 year period (January 1994 -July 1996) we studied a group of 300 pregnant women after assisted reproduction as early as 3 -4 weeks after conception. All patients had serum drawn for measurement of hCG and progesterone levels and studied endovaginally using color duplex Sonography. Results: Of the 300 women studied 39 had an ectopic pregnancy. The diagnosis of E.R w as based on real-time findings as well as on the recognition of placental blood flow on color duplex Sonography. Patients with positive scans were referred fo r laparoscopy. In all patients with EP, hCG values were above 1000 mlU/mL, and progesterone rates below 25 ng/mL. The use o f endovaginal color duplex Sonography in relationship with B-hCG and progesterone levels increases the diagnostic sensitivity to 100% in the early scanning of a population at increased risk for EP. ranged from 1.8 to 6.0 cm (8/32 less than 2.0 cm, 11/32 between 2.0 and 3.0 cm and 13/32 more than 3.0 cm). Simple m onopolar needle technique was used in 11 pts, bipolar technique in 3, and modified m onopolar (lateral exit needle o r cooled needle) in 18. Twelve pts had surgical control to evaluate the degree of necrosis by histology; the remaining 20 had follow-up by imaging (sonography and CT) and serum tum oral markers essay. Results: 100% necrosis was obtained in 4/12 pts with surgical control and in 6/20 without. In the remaining 22 from 60 to 90% necrosis was obtained. No com plications o r seeding w ere observed. Results: Sensitivity, specificity and p value were 80%, 100%, and < 0.001, respectively, fo r rim enhancement at PD-o r LP-phase, and 95%, 100%, and < 0.001, respectively, fo r rim enhancement at AD-phase, for differentiat ing com plete ethanol-induced tum or necrosis from incomplete necrosis. The false-negative findings occurred when the rim w as absent (n = 8 ). Neither com pleteness, presence of hypodense halo, nor destination we significant in distinguishing between com plete and incomplete tum or necrosis. All biopsies (17/17) of rims seen at PD-and/or LP-phase revealed liver tissue with inflam m atory changes and no viable tumor, and biopsies (9/9) of rims detected at AD-phase revealed residual viable tum or cells. Conclusions: O ur results show that peripheral rim enhancement detected at PD-and/or LP-phase C T is sensitive (80%) and highly specific (100%) as a reliable sign fo r differentiating com plete ethanol-induced tum or necrosis from incom plete necrosis and residual tumor. One type o f lesions (group 1; n = 13) were hypoenhanced in all phases. A nother type o f lesions (group 2; n = 17) were hyperenhanced in the AD and PD phases, and iso-o r hyperenhanced in the LP phase. The other 8 lesions (group 3) were hyperenhanced in the AD phase but isoenhanced in the PD and LP phases. The lesions were either w edge shaped (n = 15), nodular (n = 4), o r distinct with irregular borders (n = 8 ). The remaining 11 lesions were ireegular extensions o f the tum ors. All lesions except these later 11 were located peripherally to the tumors. Evolution: All group 1 lesions developed into nodular hypoenhanced lesions with focal atrophy. Of the 17 group 2 lesions, 5 developed into focal atrophy, 7 into w edge atrophy, and 5 into segmental atrophy. 2 of the later form ed lobar atrophy. All group 3 lesions disappeared without sequelae. Hepatic parencym al injuries were common, particularly after multiple EIT sessions, and could mimic new lesions or tum or regrowth. Hypoenhanced abnorm alities persisted and could progress to atrophy. On the other hand, hyperenhanced lesions could persist and progress into atrophy, or disappear without sequelae. No patient had significant changes in liver function tests. Doppler signal, its location and the results of FFT analysis were evaluated. The results were com pared with tum or vascularity determ ined by combination of helical CT, dynam ic MR and angiography used as the golden standard. Results: One to 18 months after TACE, color signals were seen in 39 o f 56 lesions. The location of color signal was either central (n = 10), peripheral (n = 18) or boundary o f the tum or (n = 11). Pulsatile waves were more frequent than continuous waves. C olor Doppler US had a sensitivity of 90%, specificity of 90% and accuracy of 86% in detecting tum or vascularity. Conclusion: Color Doppler US proved useful in the follow us study after TACE on HCC.  Eighteen patients with 57 focal liver lesions (48 metastases from colo-rectal cancer, 9 from gastric cancer) underwent MRI examination at 1.0 T just after cryoablation (3 -6 days post treatment) and following at 1 -2 months in all patients. Long term follow-up (6 months) was performed in 5 patients. T2W and T1W images, before and after Gd-DTPA i.v. administration (dynamic study), were acquired in all patients. Hystologic proof of cryolésions was available in three cases. MR images were quali tatively evaluated. Appearances of the treated lesions were described (size, morphology, and signal intensity). Results: Fifty-one lesions were hyperintense just after treatm ent on T1W images while 6 were hypointense. Follow-up examination at 1 -2 months showed isointensity with liver parenchyma on T1W images in 35 lesions. Follow-up examinations at 6 months showed shrinkage (reduction in size and in conspicuity) o f those lesions which were hyperintense on T1W images at first control. Recurrence of tum ors w as demonstrated in one of the three lesions which were hypointense at first control after treatment. M aterials and Methods: 20 patients underwent 24 atherectom y procedures to anastom otic stenoses. There were 15 PTFE, 4 Dacron, and one com posite graft; these were sited both above and below the inguinal ligament. 12 (57.1%) of 21 grafts were occluded at presentation and required throm bectom y or thrombolysis before atherectomy. Atherectom y was perform ed percutaneously in all but 4 patients who had surgical cut down onto a graft under local anaesthetic. Average follow up was 12.9 months (range < 1 to 40 months). Follow up was by duplex graft surveillance and angiography if necessary. Results: Technical success: 19 of 22 (86% ) showed < 30% residual stenosis post procedure. Complications: There were 4 puncture site haematomas, 3 required surgical treatment; in one case contrast extravasated a t the site of atherectomy, this did not require surgical treatm ent and the graft w as patent at 22 month follow up. Follow up: At 16 atherectomy sites there was no evidence of significant restenosis, of these: 12 grafts remain patent; 1 patient (two atherectom y sites) died following myocardial infarction with a patent but failing graft; 2 occluded due to progressive outflow disease. 1 patient had atherectom y repeated due to residual stenosis at follow up duplex imaging. 3 others have occluded but it was not clear if recurrence of NIH was to blame. 4 grafts failed despite technically successful atherectomy in patients with grafts occluded at presentation and successfully reopened by lysis. Graft occlusion occurred alm ost immediately post atherectomy: 2 patients underwent above knee am putation, one died of complications. The other patient (two atherectom y sites) had a successful surgical revascularisation and the limb was salvaged. In insufficient haemodialisis access fistulas (HAF) percutaneous intervention has proven to be an effective and efficient therapeutic procedure. No long-term outcome of interventional therapy has been com pared to surgical therapy on a sufficient large data base up to now. In a retrospective study prim ary and secondary function time of 201 HAF in 141 patients after 160 interventions (77 surgical, 83 radiological) were evaluated with respect to therapeutic procedure (radiological vs. surgical), shunt type (Cimino-vs. PTFE), pathology (stenosis vs. occlusion) and sequence of intervention. Results: Mean prim ary and total function time of a HAF w as 3.9 and 6.7 years, respectively. The population of HAF can subdivided in "unproblem atic shunts" (about 2/3 of total group) and "problematic shunts". Mean primary function time of unproblematic shunts is about 7 years and of problem atic shunts about 1.1 years. Therapeutic procedures (radiological and/or surgical) can raise the total function time of problematic shunts up to the level o f unproblem atic shunts. Conclusion: Percutaneous intervention is equivalent to surgical therapy in all aspects of post-interventional function time. 14:20 1020 4-years-experiences with iliac stents in 107 patients -Differences between W ailstents and Palm az-stents? G. Schäffler, K.A. Hausegger, M. Lafer, E. Pilger; Graz/A Purpose: To com pare the short-and longterm follow up results of W ailstents and Palmaz-stents in symptomatic arteriosclerotic lesions of iliac arteries. P a tie n ts an d Methods: 107 patients with 117 arteriosclerotic symptomatic iliac lesions were reviewed. All lesions were classified according to the SCVIR Classification. 77 lesions w ere treated with W ailstents, 40 lesions with Palmazstents. 99 stents were placed because of an insufficient result after PTA. 18 stents were placed without PTA. Periinterventionally all patients got 5000 IE Heparin after stent-placement, all patients were fully heparinisized for 48 hours. Most o f our patients w ere antikoagulated in the first six months after stent-placement. The mean follow up was 28 month (maximum 80 months, minimum 6 months). The results of both groups were compared by using the Log-Rank-Test. Results: Technical success in both groups was 97%. The primary clinical patency rate after 3, 6, 12, 18, 24, 36 and 48 months fo r the W ailstents was 94%, 91% , 88%, 83%, 77%, 70%, fo r Palmaz-stents 85%, 85%, 85%, 85%, 85% , 77%, 77% . Totally we had 17 stent occlusions after stentimplantation (2 occlusions within 14 days, 15 occlusions after 14 days. W e were able to reopen 14 stents. The secondary clinical patency rate after 3, 6 ,1 2 ,1 8 , 24, 36 and 48 months fo r W ailstents was 100%, 98%, 98% , 98%, 93% , 93%, 93%. The secondary clinical patency rate o f the Palmaz-stent within 48 month was 100%. The com plication rate was 5% (2 x hematoma, 1 x aneurysm a spurium, 1 x av-fistula, 2 x emboly). There were no differences between the shortterm and longterm results between W ailstents and Palmaz-stents. Conclusion: Shortterm and longterm results concerning clinical and SCVIR classification show no statistically significant différencies between the patients with W all-stents and Palmaz-stents. 14:30 Purpose: Restenosis after percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) remains to be a problem unsolved. In this paper we demonstrate the inhibitory effect of 32P (/3-particle) on smooth muscle cells (SMCs) in order to seek an effective method to inhibit neointimal proliferation. The aortic SMCs o f NZ rabbit are cultured, subcultured and identified by а -actin staining. 32P is used as /З-particle source to irradiate SMCs fo r 7 days with doses ranging from (0.0156-156 μ Ci). Its inhibitory effect to SMCs is assessed with MTT method immediately after irradiation. Result: 1. Small dose o f ^-irradiation have no noticeable effect on SMCs. 2. Medium dose o f /3-irradiation (8 -6 4 μ Ci/well for 96-well plate) can inhibit SMC proliferation. And its dosage is positively related to its effectiveness. 3. Large dose of ^-particle can kill the SMCs. Medium dose o f 32P (^-particle irradiation) could be used to inhibit SMC proliferation. It might be helpful in preventing restenosis after PTCA. Purpose: New types of film/screen-systems promise similar image quality for a sensitivity class of 400, as could be achieved with previous film/screensystems with a sensitivity class of 200. In this study image quality was compared fo r a new system (Regular Screen/Medical X-ray film SO 133-1, sensitivity class 400) and the previous system (Medium ЭсгеепЯ-МАТ Plus DG film, sensitivity class 200) in order to assess, whether sim ilar image quality could routinely be achieved at a low er dosage. The above mentioned film s were alternatively used on patients, who obtained follow-up examinations. In 30 patients elbow films and in 50 patients knee film s were available with both systems. Only correctly exposed films were used fo r comparison. Results: Two observes independently rated the two system s with a time interval for evaluation o f at least 6 weeks. Rating included resolution of the normal trabecular bone structure in areas o f different density, soft tissue contrast and visualisation o f pathology in areas of different density. Rating was equivalent fo r both system s for evaluation of pathology, for display o f soft tissue and for visualisation o f normal structures in areas o f medium density. The new system was slightly inferior in areas o f low density, but overall saved 25% of the dosage. Conclusion: The new system s may be able to replace the old one in most cases. W hen high detail is required the form er system should be preferred, particularly in areas o f a wide object range. 1028 Europium activated phosphors fo r use in X-ray detectors of medical imaging systems I. K andarakis1, D. C avou ras1, E. P apadopoulou1, G.S. P anayiotakis2, C.D. N om icos1 ; 1 Athens/GR, 2 Patras/GR Purpose: The purpose of this work was to investigate the suitability of europium activated phosphor screens to be used in detectors of C T and digital radiography systems. These detectors use phosphor m aterials coupled to silicon photodiodes. Method: The Y20 2S:Eu, Y V O^E u , and Y20 3:Eu phosphor m aterials were used to prepare test screens in laboratory employing the sedim entation method. Screens were excited by X-rays at various tube voltages and their efficiency (intensity o f light emission over exposure rate) was measured with a photom ultiplier-electrom eter system and a dosimeter. The light spectrum was also measured with an Oriel monochromator. Finally, the spectral com patibility with the Si photodiode and the num ber o f electrons generated per X-ray absorbed were calculated using appropriate m athem atical formulas. Results: Y20 2S:Eu screens were found most efficient while Y 20 3:Eu screens were better than Y V 0 4:Eu. The spectral com patibility with the Si photodiode w as found equal to about 0.7 fo r all phosphors, w hich is better than the corresponding values o f terbium activated phosphors. The num ber of electrons per X-ray is adequately high at a range o f X-ray energies from 20 to 50 keV, which is very interesting fo r medical radiography. Conclusion: Detectors from europium activated yttrium com pounds are e f ficient and well matched to the sensitivity of Si photodiodes used in digital radiography and C T systems. 14:20 1029 Reduced pollution, wash water consum ption and costs in autom atic X-ray film processing S. Lindequist, J.E. Madsen, I. Christiansen, B. Nielsen; Esbjerg/D K Purpose: X-ray film processing is associated with pollution due to the use o f wash water and photo chemicals. To reduce pollution and costs, a new system fo r recirculation of wash water and use o f solid chemicals has been developed. Methods and Materials: W ater and film consum ption, im age quality, processor and storage stability was measured before and after installation of equipm ent fo r "on site" mixing from solid photo chemicals and reuse of wash water. Results: Wash water consumption w as reduced with 100%. The total water reduction was 88% per m2 film. The outlet of the silver contam inated wash w a te rw a s eliminated. Image quality and storage stability remained unchanged. The use of solid photo chemicals and specially designed mixers were efficient and provided a stable and high processing quality. The risk o f pollution by transportation, storage and handling of liquid chemicals w as reduced. The wash water recirculation system reduced w ater consumption and eliminated pollution with silver. Use o f "on site" preparation o f photo chemicals was advantageous and both system s reduced the costs of film processing. 14:30 Regulations specify that all equipment used fo r medical exposure must be designed so as to keep patient doses as low as reasonably achievable. How ever, there is no assurance that APEX design criteria embodies optimisation in the sense implied by the ALARA principle. Conversely, it is also important that doses are not reduced low er than required to produce acceptable image quality. Therefore, the aim this investigation was to assess the functional perform ance of APEX controlled conventional and digital Selected previous (Greenleaf 1982 , Kossoff 1973 and recent papers (Richter and Heywang-Köbrunner 1995), however, indicate that sound velocity is faster in carcinom as com pared to normal breast tissue. This phenomen may be diagnostically useful, but has also been disputed. Therefore in vivo and in vitro measurements have been performed by us. Material: Sound velocity w as measured using an ultrasound forceps contain ing a transm itter and receiver connected to an oscilloscope. Multiple (> 10) m easurem ents w ere performed in 18 volunteers and in 20 fresh biopsy and mastectom y specim ens. The system was calibrated to w ater and a correction fo r tem perature w as made. Results: Sound velocity in normal and mixed breast tissue varied mostly between 1430 and 1470 m/s and w as about 4 -6 % lower than in carcinomas. Some overlap was seen between carcinomas and fibrocystic disease. Ob served phenom ena like elevation of a 'reflexogen line' (Richter and Heywang-Köbrunner 1996) w hich has been diagnostically used in a new sonographic m ethod (CARI-ultrasound) fo r the detection of carcinomas, are qualitively and quantitatively well explained. Conclusion: Significant differences o f sound velocity in normal and diseased tissue exist, which explain known phenom ena and which may be diagnostically useful. 1034 Optimization of X-ray beam in the m am m ographie field C. Gilardoni; Mandello d e l Lario/I The fundam ental characteristics of an X-ray beam are tied both to the material constituting the anode of the radiogene tube and to the one used in the filtration system. The diagnostic area where the need is chiefly seen, is without doubt mammography and the introduction of radiogene tubes with anodes in mammographie units is exactly due to the fact that such anode satisfies the need to distribute most of the radiant energy a t 18 and 20 KV in the optimum zone of absorbm ent of a medium-small breast of a middle-aged woman with prevalence o f adipose tissue. The usual filtration of Molybdenum does not w ork well in the case of breasts with elevated thickness o r which are more opaque because richer in glandular tissue (adolescent women). The objective of this work is to verify the possibility to exceed these limitations. The study in object began from the scientific pre sumption that the use filters with discontinuity К localized at a higher energy that with filter in Molibdenum, allows you to obtain, also with tube with anode in Molybdenum, photons X o f a superior energy. In fact recurring to filters in Palladium (Pd) o r in Rhodium (Rh) it was verified that the percentage of X-ray photons, with energy included between 19 and 23 KV increases significantly and so puts at disposal a radiation which is energetically more penetrating. Basic imaging parameters, namely, scatter fractions, modulation transfer func tions (MTFs), W iner spectra, and radiographic doses fo r both systems were investigated. Observer perform ance tests w ere carried out to assess the de tectability of microcalcifications in the magnification digital and screen-film mammograms. The observer perform ance data were evaluated using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. The area under the ROC curve and the true positive localization fraction (TPLF) were both used as performance indices in the evaluation. Results: Magnification digital images provided higher detectability than both screen-film images. Low-dose magnification digital images showed higher detectability than that of contact digital images. We present images of m ammographie test objects and ex vivo tissues obtained using a silicon digital detector and a monochromatic X-ray beam. The X-ray lam inar beam, obtained from a bending magnet at Elettra Synchrotron Radiation Facility in Trieste (Italy) has energies in the range 1 0 -3 0 keV. The linear array silicon pixel detector performs single photon counting. The very high efficiency o f this device is due to its geometric configuration, allowing fo r a com plete absorption of the impinging photons. The Ackermann test object and the C ontrast Detail phantom are studied, moreover breast tissue specim ens are investigated at different energies. Our images o f both tissues and test objects show a higher contrast resolution than those obtained with film-screen system. Using post processing techniques a spatial resolution of 10 Ip/mm is reached. The delivered doses are twice to ten tim es lower than doses necessary in conventional mammography. Conclusions: Our preliminary results indicate that using both synchrotron ra diation and a silicon pixel detector, digital images with high contrast resolution are acquired delivering low doses. The aim of our prospective study was to com pare muscle metabolism in occlusive arterial disease before and after vascular therapy by dynam ic 31P-MR-spectroscopy. We examined 32 patients with stenosis/occlusion of the pelvic arteries before and after percutaneous transluminal angioplasty or vascular surgery. Acquisition of up to 60 consecutive 31 phosphorus spectra of the quadriceps muscle was done during rest, tw o kinds of exhaustive exercise and recovery, respectively. We evaluated intracellular pH and the ratio inorganic phosphate/phosphocreatine (P¡/PCr). Results: After vascular therapy the patients performed both of the exercises significantly longer (282 vs. 199 s and 575 vs. 222 s). There were no changes regarding pH (7.05) and P¡/PCr (0.14) at rest. W e also found no significant differences in the extreme values of pH (6.89 vs. 6.87 and 6.90 vs. 6.89) and P,/PCr ( To analyse and to quantify param eters of high energy metabolism in lower extremities sceletal muscle in patients with arterial occlussive disease (AOD) using 31-P magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Methods and Materials: Using a Magnetom SP 63 1.5 Tesla (Siemens) with a 50 mm double resonant surface coil we acquired up to 160 spectra (TR = 700 ms, 32 Acquisitions) in each individual. Magnetic field homogenity was accepted when the line width at half high of the proton signal w as below 0.35 ppm fo r on FID. Using a UNIX W orkstation using UXNMR software (BRUKER) after phase correction, Fourier transformation, baseline correction, and Lorentz deconvolution m etabolite's concentrations (peak areas), relative concentrations (peak ratios), and pH value (chemical shift o f PCr peak and Pi peak) were calculated. 7 volunteers and 14 AOD patients (with different severity o f disease) underwent examination. Results are presented as mean and standard deviation. The Wilcoxon test was used to calculate statistical significance; p < 0.05 was considered as significant. Results: We observed a significant increase according to the grade of dis ease of all parameters containing phosphomonoesters (PME) like PME/b-ATP, PME/PCr, and PME/Pi analysed in this study, w hereas all other quotients were not significant. pH showed a not significant increase, PCr/Pi-ratio a not signifi cant decrease. In AOD grade IV patients we found the quotient PME/b-ATP 3 times over the value in volunteers, the PME/Pi ratio increased 2.7 times, and PME/PCr 2.2 times. Conclusions and Discussion: O ur results suggest that PME concentration in muscle cells does increase under chronic circulation deficiency. To our opinion this in the first place is founded in a reduction of oxydative phospho rylation followed by impaired oxygen diffusion into the muscle cells caused by atherosclerosis. ). O f these examinations a total of 408 corresponding images were selected, 50% with and 50% without cartilage lesions. Five radiologists scored all im ages according to five levels of confidence and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was performed. Results: ROC analysis of pooled data from all readers showed the highest area under the ROC curve for the sequence with the highest spatial resolution (A). There was no significant difference between sequences (B) and (C). The diagnostic performance using sequence (D) was significantly low er than in all other sequences. Methods: 20 patients with either traumatic, inflam matory o r neoplastic bone m arrow pathology were scanned in a 0.2 T dedicated extremity MRI system (Artoscan'", Esaote/Lunar). The protocol included three different inversion recovery sequences (STIR compared to IRGE with increased spatial resolution as well as IRGE with faster acquisition time) using identical plane, num ber of slices and orientation. The images will be independently read by 5 readers S 2 0 5 and blinded fo r patient and type of sequence. The findings will be qualitatively assessed fo r presence and sem iquantitatively evaluated fo r visibility and conspicuity of pathologic findings. Results: In our preliminary analysis the diagnostic sensitivity on IRGE se quences is at least com parable to conventional STIR techniques with the advantage o f either better spatial resolution o r decreased examination time. Conclusion: IRGE sequences on low field system s may become a remarkable improvem ent over STIR sequences and therefore will potentially enhance the feasibility of low-field MRI fo r evaluation of bone marrow pathology. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is the modality of choice to non invasively investigate the bone marrow due to its ability to recognize the tw o principal components of the normal bone marrow that is fatty o r yellow marrow and hematopoeitic o r red marrow. MR imaging also enables recognition of a large variety o f bone marrow changes since they generally induce a change in the balance between fatty and non fatty com ponents in either a diffuse, regional o r focal pattern. The following points and their implications for patients management will be presented: (1) Normal bone m arrow distribution and appearance at MR imaging with em phasis on normal variants (bone marrow hyperplasia) (2) Imaging strategies (sequences and regions to investigate) in patients with oncological disorders (Plasma cell disorders, lymphomas, metastases) in order to enhance the MR potential fo r staging and prognosis. Mammography is today the method of choice in order to detect clinically occult early breast cancers. Correlative studies between radiological appearance and its corresponding histopathological clue should be the basis fo r radiologic work. Some observations o f importance to appreciate a mammogram are described below. Microcalcifications can under certain conditions arise concern. The micocalcifications that differ in shape, size and intensity and that are seen in a linear or bifurcated form are likely to be situated within the ducts and thereby in most cases represent areas of malignancy. Breast anatom y and lobular and ductal topography teaches us that the ducts have a pathway from lobules out to the nipple. The observation of linear microcalcifications for example in cranio-caudal direction, i.e. across lobules, make the observation less likely to represent a malignant area since the pathways of the ducts generally do not interconnect lobules. Circumscribed opacities are another type of mammographie findings that can be diagnosed with a rather high PPV. Clinical symptoms like tenderness is a helpful factor to confirm the presence of a cyst. O f course there are adjuvant methods like ultrasound and MR to confirm/evaluate this finding but the objective of this abstract is restricted to interpretation o f mammograms only. Increased densities as com pared to surrounding tissue is another finding which should warrant careful analysis of the area since they often represent increased cellularity. Even if many dense areas could represent non-malignant findings these areas should be considered potential risk zones until further evaluation convinces us the opposite. The last but not the least im portant feature is architectural or parenchymal distortion. Areas without obvious characteristics like microcalcifications or in crease in density should still draw attention if local arrangement of parenchyma is not in total harmony with the rest of the parenchymal arrangement for one and the same breast. The signs could be very subtle but none the less can be learnt to appreciate pathological areas. 1049 Radiological/pathological correlation in the breast N.M. Perry; London/U K How accurately is it possible (or wise) to predict pathological findings from mammographie appearances. Providing that imaging is optimal it is possible to predict certain categories of pathology with a high degree of accuracy but there will always be an error rate. This may in part relate to the nature of the pathology, but also to the type of breast and the degree o f experience of the examining radiologist. It is important where possible to ascertain imaging information that will alter surgical management. There is more experience with rectal endosonography than MRI for can cer staging. "T" staging is accurate, though inflam matory changes lead to overstaging, and microscopic extension to understaging. Nodal differentiation between metastatic involvement o r inflammatory reaction remains difficult. 1051 Imaging of anorectal disorders using endosonography and MR (part II) Due to the introduction of endosonography and MRI, the imaging o f the anorectal disorders has been improved during the recent years. Due to limi tation of endosonography, endoanal MRI was introduced. W ith a com bination of multiplanar capability, high inherent soft tissue contrast, and high spatial resolution, endoanal MRI has substantially improved the imaging of the normal anatom y and pathology of the anorectum. Purpose: This course will provide an insight in the normal MR imaging anatom y o f the anal sphincter complex, and will stress the im portance of endoanal MRI as a newly em erging and promising diagnostic tool in patients with faecal incontinence, anal fistulas, and anorectal tumours. In this w orkshop the basic technique of percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage is briefly reviewed. More advanced techniques, such as balloon dila tion of benign strictures, stone removal, and stenting o f malignant and benign strictures, are discussed in detail. The use of percutaneous cholangioscopy is shown as well. The presentation will have the form at of a "Case presentation" and will consist of several cases that can be encountered in common clinical practice. Emphasis is put on correct indication to the procedure, selection and use o f different interventional materials, and management o f technical issues encountered during the various procedures. The discussion o f the cases will be done together with the audience, in an interactive fashion. The introduction of high-resolution com puted tom ography (HRCT) has revolu tionized the radiologic approach o f patients with suspected diffuse infiltrative lung disease. Over the last ten years, this technique has enabled precise analysis of the morphological changes occurring at the level of the lung parenchym a as well as better understanding of the distributions o f abnorm ali ties. On the basis of close correlations between HRCT findings and pathologic lung abnormalities, it has been possible to clarify the terminology used to describe abnorm al C T findings and thus, to avoid non specific terms. In addition to a detailed understanding of normal lung anatom y and of the pathologic alterations in normal lung that occur in the presence of disease, knowledge o f th e interface between normal and diseased lung is an additional prerequisite fo r an accurate recognition of lung changes. The aim of this lecture is to review the various types of anatomical features which could be mistaken fo r abnormal changes and em phasize the most common pitfalls related to the C T protocol chosen and/or the patient's physiological status. 1055 Value of expiratory HR-С Т In the diagnosis of small airways disease J.A. Verschakelen; Leuven/B Small airways disease (SAD) is generally defined as a pathological condition in which the small conducting airways are affected. This bronchiolar involve ment can be the prim ary finding but is more often a com ponent of a more widespread lung disease. It can be a reversible bronchoconstriction, bronchi olar wall thickening o r obliteration of the bronchiolar lumen and is very often a com bination o f these features. The wide variation in histologic appearance together with the variable clinical course and etiology have caused a lot of confusion in the term inology of SAD and are responsible for the fact that the CT interpretation o f this condition is often considered a difficult task. CT and especially HR-СТ can, nevertheless, give im portant additional information on the type o f bronchiolar involvement and on the extent of the disease. In this presentation a review will be given on the HR-С Т features of the different types o f bronchiolitis. The im portant role of HR-С Т images performed at suspended deep expiration will be em phasized. The HR-С Т signs "mosaic perfusion" and "air-trapping" will be discussed in detail. Results: MRI has a much higher diagnostic yield in identifying structural epileptogenic abnorm alities than CT. Three types o f abnorm alities can be encountered: 1) mass lesion (tumor, hamartoma, abscess); 2) area(s) of ab normal signal intensity o r structural anomaly without mass effect (gliosis, gray matter heterotopia, vascular malformation); 3) hippocam pal sclerosis/atrophy. The latter condition is characterized on MRI by an asym metrically small, at rophic hippocam pus with increased signal intensity on T2-weighted images ipsilateral to the seizure focus. Conclusions: MRI has significantly improved the detection, localization and differentiation of epileptogenic brain lesions. 1057 Radiological approach to cerebral em ergencies G. Scotti; Milan/I A cerebral emergency is a situation in which a pathological event occurring w ithin the head and brain may potentially be life-threatening if not rapidly and properly diagnosed and treated. Classification according to ethiology may recognize fo u r main groups: cere brovascular accidents; trauma; infection; metabolic disorders. Symptoms and neurological signs vary according to ethiology and severity: sudden loss of consciousness; coma; sudden focal neurological deficits; rapid progressive deterioration; nausea and vomiting. The role of the neuroradiologist in the management of cerebral emergencies may be both diagnostic and therapeutic. Diagnosis m ust be obtained as fast as possible: CT is the first modality of choice fo r alm ost all the pathological conditions. In severe head traum a CT is usually sufficient to provide infor mations regarding conservative or surgical treatm ent of the patients. There is almost no role for plain films. In cerebrovascular em ergencies, CT must be immediately followed by angiog raphy in subarachnoid hemorrhage or intracerebral hemorrhage in unusual location or inappropriate age group. Aneurysms o r recent thrombosis may require immediate intravascular treatm ent with GDC coils o r thrombolysis. In rare metabolic disorders MR may be required in emergency situation. Gamma cam era renography is today the main screening procedure fo r de tection of renovascular hypertension. O lder techniques using radiopharm a ceuticals with unfavourable biological and physical prestanda and primitive single-crystal detectors solely yielding curves, have been replaced by mod ern tracers with high extraction efficiency and elaborate detectors providing supplementary anatomical information of high quality. Advances in com puter technology during the last decade have contributed to numerical analysis of the examinations and made it possible to create quantitative indices to help the interpretation. This review will focus on how to perform the examination in the daily routine. Preparation o f the patient, different radiopharm aceuticals and data interpreta tion o f will be highlighted. Examination protocols based on clinical algorithms for handling of the hypertensive patient including provocation with captopril will also be discussed. With the recent improvement of revascularization therapies, there has been an increasing need for an optimal method fo r the screening of hypertensive patients at risk of renovascular hypertension (RVH) due to renal artery stenosis (RAS). Color Doppler ultrasound (CDUS) which is strictly a non-invasive and a minimally expensive method, has the potential to play an efficient role in the detection of RAS. The purpose of this lecture is to overview the main criteria used to detect significant RAS and to discuss their diagnostic value. At present, the most reliable diagnostic features remain those obtained from the stenotic site. However, these features requires experienced hands in order to accurately interrogate extrarenai arteries. Intrarenal Doppler waveform alterations which can be obtained in nearly all patients, have been used in order to indirectly diagnose RAS and to provide a functional assessment of RAS. Aside from classic tardus parvus patterns, downstream repercussions of significant RAS have been quantified through various criteria which will be discussed. The CDUS-based strategy which we apply fo r the screening of patients sus pected of RVH will be described and validated in term s of cost-effectiveness. This strategy can allow significant cost savings over a screening method relying primarily on arteriography. In the assessment o f renovascular disease CT-and MR-Angiography are less invasive, less expensive and easier and quicker to perform than conven tional angiography. СТА is based on helical data acquisition with consecutive post-processing and three-dimensional reconstructions. It provides accurate detection o f significant renal artery stenoses and additional information on mural calcifications. СТА is limited by a low cranio-caudal coverage, the need for iodinated contrast media, and the lack of ability to quantify blood flow in renal vessels. The phase-contrast (PC) technique is recommended for unenhanced MR angiography of renal arteries. The directional com ponent of the phase images permit easy differentiation of arteries from veins, thus eliminating a potential source of error. Morphologic assessment of the renal arteries with PC-MRA is, however, still handicapped by the inability to adequately visualize distal renal artery segments and small accessory vessels. W hile the accepted gold standard, conventional angiography, is highly sensitive in the detection of renovascular disease, it is merely 5 0 -8 0 % specific. CINE-PC based functional blood flow analysis, capable of expressing renal flow, may overcome some of these limitations. A breathheld PC-imaging strategy is essential fo r accurate blood flow quantification. Contrast-enhanced 3D MR acquisition techniques proved to be highly accurate RC for visualization of renal vessels. In its initial implementation imaging times ranged from 3 to 5 minutes. The use o f fast gradient system s allow s to reduce imaging times and to perform breath-hold data acquisition. High resolution images of main and segmental arterial branches can be obtained after injection of higher doses of paramagnetic contrast media. A virtual angioscopic display of the acquired images provides a new insight into m orphologic alterations of renal arteries. Radiology Information Systems (RIS) have proven to be indispensable fo r the operational management of radiology departments. This lecture discusses how state-of-the-art RIS support the daily process from request to reporting, and how these system s can be used to improve the departm ental performance. The major functions of RIS will be described and explained: (1 ) patient identification and history retrieval (2) request processing and appointm ent scheduling (3) folder management (4) patient tracking (5) coding of radiological findings (6) reporting and communicating results to the requester. The focus will be on their applicability in daily practice and the results to be achieved. Examples will be given based on the experiences with a RIS currently in use in 37 hospitals in the Netherlands. One important facet is the communication with other departm ents in the hospital. This is essential to allow fo r i.a. the tuning of patient appointm ents with other hospital visits, decentralized order entry, automatic importing of patient data into radiology reports, and immediate availability o f results to the requester. Another im portant aspect is the com m unication of the RIS with digital modalities and FACS. Finally it is discussed how a RIS offers direct support to the m anagem ent of the departm ent by transform ing the operationally recorded data into valuable information and statistics on production, lead times, waiting times, w ork load, patient mix, referral patterns, etc. After more than 20 years of experience, angioplasty is the method of choice in the m anagem ent o f vascular stenosis and occlusions. In order to decrease the recurrence and com plication rates partially induced by the angioplasty's mechanism, that is plaque fracture with intimai and/or medial dissection, different devices have been developed. Techniques such as laser, atherectom y devices, covered and non-covered stents and fibrinolytic agents have been developed trying to improve the long term patency rate. Unfortunately none of these techniques is a real alternative to angioplasty. Debulking with laser o r atherectom y devices was used to increase the vascular diam eter while minimizing the angioplasty effects, however, the long term patency was not better than that of angioplasty alone. Because of the technical limitations and the high cost, their use has been reduced dramatically over the past years. The use of vascular stents has significantly improved the long term patency rates of revascularization techniques. Recent publications advocate primary stenting as a more cost-effective method than angioplasty alone. However, the com bination of stent and PTA seems to be the best approach at the present time. Throm bolysis along with stent and PTA constitute the third leg of a tripod of percutaneous techniques in peripheral vascular interventions. Complications of angioplasty occurred in approxim ately 10% o f cases and just 2.5% o f them need surgical treatment. In conclusion, balloon angioplasty remains the gold standard for percutaneous revascularization techniques either as the primary method o r in combination with fibrinolysis and/or stenting. A.-M. Belli; London/U K Peripheral PTA is a vast subject encompassing balloon dilation, stenting and atherectomy. My videoworkshop will concentrate on some of the less conventional m ethods that may be utilised to achieve improved clinical results. Perantaneous atherectom y has enjoyed relatively little popularity but one of the areas w here it enjoys some success is in the resection of neointimal hyperplasia (NIH) and atherectom y in the treatm ent of graft anastom otic stenoses and stent NIH will be shown. Some of the problems encountered with such treatm ents will be shown. Another unusual role for balloon dilatation is aortic fenestration in aortic dissection to aid revascularisation o f an ischaemic limb. Two cases will be shown with different aetiologies, one as a result of aortic dissection following cardiac catheterisation and the second a Type III dissection as a result of aortic valve replacement. In each case the connection between true and false lumens w as dilated using a balloon with immediate improvement in pulses and symptoms in the ischaemic limb. Approaches to register multiple images are divided into extrinsic methods based on artificial markers, and intrinsic matching methods based solely on the patient image data. For rigid registration of volum etric images (3D-3D matching), the various methods are com pared by a num ber o f characteristics, which leads to a clear preference fo r one class of intrinsic methods, viz. voxel based matching. Elastic registration and 2D-3D image matching will be briefly discussed. Furthermore, a survey of 2D and 3D approaches fo r multimodality display will be given, with an em phasis on recently developed techniques fo r 3D fusion of functional and anatomical information. 1067 Multim odal imaging and im age fusion in practice L.C. Meiners; Utrecht/NL Multimodal matching refers to matching of different imaging techniques, which provide com plem entary information. Clinical fields in which multimodality dis plays may be useful are neurosurgery and radiotherapy. Advantages and disadvantages will be discussed using examples in practice. Advantages of m ultimodal im aging and fusion are: 1. Obviating limitations and artifacts of one technique by fusion with another technique: Example 1) Coricai bone disruption by a skull base tumour, better appreciated on CT than on MRI: furtherm ore the bony landmarks on C T correlates better with the intra-operative visualisation o f these structures: the soft tissue com ponent of the tum our however m ay be better visualized by MRI. Example 2) Implanted subdural electrodes are readily segmented on postoperative CT scans. On MRI however the hypointense artifacts associated with the metal cause difficulties in segmentation using this technique. Example 3) In radiotherapy, fusion of CT and MRI may be useful in radiation doses-calculation on CT (electron density determ ines radiation absorption) in tumours. MRI is used for volume demarcation of tum our and fo r exclusion of normal surrounding tissues. 2. Complementary information provided by tw o different imaging modalities: Example 1) 3D MRI structural visualisation of the brain combined with images of glucose metabolism using 18FDG PET or com bined with blood flow images using HMPAO SPECT scans. Example 2) 3D MRI com bined with EEG brain maps o r with m agneto-encephalography (MEG) for the demonstration of physiological changes in patients with epilepsy. Disadvantages and limitations of multimodal matching are: 1. Non-congruent displays e.g. round model used fo r brainm aps and realistic visualisation of the oval form of the head. 2. Artifacts e.g. MRI susceptibility artifacts at the border of tissue all amy lead to deform ation of structures in these areas. 3. Matrix size differences in MRI and PET and SPECT. Two fundam ental topics o f quality control will be discussed: organizational and logistical aspects and a technical quality control program. The Dutch Society of Radiographers is closely involved in the developm ent of standards and protocols concerning these subjects. In this presentation the role o f the Dutch Society will be discussed and in more detail the implementation in the daily practice. (1) A Radiology Information System (RIS) offers direct support to the man agement by transforming the operational data into valuable information and statistics. The communication with other hospital departm ents and the communication within the radiology departm ent form s another im portant aspect of a RIS. Measurable criteria are form ulated concerning patient routing through the radiology department. (2) The problems that have to be overcome w hen starting a program for testing X-ray equipm ent will be reviewed. W here to begin and w hat criteria can be used fo r selecting the first subjects fo r testing will be discussed from a practical point o f view. For reliable and consistent testing good protocols are essential. O ne of the protocols which are developed by the joined professional groups in the Netherlands will be discussed in detail with regard to general structure and contents. If these m ethods are used properly the positive predictive value fo r breast cancer will be in the order of 5 0 -8 0 per cent with a very low rate of false negatives. It is, however, im portant to realize that 5 to 10 per cent of all carcinomas with some sort of physical finding are occult on mammography. The differential diagnosis of breast disease will be briefly discussed under the subheadings of densities, architectural distorsion, calcifications and edem a of the breast. Mammography plays an im portant roll as a guide to stereotactic fine needle aspiration biopsy o r core biopsy as does ultrasound. The radiation dose with modern mammography is exceedingly small. Thus, although the risk of inducing breast cancer is negligible in the ordinary breast patient, the dose should be taken into account in tw o situations: a. in symptomatic patients under age 30. b. when screening large populations of asymptomatic women. Quality control is im portant to assure a high and consistent level o f accuracy. Important components of a quality control program are proper training of all personnel involved, continuous correlation o f radiographic findings with pathology and cytology, sensitometry o f film processing, phantom exposure and regular testing of the X-ray equipment. With the improvement o f technology, breast sonography (US) has become very popular. However, some specific conditions are required to achieve accurate quality: (1 ) appropriate equipment, technical skill and a standardized US examination (2) background knowledge of the anatomy, physiology and pathophysiology of the breast (3) perfect knowledge o f the other imaging modalities. Indications for breast sonography are not only restricted to the simple differention of solid/liquid masses but include: (1) mass in women under 30 years old (first examination technique) (2) palpable mass not visible or atypical in radiographically opaque breast (3) discrepancy between physical findings and mammography (4) impalpable lesion with atypical mammographie findings (5) inflammatory disorders (6) breast implants (7) mass out o f the mammographie films (8) guidance of interventionnal procedures Pitfalls and limitations have to be kept in mind: (1) significant abnorm alities may be missed in fatty breast, large breast (2) overlap between malignant and benign sonographic features (3) poor detection of microcalcifications Sonography is a very useful com plementary tool of mammography improving the specificity o f breast imaging, avoiding som etimes unnecessary surgical biopsy or permitting detection o f carcinoma not seen on mammography (up to 16%). 1072 C. Magnetic resonance of the breast C. Frouge; Le Krem lin-Bicêtre/F MRI after injection of Gadolinium have demonstrated a good sensivity in detecting breast carcinoma partially related to the enhancement of intraductal carcinoma. The major problem o f breast MRI, is its a lack of specificity since some benign lesion like fibroadenom as and epithelial hyperplasia also presents a signal enhancem ent after Gadolinium injection. MRI have from now on, obvious indications such as post operative, irradiated or augm ented breast but the other indications to determ ine precisely the place o f this examination, due to his cost and the good diagnostic perform ance of the association of clinical examination, mammography and sonography com pleted by cytoponctions o r microbiopsies under sonographic or stereotaxic guidance. In this part o f the course, we will first study the com plex mechanism s o f tumoral enhancement after Gadolinium injection with a special attention to intraductal carcinoma. In a second part, we will try to define the perspectives of breast MRI fo r the years to com e in two different clinical situations: detection of a focal lesion and characterization of a lesion previously described by another modality. plays presently a basic role in characterizing pancreatic tumors; nevertheless, the ongoing evolution of the different Imaging modalities as well as the most recent acquisitions on the pathology o f some pancreatic tum ors allow presently not only to differentiate ductal carcinom a vs. the other pancreatic neoplasms, but also to characterize in a noninvasive way the various tumors, even the rarer ones. Among the cystic tum ors a few patterns have been identified, which allow to differentiate peripheral m ucinous cystic tum ors from both serous cystadenoma and papillary cystic tumor. A significant diagnostic improvement has been achieved especially in the identification of intraductal mucin-producing tumors, which were in the past either underestim ated (wrong diagnosis of obstructive chronic pancreatitis) or mixed up with other tum ors (peripheral cystic tumors). Also among the rare solid tum ors of the pancreas (nonfunctioning islet cell tum ors; acinar carcinoma; lymphoma; metastasis; etc.) it is possible to identify some patterns which allow these lesions to be differentiated from the ductal carcinoma. This report emphasizes the contribution of the different Imaging modalities -notably US, CT, MR, Angiography and ERCP -to the correct characterization of these tum ors as well as the possible pitfalls. In the adult solid renal masses are detected because of an alteration in the renal contour, a distortion of the collecting system o r an abnorm ality in the density/echogenicity of the mass com pared to normal parenchyma. Once a solid mass is detected it is helpful to evaluate its patterns of growth: expansion (ball) o r interstitial infiltration (bean). Expansive masses (ball growth) are characterized by focal distortion of the renal contour, sharp margination with norm al parenchym a and focal displace ment of the collecting system. In the adult the most common solid balls include renal cell carcinoma, oncocytoma, angiom yolipom a and metastases. Infiltrating masses (bean growth) are characterized by an ill-defined margin, encasement o f the collecting system and focal or diffuse enlargem ent of the renal contour. The most common beans include lymphoma, invasive transi tional cell carcinom a and metastatic disease. This course will em phasize these tw o growth patterns as well as the differential features o f solid renal tumors. Renal cystic masses com prises a mixed group of heritable, developm ent, and acquired disorders. An awareness of the pathology of each cystic disease is helpful in the understanding of the corresponding images from the simple cyst to the cyst with malignant tissue in the wall. Meticulous attention to subtle radiologic findings is, therefore, essential for reaching a correct diagnosis as well as the findings should always be carefully correlated with the clinical features. The diagnostic m anagem ent should clarify w hether heparin treatm ent started at the first clinical suspicion of PE should be terminated, continued or extended to more aggressive therapy. If severe PE is clinically suspected bedside echocardiography helps in quick decision-making by assessing RV overload and imaging right heart andwith esophageal probes -central pulm onary arterial thrombi. Absence of echocardiographic signs of RV pressure overload makes attem pts at throm bolytic/surgical embolectomy unjustified. When milder form s of PE are sus pected perfusion lung scan should be checked against ventilation scan or chest X-ray fo r mismatching. Unfortunately, the majority of scans are abnor mal but inconclusive. Contrast enhanced spiral C T is likely to replace lung scan as a first-choice test fo r suspected PE. Isolated subsegmentai emboli missed by this highly specific method are of questionable clinical significance in the absence of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). In cases without clear con firmation of PE and with preserved cardio-respiratory resen/e serial negative compression ultrasound testing fo r proximal DVT justifies withholding o f an tithrombotic treatment. MRI venography could be combined with search for pulmonary thrombi, if not fo r relatively low specificity fo r the latter. Thus, pulmonary angiography remains the golden standard fo r PE, but is being challenged by non-invasive and cost-effective imaging methods capable both to directly visualize pulm onary emboli and provide alternative diagnoses. ance (MR and CT, plain and with contrast), and anatom ic location help to tentatively identify the tum or's nature. Conclusion: MR imaging, carefully performed, has become the prim ary inves tigative tool for the diagnosis and follow up (effects of treatm ent, recurrences) of brain tum ors in children. The mode o f inoculation in infancy and childhood is predominantly hematoge nous and, in many instances, the origin remains unknown. C ertain aspects of pediatric osteomyelitis pose unique diagnostic challenges. Imaging techniques, including conventional radiographs, scintigraphy, sonog raphy, C T and MR m ay all play a role at the time o f diagnosis. Plain radiographs and scintigraphy should be considered mandatory in the diagnostic approach to suspected bone infection. Sonography and C olor or Power D oppler if available can be helpful in depicting subperiosteal collections and neighbouring soft-tissue involvement. CT allow s accurate visualization of cortical bone involvement. MR gives essential information about the extent of the lesion and allows presurgical mapping. As we are dealing with growing structures, complications based on physeal damage m ust be specially considered. Clinically suspected growth distur bances should be first confirmed with plain films. Scintigraphy will assess physeal dysfunction, but MR is the technique of choice fo r accurate depiction of the anatom ic background o f the lesion and set surgical indication. In postsurgical assessment, MR, together with plain radiographs and scintigraphy will also be of use. 1085 Im aging concepts of soft tissue m asses in the limb G.F. Eich; Zurich/C H Soft tissue neoplasm s in children differ from those in adults in frequency, anatom ic location, histology, and prognosis. Most pediatric soft tissue tumors are benign, but soft tissue sarcom as account fo r up to 10% of childhood malig nancies. Classification traditionally is based upon histologic criteria which bear considerable nosologic uncertainties. Recent molecular genetic data have led to reclassification of several tum ors. Imaging o f soft tissue masses is used for staging purposes primarily. Despite the use o f conventional radiology, ultra sonography, scintigraphy, com puted tomography, angiography, and magnetic resonance imaging a specific diagnosis can be obtained in a minority of cases only. Even differentiation o f benign from malignant lesions may be impossible. However, knowledge o f the patient's age, sex, symptoms, and associated findings, and the lesion's number, location, size, growth velocity, and imaging characteristics may allow fo r a reasonable differential diagnosis, based on knowledge of the possible, age specific pathology. The clinical usefulness of magnetic resonance spectroscopy and positron emission tom ography has still to be determined. Stent placement is carried out under fluoroscopic control; endoscopy is un necessary in most cases. A catheter is advanced via a mouth guard into the upper esophagus and manipulated across the stricture. Once the catheter tip has reached the stomach a stiff Amplatz guidewire is inserted and the catheter withdrawn. A 15 mm balloon is used to dilate the stricture. Following dilatation, the stent introducer is inserted and the stent is positioned across the stricture under fluoroscopic control. A barium swallow is carried out on the following morning to confirm satisfactory function of the stent. In patients with pharyngeal or esophageal tum ors unsuitable fo r treatment with stents a percutaneous gastrostom y is a useful procedure. The stomach is inflated with air using a nasogastric tube. Its proximity to the skin is confirmed on lateral fluoroscopic screening. The stomach is then punctured and Cope suture anchors used to secure apposition of the anterior gastric wall to the anterior abdominal wall. A guidewire is then inserted via a needle into the stom ach and, following dilatation, the gastrostom y tube is advanced into position. 1088 Results: Long-term improvem ent has been achieved in a majority of the patients treated fo r dysphagia secondary to malignant strictures. The most common com plications were ingrowth of tum or through the stent mesh and migration of the stents. C overed stents have been of great value in the treatment of patients with esophago-respiratory fistulas. We will discuss the basic principles o f spiral CT scanning and some of the technical prerequisites and limitations. In particular, we will explain the necessary z-interpolation algorithm s and their influence on image quality. Image quality in spiral CT is the same as in conventional section-by-section imaging with respect to most parameters. Differences relate to pixel noise and section sensitivity profiles. The dependence of these two param eters will be discussed in detail as a function o f section thickness, z-interpolation algorithm, table speed, and reconstruction interval. There are no significant drawbacks to spiral CT; in fact, continuous scanning in the longitudinal direction (z axis) provides advantages fo r 3D resolution. Spiral CT offers a num ber of significant advantages for clinical work with the additional potential to reduce dose. W e will present a review of clinical applications where spiral C T had particular impact. A special focus will be on CT angiography and the creation of anatomical models fo r surgical simulation and planning. Examples will be used to discuss the choice o f scan param eters and their influence on image quality and dose. Some of these diseases are equal to those in seronegative patients. With increasing immundeficiency, however, m anifestation will differ. For example, miliary tuberculosis is rather frequent in AIDS patients but rare in seronega tives. Cavitation in tuberculosis is rare in patients with AIDS, but a common feature in others. W e will describe typical diagnostic Roentgen and CT signs, especially in invasive aspergillosis, tuberculosis and other bacterial infections, and in Kaposi sarcoma. Purpose: W hether experienced in spiral CT o r not, participating radiographers shall know the differences between conventional and spiral CT after this course and be able to optimally apply the advantages of spiral data acquisition and postprocessing. The differences in handling and practical ways to overcome problem s with spiral C T will be worked out. M aterial and methods: Based on concrete examination protocols in clinical routine, the selection and modification of scanning parameters such as kV, mA, rotation time, will be demonstrated. Step by step, radiographers will go through planning, data acquisition, image reconstruction and postprocessing. Results: A s com pared to conventional CT, spiral CT requires thorough plan ning because o f the great num ber o f examination parameters; data acquisition is much faster and covers the entire volum e of the body region; most im portantly, the patient can leave the scanner while retrospective raw data evaluation is going on. The choices in image reconstruction, visualization, reform atting and 3D presentation will be shown. Conclusion: Based on tw o years of experience with a modern spiral CT scanner, after having worked years with conventional CT and first generation spiral CT, the authors are convinced that there are clear advantages with spiral CT both fo r the patient and fo r radiographers and radiologists. The total num ber of MRI installations world-wide is estimated to be well over 10000. The United States is the m arket leader with some 4000 installations, out of w hich about 2/3 are high field devices (1.0 T o r higher). Although 1.5 T continues to be the most popular choice, the largest growth segment in recent years has been in the 1.0 T market, which has surpassed the 0.5 T mid-field in popularity. This is attributed to its advantageous com prom ise between the clinical and marketing requirements o f high field and the cost-effectiveness of mid-field systems. The m arket share of low field (under 0.5 T) systems used to be relatively low. In 1992 the num ber of 0.5 T installations was more than twice that o f low field systems, while in 1995 the num ber of sold low field units was almost equal to that of 0.5 T units, mainly due to rapid fall in the mid-field installations. In 1994, 85 out of 339 sold system s (25%) in the US were less than 0.5 T (1). Out of these 55 were under 0.21 T systems. In Europe and Japan the share o f low field devices is higher. The num ber of annual new installations continues to increase in Europe, while in Japan the number of new MRI installation orders has levelled off. The original idea of producing low or even ultra-low field (< 0.1 T) MRI devices was to avoid the high cost of high field MRI equipment. There was also some scientific evidence which favoured low field. Although the sensitivity of the very low field imagers w as proven to be quite satisfactory fo r most diagnoses, the very lowest field strengths (200 and 400 gauss) were replaced by somewhat higher fields due to dissatisfied response o f the medical community -even if the images were clearly sharper than any state-of-the-art nuclear medicine equipment can produce. Altogether only about 200 installations in the range of 0 .0 2-0 .064 T were ever delivered, if one excludes the unknown number (70?) of Chinese illegal copies o f one o f these devices. There is still no consensus as to w hat constitutes the optimal field strength for MRI. Since the early years of clinical MRI, there has been a widespread belief that the higher the field strength, the better. It is obvious that prettier and sharper images can be produced in relatively shorter tim es using high field strength. Financial pressures on the health care system s in most countries would need a quantitative analysis on the diagnostic quality versus field strength. Efficacy studies o f low-or mid field strength versus high field strength MRI are very few. According to one report, only 47 such studies have been published. There is not a single controlled clinical study that proves the superiority of high field. W hat exists shows that there is no diagnostic difference. It is obvious that state-of-the-art low field devices perform better than older generations of high field systems, but this may not appear sufficient S 218 since high field devices have improved fast, too, and produce very detailed and pretty images. The decision making in the process of acquisition of an MRI system is affected by many other factors than diagnostic sensitivity. According to the published data diagnostic difference is smaller than most radiologists and clinicians want to believe. More likely the decision is determ ined by other factors, such as: (1) Attitudes: Sincere believers o f " 100% medicine" claim that patients must have access to the very best equipm ent in any case. For them that means high field in MRI. A good example of this continuing conflict of attitudes regarding field strength is demonstrated in the January -February 1996 issue of JMRI. In addition, com petition fo r patients is som etimes based not on the diagnostic efficacy that a centre provides, but rather on field strength. (2) Industry: High field system s are more expensive and are likely to provide a larger margin to the m anufacturer o r sales organisation. (3) Academic interests: Options, such as spectroscopy and functional imaging, may direct the interest o f academic radiologists towards high field even if everyday work could be performed with low field. (4) Governmental regulation. The radiologist making the choice sees the pur chase as a one tim e opportunity. Therefore he selects the most expensive and visible unit, since he may not have a second chance in a country with strong governmental control. (5) Reimbursement policy. In some countries reimbursement levels are set according to field strength in such a w ay that it is actually more profitable to the service provider and to the patient to have the examination done at high field. The cost savings in low field MRI are obvious. The investment cost of a low field MRI system is 50% o r less than the cost of a state-of-the-art 1.5 T system. Running costs of a non-superconductive low field system show even greater difference in favour o f the low field. Site preparation and personnel costs may be close to equal. Patient throughput in modern high field system s may be up to 50%, but not 100% higher than in low field systems. For low field MRI to perform well, high technology is necessary in low field MRI even more than in high field. Therefore the relative price of low field MRI has not decreased as much as high o r middle field during the past tw o years. As long as there is an unlimited demand fo r MRI examinations despite their high cost, it appears to be financially profitable to run a high field system. Should the demand fo r MRI be saturated in a given community, low field systems cause less financial pressure to the reimbursement organisation and to the service provider, should the medical com munity accept low field as an accepted modality. As a com parison, X-rays of a broken ankle or wrist are accepted even if they are not produced with the most up-to-date, high performance, remote controlled, digital, multi-angle equipment. Low field MRI provides sufficient diagnostic information using spin echo and gradient echo techniques. The fast spin echo and steady state techniques reduce the acquisition time and separate w ater and fat images can be re constructed with gradient echo sequence. Optim um design of closely coupled RF-coils is im portant in increasing the signal-to-noise. Low band width tech nology and long TE gradient echoes are additional techniques to improve the performance of low field systems. Low RF absorption enables the use of special in vivo magnetisation transfer and spin lock techniques. Recently introduced open m agnets offer com pletely new dim ensions to low field MRI. Body applications o f low field MRI enjoy low er sensitivity to vascular, respiratory and peristaltic motion as com pared with high field units. Easier use of life support devices are in favour o f low field imaging. The interventional and functional applications o f MRI have been developing slower than anticipated. This may be partly due to industry's lacking interest in developing new applications until now. Dedicated extrem ity imaging devices seem to have market among certain clinical specialities (outside hospital-based radiology). Interventional applications are more hospital-oriented and appear to develop slower. The recent pressure on cost containment, developm ent of interventional tech niques, use of MR system s in intensive care and operating suites, deployment of magnets in office suites and developm ent o f new magnet configurations all favour the use of low field systems. It is up to the medical com munity to decide if highest available image quality and cost is always required or not. Magnet design is the key issue fo r open MRI systems. Iron core magnets typ ically utilize perm anent or resistive technology but superconducting solutions have also been introduced. These magnets feature a horizontal gap rather than a bore. Air-core superconducting m agnet with vertical gap is another approach. Interventional MRI is the area where open MR is expected to have largest impact. IMRI sets several requirements fo r the scanner and its accessories. These may include MR compatible patient monitoring, special patient coach, navigation systems, fast imaging techniques etc. It is evident that open MR imagers will have a m ajor impact in MR imaging. New applications may be the driving force, but due to the improved patient comfort, and the ease of patient positioning and monitoring make these magnets attractive also for routine MR scanning. 1099 Clinical experience of dedicated sm all bore MRI equipm ent M. Mastantuono; Rome/I Nowadays, total body system s are yet burdened with heavy w ork loads fo r neurological and neoplastic patients. This is a very im portant limitation to a w ider utilization of MRI in osteo-articular pathology; moreover, purchasing and installing a total body equipm ent it is quite demanding. To this well perceived need for the developm ent of dedicated MRI system s for the limbs answered the evolution of technology that made possible to obtain im portant advantages in term s of easiness o f installation, low-cost o f purchase and utilization, and smaller dimensions o f the installation site required. Here we discuss about clinical potentialities of this kind of MRI system, their characteristics, fields of utilization and some operative limits. W e also report the results obtained in four years experience in the developm ent and clinical use o f a 0.2 T permanent magnet weighting 800 kg with a builtin radiofrequency shield and gradients of 10 mT/m with which we have performed from October 1992 to July 1996 7345 MR exam inations o f the limbs on patients, with age ranging from 5 to 83, obtaining results on the whole very satisfying that are com parable to those obtained with equipments with higher theorethical potentialities. Vertically open construction offers certain advantages com pared to horizontally open ones, especially when imaging the spine. Special joint motion devices are needed to provide accurate and reliable examinations. There are devices commercially available, but novel devices are certainly needed fo r certain joints (cervical spine, hip). Examination produced by low-field imagers tend to be so-called sem i-cinematic imaging. In knee, patellofem oral malalignment and tracking abnorm alities with o r without quadriceps loading can be imaged. Also, anterior and posterior cruciate ligament function can be evaluated. The patient can be in prone, supine, o r lateral decubitus position. In shoulder, abduction, adduction, flexion or extension are imaged. Assessment of the supraspinatus tendon fo r evaluation o f impingement syndrome can be made. In ankle, com plete range of motion through abduction, adduction, flexion and extension can be analyzed. Also, ankle stability o r instability and m otion-related impingement may be depicted. In wrist, com plete range of motion through ulnar and radial deviation, flexion and extension can be assessed. Kinematic imaging visualizes dislocations, ligam entous and carpal malalignm ent and motion-related impingement. In cervical and lum bar spine, sagittal anatom ical alignm ent through flexion and extension is seen, and disc protrusions may be better visualized. Evaluation of vertebras during motion after surgical fusion is possible (cervical spine). Also, open configuration enables imaging of cervical spine during flexion, extension, side-bending and rotation; this may be called as a multidirectional access. Kinematic magnetic resonance imaging of the joints is a new and intriguing m ethod to evaluate joint pathology. To determ ine the clinical benefits, judicious clinical trials will be needed. 1101 Clinical applications of a vertical mid-field open MR system G.K. von Schulthess; Zurich/C H One type of "open" MR system resembles a standard MR system with the center third removed, is manufactured by GE and operates at 0.5 T, representing currently the best com prom ise between accessibility and imaging performance. The central 60 cm magnet gap permits patient access fo r two "interventionalists" with the patient parallel to the cylinder axis, but the patient can also be placed between the tw o "doughnut" shaped m agnet parts. As imaging instrum ent the system performs like a standard midfield imager, but the patient can be examined in the vertical position when relevant, i.e. when imaging the spine in sitting patients and in MR-defecography. The more S 219 interesting, albeit difficult use is as interventional system where it provides good patient access as one of the im portant prerequisites, but has similar problem s to be solved as other MR system s claimed to be useful for guiding interventions, i.e. fast high resolution imaging and instrument visibility. Brain biopsies are likely to represent the first use fo r such systems. Biopsies of other lesions poorly seen, but in MR, are also initial targets. Interventions using therm al surgery are the next step. Vascular interventions are very interesting and instrum ents is being developed, but remains the technically most challenging application. Proton-density-weighted, and T2-weighted spin-echo with and without fat suppression, T2*-weighted gradient echo and T1-weighted, fat suppressed sequences after intraarticular injection of a 2 mm olar Gd-DTPA solution were em ployed. After imaging, the specim ens were frozen and either transversely or oblique coronally sectioned into 4 mm thick slices. After anatomical correlation, histologic analysis w as performed. Results: There w as a great variability concerning the attachment of the su perior labrum on to the glenoid rim. It ranged from firm to loose attachments, the latter consisting o f thin connective tissue that stretched easily. It corre sponded to areas of sublabral bands o f intermediate to high signal intensity on MR images. There w as a close association between the labrum and the biceps tendon grossly and histologically. The superior glenohumeral ligament varied in size and strength, and could be best identified on T1-weighted fat suppressed images after administration o f gadolinium. There is a great variability of the attachm ent of the superior labrum on to the glenoid. This has to be taken into consideration when dealing with SLAP-lesions of the shoulder. The superior labrum, superior glenohumeral ligam ent and labral bicipital com plex are best evaluated after intraarticular administration o f gadolinium. Methods and Materials: One-hundred cases of impingem ent syndrome of the shoulder were subm itted to MRI using a standard technique (axial, coronal oblique and sagittal oblique scan planes, SE T1-and T2-WI, GE T2-WI) and a new orientation of SE T1 -W l sagittal-oblique scans. W e used a 0.2 T permanent magnet, a "dedicated" coil, 3 to 5 mm. slice thickness and 2 4 -2 6 cm. FOV. All patients were previously subm itted to plain film. Results: All patients had critical impingem ent points. In 24% of cases, acromioclavicular arthritis induced impingem ent on the supraspinatus ten don and in 10% of cases on the supraspinatus muscle. In 25% of the patients impingement between the coracoacromial ligam ent and the supraspinatus tendon was present. In 2% of the shoulders the acromion had a hooked-like shape. In 39% internal, 8 in the antero-external. The site, the history and other secondary signs allowed us to strongly suspect the nature of the lesion in Hill-Sachs lesions, postero-superior impingement and traumas (small bone detachments misdiagnosed on X-rays were observed in 13 cases). The nature of the lesion was not obtainable in the other cases (antero-internal impingement, arthrosis, insertional entesopathies). Methods: W rists of 7 asym ptom atic volunteers and of 13 patients currently undergoing conservative treatm ent fo r clinically mild to m oderate carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) were examined using a 0.2 T dedicated-extrem ity MRI (DE-MRI) system. Axial T2-TSE and T1-GRE sequences were obtained with and without two different wrist splints. Bowing ratio of the flexor retinaculum, signal intensity and configuration o f the median nerve, interspacing and signal intensity o f the tendons and changes in carpal tunnel dim ensions and carpal arch angle due to splinting were assessed. Results: Chronic tenosynovitis was found in 3 patients with sym ptom s and was not seen in control subjects. The mean palm ar displacem ent of the flexor retinaculum was 2.7 mm and the mean bowing ratio w as 10.9% in the symptomatic patients, averaging 1.1 mm and 4.4% in asym ptom atic volunteers. The median nerve was found to be above the hamate-trapezium axis in controls and under o r in the middle in carpal tunnel patients. The thickness of the flexor retinaculum varies between 1.2 -2.4 mm fo r symptomatic and between 0 .9 -1 .5 mm for controls. Despite the significant changes in the shape of the wrist due to splinting the carpal tunnel cross-sectional area does not show significant changes when using a splint but the position of the median nerve changed in 3 of the symptomatic patients when splinting was used. W ith tw o exceptions when using a splint the carpal arch angle decreased in all examined cases. Conclusion: DE-MRI shows MRI changes in patients with CTS. It can also provide new information related to splint design. Purpose: A prospective study was performed between 1993 and 1994 at Evagelismos Hospital, Athens, to evaluate the accuracy of dynamic CT and ERCP in the diagnosis of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. M ethods and Material: 63 patients underwent dynam ic contrast enchanted CT. The scan w as performed first without contrast and then was repeated during the effusion o f I.V. contrast; 50 ml bolus and then 10 ml prior to each scan. 5 mm slices w ere performed fo r the pancreas and 10 ml fo r the liver. A total of 1 0 0 -2 0 0 ml of non-ioning contrast was injected. 21 patients were also underwent ERCP. S 2 2 2 Material and Methods: Twenty four patients with radiologically (PTC and/or ERCP) diagnosed and pathologically proven pancreatic carcinoma (N = 23), and insulinoma (N = 1 ), were exam ined by CT preoperatively, and IOUS during the operation. CT examinations were obtained through the upper abdomen. Sections were made by use of 5 mm. collimation at 5 mm. contiguous intervals at the level of the pancreas, and IV contrast material w as given in all patients. IOUS were performed during the operation by real-time and 5, 6, 7.5 mHz. sector probe o f Siemens Sonoline SL-1 US machine. Results: Although CT identified the tum or in 17 patients, 23 masses were de tected by IOUS examinations. According to the C T and IOUS results, accuracy ratios of tum or detection were calculated as 70% and 95% respectively. All patients were operated. Nine of them were operable and the other fifteen were found as inoperable. According to the CT examinations sensitivity, spesificity and accuracy ratios of determining vascular invasion and resectability were found as 66% 100%, and 79%, respectively. However these ratios of the IOUS study were found as 86%, 100%, and 90% respectively. Conclusion: IOUS was superior to CT examination in the detection of tum or and evaluation of vascular invasion in the pancreatic tumors. However the results of CT study in the lymph node detection w as more accurate. Both of the modalities did not have false positive results, however false negative results o f C T study w as higher than IOUS. For this reason, the operable lesions of pancreas detected by CT study, must also be evaluated by IOUS.  In 52 patients (Group I: 32 with non-resectable pancreatic cancer, Group II: 20 after palliative resection) local chemotherapy (Mitoxantrone, Folinic Acid, CDDP) was carried out via celiac axis. In 4 pa tients local therapy w as carried out via an implanted Jet-Port-system. In the remaining 48 patients local therapy w as carried out via a tranfem orally appli cateci angiographic catheter located in the celiac axis. Angiographic controls of the catheter position within a cycle (5 days) w ere carried out. C T of the pancreas region was carried out before therapy and at the 3rd and 6th cycle. Results: A total of 210 cycles were performed. In unresected patients (Group I) median survival is 12 months (stage III) com pared to 4.8 months in patients with biliodigestive bypasses (p < 0.006) and 4 months (stage IV) com pared to 2.7 months in untreated patients. The median survival of Group II patients (palliative resected) under adjuvant regional therapy is actually 17.8 months com pared to 9.3 months in a historical control (patients with pancreatic cancer stage II and III, resected). Conclusion: Regional chem otherapy in advanced pancreatic carcinom a is safe, well tolerated and prolongs survival significantly. To correlate the influence of the first-pass effect on 5-Fluoro-Uracil with the therapeutic outcom e in a group of patients suffering from inoper able pancreatic cancer. For 5-FU a response-rate of 10 -2 0 % is com monly accepted. W e w ant to determine non-responders with our non-ivasive spectroscopical technique (median survival-time less than 21 weeks). Materials and Methods: 22 patients (median 60 y), 9 fem ale and 13 male, were treated with combined radio-chemotherapy. Infusion rate was 8 ml/min, concentration 1000 mg/m2 body-surface. 1 2 -1 5 spectra were acquired using a 19 cm diameter, double-resonant surface-coil in a 1.5 T SIEMENS Magnetom SP (TR = 700 ms, NEX = 512, ТА = 6 min 6 sec, dwell-time 250 д з). Results: Evaluation o f the primary catabolite Fluor-0-alanin gives us an estim ator of the first-pass effect. Parametrizing is done using an exponential fit. Initial slope of the curve allow s to group in 'fast' and 'slow ' metabolism. Our initial results exhibit 6 patients with 'fast' metabolism (median survival 20 weeks), 10 patients with 'slow ' metabolism (m edian survival 59 weeks). Conclusion: First-pass effect of the liver is leading effect in com bined radio chemotherapy o f pancreatic cancer. Response rate is higher than expected. 19F MR spectroscopy is a useful tool to inidvidualize therapeutic schemes.  Methods and Results: A total of 104 lesions (% stenosis > 70) were treated by PTC BA between March, 1991 and December, 1995 Purpose: Evaluation of regional myocardial motility, perfusion and edem a in patients 7 -1 4 days after acute myocardial infarction. Methods: 15 patients were examined using a segmented T2-weighted spinecho-technique fo r the assessment of cardiac edem a and 9-fold k-space segmented Cine-FLASH 2D (TR 80; TE 4.4.; flip 20°) fo r regional motility. Subsequently, myocardial perfusion was investigated with a turbo FLASH 2D sequence (TR = 3.3, TE = 2.0; flip angle 12°) measuring first pass and late contrast enhancement in areas of reduced regional motility after injection of 0. The selection was performed using the "ARVD criteria" proposed by the "ARVD task force". W e considered the evidence of fatty myocardium replacement, dilatation of the right ventricle and regional diskinetic wall function. We observed an increasing possibility o f diagnosing ARVD by com bining MRI findings with the ARVD criteria proposed. Moreover, the diagnosis obtained using the imaging findings alone was inferior to the com prehensive analysis. W e also observed coincidence of signs during the follow-up. We believe that MRI is extremely useful in the study of pa tients with suspected ARVD. W e suggest to make a diagnosis by performing an analysis of coexistence of multiple signs (dilatation, fat substitution and diskinetic areas) and also using clinical and non-imaging instrumental data. In nine cardiovascular patients graded as inoperable we performed ten examinations following indirect myocardial revascularisation. These ex am inations were a helical CT, an angiogram and a com bination o f both with intraarterial contrast injection during the Cat-scan. Beside the transversal CT-images we used planar and 3-D reconstructions for evaluation. Results: In the helical-CT group (3 patients) it was possible to grade the muscular atrophy which appears always. There was no significant density uptake nor in the sceletal muscle neither in the myocardium. In another nine patients there was a high density uptake in the muscle transplant after superselective intraarterial contrast injection. In tw o patients small vascular connections from the sceletal muscle to the myocardium could be found as well as a little density uptake in the myocardium. There w as no stenosis o f the arterial branch seen in the angiogram. Conclusion: Helical angio-CT shows good results in the evaluation of vital function following indirect myocardial revascularisation so that this method must be regarded as an alternative treatm ent in extensive cardiovascular disease. The com bination o f angiogram m and spiral-CT is superior to iv. spiral-CT and seems to be the method of choice in the anatom ical and functional imaging in so treated patients. Results: 45/55 patients demonstrated normal findings of the cochlea and the canalis sem icirularis post., ant., and lat. and the facial, cochlea, Results were com pared fo r lesion detection, conspicuity and extent. Results: Abnormalities were equally detected with both sequences in 35 children. In 32% of the cases, more lesions in areas adjacent to CSF were seen with flair sequence and in the remaining 68%, equal numbers were seen. Conspicuity w as better with flair sequences in 32%, equal in 56% and worse in 12% (cystic lesions). Conclusion: FLAIR appears superior to conventional T2-weighted sequence for detection o f brain lesion in children. By virtue of its heavily T2-weighted contrast with suppression of cerebrospinal fluid signal, flair sequence signifi cantly improves detection of periventricular and cortico-subcortical lesions in children. 1145 Fast-Flair sequence, 3. T1-weighted sequence after iv-contrast. 4 radiologists independently rated signal-intensity, inhomogeneity, differentiation tumor-brain, tum or-edem a and brain-edema, motion and other artifacts. D ata analysis was realized for all patients and separately fo r different subgroups. Results: Using Fast-Flair, generally the tum or appeared more hyperintense and more hom ogenous than in T2, the dem arcation tum or-brain, tumor-edema and brain-edem a was better than in T2 but not as good as in T1. Artifacts rarely interfered with the evaluation of Fast-Flair-images. Astrocytomas and tum ors with poor contrast-enhancement had the highest signal-intensity and the best demarcation against brain and against edem a using Fast-Flair which were even better than in T 1 . The Fast-Flair sequence is a valuable tool for the diagnosis and the differentiation of brain tumors. Especially astrocytom as and tumors without contrast-enhancem ent are best depicted using Flair. Due to its imaging characteristics, Fast-Flair com pletes T2. Methods and Materials: Both sequences were performed in 44 HIV-seropositive patients using a 1.0 T and 1.5 T MR system. Number, size, location, and con spicuity of the lesions, were evaluated by two independent observers. Contrast ratios (CR) between lesions and normal brain/CSF, as well as contrast to noise ratios (CNR) were calculated. Results: FLAIR is found to be significantly superior to T2-TSE in detection of small lesions, and lesions located in cortical/subcortical regions and deep white matter. To evaluate fast fluid-attenuated inversion-recovery (FLAIR) tech nique fo r imaging intraaxial brain tum ors and to com pare this method with conventional T2-and PD-weighted turbo spin echo. Patients and Methods: Twenty patients with intraaxial brain tum ors were studied with MRI, including turbo-Flair and conventional T2-and proton density (PD)-weighted turbo spin echo. Four quantitative and three qualitative criteria were used. The quantitative criteria were lesion to white matter contrast, lesion to white matter contrast to noise, lesion to CSF contrast and lesion to CSF contrast to noise. The qualitative criteria were lesion conspicuity, lesion detectability and image artifact, evaluated in a multireader analysis. Results: Turbo-FLAIR images had a significantly higher lesion to white-matter contrast and a significantly better lesion to CSF contrast com pared to T2 and PD images. The lesion conspicuity was in 80% o f the patients better with FLAIR than with T2 o r PD images. In 5 patients FLAIR images provided better definition between edem a and tumor. In another tw o patients additional lesion could be detected. Image artifacts were present in 60% o f the FLAIR images, but image interpretation w as disturbed in one patient only (5%). Conclusion: Turbo FLAIR is superior to proton density and T2 weighted im ages in the detection and delineation of intraaxial brain tumors. The sequence should be included into the image protocol in the diagnosis and management of intraaxial brain tumors. 1150 MR cisternography using a three-dim ensional half-Fourier single-shot fast spin-echo sequence K. Tsuchiya, S. Inaoka, Y. Mizutani, J. Hachiya, Y. Kassai; Tokyo/J Purpose: To assess the usefulness o f MR cisternography using a three-dim en sional (3D) half-Fourier single-shot fast spin-echo (FastASE; fast advanced spin-echo) sequence in dem onstrating the cranial nerves. Methods and Materials: W e evaluated MR cisternogram s obtained using the 3D FastASE sequence in 5 volunteers (4 men and 1 woman; age range, 2 5 -3 6 years) and in 13 patients (5 men and 13 women; age range, 2 0 -7 9 years). The MR cisternograms were obtained on a 0. Material and Methods: Hippocampal and brain volum es were measured com puterized in 50 children (1 month to 15 years, mean: 5.7 years) without epilepsy, using a spoiled FLASH 3D (slice thickness: 0 .9 -1 .7 mm) and T2 weighted sequence. Data analysis included inter-and intraobserver variability as well as calculation of the coefficient of error. Hippocampal volum e was normalized to a total brain volume of 1000 cm3. Results: Intraobserver variability was 1.4% and interobserver variability 3.2%. A significant mean difference in volum e (p < 0.0001) does exist between the right and left hippocampus, with the right being larger by 0.14 cm3. In children older than five years, hippocampal volum e correlated with total brain volume with a regression coefficient o f 0.81. Normalized hippocam pal volume revealed a mean value of 1.7 cm3 and a standard deviation of 0.13 cm 3 Under five years, ratio between hippocampal and brain volum e follow s a non linear function. In eight patients with histologically confirm ed carcinoma of the urinary bladder and one patient with chronic cystitis, a helical C T scan with double detector technology was carried out pre-operatively. A native scan was first performed, followed by an examination in the early contrast medium enhanced phase. After adequate contrasting of the urinary bladder (30 minutes latency), further images were acquired. These data were transferred to a separate graphic com puter workstation and reconstructed. The results were then compared with the cystoscopic and pathohistologic findings. Results: All tum ors of the urinary bladder identified at fiberoptic cystoscopy were also visualized with virtual cystoscopy. The best reconstruction results were obtained from data acquired after the 30-m inute latency period. The rhabdosphincter o f the male urethra is an omega-shaped loop of striated muscle fibers that surrounds the membranous urethra at its lateral and anterior aspects. In a com bined anatom ic-sonographic study we wanted to define sonom orphologic criteria of this muscle. Methods and Materials: After sonographic examination histological sections w ere com pared to the images obtained by m eans of three-dimensional transrectal and transurethral ultrasound in 7 anatomical specimens. Then, in a total of 52 patients the rhabdosphincter o f the male urethra was investi gated by m eans of these new imaging techniques and urodynamics. 40 of these patients were fully continent after radical prostatectomy and served as control group; 12 patients presented with urinary stress incontinence after transurethral resection of the prostate o r radical prostatectomy. The anatom ic arrangement and the contractions of the rhabdosphincterloop could be clearly visualized in three-dimensional transrectal and transurethral ultrasound; during contraction the rhabdosphincter retracts the urethra, pulling it tow ards the rectum. W e were able to detect defects and postoperative scarrings in 7 o f the patients with postoperative urinary stress incontinence. 3 patients showed thinning in one part of the muscle and 2 patients had com plete atrophies o f the rhabdosphincter; in these patients no contractions of the rhabdosphincter could be seen. Measurement of urethral pressure pro files revealed that urethral closure pressures were markedly decreased in the group of incontinent patients. Conclusion: Our study shows that the rhabdosphincter o f the male urethra can be visualized by means of transurethral and three-dimensional transrectal ultrasound. The sonographic pathom orphologic findings of postoperative uri nary stress incontinence correlate well with the clinical symptoms as well as with the urodynam ic findings. Six additional posterior biopsies were also performed in every patient, together with 4 anterior biopsies in 142 patients with normal DRE and prostate weight above 40 g. Results: Biopsies w ere positive in 122 patients (37%). CD w as positive in 115 patients and negative in 212 Positive biopsy rate (PBR) of directed biopsies was 67% in patients with a positive CD and 21 % in patients with a negative CD (p < 0.001). These rates fell to 53 and 13% respectively when PSA level was between 4 and 10 ng/ml. Cancers with a negative CD showed a significant (p < 0.001) low er Gleason score (5.5 ± 0.9) than that o f CDUS+ cancers (6.5 ± 1.1.). Fourteen cancers were diagnosed by only anterior positive biopsies. All of them had a negative CD and a PSA level above 10 ng/ml. Conclusion: In patients with negative CD, normal DRE and PSA level between 4 and 10 ng/ml, deferm ent of biopsy can be advocated. Anterior biopsies are only useful in patients with a PSA level above 10 ng/ml and a negative CD. 1157 Tubular ectasia o f the sem iniferous tubules of the rete testis is a rare benign lesion, only recently described. The sonographic appearance of this condition is typical and allows to distinguish it from cystic tum ors and inflammatory lesions of the testicle. The lesion has been observed in 17 patients by ultrasonoghraphic scrotal examination. Nobody had biopsy o r histologic proof of tubular ectasia. At presentation all o f the men were more than 50 years old. The sonography was performed with a 7.5 Mhz frequency linear probe. Results: Ectasia of the rete testis was unilateral in 9 and bilateral in 8 patients. It was always localized in the mediastinum testis and was associated to spermatocele in 7 cases and to testicular cysts in 5. On sonogram s the lesion showed numerous tubular or rounded anechoic structures, mimicking a hypoechoic mass. In five men with sonographic follow-up of 6-21 months there has been observed no change in size and structure of the testicular lesion. Conclusion: Tubular ectasia of rete testis shares several sonographic features with testicular cysts and spermatocele and probably they have the same mechanism o f formation. This benign condition can be distinguished from testicular tum ors or non neoplastic lesions on the basis of the sonographic findings and its recognition is im portant to avoid unnecessary surgery. Material and Methods: 7 patients (4 women, 3 men) aged 3 6 -7 6 year-old (m = 47) were referred because o f vomiting, nausea, and w eight loss due to stenosis of the duodenum (6) or the stomach (1). Stenoses were due to pancreatic (4) or ovarian carcinom a (3). One to three W allstents were placed exclusively under fluoroscopic guidance. Six patients w ere treated under nasogastric approach and one under percutaneous transgastric access. Results: All stents were deployed, but shortening of the stent in one patient during its complete expansion the day after the procedure led to placem ent of an additionnai stent. Four patients continue to have a normal food intake 1 -1 0 months after stent placement. Two patients need fractionated meals (stenose located on stmomach in one, and on first duodenum in the other). One patient did not experience any improvement because of a jejunal stenosis, revealed after stenting. The clinical utility o f referring fo r ultrasonography fo r general practitioners (GPs) was investigated. W hy are the exam inations requested? W hat is the gain? Did it influence on treatment? W hat was the quality of information and re port? Materials and Methods: 438 patients referred from municipality GPs. C om pliance more than 80%. Registration schemes were filled in at referral and when receiving reports. Questions: reason for referral, evaluation of quality, clinical effects of reports. The entire material w as reviewed by one GP and one radiologist, and concensus reached. A randomised part was reviewed by another GP and another radiologist, independent of each other. To assess whether color Doppler US allows differential diagnosis between accessory spleens and autotransplanted splenic tissue. Methods and Materials: Ten consecutive normal subjects with accessory spleen and 15 postsplenectom y patients underwent color-Doppler-US. Scintig raphy (99mTc-sulphur colloid) w as performed in 9/15 postsplenectom y patients who underwent reimplantation of splenic tissue in an om ental pouch. The shape of accessory spleens and of autotransplanted tissue was assessed by measuring the largest longitudinal (L) and smallest transverse (T) diameters on the same US scan and by calculating the L/T ratio. Pulsed Doppler analysis was performed on every persistent color signal. Results: eleven implants and a focus of splenosis were detected in 7/9 postsplenectom y patients with reimplantation. Two hypertrophied accessory spleens were found in 2/6 postsplenectom y patients without reimplantation. Accessory spleens had smooth margins and L/T ratio close to 1 (1.15 ± 0.09) whereas splenic implants were slightly lobulated and had a significantly higher (p < 0.001) U T ratio (1.85 ± 0.44). Accessory spleens showed a vascular hilum w hereas 9/11 inplants had more than 1 peripheral vessel. In the postsplenectom y patients the splenic nature of equiv ocal abdominal nodules can be assessed using radionuclide studies. Color-Doppler-US allow s differentiation between accessory spleens and autotrans plants.  We will present tw o cases with ICA aplasia w ho were brought to the emergency room following trauma. During their neurologic w ork up, lack of flow is seen in one of the ICAs in each case. Different diagnostic possibilities were entertained including dissection due to anteceding trauma. This prompted intravenous anticoagulation and carotid angiogram in one case. In the literature, the association of ICA aplasia with carotid canal absence in the temporal bone has been reported. It is yet to be determ ined which is the causative factor. Based on the same principle, in ou r cases, diagnosis was made with thin axial CT cuts by utilizing bone windows. Heparin therapy was discontinued immediately after this in the above mentioned case. Material and Methods: 65 consecutive patients with an audiologically con firmed unilateral sensorineural hearing loss were included in the study. MRexaminations were performed on a 0.5 T scanner. First the patients underwent Axial SE PD T2-W and sagittal SE T1W images of the whole brain in order to exclude retrocochlear lesions. SE T1W axial and coronal images of the petrous bones were obtained before and after administration of GD-DTPA Results: The most common finding was multiple high-signal intensity lesions located in the white matter of the brain, found in 8 patients. They were attributed to microvascular leukoencephalopathy in 6 patients and demyelinating disease in 2 patients. In another patient with docum ented Langerhans cell histiocytosis a mass like lesion w as demonstrated in the pontine region. Enhancement of the membranous labyrinth was observed only on post-Gd im ages in tw o patients with a cochlear schwannom a and relapsing polychondritis respectively. Conclusion: W e believe the use of GD-DTPA increases the capability of MR imaging for detecting lesions along the acoustic pathway especially those located in the membranous labyrinths and lACs and we would suggest that in patients with complex presentations G-d enhanced MR images should always be obtained. and T 1 w. 3D MP-RAGE (voxel size 1.0 x 0.9 x 0.9 mm3) sequences with and without contrast medium. Results: C ontrast enhanced 3D M P-RAGE: Pathological enhancement was found in the follow ing cases: Schwannom a of the cerebellopontine angle and/or internal auditory canal (12), labyrinthine Schwannoma (3), acute labyrinthitis (7), neuritis o f the facial nerve (5), posterior fossa lymphoma (1) and meatal meningeoma (1). 3D CISS: Filling defects were found in the following cases: Schwannoma (15), lymphoma (1), meningeoma (1), (partial) cochlear fibrosis (8), (partial) fibrosis of the vestibule and semicircular canals (2) and scar in the internal auditory canal (2). An enlarged endolymphatic duct and sac was found in 1 patient with Meniere's disease. Conclusion: Unenhanced and contrast enhanced 3D MP-RAGE and 3D CISS are com plem entary MR imaging modalities in order to detect tumours, inflam matory and vascular lesions. We prefer T 1 weighted 3D sequences to T 1 weighted 2D sequences because of the multiplanar reconstruction possibilities o f the former. 1188 The high jugular bulb, a pitfall fo r the acoustic neuromas surgeon K. Wadin; Uppsala/S Very large acoustic neuroma can now be removed by the translabyrinthine surgical technique, which has reduced the morbidity and preserves the facial nerve function. This technique is suitable also in old patients with "giant tum ours" . The very large tum ours over 4 cm may offer a special challenge for the surgical team. A high jugular bulb, a narrow tem poral bone with a anteriorly positioned sigm oid sinus makes surgery more difficult. In the present study the anatomic variations in these param eters are demonstrated using plastic moulding, MRI and CT. Even though peroperative surgical decompression of a high jugular bulb is most often possible, a high bulb m ay be an indication fo r early surgery before the tum or has reached too large size.  Cochlear implantation with an electronic electrode array which provides stimulation via the auditory nerve has become a standard treatm ent fo r profound and total deafness. Post operative radiography to confirm satisfactory intra-cochlear electrode placem ent is essential. It enables evaluation of the num ber of electrodes which have been inserted and detects possible complications. We also assessed the relative radiation dose of the digital technique, conventional radiography and CT scanning.  In 23 patients a correct inserted electrode was found, while in 10 patients com plications concerning the electrode (bending of the electrode outside the contacts n = 2, one or more contacts outside the cochlea n = 7, electrode in the vestibulum n = 1) were noticed. An excellent correlation was found between the radiological and surgical results of the insertion depth (r = 0.98). A significant difference of auditory performance w as found between patients with an insertion of 21 mm or less and those with a deeper insertion (p < 0.006). Conclusion: Digital radiographs in the modified Stenver's projection allow a reliable postoperative assessment of the Combi 40 device and an exact evaluation o f the insertion depth. Patients with deeply inserted electrodes showed a significantly better auditory performance than those with a lesser deep insertion. Beside photon absorption coherent and incoherent object scatter are the major attenuation com ponents of X-rays transmitted through an object slice. Scattered photons reaching the detector array increase the detected signal and produce image artifacts as "cupping" effects in large objects and dark bands between high attenuating regions. The artifact am plitudes increase with scanned volume or slice width. Object scatter can be reduced significantly in 3rd generation CT systems by collimating the detector elem ents but a correction can still improve image quality. For 4th generation geometry only poor collimation is possible and a numeric correction necessary. This paper presents a correction algorithm for 3rd and 4th generation CT geometry requiring low com putation effort which allows flexible application to different body regions by simple parameter adjustments. The calculation of object scatter intensity within the scanned projections is based on a convolution o f the weighted and windowed projection data with a spatially invariant "blurring" function. The scatter intensities are subtracted from the scanned intensity data. The "blurring" function is approxim ated from the angular shape of coherent and incoherent differential scatter cross sections and depends on the scanner's geometry and collimation. Several examples of phantom and medical objects scanned with 3rd and 4th generation CT system s are discussed. In 3rd generation scans scatter artifacts are efficiently corrected. More extensive scatter artifacts caused by less effective collimation are also compensated. For 4th generation geometry with poor collimation object scatter artifacts are significantly reduced. 1193 Minute reconstruction algorithm free from nonlinear partial volume artifacts in X-ray CT N. Sato, M. Gono, S. Azemoto, S. Miura; Tokyo/J Purpose: Dark streaks connecting the petrous bones are often observed in cranial transverse section CT images, even after applying tw o path beam hardening corrections (IBO). This artifact is classically known as nonlinear partial volume effect. Several m ethods have been tried to reduce these artifacts fo r many years with limited success. The purpose of our study is to propose a minute reconstruction algorithm using helical scan data that can provide images free from partial volum e artifacts. The principle of this new algorithm is to detect dis continuous points of tw o different objects in the slice of interest, and to correct projection errors of partial volume by using information of longitudinal variation from the helical scan data set. The correction m ethod was evaluated on a partial volume phantom and clinical 5 mm slice data. Results: Partial volume phantom was scanned so as to include discrete dis continuous points in the scan plane. W hen minute reconstruction algorithm was applied, dark streak artifacts which can be seen on the normal reconstruc tion images were removed. Also significant reduction o f dark streak artifacts in petrous bones were observed on clinical 5 mm slice data. The new correction algorithm can provide artifact-free images o f posterior fossa with w ider slice thickness by using helical scan, which can provide efficient head study in X-ray CT. We studied the idea to reconstruct images in arbitrary planes using section thicknesses comparable to conventional CT. We performed phantom studies to m easure image noise and spatial resolution. Spiral scans were obtained with 1 mm collimation, pitch 2, 0.5 mm reconstruction increment. Thick-section multiplanar reform ats from the spiral CT data set were reconstructed in the axial, coronal and sagittal plane (MPR width: 1 -7 mm) and were com pared to 1 -7 mm thick conventional axial CT sections (identical mAs/rotation). Results: An axial MPR (7 mm) reduced image noise by > 60% as com pared to the original axial 1 mm -section. W ith increasing section thickness, image noise decreased faster in conventional axial CT sections than in axial reform ats of com parable width. Image noise in coronal or sagittal reform ats was similar to that in conventional axial sections of identical thickness. W ith MPR, spatial resolution was alm ost identical in all three planes (0.6 mm axial vs. 0.8 mm coronal/sagittal). Conclusions: Thin-section CT with thick-section multiplanar reformats provide the basis for multiplanar imaging with noise levels only slightly above those of conventional C T and near isotropic resolution. To test the perform ance of spiral versus axial CT regarding highcontrast resolution fo r various doses, pitch factors and section thickness in-plane and along the z-axis. A phantom with hole patterns arranged in the x-y-(hole size between 0.5 and 4 mm) and the x-z-plane (hole size between 0.8 and 6 mm) was scanned within an oval shaped plexiglas body phantom. MAs values were varied between 30 and 300, pitch factors between 1 and 2 and section thickness between 1.5 and 8 mm. To test z-plane resolution overlapping reconstructions with 2 images per section thickness were made and used fo r calculating images in the x-z-plane. Two radiologists blinded to the protocols evaluated delineation of different-sized holes. Results: Regarding in-plane delineation of holes there was no difference between axial and spiral scanning as well as for various mAs values, pitches and section thickness. Z-plane resolution was only slightly affected by pitch, but independent of mAs. Thin sections clearly improved z-axis resolution. In-plane high-contrast resolution in spiral C T is independent of radiation dose, pitch and section thickness. Z-axis resolution, however, clearly depends on section thickness. 1198 Purpose: Evaluation of dose reduction using "Smart Scan" R in 300 helical CTs. M aterials and Methods: "Smart Scan"R allows a dynamical adaptation of tube current due to local absorption o f the patient. The degree of dose reduction mainly depends on the geom etry o f the patient, especially on the index "vertical/transverse" diameter. To get clinical datas the change of tube current in patient studies of the thorax (n = 100), abdomen (n = 100) and pelvis (n = 100) w as evaluated. The mean of tube current reduction was 10.5% in the pelvis, 7% in the thorax and 5.7% in the abdomen com pared to standard protocoils. Single patients showed a reduction up to 28%. Conclusion: Software triggered dose reduction with "Smart Scan"R can achieve a significant decrease of tube current, particularly in the thorax and pelvis. Other means of imaging are useful: 1) CT, 2) Bone scintigraphy, 3) MRI. In the case of osteoporosis due to any cause the lesions are normally located on the pelvic bone or upper part of the femur. These lesions must be distinguishable from secondary fractures which occur on focal bone destructive lesions and from tum or or infections which can display sim ilar patterns. Their treatment is the suppression of stress such as: 1) Repeated micro-traumatisms, 2) Immobilisation and intelligent modification o f movement. The frequency of these fractures explains that it is a very common occurrence and its possibility and pattern must always be kept in mind, when confronted with proliferative bone lesions. changed with introduction of ultrasound, MRI and, to a lesser extent, CT. It is now possible with each technique to differentiate partial from com plete tears and, with ultrasound and MRI, to localise the retracted tendon ends. It is also possible to distinguish inflammatory conditions affecting the lining of the tendon (tenosynovitis) from degeneration o f the tendon substance. W ith whichever technique is preferred it is im portant to appreciate the spectrum of normal appearances. In the sporting context the influence of prom pt and accurate diagnosis on management and training schedules is self-evident. 1206 Synovial pathology C. Paletti; Turin/I Synovial structures present in synovial joint, bursae mucosae and tendon sheats, dam aged as a result from overuse injures are becoming more common in com petitive and active athletes. They may be the effect of acute traumatic events o r o f repeated microscopic lesions. The dem ands and requirements of both training and competition, in fact, make it difficult to be com petitive even with minor injures. For com petitive athletes these injures represent a great problem that in many cases has forced them to retire early. It is very im portant therefore that these clinical problem s are not ignored and recognised early. W hen a diagnosis is made correctly and in due time, sensible principles of treatm ent can be applied. O ur experience and that of many others authors has demonstrated that this is w hat the new imaging diagnostic m ethods are able to offer. The purpose is an overview of synovial joints, bursae and tendons overuse dam ages diagnosed in com petitive and amatorial athletes, using multiple radiological modalities such conventional radiography, ultrasound, C T and MRI. ). C T results indicate a BR's formation with repeated anatom ic form and structure at an osteotomie place of a bone. Irregular BR's developm ent is characterized by significant liming sizes, intensification of their density, presence of a definite BR "contraction" and its contour pressing. Conclusion: Taking into account lack o f statistically true differences on other C T signs and in normal X-ray picture (absence of "contraction"), C T doesn't present any com plem entary information and shouldn't be performed. CT signs as significant liming sizes, intensification of their density, presence of a definite regenerate "contraction" and its contour pressing are bad prognostic signs requiring correction in distraction. Methods and Materials: MR imaging of the wrist was performed in eight patients with tuberculous arthritis. Spin-echo images (T1-, T2-and protondensity weighted) were obtained in axial, sagittal and coronal planes. T1weighted axial images were obtained before and after the intravenous injection o f Gd-DTPA. All patient had a surgical biopsy and obtained histopathologic diagnosis. W e divided them into tw o groups of the patients as with diffuse (both the flexor and the extensor tendon group involved) and focal (one of the flexor or the extensor tendon group involved) involvement. Results: All patients presented with mass, and had pain and neurologic sym ptom s around wrist. Four out of five patients with nerve compression symptom had carpal tunnel syndrome. MRI showed diffuse (n = 5) and focal (n = 3) synovial hypertrophy. Four cases of the diffuse involvement had diffuse bone m arrow involvement. Four patients showed ring enhancement on post enhanced T 1 -w eighted images w hich turn out to be abscess. No joint fluid was seen in any o f the patients. Abscess wall w as well delineated with linear hom ogeneous high signal intensity of uniform thickness on post-contrast study. O ther findings were focal bone erosion (n = 3), joint space narrowing (n = 2) and subchondral bone destruction (n = 2) on MR images. Patients (n = 4) who had abscess (n = 4) treated with surgical debriment, other patients (n = 4) who had synovial hypertrophy with no abscess had medical treatment. Conclusions: MR imaging of the tuberculous wrist dem onstrate well the synovial hypertrophy, abscess formation, focal bone erosion and nerve com pression which will help make treatm ent planning on these patients. The aim of this study was to quantitatively examine the relative sensitivity and specifity of conventional X-rays in com parison with scintigraphy in the diagnostics of osteomyelitis (OM). Material and Methods: 115 patients with arterial obstructive disease in stage Fontaine IV, diabetes mellitus and/or vasculitis of the angiological clinic were referred fo r exam inations of peripheral skeletal parts (hands, lower limbs, ankle joints and feet). 115 patients underw ent 126 X-ray examinations and bone scans. The time between the two exam inations in one patient was 2 -1 0 days so that the results could be com pared directly. The results of these examinations were all checked by either a radiological follow-up examination and/or a leukocyte scintigraphy. The radiological criteria fo r OM included local osteopenia, periostal reaction, bone destruction and sclerosis surrounding a necrosis. The scintigraphic standard for OM w as an enhancement during the 3 phases of the bone scan. The sensitivity of the the X-rays w as 47% with a specifity 91%, whereas the sensitivity and specifity of the bone scans were 78% for both values. The positive predictive values (PPV) o f the X-rays and the bone scans were 87.5% and 85% , respectively, w hereas the negative predictive values (NPV) varied between 80% for the X-rays and 97% fo r the bone scans. Conclusion: OM can be diagnosed with relatively inexpensive methods such as X-ray and 3-phase scintigraphy. Only in unclear cases the diagnostics should be supplemented by leukocyte scintigraphy, com puter or magnetic resonance tomography. 14:40 To evaluate high-resolution and power Doppler US in the study of synovial membrane in patients with rheumatic diseases o f the wrist. Methods and Materials: 21 patients with active artrhitis, including rheumatoid arthritis (n = 10), juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (n = 1), psoriatic artrhritis (n = 4), Crohn arthritis (n = 4) and Reiter syndrome (n = 2) underwent US and power Doppler examination of the wrist by means o f 1 0 -1 3 MHz high-resolution probes performing Doppler at 6.5 MHz. C olor gain settings were adapted for maximum sensibility avoiding background noise. 12 patients were evaluated in remission phase after therapy. Results: High-resolution US always assessed the extent of synovial pannus in the dorsal aspect of the wrist. Power Doppler always detected a hipervascular pattern in the synovial pannus. Spectral analysis showed arterial waveform s with resistive index ranging from 0.68 to 0.74 (mean value 0.72); venous flow was detected in 18 patients. In the remission phase there was a reduction of the hypervascular pattern in 10 patients. Conclusion: High-resolution US proved to be able to identify the synovial pannus o f the wrist in patients with rheumatic diseases. Pow er D oppler can detect the synovial vascular changes in the acute and remission phase. From our preliminary report we suggest power-Doppler as a useful tool in clinical assessment of the disease. S241 multicentric recurrences were merely diagnosed by MR-mammography. Conclusion: MR-mammography is the method with the highest accuracy in the diagnosis of local recurrences and multicentricity during follow-up of breast cancer patients. 1223 New technique for MR-guided preoperative lesion localization of the breast M. Müller-Schimpfle, P. Stoll, W. Stern, P.E. Huppert, C.D. Claussen; Tübingen/D Purpose: To test a newly designed device fo r exact MR-guided localization of breast lesions and to test a new marking technique using a non-displacable metal coil. Methods and Materials: The exam inations were performed on a 1.0 T im ager (Siemens, Erlangen/G), using a sagittally oriented oval spine coil. The MR compatible localization device which was constructed in our institution consisted of a perforated plate with 2 mm bore holes in 2 mm distance. The patient is examined in prone position. For localization o f lesions close to the thoracic wall the plate can be angulated. The plate contained an " M"-shaped tube filled with oil. This enabled exact localization of the lesion in relation to the bore holes. After needle placement (19.5 G, MR com patible, Cook, Münchengladbach/G) through a bushing (BIP, Türkenfeld/G), the marking coil (5 mm, Cook, M ünchengladbach/G) was placed through the needle next to or into the lesion. Then a suspension of charcoal, Gd-DTPA, and w ater was injected (1 ml). The protocol was approved by the local ethical committee. Suspicious lesions that could be visualized only by MR were preoperatively localized and marked in five patients. Specimen radiography w as performed. One patient could not be exam ined due to obesity. Results: The lesion size ranged from 0.5 to 3.5 cm (median 1.2 cm). The marking coils were exactly placed, w hereas the suspension showed a variable distribution. Three benign lesions (intraductal hyperplasia 2 x , radial scar 1 x ) and 2 malignant lesions (DCIS and ductal invasive cancer) were found. Angulation of the plate was beneficial in tw o cases. Conclusion: Using the newly designed add-on device, exact MR-guided localization of breast lesions is leasable, independent of their location in the breast. The construction of an additional MR coil is not necessary. The excision of the lesion is proven by the concom itant excision of the marking coil that cannot be displaced after its placement. Purpose: A breast biopsy device is needed for: 1) the necessary preoperative marking of MR-detected lesions fo r surgeons and pathologists; 2) percuta neous biopsy for minimal invasive differentiation of MR-detected indeterminate lesions. The device consists o f a patient support with an integrated compression device, an aiming device, and a RF coil. The patient is moved into and out of the magnet on the support. The device allow s lateral access to the patient's breast. The new design has been optim ized based on the results o f a multicenter trial on 74 patients with first generation biopsy coil. It allows access to the com plete breast tissue, needle insertion parallel to the chest wall, excellent immobilisation ot the breast tissue, high accuracy, faciliated handling, possibility of com puter assisted autom ated needle guidance. Results o f the clinical application at the University of Halle will be reported. The typical procedure includes: patient positioning, moderate breast com pression, MR scan for lesion detection, adjustment of the aiming device, insertion of a coaxial needle system, imaging to verify the correct needle position, biopsy, final imaging verification. The new device offers significant improvem ent com pared to previous designs.  In six patients, w e performed a contrast enhanced (i.v. 0.2 mmol Gd-DTPA/kg b.w.) breast MRI on a 1.0 Tesla system (Magnetom Impact, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) using a body coil and a GRE 3D se quence. In prone position, the patients were placed in a custom ized positioning device offering lateral access to the breast. The localizations were done with a MRI-compatible wire. In addition, all patients underwent the sam e imaging protocol using a dedicated breast coil (without localization). The localisation results were correlated to pathologic findings. Results: There w as no difference in lesion detection (lesion size: 0.5 to 1.2 cm) using the body coil or the dedicated breast coil. In all cases the localisation was successful. Conclusion: In our preliminary experience, detection o f breast lesions and wire-localisation of the lesion by MRI is efficient and reliable using a nondedicated body coil.  In a prospective study 42 fem ale patients with sus pected cancer of the breast were exam ined with a T2-weighted fat-suppressed turbo-spinecho sequence (T2-SPIR) and a T1-weighted fat-suppressed spinecho sequence after Gd-DTPA (T1-Gd-SPIR). Images were com pared with subtraction images o f dynamic T 1 -weighted 3D-gradientecho series (3D-Gdsub) and T2-weighted turbo-spinecho images (T2-tSE), w hich represent the standard protocol fo r breast MRI in our department. A lesion by lesion analysis was performed by tw o readers in com parison to the histopathologic findings. Results Diagnostic sensitivity, specificity and accuracy were highest in T1-Gd-SPIR images (85%; 84%; 80%) followed by 3D-G d-sub im ages (77% ; 64%; 70%). In T2-SPIR images small lesions were covered by normal glandular tissue (Sensitivity 54%, Specificity 90%, Accuracy 73%; p < 0.001) and cysts and tum ors could not be differentiated. Conclusion T 1 -Gd-SPIR are very helpful in the assessment of breast cancer and may replace dynamic contrast-enhanced subtraction MR imaging (3D-Gd-Sub) in the future as the imaging method of choice. 1228 Dynamic im aging in breast MRI: Com parison of enhancem ent with and without the keyhole method C. Kutschker, H. Kooijman, B. Allgayer; Erlangen/D Purpose: The keyhole method allows higher tem poral resolution by acquiring reduced к -space data o f the post contrast images. The study aim w as to evaluate whether 3D-Keyhole imaging shows identical enhancem ent in breast lesions com pared to normal imaging. M aterials and Methods: Ten patients with 19 lesions were studied (1.5 T, Gyroscan ACS-II, Philips). A 3D-GRE-sequence w as performed before and S 243 4 tim es after bolus Gd-DTPA administration (0.2 mmol/kg). 50 coronal slices (2.5 mm, 256 x 225 matrix) were acquired and reconstructed. In an additional keyhole reconstruction the centre 40% of к -space of the post contrast images was com bined with the outer part of к-space of the pre contrast scan. Using identical ROI's, tim e-intensity curves of both reconstructions were compared. Results: Signal values of the tim e-intensity curves of 18 lesions (17 carcinoma, 1 fibroadenom a, max. diam eter 5.6 to 37.5 mm, mean 14.3 mm) differed less than 3.5%. One small lesion (a vessel, 2.5 mm) showed an 11% lower enhancem ent in the keyhole reconstruction. Conclusion: We demonstrated that all relevant lesions showed comparable enhancem ent without and with keyhole. The latter offers potential higher tem poral resolution. W e consider keyhole imaging to be the most appropriate method in breast MRI. The tem poral resolution w as 1 8 -3 0 seconds with continous scanning for 10 minutes. Dynam ic contrast-enhanced images were transferred to a Sun Sparc station and evaluated with color coding software. A color coding scala from blue to red was introduced according to enhancement percentage of tissues as a function of time with red regions indicating a rapid uptake of the contrast agent. C olor coded images were evaluated by using ROI analysis and time-intensity curves were obtained. Results: With color coding software, regions or lesions showing pathological contrast enhancem ent were identified easily and quantitatively. Malign lesions usually displayed focal red regions. W hile some of the benign lesions showed color values not different than normal breast tissues, some demonstrated more intense coloring than normal breast. Conclusion: Color coding, in dynam ic contrast-enhanced with no fat satura tion T1-weighted 2D FMSPGR sequences of whole breast with a reasonable temporal resolution, gives the advantage to dem onstrate pathologic contrast enhancement by obviating the observer variability associated with ROI analy sis. Patients and Methods: The study com prised 8 patients with gastric NHL (6 high-grade and 2 low-grade, one of the MALT type) and a control group of 7 patients (5 patients with NHL without clinical signs of gastric involvement, 1 patient with NHL and benign gastric ulcer and 1 patient with adenocarcinoma of the stomach). All patients with gastric NHL and the tw o with benign gastric ulcer and adenocarcinoma, respectively, underwent endoscopy including multiple biopsies fo r histopathological diagnosis. C T was performed in all patients except 3 from the control group, in whom magnetic resonance imaging was performed instead. Results: All patients with high-grade and one o f the tw o with low-grade NHL and the patient with adenocarcinoma displayed high gastric uptake of ,8FDG corresponding to the pathological findings at endoscopy and/or CT. No pathological tracer uptake w as seen in the patient with low-grade gastric NHL of the MALT type. In 6/8 patients with gastric NHL, ,8FDG PET demonstrated larger tum or extension in the stomach than was found at endoscopy, and there was high tracer uptake in the stomach in 2 patients who were evaluated as normal on CT. I8FDG PET correctly excluded gastric NH L (no focal pathological tracer uptake was found) in the patient with a benign gastric ulcer and in the patients with NHL without clinical signs o f gastric involvement. Conclusions: 18FDG PET provides novel possibilities fo r evaluation o f gastric NHL and would seem valuable as a com plement to endoscopy and CT in selected patients, where the technique may yield additional information decisive fo r the choice of therapy. 14:50 1237 Correlation of CT with histo-pathological findings in patients with gastric and oesophageal carcinom as following neoadjuvant chem otherapy C.S. Ng, J.E. Husband, D.A. MacVicar, D.C. Cunningham; London, S utton/U K Purpose: To evaluate C T in predicting resectability follow ing neoadjuvant chemotherapy in non-metastatic gastro-oesophageal cancers. Pre-operative CTs in 20 patients w ho had received neoadjuvant chemotherapy were assessed blindly fo r residual masses, and loco-regional spread to the gastro-hepatic ligament, greater om entum, ad jacent organs and lymph nodes. The results of CT were com pared with histopathological findings at surgery. Results: Tum our sites were gastro-oesophageal junction (35%), gastric body (35%) and gastric antrum (30%). Residual masses were demonstrated on CT in 19 patients; in 79% o f these, active malignancy was demonstrated histopathologically. Active tum our was also present in the one patient in whom a residual mass could not be identified. The overall sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values were 67%, 43% , 67% and 38% , respectively. The corresponding values for loco-regional spread to the (a) gastro-hepatic ligament were 54%, 43% , 64% and 33% , and (b) greater om entum w ere 40%, 93%, 67% and 82%, respectively. There were tw o false positive CT studies for pancreatic invasion, and two negatives fo r peritoneal and pleural invasion. Conclusion: Following chemotherapy, residual masses are seen on CT in 95% o f cases, and are likely to contain active tumour. CT is not accurate at identifying residual loco-regional spread and should not preclude surgery. conventional scans as well as perfusion studies (multisection EPI-SE with 0.2 mmol G d/kg bodyweight at 1.0 T (Siemens Magnetom Impact Expert) to differentiate posttherapeutic effects from residual o r recurrent tum or growth. Results: Local tum or control was achieved in areas with laser energy deposi tion with clinically stable conditions over > 6 months. Conventional contrastenhanced scans dem onstrate strong enhancement surrounding areas of tissue ablation. Perfusion studies are useful to discriminate granulomatous tissue en hancem ent from residual or recurrent tum or growth. Conclusion: Careful application of LITT may sen/e as a palliative concept for patients with high-grade gliom as avoiding more invasive treatm ent options. 1272 Intraoperative MRI: Can it increase the radicality of brain tumour surgery? M. Knauth, R. Wirtz, V. Tronnier, F. Albert, M. Forsting, S. Kunze, K. Sartor; H eidelberg/D Purpose: In patients with high grade gliom a the removal of enhancing tum or has been shown to significantly prolong survival time. By combined use of neuronavigation and intraoperative (io-) MRI we tried to increase the percentage of patients in whom 'to ta l gross tum or removal" can be achieved. Methods and Materials: 15 patients were operated fo r high grade glioma. To assess radicality o f surgery an io-MRI was performed using an "open" M R-scanner (0.2 T). T1w-im ages were acquired precontrast and serially after administration of a double dose of Gadolinium-DTPA. lo-MRI was compared with an early (day 1 -3 ) postoperative (epo-) MRI aquired with a high-field scanner (1.5 T). Results: lo-M RI showed residual enhancing tum or in 7 o f the 15 patients. Surgery w as continued in 6 o f these 7 patients. In 4 of these 6 patients epo-MRI did not show enhancing residual tumor. In all patients io-MRI showed enhancement that was not visible in preoperative MRI and thus represents surgically induced enhancement. The com bined use of neuronavigation and intraoperative MRI can increase the radicality of brain tum or surgery. However, a careful com parison with the pattern o f enhancem ent in preoperative MRI is necessary to differentiate surgically induced enhancement from residual tumour. 1273 MP-RAGE data sets for MRI of brain tum ours as an im portant tool fo r im age guided surgery F. F e lln e r1·2, K. H o ll2, P. H eld3, C. F e lln er3, H. Böhm -Jurkovic2, W. B a u tz ' ; 1 Erlangen-Nürnberg/D, 2 Linz/A, 3 R egensburg/D Purpose: To determ ine the value of MP-RAGE data sets in MRI of brain tum ours as an integrated tool fo r image guided surgery. M ethods and Materials: 30 patients with brain tum ours were examined using a 1.0 T MR unit (M agnetom " Impact" , Siemens). MP-RAGE (slice thickness: 1 mm) and T1 -weighted SE (slice thickness: 6 mm) sequences were used before and after application o f Gd-DTPA. A visual evaluation o f anatomical and pathological structures w as performed on a workstation by a radiologist and a neurosurgeon. The imaging results were confirmed by intraoperative findings. Results: MP-RAGE gives an extremely accurate visualisation of the topog raphy of anatom ical and pathological structures due to high resolution and contiguous organ perception. Especially the topography of lesions to small anatom ical structures -as vessels and brain nerves -is significantly better seen in the MP-RAGE than in the conventional SE technique. Multiplanar reconstruction and dynam ic image analysis provide an enormous am ount of information fo r the operating neurosurgeon. Segmentation of the 3D data sets gives additional benefits. Data transfer makes this information available on workstations and guidance system s located in operating theatres. Patients and Methods: Ninety-four İHA were studied in 87 children classed in four age groups (0 -3 months, 3 -6 months, 6 -1 2 months, > 12 months). Twenty-six were studied using several examinations. Echogenicity and degree o f vascularization were assessed qualitatively. Resistivity index (Rl) was measured in 78 cases and peak systolic velocity in 43. Results: All the lesions presented as vascularized tissular masses with nu merous arteries and veins. 63% of lesions w ere hypoechoic, 16% hyperechoic, and 21% mixed. All hypoechoic lesions showed high vascularity and 13/15 hyperechoic İHA showed low vascularity. Mean Rl was significantly higher (p < 0.05) in the first (0.61 ± 0.14) and fourth (0.6 ± 0.14) classes of age than in the second (0.51 ± 0.12), and higher in the hyperechoic group (0.7 ± 0.13) than in the hypoechoic (0.53 ± 0.11) o r the mixed (0.56 ± 0.12). Systolic velocity values were spread with no differences between groups. Conclusion: İHA have characteristic color flow sonographic patterns even in diagnostically problematic subcutaneous forms. C orrelations were found between morphologic aspects and hemodynamic patterns and the evolutive phase. İHA are hypervascularized masses. Level of resistivity follows clinical evolution. 14:10 1275 Com parison of ultrasound and CT with diagnosis o f benign vascular lesions o f the liver in children S. Mahboubi, K.E. Fellows; Philadelphia, PA/USA Purpose: To assess the diagnostic accuracy of three phase CT scan and the ultrasound in the diagnosis of benign vascular lesions of the liver in infants and children. Materials and Methods: Twenty-seven pediatric patients, 5 under one month, 15 one m onth to six months, 4 over six months to three years, and 3 over three years old with proven hemangioendotheliomas or arteriovenous malformations o f the liver underwent primarily 2 abdominal imaging procedures; ultrasound (n = 22), three phase com puted tom ography (n = 18). Presenting symptoms were an abdominal mass in 26, congestive heart failure in 7 and thrombocytopenia in 2. Elevated alpha-fetoprotein levels were present in 4. Diagnosis was confirmed surgically in 14 and by clinical follow -up in 13. Results: Two different US patterns were observed; 13 of 22 patients had typical pattern, but 9 of 22 were atypical and could not be differentiated from m alignant tumor. Three different C T patterns were observed pattern 1 (n = 12), pattern 2 (n = 4) and pattern 3 (n = 2). Three phase CT studies were characteristic of vascular malformations in 18 patients. However, in one patient with similar CT pattern 3 with high alpha-fetoprotein which remains high, biopsies show hepatoblastoma. Conclusion: 1) Many cavernous hemangiomas do not exhibit typical US appearances. 2) Three phase C T scan accurately diagnosis benign vascular lesions of the liver. 14:20 1276 Diagnostics of seat belt injury using spiral CT R. Kloeppel, D. Brock, S. Koesling, J. Bennek, D. Hoermann; Leipzig/D Purpose: Seat belt injury based on not properly applied seat belts in case o f car accidents. Importance of spiral CT fo r diagnostics of s.b.i., especially hidden traumatic lesions will be demonstrated. Methods and Materials: O ur experience include 9 children in the age o f 4 to 13 years suffering from life-threatening seat belt injury. After life-saving treatment we took a spiral CT (Som atom plus S): first spiral CT, 10 mm slice thickness, without contrast medium, second spiral CT, 5 mm slice thickness, start delay 3 5 -4 5 s after a large volum e o f contrast medium. Results: 8 of 9 children survived. Besides bruising signs, head injuries, and knee joint's lesions in 4 of 9 cases a com bination of ruptured duodenum, ruptured liver or spleen, and chance fractures o f the spine was founded which is typical for s.b.i. In the remaining 5 cases tw o o f the lesions were combined. Ruptury of the small bowel showed up mainly as discrete findings of free air or inhomogenous ascites with high density (bowel contents misced with blood). Conclusion: Not only emergency doctor but also radiologist should take into account the com plexity of belt injuries. Spiral CT is the imaging methode of choice in case of polytraum atic children. 14:30 1277 Integrated diagnosis and im age fusion in pediatric neuroblastoma: MRI, MR-angiography, and MIBG scintigraphy T. Pfluger, S. Lorenz, U. Graubner, G. Meyer, G. Leinsinger, S. Dresel, K. Hahn; Munich/D Purpose: To assess the value of com bined imaging modalities fo r planning the therapeutic strategy in pediatric neuroblastomas. Materials and Methods: 63 MR and 49 l 123-MIBG exam inations were per formed prospectively in 41 patients (average age: 2.5 years). Intravenous Gd-DTPA was applied, and MR-angiography was performed in all MR exam inations. Image fusion was done using a 3D matching algorithm. Histology revealed neuroblastoma (n = 27), ganglioneurom a (n = 2), hepatoblastoma (n = 2), and Wilms tum or (n = 10). Results: In 71% of cases the tum or's origin could be clearly delineated in MRI, thereby indicating neuroblastoma. In these 30 patients M IBG-scintigraphy re vealed 3 false negative results. However, in 8/12 cases where MRI findings were unclear, MIBG-scintigraphy was proved neuroblastomas. As a whole body examination, MIBG-scintigraphy detected unknown metastases and re currences in 7/10 cases, later confirmed by MRI. Postoperatively, in 11 cases MRI demonstrated an unclear contrast enhancing mass that was suspected as a residual tumor, w hereas MIBG scintigraphy showed no activity in 9 of these cases. Conclusion: MIBG scintigraphy is an excellent tool for differentiating neu roblastomas, monitoring chem otherapeutic effects, detecting metastases and recurrences, and assessing residual tum ors. MRI and MRA are the methods of choice for operative planning. However, only both modalities combined with the image fusion technique can effectfully optimise the therapeutic management. 14:40 1278 US evaluation of the partial splenic em bolization in the treatm ent of Hypersplenism T. Berrocal, A. Arjonilla, C. Estrada, C. Prieto, J. Gutierrez, M.L. del Hoyo; Madrid/E Purpose: To evaluate the long term evolution of patients who have undergone partial splenic em bolization due to hypersplenism. Material and Methods: Twenty-one paediatric patients perviously diagnosed of hypersplenism underwent partial splenic embolization, using Ivalon parti cles introduced through the splenic artery. The amount of embolized splenic parenchyma ranged from 50 to 90% . The follow -up was performed for a pe riod of 12-103 months (average of 32 months). Remaining splenic tissue was evaluated using ultrasonography, nuclear studies and hematologic parameters (leukocytes and platelets blood levels). Results: U.S. study postembolization revealed a mean decrease in the size of the spleen of 40% in the first year and only 17.7% in the fifth year. The values of leukocites and platelets became normal during the first month postemboliza tion and remain stable during the following three years. A decrease in the hematologic parameters was observed after the fifth year in 85% of patients. Conclusions: H ematologic values prove that partial splenic embolization is useful to control hypersplenism for a period of several years, with poor results after the fifth year postembolization. U.S. study shows long term regeneration of the embolized spleen. W e have not found a direct relationship between the recidive of hypersplenism and the am ount of tissue regenerated. 14:50 1279 Com puted tom ographic evaluation of bladder exstrophy V.A. Duddalwar, D.D. Shetty, G.V. Datar; Aberdeen/U K Bladder exstrophy is a problem that has plagued surgeons fo r many years due to the com plex musculoskeletal defects. The aim of this study w as to evaluate skeletal anomalies in bladder exstrophy syndromes with the objective of establishing parameters to aid surgical correction. A retrospective study of 48 cases of bladder exstrophy with preoperative C T scans was performed. Parameters evaluated included pubic diastasis, interischial distance, acetabu lar angle and acetabular anteversion. The measurements obtained were then analysed for statistical significance com pared with controls. Pubic diastasis increased significantly with age in bladder exstrophy. There was no significant increase in the interischial distance but this tended to vary with pubic diastasis. A significant increase in acetabular angle (controls 23 degrees; exstrophy 26.8 degrees) and a significant decrease in the acetabular anteversion (controls 17.66 degrees; exstrophy 8.04 degrees) was noted. We conclude that the relation between pubic diastasis and interischial distance signifies that the fulcrum o f rotation of the anterior pelvic arch passes at least partially through the ischial tuberosities. The increase in acetabular angle and decrease in acetabular anteversion denotes that there is rotation of the acetabulum into a sagittal plane. The biom echanical effect o f these observations would imply that these aberrations make the pelvis unstable and partly explain the increase in pubic diastasis with age. 1280 Normal liver, spleen and kidney sizes in children: Evaluation with ultrasonography Ö.L. Konus, A. Özdemir, S. Köse, N. Ercan, E. Aşik, A. Akkaya, S. Işik; Ankara/TR Purpose: In the pediatric age group, evaluation of hepatom egaly is often difficult because of uncertainty o f the normal range of liver sizes. W e tried to establish normal size ranges fo r liver, spleen and kidney with ultrasonography in healthy children. This study involves 110 girls, 90 boys, totally 200 children (0 -1 6 years) with normal examination findings o r with sonography because of problems unrelated to the measured organs. All children had normal sonographic findings of liver, spleen and kidney. Longitudinal and antero-posterior measurements of liver were obtained at the midclavicular and midsagittal lines (at the xiphoid). Longitudinal and diagonal m easurem ents of spleen were performed on a coronal slice obtained from the splenic hilum. Kidneys were measured on transverse and longitudinal axis. Results: Regression lines and correlation coefficients o f the organ sizes with age, body height and weight were investigated fo r girls and boys, separately. Mean sizes and standard deviations of the organs were calculated fo r each age group. Results of both sex were compared. These organ sizes in childhood showed well correlation with increasing age, height and weight but the most with the body height. Conclusion: Our data is useful to establish the pathologic size differences in daily routine US examinations fo r children. Conclusions: similar accuracies were found for C T and MR; MR showed the best results in hemangiomas, whereas CT in HCC. Doppler-US showed a good specificity but low sensitivity. Definitely integrated imaging yielded a significant increase in accuracy (p < 0.001). patients (44 fem ale, 26 male, mean age 61 years) were prospectively reviewed on a supra conductive 0.5 T m agnet with Echo Planar capability (Gyroscan T5 NT, Philips, The Netherlands). T1 TSE (TR/TE 500/12 ms; NAS = 6; turbo fa cto rs; 3 :4 9 min) and M ultishot Echo Planar. T 1 TSE (TR.TE 500/30 ms; NAS = 6; EPI factor 7 2: 13 min) sequences were randomized then quantitatively (lesion signal to organ ratio; lesion signal to noise ratio) and qualitatively (artifacts, lesion detection, conspicuity) com pared in blinded fashion by three readers. Results: Quantitatively there was no significant difference between the two sequences although the EPI sequence tended to have low er lesion signal to organ, and lesion signal to noise ratios. Qualitatively: the EPI sequence had significantly less flow artifact (P < 0.5 Kruskal wallis test). For lesion detection specificity and sensitivity were not significantly different (86% and 84%; 86% and 76% fo r T1 TSE and EPI T1 TSE respectively). Kappa correlation tests and Mac Nem ar tests were high fo r both types of sequences either alone or combined with a T2 sequence. Conclusion: An EPI T1 TSE sequence can be an acceptable substitute for T1 TSE sequence in the abdomen and pelvis, it allow s a 40% time gain (133 vs 229 sec) without significant reduction in diagnostic accuracy. 14:10 1295 Methods and Materials: 44 patients with different pelvic pathologies were examined using a 1.0 T MR unit (Magnetom "Impact", Siemens) with following sequences: TSE-1 (TR = 3050 ms, TEeg = 105 ms, r = 15 ms), GRASE (TR = 4000 ms, ТЕеп = 110 ms), and TSE-2 (TR = 6620 ms, ТЕ = 112 ms, г = 22.5 ms). Contrast behaviour of anatom ical and pathological structures, and artifacts were judged by tw o independent observers. The results were statistically controlled by two-tailed W ilcoxon's test (statistically significant for p < 0.05). Results: Overall image quality w as superior in TSE sequences. Bright lesions were optimally visualised by TSE-2 and GRASE due to the low signal intensity o f pelvic fat. Hypo-and isointense lesions were better delineated in TSE-1. Chemical shift artifacts were significantly reduced in GRASE, w hereas blurring was pronounced. Motion artifacts did not reveal significant differences. Methods and Materials: Perfusion MRI using an FFE sequence was done in 27 women with proven cervical carcinoma. The first-pass contrast-enhancement of the tum or was quantified by maximum slope and am plitude of the timeintensity curves. These parameters were correlated with tum or invasion depth and lymph node status as assessed during surgery and in the hysterectomy specimen. Results: Tumors with lymphatic spread (n = 7) did not show steeper slope or higher amplitude than those without lymphatic spread (n = 20). Slope: 1.9 U/s ± 0.9 v. 2.3 ± 0.8; Amplitude: 23.9 U ж 15.3 v 32.9 ± 10.1. Also, infiltration depth > 15 mm (in n = 8) did not correlate with dynamic parameters. Slope: 2.2 U/s ж 0.6 v 2.3 ± 0.9; Amplitude 27.0 U ± 4.7 v 32.1 ± 11.1, P = not significant. Conclusion: C ontrary to other investigators, we found no significant correla tion between parameters of MRI perfusion and tum or aggressiveness in cervix carcinoma. Methods and Materials: 35 patients with carcinoma of the cervix were studied on a 1.5 T Magnetom Vision System (Siemens) using a phased-array body coil. Heavily T2-weighted TSE sequences, STIR sequences and T 1 -weighted SE sequences with and without spectral fat saturation before and after Gd-DTPA were employed. All sequences were performed in the axial plane with identical image locations. Slice thickness was 5 -7 mm and spatial resolution < 1 mm. MR imaging results were com pared with histopathologic findings. Results: Using all sequences fo r the assessment of parametrial involvement the sensitivity was 92%, specificity 86% , and accuracy 90%. W ith T2-weighted TSE sequences a sensitivity o f 92%, a specificity of 78% and an accuracy of 84% could be achieved. For STIR sequences the respective values were 85, 75 and 79%; fo r T 1 -weighted SE sequences 85.20 and 50% ; and for fat saturated T 1 -weighted SE sequences 75.78 and 77%. The accuracy of clinical investigation was 68%. Conclusion: MR imaging is highly accurate in the prediction of parame trial involvement in cervical carcinoma. T2-weighted TSE sequences provide superior diagnostic potential com pared to other sequences. To compare the accuracy of MR imaging with a standard body coil and with a phased-array body coil in the detection of pelvic lymph node metastasis from uterine carcinoma. Material and Methods: The study included 75 consecutive patients with cervical (n = 51) o r endometrial carcinoma (n = 24). 25 patients were studied on a 1.0 T system with a standard body coil, the remaining 50 patients on a 1.5 T system with a phased-array body coil. On both system s axial T2weighted FSE and T1-weighted SE images o f the pelvis before and after IV administration of Gd-DTPA were performed. Lymph nodes with a diam eter of > 8 mm were considered positive. In all patients MR imaging results were correlated with surgical-pathologic findings. Results: MR imaging with standard body coil had a sensitivity of 62.5% , a specificity of 82.3% and accuracy of 76.0%. W ith phased-array coil imaging, the respective data were 88.9%, 90.6% and 90.0%. Conclusion: C ompared to conventional body coil imaging phased-array body coil imaging provides increased accuracy in the detection of pelvic lymph node m etastasis in uterine carcinoma. To evaluate the contribution of magnetic resonance im aging (MRI) in the diagnosis of indeterm inate adnexal masses. Methods and Materials: 102 patients with clinical and ultrasonographic sus picion of adnexal mass were submitted to MRI of the pelvis. 0.5 T su perconducting unit with body coil and SE T1-w eighted-before and after i.v. Gadolinium-DTPA-and FSE T2-weighted sequences on the three spatial planes were always performed. MRI findings were prospectively analyzed with consensus reading by at least tw o of the authors in order to distinguish benign from malignant lesions on the basis of the following primary and secondary criteria: the form er included solid, vascularized com ponents either nodules or thick (> 3 mm) septations or larger com ponents, and the latter ascites, in volvem ent of adjacent pelvic organs, peritoneum, lymph nodes. Surgical proof was obtained in all patients.  The study population consisted of 32 consecutive women with clinically diagnosed PID. All patients underwent a routine bed-side transvaginal sonography (TVS). The minor pelvic cavity was examined with a 1.5 T imager using T1W, T2W and STIR sequences in sagittal and axial oblique planes. Phased array receiver coils were used. The presence of free pelvic fluid, hydrosalpinx, or tubo-ovarian abscess w as systematically studied. The total scanning time w as 27 minutes. Results: Adnexal mass was seen by sonography in 15 cases, and by MRI in 18 cases. Hydrosalpinx was seen by sonography in 4 cases and suspected in 9 additional cases. Hydrosalpinx was seen by MRI in 17 cases. Free pelvic fluid was seen by sonography in 12 cases and by MRI in 24 cases. Consequently, in 16 (50%) of 32 cases MRI provided more information than sonography. Seven of the 26 PID positive patients subsequently underwent an operative procedure, and all seven had a histopathologically or cytologically proven PID consistent with MRI diagnosis. Conclusions: High field MRI offers advantages compared to traditional bed side TVS in the diagnosis of PID. images by quantitative evaluation of normal pancreas and tum or enhancement, and to evaluate each phase fo r assessm ent o f tum or resectability. Materials and Methods: 40 patients with pancreatic adenocarcinom a under w ent dual phase spiral C T (3 mm collimation; 1 mm overlapping reconstruction; 160 ml contrast medium injected at 4 ml/sec; scan delay 18 sec fo r arterial phase, 60 sec fo r portal venous phase). Tissue enhancem ent and tum or to pancreas-contrast w as compared. Resectability was evaluated separately on arterial and portal venous phase images. Results: Tum or conspicuity was significantly greater in the portal venous phase (tum or to pancreas-contrast 54 ± 31 HU versus 31 ± 29 HU; p = 0.007). Evaluation of resectability o r unresectability could only be determined in 23 of 40 patients on arterial phase images com pared to 36 of 40 patients on portal venous phase images (p < 0.001). Conclusion: Arterial phase imaging with spiral C T for detection and staging o f pancreatic adenocarcinom a has limited benefit. 14:20 1305 T2-weighted spin-echo and echo-planar im aging of the pancreas: Fast versus ultrafast T. Helmberger, N. Holzknecht, J. Gauger, M. Reiser; Munich/D Purpose: To evaluate the efficacy of T2w EPI in com parison to T2w TSE in imaging the pancreas. Material and Methods: 25 patients and 5 volunteers were examined at 1.5 Tesla using a body array coil. Following T2w sequences were obtained during breathhold: T2w TSE (TR 3300 ms, TE 138 ms, ETL 29, matrix 2562, acqu. tim e 17 sec, 11 slices, frequency selective fat-suppression), and EPI (TR 600 ms, TE 17 ms, ETL 140, matrix 96 x 128, acqu. time 5 sec, 20 slices, fat-suppression by inversion recovery). The signal intensity fo r pancreas, surrounding fat, and background noise were measured, the signal-to-noise ratios (SNR), and the contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) for pancreas and fat were calculated and statistically compared. Additionally, visualization o f the pancreas was qualitatively evaluated by three readers (score: 1 completely/2 in parts/3 not sufficiently visualized). The SNR for pancreas was not significantly different fo r both se quences, while on EPI fat presented a significant decreased SNR (p < 0.001). The CNR for pancreas and fat was slightly but not significantly higher on EPI. In spite of artifacts on EPI arising from susceptibility differences between tis sue and air there w as no significant difference in the qualitatively assessment of the pancreas. The presented EPI sequence allow s imaging of the pancreas com parable to T 2w TSE imaging. Further technical progress of EPI will stimulate the use o f ultrafast imaging of the abdomen. 14:30 1306 MR Imaging of pancreatic hemosiderosis: Correlation with glucose disturbances and total iron stores O. Papakonstantinou, T. Maris, S. Kostaridou, A. Gouliamos, K. Politou, C. Kattamis, L. Vlahos; Athens/GR Purpose: To correlate MRI findings of pancreatic hemosiderosis with glucose disturbances and with total iron burden, in patients with b-thalassemia. Methods and Materials: Abdominal MR T1 and T2 weighted images, ob tained by thirty-five multiple transfused, b-thalassemic patients were reviewed blindly and retrospectively. Pancreatic signal intensity (PSI) was qualitatively evaluated as normal w hen greater than that of muscle (MSI), o r low when less or equal to MSI. Patients were categorized on the basis of oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) into three groups: group A: patients with normal OGTT, group B: patients with impaired OGTT, but asym ptom atic regarding glucose disturbances, group C: patients with clinically manifestated diabetes mellitus. Results: a) PSI w as normal in 5/11 and low in 6/11 patients of group A. Four patients o f group A with low PSI developed impaired OGTT in the following six months after MRI examination, b) Low PSI was observed in 8/10 patients of group В and in 11/14 patients of group C. c) No significant relationship between PSI and indeces of total iron stores, such as liver iron concentration, liver T2 relaxation tim es o r serum ferritin was revealed. Conclusion: MR imaging of pancreatic hemosiderosis seem s to associate with endocrine dysfunction o f the organ and might be used as a predictive sign fo r the developm ent of glucose disturbances. Nonetheless, the existence of pancreatic hemosiderosis does not correlate with liver iron content and total iron stores, in transfusional iron overloaded. Purpose: This clinical study was perform ed to evaluate the diagnostic potential of MRI for assessment of pancreatic masses. Results were correlated to other common imaging modalities, surgical exploration, laparoscopy, and histomorphological findings. Materials and Methods: 115 patients suspected to have a malignant mass of the pancreas were studied. MRI exam inations were done with respiratory gating on a 1.5 T ACS II (Philips) using T1w SE sequences (450/15), T2w TSE sequences (2500/120), and T2w SPIR sequences (3100/120). In some patients MRCP and MR angiography w as done additionally. Results were assessed by two independent, blinded radiologists and correlated to the methods of reference. Signal-to-noise (S/N) and contrast-to-noise (С/N) ratios were determined. Results: In 75/115 patients a difference in signal intensity marked the malig nant pancreatic mass. С/N ratio was statistically significant improved using the SPIR sequence. A vascular involvement o f the mass could only be depicted on MR angiography in case of a com plete occlusion, but with high sensitivity on axial scans. Conclusion: MRI of pancreatic m asses is just starling to play a role in clinical routine. It offers a lot of tools to do a com plete staging in only one examination. 14:50 1308 MRI of pancreatic cystic m asses L.H. Ros, P.J. Mergo, P.R. Ros; Zaragoza/E, Florida/USA Purpose: It is well accepted that MRI can be a useful tool in imaging of the pancreas, as a com pliment o f the imaging findings seen initially with CT. The MRI appearance of the most common pancreatic diseases (adenocarcinoma and pancreatitis) is well known. However, knowledge of pancreatic MRI is limited primarily to the study of solid neoplasm s and inflam matory processes. We present the applications of MRI to the study of cystic neoplasms and inflammatory masses. Materials and Methods: W e have accumulated in the last four years thirty proven cases o f pancreatic cystic masses including true cysts (N = 3), pseudocysts (N = 15), cystic neoplasms (N = 5), and solid tum ors with cystic degeneration (N = 7). In all cases MRI was performed with a dedicated pancreatic MR protocol. Correlation with gross and microscopic features is offered when available. Results: MRI is helpful in outlining precisely the morphological features of pancreatic pseudocysts including their anatom ical relation to surrounding structures. MR is also helpful in detecting the hemorrhagic nature of pancreatic pseudocysts. MR depicts well the internal architecture o f microcystic adeno mas and mucinous cystic tum ors, allowing a precise differentiation between these two entities in many cases. MR also enables the differentiation of solid tumors from multiple true pancreatic cysts in patients with von Hippel Lindau disease. Conclusion: MRI is able to outline in detail the morphologic characteristics of pancreatic cystic masses, including the presence o f internal hemorrhage. To evaluate the effect of ultrasmall superparam agnetic iron oxide (USPIO) fo r imaging of the spleen. Material and Methods: 50 patients with normal spleen were examined at 1.0 T with T1W I, T1WI Fat Sat, T2W I, T2TSE before and after the administration of AMI 7227 (AMI Inc., Princeton, NJ). Signal intensity (SI), Signal to noise ratio (SNR) and contrast to noise ratio (CNR) was evaluated for the spleen for each sequence and statistically compared. Results: W e saw an increase in signal intensity in T1WI (38%, p < 0.3) and T1WI with Fat Sat (26%, p < 0.15). In T2WI the spleen demonstrated a decrease of signal intensity of 56% (p < 0.05) and in T2 TSE a decrease of 55% (p < 0.05). The contrast between spleen and the surrounding fat was in the T2 weighted images remarkable increased leading to an excellent delineation of the spleen. Conclusion: Using USPIO due to a signal intensity loss the visualisation and delineation of the spleen was improved in T2 weighted sequences. The T1 effects demonstrated a increase in S1 fo r T1W I with and without Fat Sat. The efficacy of USPIO in imaging of pathologic processes of the spleen is yet to be determined. It can be suppossed that in cases of spleen tum ors the delineation of this tum ors especially in T2W sequences is improved. There is no correlation between the severity of cirrhosis and splenic enhancem ent patterns (P = 0.78). Siderotic nodules are observed in 14 cirrhotic patients, but none in the control group (p < 0.005). The frequency of siderotic nodule is higher in patients with more severe cirrhosis (P < 0.05). Conclusion: W e characterized the splenic enhancem ent patterns by dynamic MRI, though the correlation between these patterns and live cirrhosis deserves further study. The presence of siderotic nodules in the spleen could be an indicator of the severity o f liver cirrhosis. 1311 Cystic splenic masses: Im aging-pathologic correlation L.H. Ros, P.R. Ros; Zaragoza/E, Florida/USA Objective: The aim of this presentation is to dem onstrate the spectrum of cystic splenic lesions and how using imaging criteria it is possible to narrow the differential diagnosis and potentially characterize them. Materials and Methods: Thirty splenic masses were studied by imaging techniques (ultrasound, com puted tomography, and/or magnetic resonance imaging). Pathologic correlation was performed both macro-and microscop ically in all casses. Entities analyzed include metastases (N = 8), primary splenic neoplasms -hemangioma, angiosarcoma, lymphoma (N = 6), infarcts (N = 5), cysts -true and false (N = 4), echinococcal cysts (N = 3), abscess (N = 2), lymphangioma (N = 1), and peliosis (N = 1). Results: Although significant overlap was noted, not allowing a specific diagnosis always, the following criteria were considered as suggestive for the following entities: (1) well-defined internal septa fo r true cysts, (2 ) egg shell calcifications fo r hydatid cysts, (3) thick and irregular wall fo r abscess, (4) multifocality and internal hemorrhage for infarcts, and (5) heterogeneous nature and internal calcifications fo r neoplasms. In many cases, once these findings were coupled with the clinical history, a diagnosis could be obtained. The use o f imaging allows, in many cases, the narrowing o f the differencial diagnosis in splenic cystic masses and coupled with clinical history, a definitive diagnosis can be obtained in many cases. Material and Methods: In a total of 43,166 cases prospectively collected in 26 Italian Radiology Depts., variables related to coagulative status (PT and PTT lab values) and to other potential socio-dem ographic and clinical characteristics were evaluated, as well as the occurrence of HAEs in the peri-procedural period. Bivariate and m ultivariate methods were applied to test power, direction and statistical significance o f the association between the presence of an altered coagulative status (PT > 15 sec, PTT > 35 sec) and the haemorrhagic event. Results: Out of 43,166 patients included, 4,020 (9.3%) presented an alteration on coagulative status and 111 (0.3% ) an HAE. There is a significant asso ciation between the presence of an altered coagulative status and the HAE occurrence (OR = 2.02, p = 0.005). The association is confirmed even after the adjustm ent for potential confounders like previous surgical intervention, history of neurologic disorder, type of procedure and dose of contrast media (g iodine/kg bw) administered (m ultivariate analysis: OR = 1.96; p = 0.01). Conclusions: Results from this observational study indicate that patients with an altered coagulative status may experience an HAE event almost twice as frequently as those without altered PT and PTT values. To evaluate the efficiency of molsidomine local delivery during hydrogel-balloon angioplasty in preventing throm bosis and neointimal hyper plasia (NIH), w hich can lead to restenosis. M ethods and Materials: Seven Pietrin pigs fed with atherogenic diet during 4 months received traum atic angioplasty in both iliac arteries at 2 months, and pharmacologic angioplasty (P-Ар) with the hydrogel balloon loaded with molsidomine (150 mg) (M-Ар, one iliac artery) or placebo (C-Ар, the other iliac artery) at 4 months. The anim als were euthanized at 3 hours (2 pigs), 24 hours (2 pigs) and 3 m onths (3 pigs) after P-Ар. Histological and immunohistochemical (PCNA, alpha-actin) patterns and endothelial surface platelet aggregation (scanning electron microscopy) were studied in iliac arteries. Results: No significant therapeutic effect was detectable 3 hours after M-Ap. At 24 hours, throm boresistance was significantly restored as compared with C -Ар. At 3 months, M-Ар significantly prevented NIH and reset intimai throm boresistance at the arterial sites free of adventitio-medial dissection scar. Conclusion: Local delivery of molsidomine during angioplasty is feasible by using the hydrogel-coated balloon and has substantial anti-NIH and antithrom bosis effects attributable to the pharmacologic properties of molsidomine, a nitric-oxide-donor. 14:15 1314 Clinical pharm acology of BR1 a new stabilised, bubble-based echocontrast agent D. Bokor, M. Cassinotti, В. LIull, A. Spinazzi; Milan/I Purpose: To present clinical pharmacology of BR1, a new contrast medium (CM) fo r ultrasound imaging. Methods: Ninety-eight healthy volunteers were studied in five single and repeated-dose phase I trials, tw o of which placebo-controlled. Doses of BR1 ranged from 0.003 ml/kg bw (single) to 0.6 ml/kg bw (cumulative of three consecutive doses). Efficacy w as evaluated as improvement of В-m ode signal in cardiac and Doppler signal in extracardiac studies. Safety was assessed in term s of subjective and physical observations, monitoring of vital signs, O2 saturation, Holter ECG and echocardiography, Mini-Mental State test, visual acuity and laboratory assessem ents prior to and after injection o f CM, Tolerance w as assessed as patient discom fort associated with the injection of CM. Adverse events (AEs) and safety parameters were monitored up to 2 4 -7 2 h post-dosing. Results: BR1 was always able to pass through the pulmonary circulation and to improve the endocardial border definition o f the left ventricle and the Doppler signal in different vascular districts. No serious AEs were recorded in any study. The non-serious A Es were transient, mild in intensity and unrelated to CM. No clinically significant changes in blood pressure, pulse rate, 0 2 saturation, respiration rate and ECG were observed. In pain therapy of severely ill patients often interventional treatment and perm anent neurolysis is necessary. According to legal and safety aspects, difficult procedures are performed CT-guided with increasing frequency. The aim of the study was to establish the value of CT-guided needle procedures in difficult localisations and to define it's impact on clinical results. Material and Methods: 202 CT-guided interventions in 135 patients were retrospectively analysed with respect to technical (slice thickness, needle angle and size) and clinical aspects (pain relief). 80% needle applications and 20% catheter procedures w ere distributed to 44 plexus coeliacus, 123 sympathetic chains, 7 plexus sacralis, 17 spinal nerves and 11 facet joints. Bupivacain w as used for diagnostic and 90% ethanol for permanent blockages. Results: A deviation of the needle tip of more than 13 mm leads to insufficient clinical results. In the majority o f cases there is a positive correlation between an optimal needle localisation and clinical success. However in 10% of an acceptable needle localisation there w as only poor clinical pain-relief. Despite o f som e needle dislocations, there were no severe com plications at all. Conclusions: A precise placem ent of the needle tip is essential fo r an optimal clinical pain relief. Subsequently ou r study shows, that CT is an reliable method fo r needle guidance, w hich com bines good clinical results with rare complications. 14:45 flow velocities are low er com pared to the Doppler based data (p < 0.001), but the ratios and the calculated cross-sectional area stenoses showed a high correlation (r = 0.96). Conclusion: In a validated pulsatile hydraulic model the assessment of hemodynamic changes caused by stenosis using MR phase contrast flow measurements is reliable. Consequently these data should be followed by in vivo evaluations of atherosclerotic lesions to evaluate the clinical impact. 14:55 1319 Reduction of radiation dose in CT-guided intervention P. Hendrickx, D. Busche; H annover/D Purpose: Is there a way to reduce the radiation dose per slice in CT-guided interventions of the lumbar spine without a loss of quality? Materials and Methods: Diagnostic CT of the lumbar spine is performed with 133 kV and 475 (350-7 00) mAs per slice and a slice thickness of 3 mm. In interventional CT 5 mm thick slices were used with 133 kV and 4 possible steps of mAs: 6 0 -9 0 -1 5 5 -2 2 5 mAs. In 100 patients we tried to find the minimal radiation dose needed for correct needle positioning and fo r safe drug application. If the first slice performed with 60 mAs was poor, the next higher level was used until the image quality w as adequate. Results: In most patients (84), the lowest dose level of 60 mAs was sufficient for precise application of drugs. Only 16 patients required a higher dose level. The results of this evaluation were correlated to the body weight of the patient and to the thickness of the fat and muscle layer. Conclusion: Radiation dose in interventional CT o f the lumbar spine may be significantly reduced compared to diagnostic CT. 1320 Percutaneous im plantation of catheter for intra-arterial regional chemotherapy M. Grosso, E. Zanon, A. Mancini, M. Serrallonga, C. Zanon, O. Alabiso, C. Fava; Torino/I Purpose: To evaluate the feasibility of percutaneous implantation o f catheter for continuous infusion intra-arterial chemotherapy. Material and Methods: 24 patients (12 fem ale, 12 male, mean age 62 years) underwent to percutaneous implantation of catheter (21 in the hepatic artery for metastases, 1 in the splenic fo r pancreatic cancer, 2 in the ipogastric for bladder cancer). The access was the left auxiliary artery in 21 cases and the right femoral artery in 3 (one patient had both the accesses). A 5 French catheter was inserted in the tum or perfusional artery and is connected to the port sutured to the pectoral fascia or to the inguinal ligament in a subcutaneous pocket. Results: Implantation was possible in all cases. One major complication occurred: a pseudoaneurysm of the auxiliary artery after fo u r months percutaneously treated by positioning a covered-stent and a new implantation of the catheter via transfem oral approach. Seven cases of catheter dislodgem ent into the aorta were percutaneous repositioned. All the catheters are currently patent and function in the preliminary follow-up period range from 1 to 9 months. Conclusions: Percutaneous placem ent of indwelling catheter fo r infusion therapy is feasible and safe procedure tow ards surgical placement. 1321 Risk factors for serious adverse events in diagnostic cardiovascular procedures: Results of 32,294 procedures G. Feltrin, P. Mannella, G. Apolone, G. Bertolini, G. Laurora, C.l. Cordaro, A. Spinazzi; Padova/I Purpose: To identify clinical characteristics exposing patients undergoing cardiovascular procedures to higher risk fo r serious adverse events. Material and Methods: Data upon 32,294 cardiovascular diagnostic proce dures were prospectively collected in 26 Italian Radiological Depts. as a part of CAMPUSLINK Project. Adverse events that were fatal, life-threatening, causing/prolonging hospitalization, or resolving with permanent sequelae were considered as serious. Descriptive and multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed on the discrete data base. Results are reported as mean ± SD and odds ratio (OR). Results: Patients mean age was 61.5 ± 13.4 years; 73.9% of them were males. The following risk factors resulted to be significantly associated with the occurrence of serious adverse events: com atous status (OR = 4.2), A.S.A. physical score 4 -5 (OR = 1.8), previous reaction to contrast media (OR = 3.1), volume injected < 50 ml or > 300 ml (OR = 2.3), presence of cardiac disease (OR = 2.6), presence of cerebrovascular disease (OR = 1.8), cardiac vs non-cardiac procedures (OR = 1.9). Conclusions: This survey confirm s that there are patients at higher than usual risk for serious adverse events to intra-arterial cardiovascular diagnostic procedures and identifies the most representative risk factors in ou r population. image quality due to patient motion. The purpose of this w ork w as to address these limits by applying real-time signal processing techniques. The overall goal is an fMRI exam which is clinically accurate, reliable, and efficient. Methods: Hardware developed previously fo r MR Fluoroscopic imaging was applied to fMRI. Prospective motion correction was performed using navigator echoes to instantly (within 100 msec o f measurement) control the excited section. Real-time reconstruction w as performed of a multislice echo-planar imaging sequence, and images were immediately processed using cross cor relation. The methods were applied in volunteers and patients with m edically refractory epilepsy. Results: Composite maps showing activation superim posed on the T1weighted images were generated within one minute of com pletion of the acquisition. The speed of the acquisition and processing allow multiple, motionregistered fMRI runs to be made within a 30 minute examination. Prospective motion correction reduces the sensitivity of the acquisition to motion. Conclusion: Real-time signal processing techniques can address the limi tation o f motion in fMRI and significantly reduce the duration of the exam, enabling interpretation while the patient is still positioned in the MR scanner. 14:10 . Activation images were determ ined by calculating the correlation coefficient between the MRI pixel time course and the reference function of the stimulus protocol. The qualitative analysis was perform ed on composite images. Correlation maps (motion-corrected and spatial Gaussian filtered) were normalized for brain size and averaged to compute a mean activation map, which was projected in a second step onto the averaged anatomical map. Result: A marked signal increase during the W isconsin Card Sorting Test w as detected especially in the prefrontal cortex, the right anterior cinguli, the thalam us and both tem poral lobes. Activation -especially in the male S261 Thursday subgroup -was more pronounced in the right prefrontal cortex and the right anterior cinguli. In the fem ale subgroup, activation in both hemispheres was in the sam e degree. Discussion: The observed latéralisation in the male subgroup and the bi laterally frontal activation in the female subgroup suggests a gender specific asym m etry o f the brain.  The magnetic moments o f 14 specim en (clips, wires, implants) were tested by m eans of a highly sensitive biom agnetom eter (PHILIPS), usually used for magnetoencephalography. The device is able to measure magnetic field changes in the range o f pico Tesla. In addition, 171 patients with unknown metallic materials were examined. Results: All ferrom agnetic particles could be identified within a measurement time of 1 minute. In 86 of the 171 patients the metallic implant proved to be non-magnetic, so that a following MRI-examination at high field (1.5 Tesla) w as possible without any risks. 85 patients were rejected from MRI due to a strong magnetic implant. Conclusions: Biomagnetic measurements enable a quick and precise identi fication o f magnetic particles and allow to examine patients with foreign bodies w ho would have been excluded from the investigation otherwise. 14:30 1326 MRI influences the skin 2D electrophysiological parameters L. Babich, I. Fomenko, M. Nuzhdina; Kiev/UKR The dynam ics o f the skin electrophysiological relief (SER), particu larly directed autoW aves (DW), lately detected by the skin electrophysiological imaging (SEI), proved to be extremely sensitive to some specific EMF-fre quences. O ur aim was further investigation how MRI effects the SER. Methods and Materials: Impulse magnetic field (MF) (0 .1 -0 .2 T) + relevant EMF (0 .1 -1 0 mW/sq. cm) were applied directly (or ab. 10 cm. apart) to the areas of visualization: neoplasm ata and "bioactive" zones (BZ) (20 x 40 mm.). 26 subjects (ab. 800 image frames) in health and desease were investigated. Results: Radical induced changes o f the SER were registrateti at the tum or outlines and the BZes of unhealthy subjects, e.g: suppressing of initial slow autowave processes (fractions of mm/min); appearance of fast induced DW (up to 8 mm/min) o f about constant am plitude within the BZ (swing up to 70%); the DW' back front was capable o f reversing with the MF+EMF being switched off; through image-sequence autocorrelation analysis has shown significant impact of the MF+EMF to the SER ' chaotic dynamics at normal and, particularly, tum or border-line, areas (up to r = 0.6 per 1 min). No noticable differences were registered between local and distant exposition, and between w eaker and stronger fields. In all cases, the SER' response was most marked to the influence "switch on-off" factors. The observed DW phenom ena supposedly are macroscopic manifestation of intercellular signalling or/and local cooperative processes of peroxide oxidation of lipids with enzymes participation at the receptor fields, while the chaotic behaviour may rather reflect equilibrium between processes o f aerobic/anaerobic breathing. These finding may be useful fo r developing fMRI technique with more patient-adequate EMF-frequences and MF-fronts steepness. 14:35 1327 To evaluate biological effects eventually induced on mononuclear cells from human blood by the exposure to static magnetic field of a com mer cially available magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) unit. Methods and Materials: Peripheral blood sam ples (20 ml) from 20 healthy volunteers were obtained. Mononuclear cells were isolated by density gradient centrifugation, positioned on a phantom and exposed on a 0.5 T supercon ducting MRI fo r 120 minutes in isothermal (24.5 C) conditions. Non exposed control sam ples were kept at the same conditions. The effects of MR exposure on membrane activation clusters were evaluated by cytofluorimetric analysis. Production of interleukins (IF N -y, TN F-a, IL-4) was evaluated before and after PHA stimulation (25 mg/ml) with immunoenzymatic analysis. The following data were obtained. A significative decrease of expres sion of CD 69 after PHA stimulation; spontaneous release of IF N -y, TNF-c*, and IL-4 was increased in culture and decreased after PHA stimulation. The exposure to a static magnetic field com m only employed for clinical purposes increases the spontaneous release of interleukins from Th-1 and Th-2 lymphocytes and decreases the release after mitogen (PHA) stimulation. Results obtained indicate that the production of interleukins synthethized by T-lymphocytes may be influenced by the exposure to magnetic resonance. 14:40 1328 Assessm ent o f a novel autom ated brain segm entation procedure based on a multi-spectral relaxom etric MR approach B. Alfano, A. Brunetti, E.M. Covelli, E. Tedeschi, M. Quarantelli, M. Salvatore; N aples/I To test a method fo r autom ated brain segm entation based on multispectral images of relaxation rates and proton density, calculated from pairs of spin-echo sequences. M aterials and Methods: Two interleaved axial data sets including the entire brain were obtained at 1.5 T. Accuracy and reproducibility o f the segmentation procedure were tested with a three-com partm ent phantom simulating gray m atter (GM), white matter (WM) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). In vivo repro ducibility was tested with 12 studies performed in 5 normal subjects. Fractional GM, WM and C SF volum es were correlated with age in 50 normal subjects (age range 1 6 -7 6 years). In the phantom studies maximum volum e difference was 4.4% (simulated W M) and maximum variation coefficient was 3.2% (simulated GM). In the normal subjects standard errors of m easurement (ml) were: 8.8 (GM); 6.6 (WM) and 6.6 (CSF). In the regression analysis, a significant decrease of GM fractional volum e and increase o f CSF with age (p < 0.001), with no significant changes in WM were found. GM and CSF slopes were respectively -0 .1 3 1 % ± 0.020% and +0.155% ± 0.027% per year. Conclusion: This multispectral segm entation method permits reproducible, operator-independent volum e measurements o f intracranial tissue compart ments. 14:50 1329 Accuracy o f a rigid system of m arkers for multimodal brain studies correlation S. Pallotta, A.R. Formiconi, C. Gori, G. Biti, U. Meldolesi; Florence/I The aim of this work was to assess the accuracy o f a rigid system of markers for the geometrical correlation o f MRI, CT, SPECT and PET brain studies. The system consisted o f a fram e of carbon roads which can be fixed to the head of the patient. The fram e features graduated scales fo r the accurate repositioning and spherical markers which can be filled with different substances fo r multimodal acquisitions. A first SPECT acquisition was performed. The rigid system of markers was rem oved and than put again S 262 on the head o f the volunteer. A second SPECT acquisition was performed. The two studies were registered, using the co-ordinates of the markers fixed on the rigid system, by a least-squares algorithm. The registration parameters were then applied to the co-ordinates of the head markers. The mean residual distances of the corresponding head markers were measured, resulting in about 1.5 mm. The performances of the rigid system of markers were assessed for the correlation of SPECT studies. The accuracy of the correlation was sufficient for diagnostic use. The correlation of data from different diagnostic modalities improves the diagnostic potential allowing to merge the information relative to the same organs, structures and lesions. Funded by National MURST Project Telemed 3. 1330 Superimposition of MR and double isotope DTPA SPECT for recurrence detection in brain gliom as radioim munotherapy G. Giorgetti, G. Sarti, S. Lazzari, В. Turci; Cesena/l И 31-radioimmunotherapy imaging does not furnish any geometrical infor mation beyond an intense spot, so it is impossible monitoring the correct distribution of the radioisotope. Sometimes, the presence o f a second spot create the suspect of a recurrence without having any idea of the location. Normal superimposition techniques doesn't help in this case, as 1131 has no referrence point to compare with MR image. So we injected to the patient in the therapeutical phase 99 m-Tc DTPA to detect the skull position in relation to the therapeutical 1131 spot. The produced image may be superimposed to the MR to obtain the needed geometrical information. As we have seen in some clinical cases studied, the suspictious of a reccurence due to the presence of a second spot o r the growing of the main spot may be removed from the geometrical information obtained from the superimposition of the double isotope DTPA SPECT and MR images. Beside the application fo r imaging there are increasingly attem pts to use agents as power absorbing media fo r local hyperthermia. In this regard the determination o f physical properties of magnetite particles is necessary for clinical applications. Methods and Materials: Several types of magnetite were characterized with respect to their structural properties, magnetic losses and specific absorption rates. Results: Typical values of specific magnetic losses (0.7 J/kg magnetite) were measured for one field cycle with an am plitude of 30 kA/m. This corresponds to a specific absorption rate of 200 W /g fo r a frequency o f 300 kHz. Thermal conductivity of the medium surrounding the sam ple influences considerably the maximum tem perature increase in the absorber. The experimental results confirm well our theoretical estimations. A tem perature increase in the order of 10 К was obtained. The results show that a general figure of merit can be defined which allows to classify the heating potential of different agents. For tum or tissue, hyperthermia may be a useful tool; its clinical applications depend strongly on the targeted tissue region with respect to its localization and thermal parameters. Classical method of peripheral vessels remains balloon angioplasty. A therec tom y is still limited to circumscribed eccentric and calcified lesions of femoral and popliteal arteries. Stenting has become a major achievement. Follow-up results o f stented iliac stenoses (n = 118) showed a major com plication rate of 3.4% , primary patency of 95% after one and 82% after 4 years. Stents recanalized 103 chronic iliac occlusions by mechanical means only with a major com plications rate of 5.8%. Primary patency was 87% after one and 78% after 4 years. Radiologists used to call the shoulder joint: 'The forgotten joint'. It is now by far the most common indication fo r a musculoskeletal ultrasound exam of the upper extremity. Shoulder pain is the leading symptom and rotator cuff disease is the m ost common pathology. S onography contributes to the elbow exam by showing intraarticular loose bodies with great accuracy. Other soft tissue pathologies with similar clinical presentation may be distinguished by ultrasound as well. W rist and hand ultrasound will be indicated for a small num ber of specific disease entities o f nerves, ligaments and tendons. The study will then be ordered to confirm or exclude the diagnosis. 1336 Ultrasound of the musculoskeletal system D.J. Wilson; Oxford/UK U ltrasound has become firm ly established as the ideal technique fo r the screen, diagnosis and treatm ent monitoring in Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip. There are a variety of techniques used throughout the world. These will be presented, com pared and discussed. The validity of population screening studies has been questioned and the evidence on both sides of the argument will be presented. U ltrasound is the ideal technique for detecting joint effusions in those areas difficult to palpate clinically. This has a number of applications, but in particular the examination presenting with irritable hip and the guidance o f needle aspiration. U ltrasound is an im portant adjunct to the detection and diagnosis of mass lesions in soft tissues, close correlation and integration with other imaging m ethods is essential. For optimal results in each of these fields, the technical parameters must be well chosen: To keep the geom etrical unsharpness low, the focal spot must be small (100 micron in state-of-the-art magnification mammography). Novel tube technologies reach focus sizes < 40 micron. To keep the dose at tolerable levels, grids should not be used. The detectability of microcalcifications is improved in magnification mammog raphy a t the cost o f increased dose. W ith faster film-screen combinations, dose may be reduced while detection remains at the contact mammography level. Morphological analysis o f individual calcifications profits from the higher spatial resolution. W ith ultra high magnification techniques (focus 40 micron) dose reductions fo r survey and spot view mam m o-graphies seem possible. The increased spatial resolution at the detector level perm its digital mammog raphy with current storage phosphors with a potential increase in calcification detectability. Dedicated specimen radiography system s with copper anodes and foci < 40 micron detect excised calcifications with higher reliability. Mammographie screening provides an acceptable sensitivity for breast cancer, yet its specificity is hampered especially in dense breasts. Thus an increasing num ber o f targeted biopsies are needed to reduce the number of unneces sary surgical interventions in non-m alignant breast lesions. Complementary imaging modalities might thus play a pivotal role in the management of inde term inate mammography. Scintimam mography (SM), being around since over tw o decades, has recently seen a revival with the use o f Tc-99m MDP, a well established bone seeking agent, and Tc-99m sestamibi, a monocationic com plex of Tc-99m with isonitrile groups that has initially been introduced as myocardial perfusion tracer. In spite o f a growing number of encouraging results with SM fundam ental points are still under debate: (1 ) W hat is the "ideal tracer" for SM (T1-201, Ga-67, Tc-99m sestamibi, Tc-99m MDP, F-18 FDG, ...), (2) W hat is the ideal imaging protocol (planar-tom ographic, prone-supine position), (3) W hen should SM be applied in correlation to the stage o f the dis ease (general screening, inconclusive mammography, high risk patients, post surgical follow-up, ...), the patients' age, physical condition (dense breasts, fibrocystic disease) and to other imaging modalities (ultrasound, magnetic resonance, ...), (4) Can SM reliably predict axillary or internal mammary node involvement, (5) Is the application of SM cost-effective? is an accepted method fo r the treatm ent of com plications of portal hypertension. W ith the experience adquiered by interventionalists and new technical refinements, the success is as high as 95%. The portal puncture is performed, in m ost cases, with the only aid of a wedged hepatic phlebography with CO2. Ocasionally, an on-line delineation, with ultrasound, is still needed to achieve a safe portal access. A problem of TIPS, still not-solved, is stent or hepatic vein restenosis. There are several theories to justifie this frequent (75% ) com plication, like biliary contamination o f the shunt due to bile duct transection. Most cases respond favorably to PTA, however a second prosthesis (m ainly fo r hepatic veins) or even a second parallel shunt can be necessary. Refractory ascites is still a controversial indication fo r TIPS. Some series present a succes (no need of paracentesis, decrease in diuretics) as hig as 74% probably related to an increase o f renal sodium excretion. There are some cases with associated anatomical and/or morphological abnormalities which difficult the procedure, am ong them the Budd-Chiari syndrome and portal thrombosis. In these patients TIPS is an excellent method for portal decompresion with com plete throm bus dissappearance. 1340 Advances in radiological diagnosis and m anagem ent of portal hypertension (part II) P. Rossi, G. Pizzi, M. Amoruso, A. Russo, A. Ascarelli; Rome/I In the last ten years, an increasing role o f C olor-Doppler US, CTs, and MRIs with different sequences fo r the study of portal hypertension has been observed. C olor-Doppler US is probably the most used modality for the evaluation o f portal hypertension, because of its high accuracy in diagnosing patency, collateral circulation, and flow direction and speed. Moreover, it is an excellent tool to m onitor patency of TIPS procedure. Major indications for TIPS, nowadays, are recurrent bleeding and failure after S 2 6 4 sclerotherapy or surgery (153/177 TIPS performed). Excellent indications in this category are those patients in a waiting list fo r liver transplant (65/153 recurrent bleeding). Other indications for TIPS are represented by refractory ascites (23/177 TIPS), Budd-Chiari syndrome (1/177 TIPS), etc. Our results of TIPS have been quite satisfying, since our technical success has been of 98.6% in 177 patients. The monitoring o f the shunt is also very important, as mentioned before, Color-Doppler US is the least invasive modality with an accuracy of 98%. When Color-Doppler US or endoscopic findings suggest the presence o f stent mulfunctions with recurrent esophageal varices, an angiography should be performed for therapeutic reasons and to allow correction of the flow within the stent. This can be achieved by balloon dilation or by re-stenting. Very seldom an additional TIPS has to be performed. Our secondary patency rate in 177 cases in two years is 80% approximately, indicating that TIPS is a really effective procedure. Encephalopathy represents a minor problem. Although there is a high inci dence of mild encephalopathy (51% in aged people) in the first few months, in fact, it goes down to 4% at 12 months after medical treatment. Rebleeding is also a serious problem; in our randomized control series it was present in 23% o f cases, as com pared with 51% of patients treated with sclerotherapy. Esophageal carcinoma is frequently advanced at presentation and surgery is inappropriate in approximately 5 0 -6 0 % of patients. The traditional method of palliation of patients with irresectable carcinoma is insertion of rigid plastic tubes under general anesthesia. These have a relatively small caliber and most patients cannot eat solid food. The overall complication rate is 36-40% . Recently, self-expandable metallic endoprostheses have become available. Some o f these are covered with plastic to prevent tum or ingrowth. These stents can be inserted under fluoroscopic guidance without the need for gen eral anesthesia because the introducing catheters are relatively small (1 8 -2 4 F); however the fully expanded stents have a large internal diam eter (16 mm -25 mm). These endoprostheses achieve excellent palliation of malignant dysphagia and most patients can eat a normal diet. The main problem with un covered stents is tum or ingrowth, which can be managed endoscopically with laser therapy. Plastic-covered endoprotheses are associated with a significant migration rate 30% but recent improvem ents in design promise to reduce this problem. Self-expanding metallic stents are an excellent method o f treatm ent of ma lignant esophageal perforation resulting in a lower rate of complications, a shorter hospital stay and a greater improvement in quality of life than other methods of palliative treatment. The chest radiograph remains the single most com m on imaging procedure in the world accounting fo r up to 30% -40% of all conventional radiologic examinations performed in Europe as well as in the United States. In spite of its high frequency of performance obtaining a high quality chest radiograph remains one of the greatest challenges in diagnostic imaging. Conventional film-screen radiography has been the standard radiologic medium for chest radiography because of its semplicity, low cost, excellent spatial res olution and sensitivity. However there are limitations in its ability to provide optimal contrast in both the lungs and mediastinum. Current film-screen radiographic technique requires a com prom ise between the need for adequate contrast in local regions of the chest and overall image latitude. Limitations of conventional film-screen system s are more pronounced in bedside radiography. This course will explore various approaches that have been developed to produce consistently high-quality chest radiographs. Techniques utilizing con ventional screen-film com binations and equipm ent will be presented as well the rationales for specific choices and com binations. 1344 Basic chest MRI P. Armstrong; London/U K The most frequent indication of chest MRI is to assist in the staging of lung cancer. Chest MRI, like chest CT, has limitations when staging lung cancer and MRI is not used routinely. Chest MRI is used to try and solve specific problems, notably when the multiplanar imaging capability o f MRI can be exploited. It therefore has particular value in showing the extent o f superior sulcus tumours, neoplastic involvement of the aorto-pulmonary w indow and the sub-carinal region and vascular invasion. MRI can also provide useful information about m ediastinal masses, the aorta and great veins. Neither cardiac MRI o r pulm onary parenchymal imaging will be discussed in this particular refresher course. Purpose: In the therapy of malignant and benign stenoses in the tracheo bronchial system the use of stents get more and more important. At the same time an increasing variety of different types of stents accomplish the choice of the right stent for the right indication. Purpose of this study was, to analyze under clinical conditions, which stent will be the best for which indication. Methods and Materials: W e implanted Wallstents, Gianturcostents, Nitinolstents from B&S and Angiomed, Tantalumstents and Dumonstents in different covered and non covered variants under clinical conditions in more than 400 patients. We treated about 60% malignant and 40% benign stenoses. 45% of the patients had a bronchial carcinoma. In the group of benign stenoses, we had about 23% with a chondromalacia and about 12% with oesophageal compression or fistula. Results: In > 90% we improve the patient from a bedridden to an outpatient status. In case of benign stenoses we had a recurrence free follow -up to 60 months with recidivism in 12% which can be treated sufficiently by laser. In The most advanced imaging methods, such as Computed Tomography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), permit a direct view of the cranial nerves and/or the skull base foram ina through which these nerves pass. In order to obtain a correct anatomical view, it is necessary to know the best viewing planes to display every cranial nerve: It is usually the plane coinciding with the space developm ent direction of the nerve or the plane corresponding to the foram en axis (or the one perpendicular to the latter). Furthermore, there are also areas in the skull base, where several cranial nerves are close one to another: Orbital apex, cavernous sinus, pontocerebel lar angle, jugular foramen; also these anatom ical structures can be correctly showed using CT and MRI. Examples of normal radioanatomy and of the most common pathologies affecting a single cranial nerve o r groups of them are illustrated. 1346 M R-angio in AVM o f the brain G. R ode sch1, Z. P atay2; 1 Le KremUn-Bicêtre/F, 2 Budapest/H Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) of the brain are vascular lesions that can harbour different types (fistula o r nidus) o r different sizes (micro-AVMs (sm aller than 10 mm) o r macro-AVMS). They can be unique o r multiple (nearly 20% of cases in the pediatric population), even systematized (Wiburn-Mason syndrome). The revealing symptoms include intracranial hemorrhage (more than 50% ), seizures, progressive neurological deficits or headaches. Because of the poor natural history of brain AVMs, they are often proposed for treatment, and em bolization represents actually the best initial therapeutic management, either as sole treatm ent o r associated to surgery or radiotherapy. The architecture o f the lesion represents the most im portant point that has to be studied in AVMs, as it will point to the weak portions of the network that will influence the clinical course. It is therefore im portant to analyse precisely the type of AVM, its location (best seen thanks to MRI) and its angioarchitecture. Till now only angiography has proven capable to determ ine the latter data. MRA has made trem endous progress thanks to new technical achievements and refinem ents (MOTSA, magnetization transfer, gadolinium injection...). Reported sensitivity and specificity are remarkably high. Nevertheless, the accuracy o f MRA remains inferior to that of angiography, and no therapeutic decision nor analysis of the "evolutivity" of the lesion can be made with that method. The most frequent sources of errors were superposition of vascular structures, signal loss due to saturation o r intravoxel dephasing artifacts, low signal due to incorrect velocity encoding values in PC MRA, and insufficient spatial resolution. However, MRA remains, if well-performed and analyzed, a satisfactory tool fo r confirmation or exclusion of such a vascular lesion. It appears to be a reasonable imaging, or screening alternative capable of providing diagnostic information with the necessary degree of confidence. C erebrovascular disease is uncommon in children. The incidence is believed to be around 2.5 cases per 100,000 population per year, excluding cerebrovas cular disease during the perinatal period. The causes of ischemic stroke in children are varied and quite different from those in adults. The imaging strategy is therefore different in children. Despite aggressive investigation and modern imaging methods, the majority of children presenting with stroke will not have an identifiable underlying cause. The most common known cause of stroke in children is congenital heart disease with right to left shunt. Bacterial endocarditis and venous thrombosis can complicate congenital heart disease and play a etiological role in stroke. Other im portant causes include coagulation defects, hematological diseases and certain metabolic syndromes such as mitochondrial encephalomyopathies, e.g. MELAS-syndrome. Vasculopathies are uncommon in children but Moya-Moya disease may occur in older children. Traum a, particularly to the neck region, may initiate dissection of the brachio-cephalic vessels and is the cause of stroke in 20% of adolescents presenting with stroke symptoms. Intracerebral hemorrhage can clinically present as stroke. Arterio-venous malformations and dural sinus thrombosis should be suspected. The primary goal fo r imaging of stroke in children is distinguishing between hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke as further diagnostic strategies differ sig nificantly. The secondary goal is to identify those causes in w hich available treatm ent options will influence the immediate or subsequent care fo r the child. However, the need for invasive diagnostic procedures m ust be assessed in the context of potential treatm ent options. 1348 Diagnostic imaging of the ears and sinuses in children P. Anslow; Oxford/UK The com monest single indication for surgery in the pediatric population in England is for "glue" ear, where the normal ventilation of the middle ear cleft is replaced by tenacious secretion. This disorder and other com plications of middle ear sepsis are ultimately determ ined by dysfunction in the eustachian tube ventilation of the middle ear. W hilst "glue" ear does not require imaging, other com plications of chronic dysfunction, such as keratom a and mastoid infection, certainly do. The anatom y and physiology o f the middle and external ear will be described, with illustrative examples of the most important pathologies. Despite modem antibiotic therapies, intracranial com plications of both sinus and ear disease still occur and require careful investigation. Cochlea implantation is now performed fa r more frequently fo r senseorneural hearing loss and this requires assessment o f the ear both for structural abnorm alities and patency. Imaging of the ears and paranasal sinuses is, today, undertaken by cross sectional imaging using CT and MRI and these modalities will be used to illustrate the talk. The course will give a tutorial overview on state-of-the-art com puter vision techniques in radiology: Hardware, software and application developments, presented in a well illustrated fashion. The attendee learns o f volum e visualisation techniques: shaded surface gener ation, MIR generation, object definition, multimodality presentation, stereo and cine, and speed-increasing parallel techniques. Accurate multimodality match ing of anatomical with functional images (CT/MR/SPECT/PET/...) becomes indispensible. The increased tem poral resolution o f both MR and CT enables the precise quantification o f 3D perfusion and 3D motion, such as heartwall thickening. Segmentation is a classical problem, only solved in specialized cases. Several modern approaches are reviewed, including (non-)linear multiscale techniques. These are particularly effective on noisy data, e.g. 3D ultrasound, for image enhancement and restauration (e.g. deblurring), and measurements. W e dis cuss applications fo r a CD-ROM interactive anatomy atlas and virtual reality techniques. We discuss many examples o f clinical applications, am ong which 3D CT subtraction angiography, automatic MR cortical surface segmentation, 3D ultrasound ovarium follicle measurements, 3D CT trabecular bone analysis and surgical simulation studies. Advanced telecommunications infrastructure through Internet offers worldwide connectivity: we give some exam ples o f interactive 3D consultation videocon ferencing, and radiological teaching files. Computer Vision is in stormy developm ent (see also the Informatique section at this ECR). Pattern recognition o f com plicated morphology is facilitated especially in using cine display by more intuitive perception and markedly reduced time requirements to examine large stacks of slices (124). MPR has become flexible as tortuous structures can be tracked in space. MIP provides efficient means o f providing an overview of morphologic data and is relatively insensitive to partial volum e averaging. 3D-imaging has a limited clinical need, only in com plicated pathology to assess topographic relations, i.e. size, orientation and volume, providing surgeons a preview assisting in planning of a customized surgical approach resp. surgical navigation. Manufactured physical models are used for surgical simulation and implant design. Multimodality matching links functional data with the morphologic substrate and com bines relevant structures only visible in different modalities. Since com puter vision has established itself as a vital component in decision making after data acquisition, design of reporting and clinical conference rooms is changing as rapidly as volume scanners are gaining interest. The two-step, fluoroscopically guided technique fo r percutaneous nephrostomy will be shown and explained in detail. W ith the first step the renal pelvis is punctured from dorsal with a 23 " chiba needle and the obstructed system is opacified. In the second step a dilated posteriorly orientated calyx is punctured with a 19" Lunderquist needle with teflon sheath from a dorso-lateral approach. A flexible guidewire with rem ovable core is introduced into the renal pelvis and the catheter is advanced over the guidewire into the renal pelvis. Thereafter the flexible wire is exchanged for an extrastiff Amplatz wire. All further procedures are perform ed over this wire. The parenchymal tract is dilated stepwise up to 9 F and a 8 or 9 F pigtail catheter is inserted. The optimal position of the pigtail would be a dilated upper calyx. The obstructed ureter is recanalized with a guidewire after percutaneous nephros tom y has been performed. Usually a Bentson or Terumo wire is used. In difficult cases a steerable catheter, like Terumo m ulti-purpose catheter, 5 F, can be helpful. W hen the bladder has been entered with the guidew ire a 5 F catheter is advanced over the wire into the bladder and an Amplatz extra stiff wire is introduced. Over this wire the double J-stent can be inserted. In case of very firm ureteral stenoses this stenosis can be predilated. Superstiff guidewires, like the Back-up wire (Schneider) can also be helpful. If the double J-stent is in a good position and if no bleeding has occurred the external drainage is removed. 1352 Urological intervention (part II) M.J. Kellett; London/U K Video demonstrations will be shown of various percutaneous manipulations in the upper urinary tract. These will include Percutaneous Nephrolithotomy, Percutaneous Endopyelotomy, Dilatation of Ureteric Strictures and Antegrade Ureteric Stenting. Strictures which cannot be passed either from above or ureteroscopically from below we approach using a rendezvous technique. The demonstrations will be informal with open discussions between the other tw o speakers and active audience participation. 1353 Urological intervention (part III) F. Cornud, X. Belin, P. Melki, O. Hélénon, J.F. Moreau; Paris/F Incision of ureteral stenoses. W e describe a technique of incision o f ureteral and uretero-digestive anastom otic strictures using the Acucise balloon, percutaneously placed under fluoroscopic control. Acucise device is a torqued control balloon catheter covered with a cutting wire which can be safely o ri ented yielding a negligible risk of m ajor vessel o r digestive damage. Long-term actuarial patency rate of incised stenoses is 70%. Thus, we recommend this aggressive endourological treatm ent given the difficulties o f open surgical revision and the inefficacy of balloon dilatation. Percutaneous retrieval of "lost" JJ stents. During retrograde placem ent of JJ stents, recoiling of the distal pig tail can occur; if endoscopic retrieval using an ureteroscope cannot be achieved, percutaneous retrieval under fluoroscopic control is possible using either grasping forceps or lassos. These techniques can also be used fo r retrieval of broken pieces o f "lost" JJ stents S 267 MRI has a num ber o f advantages for interventional procedures such as the lack of radiation dose, good lesion contrast and strong response to thermal procedures. However, the disadvantages include poor time resolution, patient access and equipm ent compatibility. A new generation of MRI systems and interventional tools are now becoming available which overcome many of these limitations. C hallenges for interventional MRI include visualisation of delivery devices such as biopsy needles. This has been addressed by combining multiple imaging modalities such as ultrasound and MRI and the investigation of novel materials and coatings fo r improved visualisation. On-line monitoring of treatm ent change requires real-time image registration, segmentation and display. In addition the scan control system must be flexible to allow the image plane to be rapidly relocated to track moving objects. Interventional procedures w hich can be monitored using MRI include laser and radiofrequency therm al ablation, photodynam ic therapy, cryo-therapy, high power focussed ultrasound as well as the use of interstitial chemical and radioactive agents. Organs w hich have been targetted include the liver, the breast, the prostate and the brain. A review of recent results obtained with this exciting new modality will be presented. The term "quality practice" in radiography implies that an acceptable level of professional standards is being met, and fo r many radiographers quality practice is synonymous with competence. However, unless one can specify w hat constitutes "com petence" , it is difficult to know w hat to expect. Therefore, making com petence explicit can allow a profession to publish statements about w hat their qualified members are com petent to do, and w hat people can reasonably expect of them. Ensuring that standards are easy to understand, also allows a decision to be made when incompetence occurs. A further advantage is that the standards (the separate elem ents of com petence) provide a foundation fo r curriculum devel opment and for the design o f valid assessm ent systems. Together with the competence required by a newly qualified radiographer fo r their first employ ment, the publication of standards can assist in the assessment of continuing competence. But how are standards derived? In addition to a review on competence, this presentation will first exam ine the m ethods w hich may be used to identify professional standards, and secondly will consider the techniques which can be employed to design valid assessment tools including the role of portfolios fo r both assessment and for continuing professional developm ent. In this way it is hoped to raise awareness on the im portant role that education plays in maintaining quality practice. While the AIDS pandem ic appears to slow its rate of growth as it spreads into the heterosexual population of the industrial world, its becoming apparent that the disease is going to dominate many aspects o f medical practice for several decades to come. Radiologists will need to recognize its appearances, to understand how, safely, to look after patients with the disease, and to know enough about the illness to be able to counsel their patients, their staff and their colleagues. This refresher course is divided into tw o sections, the first of which (part I) provides up-to-date information on the disease, its epidemiology, its pathophysiology and describes the imaging aspects of the disease in the luminal gastrointesti nal tract (conventional double contrast studies and endoscopy). The second section (part II) will describe the imaging aspects of the disease in other abdom inal organ system s (liver, spleen, pancreas, biliary tract and retroperitoneum ), using cross-sectional imaging modalities (ultrasound, computered tom ography and magnetic resonance imaging). Candidiasis, cytomegalovirus (CMV), cryptosporidiosis, histoplasmosis, isosporiasis, salmonellosis, toxo plasmosis, bacillary peliosis and unusual mycobacteria account for a majority of nonneoplastic disorders. Neoplasms include Kaposi's sarcom a (KS) en high-grade В-cell lymphomas. Multiple sites may be involved in significant numbers o f patients. As radiologic experience accumulates, the predom inant radiographic patterns will become more clearly defined. This refresher course (part I/ll) will produce a cohesive account o f AIDS that will educate and guide radiologic practice. Purpose: The detection of radiotransparent foreign bodies, w hich account for the majority o f foreign bodies (FBs) to be found in soft tissue, has always constituted a diagnostic challenge fo r the radiologist w ho is called upon to facilitate the task of the surgeon and the medical examiner, and represent a significant gap in conventional radiodiagnostic. We assessed the validity of US in the diagnosis of FBs. Materials and Methods: Five sam ples of bovine muscular tissue 5 cm thick was used. By making 5 mm surface incisions, 20 w ooden, plastic and glass FBs having diameters ranging from 1 x 1 mm to 1 x 10 mm were introduced at various distances apart. Working independently and blindly, three ultrasographers evaluated the presence and size o f fragm ents, using a 7 .5 -1 0 MHz linear probe. Methods and Materials: radiography in tw o projections fo r 302 patients with direct repeated enlargement of image was carried out by apparatus " REIS" and "Electrónica 100D" (Russia). Focus of the tube 0.015 x 0.015 /tm . Results: in the case of gunshot injuries of extremities on the 5 and 7 times enlarged radiographs, often there determ ined small foreign bodies of different density, inculcated by wounding shell (by mine splinters, shot, bone frag ments). C omputer analysis of color encoding and filtering to differentiate bone fragments and foreign bodies which were not enough contrasting. For gunshot osteomyelitis topom etry was carried out more distinctly: form of the centres, borders, depth of occurrence, sequesters. In soft tissues the differentiation of separate muscle group and dividing adipose layers disappeared. In the case o f swelling of hypodermic fatty cellulose there were disturbances of the clarity o f image of the inner outline of the skin and hypodermic fatty cellulose. With additional filtering on the background of colour encoding in the wound channels sometimes were exposed gas bubbles. The aim of this prospective study w as to evaluate the role o f a fast, whole body helical CT scanner fo r prim ary diagnosis in traum a patients. Materials and Methods: 27 severely injured patients (9 women, 18 men; mean age 43 years) were first exam ined with a helical CT scanner allowing for digital radiogramms up to a length of 1024 mm and continous helical scans of up to 70 seconds (slice thickness 3 to 10 mm, pitch factor up to 2). The primary CT diagnosis was proofed either by X-ray after the C T examination or within the following day, by abdominal ultrasound, by additional CT scans in the following days and by clinical follow-up. Results: CT detected all clinically relevant injuries of the head, spine, chest and abdomen. The diagnosis and classification of vertebral fractures and their am ount of damage to the spinal cord was performed immediately. 4% of the fractures o f the extremities and the ribs were not seen primarily. 6% of the injuries were out of the CT scan field. Conclusion: Helical CT is a reliable and fast method of obtaining vital infor mation and of improving m anagem ent planning, in severely injured patients. It reduces the number o f conventional X-ray exam inations and can replace ab dominal sonography. In certain cases additional X-rays of extremity fractures are required. , wrist (n = 8), ankle and foot (n = 16), knee (n = 11) and hip joint (n = 3), were examined by thin-section CT including multiplanar and 3D-reconstruction. Multiplanar reconstructions (MPR) were performed in two predefined perpendicular planes. 3D surface reconstructions were optimized fo r fracture visibility. The im pact of conventional radiographs, axial CT and MPR on final diagnosis and therapeutic management as well as the value of 3D-reconstructions fo r treatm ent planning w as assessed by two board-certified traum a surgeons. Results: In 37/45 patients (82%), axial CT provided informations not available from conventional radiographs, resulting in a change in therapeutic manage ment in 9 patients (20%). Additional findings were seen on MPR in 28/45 patients (62% ) with a change in therapeutic management in 4 patients (9%). The benefit of MPR w as higher in fractures of the knee, foot and wrist. In 7/45 patients (16%), 3D-reconstructions were considered helpful fo r treatment planning.  1364 Conventional X-ray diagnosis of uncommon carpal injury P. Hendrickx; Hannover/D probably owing to differences in MRI modalities and to the w ay in which MR images are interpreted. Endorectal MRI is highly operator-dependent, and interobserver variations are frequent, particularly in case o f multi-institutionnal study. Interpretations made in a single institution, by radiologists very fam iliar with endorectal MRI yield a better specificity. Finally, radical prostatectomy specimen is an im perfect "gold standard" because incision of the prostate capsule is common during surgery precluding correct pathological staging. Despite its limitations, endorectal MRI improves the preoperative staging of prostate cancer as it identifies 50% of patients who have clinically occult extraprostatic disease, thus reducing the preoperative understaging rate by half. In experienced hands, it can detect, fo r a given individual, extraprostatic invasion with extremely high specificity, ensuring that few, if any, patients will be deprived o f curative surgery. This lecture reviews these two form s of allergic lung disease. Eosinophilic pneum onia or pulmonary eosinophilia is a diverse group of disorders characterised by pulm onary infiltrates which are rich in eosinophils. There is alm ost always an associated peripheral blood eosinophilia and an increase in the num ber of eosinophils in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. The eosinophilic pneumonias are difficult to classify but the following are those which are usually recognisable clinically and radiologically: Simple pulm onary eosinophilia, tropical pulm onary eosinophilia, allergic bron chopulm onary aspergillosis, acute eosinophilic pneumonia, chronic eosinophilic pneumonia. The characteristic radiographic and CT appearances will be dis cussed. Extrinsic allergic alveolitis is caused by the repeated inhalation of articulate organic antigen. The particles are very small and reach the terminal bronchi oles and alveolar ducts where they are responsible for a respiratory bronchilitis and alveolitis. The disease is normally divided into acute, subacute and chronic forms, depending upon the timing and severity of exposure and onset of the disease. Each give characteristic radiographic and HRCT patterns. 1385 Pneumonia in the im munocom petent and im munocom prom ised patient G. Gavelli, M. Zompatori, R. Canini, F. Celletti, G. Battista; Bologna/I Infective pneum onitis are one of the most im portant causes of morbidity and mortality. Clinical suspicion of pneum onitis is a common motivation to the radiological evaluation. It is im portant to differentiate com munity and nosocomial pneumonitis and pneumonitis in im munocompetent and immunocompromised patients. The role o f radiology may be sum marized as follow: (1 ) Defining presence, site and extension o f thoracic pathology. False negative findings are rare but possible in early stage of diffuse pulm onary infection as PC in AIDS patients and miliary tuberculosis: X-ray findings appear later in com parison to clinical symptoms but HRCT or Ga 67 scintigraphy are able to visualize pulm onary involvement in early stage. (2) Stating if radiological pattern is com patible with infective pneumonitis. Differential diagnosis between infective pathology and other lesions is difficult. It is im portant to correlate clinical and radiological findings. (3) Detecting predisposing factors as other infections, aspiration or obstructing bronchial cancer. (4) C hest X-ray and mostly CT may indicate the site of the lesion and suggest the m ost useful technique to obtain diagnostic specimens. (5) C T is the optimal technique to diagnose associated pathology and com pli cations: abscess, septic embolism, ARDS, pneumothorax, bronchiectatis, gangrena, pleural effusion, em physema, bronchopleural fistula, adenopa thy. (6) To evaluate drug therapy efficacy. Functional MRI studies may also be employed in certain circumstances; they may conceivably indicate the potential for visual recovery. 1387 Infectious diseases of the brain C.F. Andreula; Bari/I The involvement of the Central Nervous System along the course o f infectious diseases causes different clinical, anatom opathological and neuroradiological aspects, due to the different microbical agents, to their virulence and the efficacy of the Immunitary System of the host. Brain infections are distinguished according to the life period occurring: lesions affecting the foetus in the first and second trim ester of pregnancy with organogenesis disturbances and consequent m alformations, and infections of the late pregnancy, perinatal period, childhood and adulthood. Lesions are divided in diffuse and focal ones. The diffuse ones are: meningitis, meningo-encephalitis and encephalitis. Acute meningitis are alm ost always neuroradiologically negative. In Chronic meningitis the most frequent is the tubercular granulom atous form, then Mycosis as Cryptococcosis and Coccidioidomicosis. Neuroradiology monitor the com plications of meningeal infec tions, such as severe hydrocephalus, ventriculitis, subdural effusions infections and cerebrovascular complications. Among Congenital Encephalitis the most frequent infections contracted dur ing the pregnancy are listed below the acronym TORCH. Among the Periand Post-natal encephalitis we should report Herpes Simplex type 1 Virus acute meningo-encephalitis and acute dissem inated encephalomyelitis with demyelinating "plaques". Chronic encephalitis is very uncommon. The focal lesions are cerebritis, immature form, and abscess and granuloma, m ature form s and cysts. The agents responsible for abscesses are bacteria. The agents responsible fo r granulom as are mycobacteria, fungi, and protozoa (toxoplasma). Parasitic cysts are related to Echinococcosis, Cisticercosis and Cryptococcosis. S 2 7 4 8:30-10:00 Magnetic resonance (MR) have greatly advanced both the understanding and the diagnosis of pediatric pathology. In order to maximize the information, high-quality images m ust be obtained. In pediatric patients motion during imaging sequences produce artifacts that may simulate pathologic conditions. Adequate sedation or general anesthesia eliminate the gross body motion. The effects of the physiologic random o r periodic motion artifacts (i.e. bowel peristalsis or cardiac pulsation) can be controlled with a variety of techniques, including respiratory and cardiac gating, к -space phase reordering, gradient moment nulling, and even echo rephasing. Fast and reduced-acquisition ma trix Fourier-acquired steady-state (RAM-FAST) techniques allow acquisition of a set of images in less than 30 sec. Ultrafast techniques virtually eliminate all motion at the expense of a poor S/N ratio. Other artifacts may simulate pathologic conditions and produce pitfalls in the interpretation o f MR images (aliasing, truncation, chemical shift and magnetic susceptibility artifacts), in cluding those related to the use of MR angiography. W ith an understanding of MR physical principles, instrumentation and techniques artifacts can be identi fied, corrected, minimized, or avoided. Moreover, in pediatric MR, the imaging parameters for the acquisition o f optimal images differ from those of the adult because standard adult imaging sequences do not consider the changing appearance of the developing brain and bone marrow. An understanding of these physiological variations with age is also im portant in examining MR pattern and determining w hether they are potential disease process or normal variations. 1389 Doppler ultrasound In the pediatric abdomen Z. Harkányi; Budapest/H Pediatric vascular imaging using ultrasound has become an essential part of abdominal studies. Recent observations indicate the usefulness of Doppler US in the detection of increased or reduced vascularity of the bowels in certain disorders. Congenital vascular anomalies can be diagnosed with the combination o f conventional US imaging and duplex-Doppler method. New ultrasound techniques have been introduced: color Doppler imaging (GDI), color vascular imaging (CVI) and C VIQ (volume flow measurement), color am plitude imaging (CAI) (or power Doppler) (to detect slow flow). The possible impact of the new techniques will be discussed. Indications of abdominal Doppler ultrasound studies will be summarized: Liver/biliary: portal hypertension, portal thrombosis liver masses, liver trans plant, acute cholecystitis; R enal: renal artery stenosis, inflammatory diseases, renal masses; Bowel: appendicitis, inflammatory bowel disorders (Crohn's dis ease), intususception; Vessels: aneurysm , congenital anomalies, thrombosis (IVC, aorta, iliac). In some cases color Doppler US is sufficient to establish the diagnosis, in other cases we can select the patients fo r other vascular imaging studies (e.g. MRA, СТА, angiography). Vascular ultrasound seem s to be an excellent, non-invasvive and cost-effective means to increase the confidence of the diagnosis. Limitations of the applications: operator dependency of abdominal Doppler examination and the need of respiratory cooperation. In shunt stenoses, balloon dilatation is the basic technic for most lesions and offers a technical success com parable to surgical interventions. In com plex cases, stent placement is required. Primary cum ulative shunt patency after stenting was 76% after 6 and 56% after 12 months. Due to reintervention, overall shunt function was 88% after six and 86% after 12 months. Atherectom y may be used in selected cases o f stent restenosis. Cutting PTA is a promising technique for resistant stenoses showing a 100% technical success and no particular complications. In shunt thrombosis, mechanical throm bectom y is an alternative to lysis. We performed 51 hydrodynamic thrombectom ies. Arterialized flow was reestab lished in 46 o f 51 procedures (90%). Early rethrombosis occurred in six cases within 24 hours post throm bectom y (11%). Clinical success was achieved in 39 o f 46 technically successful cases (85%). Cumulative patency was calculated S275 Friday 63% after 1 week, 57% after 1 months, 37% after 6 and 32% after 12 months. Similar results are achievable by other system s such as the Amplatz impeller. Thus, both fo r shunt stenoses and thromboses, successful percutaneous techniques are available. Direct antegrade puncture o f the brachial artery is the preferred vascular ac cess fo r angiography o f failing haemodialysis fistulas. Angiography via brachial artery access gives more information about flow situation, morphology and hemodynamic significance of a stenosis than any other angiographic technique especially retrograde angiography with suprasystolic pressure cuff. Direct an tegrade puncture opens several possibilities for percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) in the arterial part, the anastom osis and the distal and even the proximal venous outflow o f an arterio-venous fistula. The advantages and disadvantages o f this technique will be discussed with several examples of PTA. All material which is necessary fo r this intervention will be demonstrated and the procedure will be explained in detail. 1395 Angioplasty o f hem odialysis fistulas (part III) M. Sapoval; Paris/F The purpose of our w orkshop is to demonstrate our current technique of angioplasty of hemodialysis fistula. W e will focus on technical points based on Video dem onstration including various clinical cases. We use a direct puncture o f the fistula using a 18G Teflon needle. A soft tip guide wire is used to cross the stenosis and a 6 F introducer sheath is introduced. A 20 to 30 mg bolus of heparin is recommended, lowering the risk o f throm bosis. The sheath allows less trauma to the skin entry point and facilitates control angiograms. Living a > 1 cm subcutaneous tract between the entry point in the fistula and the skin puncture is a valuable method to prevent late false aneuyysm. The size o f the balloon is usually from 6 to 7 mm for PTFE grafts and from 5 to 12 o r 14 mm according to the size of the vessel to be dilated in fistulae. Slight overdilation is possible. The systematic use of a m anom eter is mandatory in order to avoid balloon rupture in very strong stenoses. Regular PTA balloons are to be used on the first intention but in about 10% of cases, the stenosis will resist to 15 atm and a high pressure balloon (Blue Max, Olbert) should be tried. In some cases however, failure can occur due to stronger stenosis. Photon Emission Tomography, SPECT, functional Magnetic Resonance Imag ing, fMRI). In this lecture the physical principles o f PET, SPECT, fMRI will be presented, with reference to the most recent technological improvements. Rel ative merits and limitations with respect to the performance of the techniques in term s of spatial resolution, detection efficiency, temporal resolution, quan titation accuracy will be discussed. Their suitability fo r research and clinical applications will also be considered. Today an estimated one million children have AIDS and The World Health Organisation estim ates that this num ber will reach 10 million by the year 2000. Ninety percent of infected children are contam inated by materno-foetal transmission, blood contamination is now minimal. Twenty percent of newborns from infected mothers will contract the disease. Prognosis is still poor even if survival has improved due to treatment. The main m anifestations are: (1) Pulmonary infections: viral or bacterial usual pediatric infections, oppor tunistic infections with increasing cases of mycobacterial infections. Pneu mocystosis is decreasing with prophylactic treatment. Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia is caracteristic o f children. (2) Abdominal infections are also very frequent, due to virus, bacteria, protozoa of fungi. They concern the digestive tube but also plain organs especially the liver. Nephropathy leads to renal failure. (3) Central nervous system (CNS) involvement by the HIV itself is of poor prognosis with severe developmental delay. CNS opportunistic infections are much rarer in children than in adults. (4) Tum ors are becoming more frequent in children with better survival due to treatment. They are mainly lymphomas and smooth muscle tumors. Radiologic presentation will be described in all theses cases with examples and the role of each radiological exam will be discussed. The aim of the paper is the role o f the radiographer in the following intervention. He has to inform the patient about the follow ing procedures and monitoring him during his stay in the radiology department. (1) Have the old examination available and study them (2) Handling with stee rable guidewires (3) Special introducing set (depends on balloon thickness) Preparing the balloon catheter (balloon-length,-thickness depends on the stenosis) (4) Stop watch Iliaca and femoral stents: The procedure is the same as with PTA. In case the patient had several tim es a PTA at the same vessel position, it could be an indication to place an iliaca or fem oral stent. In addition to the normal DSA or PTA procedure you need some various types of instruments, as for example a special delivery instrument fo r the stent. Embolization: Occlusion o f abnormal, bleeding vessels and A-V shunts. There are different types of procedures, fo r example the " Hilal Embolization Microcoil" . This is a soft platinum microcoil with synthetic fibers. Used for em bolization of selektiv vessel supply. Sum mary: The different investigations from the radiographers point of view and patient handling will be discussed. 1399 Interventional radiology (part II) C.L. Zollikofer; W interthur/CH Interventional radiology may be devided in into tw o large categories, vascular and non vascular interventions. A) Vascular interventions deal mainly with recanalisation procedures i.e. per cutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) of arterial and venous obstructions. There is a vast num ber o f instruments being used ranging from steerable guidewires and various balloon catheters to devices fo r mechanical recanal isation such as aspiration catheters, various types o f drills and atherectomy catheters. For acute occlusions pharmacological thrombolysis and/or mechan ical thrombectomy devices may be used. On the other hand em bolisation procedures are performed to occlude abnormal or bleeding vessels such as in trauma, tumor, ulcers, infection o r arterial venous malformation and aneurysms. B) Non vascular procedures include mainly percutaneous biopsies fo r diagnos tic workups and drainage procedures such as abscess drainage or drainage of the biliary and urinary system. Lately endolum inal stents are increasingly used for palliation of strictures of the esophagus, stomach, duodenum and colon. The radiographer in the interventional room should be fam iliar not only with the various procedures but also with the instrumentation, patient monitoring and in most frequently used drugs in these procedures. Examinations performed in the radiology departm ent expose the patients to significant risks due to limitations in monitoring and therapy during transport and examination. Therefore, bedside im aging modalities such as plain radiog raphy (including special views) and ultrasonography are particularly important. The patients' cooperation is usually severely compromised, affecting image quality and diagnostic value of otherwise established examinations. Fast imaging modalities are required to overcome motion artefacts and decrease overall examination time. Life support devices may degrade image quality and even preclude specific examinations. Therefore, in these patients C T is usually superior to MRI. Imaging may be required out o f office hours performed by staff with limited experience. Modalities with unrestricted availability may thus replace dedi cated procedures (e.g. Spiral-CT versus pulm onary angiography in suspected pulmonary embolism). This presentation will deal with com m on diagnostic problem s and an approach to the optimum use of imaging procedures in ICU patients. Imaging of abdominal and pelvic em ergencies either traum atic on nontraumatic has undergone marked changes in the last decade. Comm only performed ad ditional imaging studies, including ultrasonography and com puted tomography, enable many underlying causes to be diagnosed promptly, more accurately and less invasively, thus contributing to a decrease in mortality rates. Precise clinical history and thorough physical examination are, however, necessary to tailor the diagnostic approach to the individual patient. Plain abdominal radiographs remain the initial examination in acute nontrau matic abdominal conditions and may be m andatory in intestinal obstruction, when careful and methodical interpretation is exersised. Ultrasonography has shown to be extremely accurate in depicting abdominal absesses or intraperitoneal, pararenal o r perihepatic fluid collections. It can also diagnose acute cholecystitis and acute appendicitis, while it demonstrates parenchymal changes in traum atic abdom inal conditions. Computed tom ography offers the advantage of a simultraneous comprehen sive evaluation of both solid and hollow viscera in inflammatory, neoplastic and vascular disorders. It has revolutionized the evaluation o f patients with intestinal obstruction, allowing an accurate diagnosis, by defining the location and the likely cause and suggesting the presence of intestinal ischem ia or strangulation. Acute cholecystitis, abdominal abscesses, pancreatitis, pelvic inflammatory disease and acute mesenteric ischem ia are additional diagnostic posibilities fo r which CT has gained wide acceptance. C ontrast enchanced CT studies have also proved the diagnostic approach of choice in evaluating stable patients with blunt abdominal trauma. Over the years trauma has become one of the leading causes of mortality, especially fo r the younger population. Moreover, the socio-econom ic impact with al kinds and grades of disability, long hospital stay, and expensive rehabilitation is a trem endous burden for the society. Despite these facts, modern and appropriate trauma m anagem ent has not been discussed and taught too often in lectures, meetings o r symposia. The purpose o f this Round- Table- Presentation is, to em phasize the necessity o f concepts, to be acknowledged and applied by the medical staff dealing with trauma. Such a concept may be represented by 5 simple words: (1) where, i.e. the Trauma Room (TER) in size and site (2) w ho, i.e. the Trauma Team (3) w hat & how, i.e. the Equipment and the W ork-Up-Program (4) when, i.e. the Organisation. It is impossible, to cover the whole topic within 90 min.; however a surgeon (Prof. Fasol) will describe the clinical aspects and dem ands in regard to imaging. He will point out the necessity of interdisciplinary cooperation and mutual information. Dr. Bode will underline this by presenting his (our) concept and system o f a well functioning trauma room. Dr. Min/is will share with us his great experience on the field of Acute Traum atic Aortic Injury (ATAI) -one im portant challenge fo r appropriate trauma workup und m anagement. The value of different imaging modalities will also be under discussion. Prof. Hruby will describe his experience with digital radiology in traumatology. The speakers are prepared and willing to take questions and to discuss com m ents from the audience. 1403 The trauma team: W hat does the surgeon expect from radiology? P. Fasol; Vienna/A At middle-European traum a units standard roentgenogram s are still on the hands of trauma surgeons. Despite of this fact modern traum atology requires close cooperation between radiologist and traum a surgeon in different mod ern examination techniques. The success of this w ork depends on many requirements which should be met: (1) 24-hours duty of full drained radiologist. (2) Close neighbourhood of radiologic departm ent to the traum a unit. (3) Urgent availability of reports together with pictures of high quality. (4) Possibility of personal contact for discussion o f examination results. 1404 Polytrauma: A concept fo r clinical m anagem ent and im aging P.J. Bode; Leiden/NL Fatal haemorrhage is the dominant cause of death in traum a victims. The pertinent role of radiology in the management o f such a patient is the reliable determ ination whether o r not haemorrhage is a threat. By looking fast and hard fo r this condition one is able to spot dam age to the respiratory and neurological system as well, both being other leading causes o f death. It is clear that such a task can only be successfully fulfilled when radiology is incorporated in the trauma team and that much of the above mentioned can be done as a collateral procedure to the surgical and anaesthesiological efforts. S 2 7 7 Location, lay-out and design of the TER (trauma emergency room) should meet the dem ands of the various branches working there and close co-operation and understanding are essential. W ork-up by protocol using conventional radiography and ultrasound are the basics. Refinem ent com es from low threshold use o f C.T. after and not in stead o f the basics. Therapeutic manoeuvres may follow-up diagnostic angiography. MRI has certainly a role to play but usually not in the first (golden) hour. W ithout the personal involvement of the radiologist a "blind" trauma team is operating. 1405 Major vascular injury in traum a: Influence o f new technology S.E. Mirvis; Baltimore, MD/USA This presentation addresses developm ents and controversies o f the last decade concerning the imaging assessment o f blunt traum a patients with potential traum atic aortic injury (TAI). The lecturer will briefly describe the "natural history" o f acute TAI as it relates to the diagnostic work-up and initial management. The appropriate plain radiographic interpretation of the chest radiograph as a baseline screening study for detection o f mediastinal hemor rhage is em phasized, including the use o f "true erect" positioning. The role of contrast-enhanced C T scan as an ancillary screening technique, particularly since the advent o f spiral technology and power-injected intravenous contrast boluses, will be considered with demonstration of the various C T findings associated with major thoracic arterial injury. The sensitivity, specificity, and predictive value o f CT, as well as its cost-effectiveness as a diagnostic tool for aortic injury is presented. Some limitations of thoracic angiographic diagnosis, the standard reference technique, will be illustrated and quantified. Finally, brief consideration will be given to the potential value of transesophageal echo (TEE) as a new diagnostic procedure and how it might fit best into the diagnostic work-up o f patients with blunt chest trauma. 1406 Role of digital radiology W. Hruby; Vienna/A Traum atology is a speciality which is heavily relying on radiological informa tion of various sources, such as plain X-ray images, com puted tomography angiography, interventional radiology, magnetic resonance imaging or ultra sound. This implies a close co-operation between the traum atologist and the radiologist. The reliable availability of radiological information as well as its fast transfer a n d com m unication to the places where needed is of crucial importance for an efficient patient care and management. The hospital m ust be equipped to perform the above mentioned modalities and staffed with experienced radiologist to run and interpret these modalities. Traum a centres effectively reduce morbidity and mortality of the accident patient. In 1995 the following percentages of patients referred to radiological exami nations by the traum a-centre were found 6% in US, 12% in CT, 11% in MRI, 11% in radiological-interventional procedures, 16% in chest-X-rays and 80% in skeletal exam inations (plain films). A s com puter technology and information sciences have made their impact on office automation and everyday Business, they also are increasingly applied in medicine and in particular in radiology. After several year of laboratory experimentation together with the radiologists of the Danube Hospital in Vienna, the operational implementation of filmless digital radiology in clinical routine w as world-w ide first possible in April 1992 at this hospital. Filmless digital radiology means a digital netw ork that interconnects radiologi cal equipm ent with diagnostic reporting workstations, with digital archives and with viewing stations on w ards and in outpatient clinics, where images and report can be retrieved on-line, without the need of searching fo r paper or films. 
