8e47fd172ac79ad7cb7f918478b9b126f60e53cd
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF EMERITUS EDITOR-IN-CHIEF SOCIAL MEDIA EDITORS EDITORIAL COORDINATION COMMITTEE Left Atrial Strain as a Predictor of New-Onset Atrial Fibrillation in Patients With Heart Failure
David J Moliterno Christopher M O&apos;connor Kalyanam  Shivkumar Douglas L Mann Julia  Grapsa Bonnie  Ky Ron  Blankstein Frank A Flachskampf Paul A Grayburn Raymond Y K Kwong Jonathon  Leipsic Stephen J Nicholls Koen  Nieman Michael  Salerno Partho P Sengupta Zahi A Fayad Harvey  Hecht Sherif  Nagueh Thomas H Schindler James D Thomas James E Udelson Y  Chandrashekhar Leslee J Shaw Vasken  Dilsizian Thomas H Marwick Dudley J Pennell William A Zoghbi David B Nelson Justine Varieur Turco   Ma Monica R Payne-Emmerson Steven  Glaros Nandhini  Kuntipuram Elizabeth  Bradtke   Ba Tamika Edaire  Alison  Beale Renu  Virmani Jeroen J Bax Robert O Bonow Eugene  Braunwald Pamela S Douglas Jagat  Narula Eloisa  Arbustini Luigi P Badano Daniel S Berman Rebecca T Hahn Harlan M Krumholz Warren J Manning Gregg W Stone Stephan  Achenbach Erick  Alexánderson-Rosas Andrew E Arai Armin  Arbab-Zadeh Eustachio  Agricola Rob S Beanlands Frank  Bengel Michael J Blaha Eduardo  Bossone Jamieson M Bourque Chiara  Bucciarelli-Ducci Matthew J Budoff Hyuk-Jae  Chang Robin P Choudhury Benjamin J W Chow Milind  Desai Marc  Dewey Marcelo F Di Carli Erwan  Donal John H Stroger   Hospital Thor Edvardsen  Andrew J Einstein Mark K Friedberg Matthias  Friedrich Henry  Gewirtz Thierry C Gillebert John P Greenwood Jong-Won  Ha Robert C Hendel Diwakar  Jain Michael  Jerosch-Herold Philipp A Kaufmann Sanjiv  Kaul Paul  Knaapen Juhani  Knuuti Wojciech  Kosmala Shelby  Kutty André La Gerche Patrizio  Lancellotti Roberto M Lang Stamatios  Lerakis João A C Lima Bin  Lu Girijanandan  Mahapatra Gerald  Maurer Edward O Mcfalls Todd D Miller Satoshi  Nakatani Khurram  Nasir Miami  Beach Kazuaki  Negishi Robin  Nijveldt Yukio  Ozaki Alan S Pearlman Steffen E Petersen Philippe  Pibarot Michael H Picard Gianluca  Pontone Cardiologico  Monzino Sanjay  Rajagopalan Harry  Rakowski Carlos E Rochitte Javier  Sanz Erik  Schelbert Jeanette Esther Schulz-Menger Joseph B Selvanayagam Roxy  Senior Robert J Siegel Albert J Sinusas Prem  Soman Masaaki  Takeuchi Ahmed  Tawakol Paaladinesh  Thavendiranathan Liza  Thomas Richard W Troughton Todd C Villines Nathan D Wong Alistair A Young Jose  Zamorano Amir  Ahmadi Shehab  Anwer   Mbbch Lilit  Baghdasaryan Sorina  Mihaila Baldea Tor  Biering-Sørensen Matteo  Cameli Raluca Elena Dulgheru Basma  Hammad Akihisa  Kataoka Asim  Katbeh Tomas  Lapinskas Savvas  Loizos Bła _ Zej Michalski Marcelo  Haertel Miglioranza Sarah  Moharem-Elgamal M B Bch Doralisa  Morrone Toma Z Podlesnikar Fuad  Samadov Rizwan  Sarwar Nishant R Shah Hatem A Soliman Carla  Sousa Elena  Surkova Francois  Tournoux Svetlin  Tsonev Brandon M Wiley Ragavendra R Baliga Andrew D Choi Jeffrey B Geske Holly  Atkinson Lawrence S Cohen Kim  Fox Robert  Frye Philip J Landrigan Richard L Popp Athena  Poppas Howard &quot; Bo &quot; T Walpole Daniel M Philbin Viviany R Taqueti Rhonda M Cooper-Dehoff John U Doherty Islam Y Elgendy Prasad C Gunasekaran Fadi G Hage Fred M Kusumoto Renato D Lopes Sandra M Oliver-Mcneil Acnp-Bc   Acc  Ma Senior  Divisional   Director Jin Joo Park Jae-Hyeong  Park In-Chang  Hwang Jun-Bean  Park Goo-Yeong  Cho 


OBJECTIVES This study sought to identify whether left atrial strain can predict new-onset atrial fibrillation (NOAF) in patients with heart failure (HF) and sinus rhythm. BACKGROUND Both HF and atrial fibrillation have common risk factors, and HF is a risk factor for the development of atrial fibrillation and vice versa. METHODS Among 4,312 consecutive patients with acute HF from 3 tertiary hospitals, 2,461 patients with sinus rhythm and peak atrial longitudinal strain (PALS) were included in the study. Reduced PALS was defined as PALS #18%, and the primary endpoint was 5-year NOAF. RESULTS During a 5-year follow-up, 397 (16.1%) patients developed NOAF. Patients with reduced PALS had higher NOAF than their counterparts (18.2% vs. 12.7%; p < 0.001). After adjustment for significant covariates, we identified 6 independent predictors of NOAF, including age >70 years (hazard ratio [HR]: 1.50; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.12 to 2.00), hypertension (HR: 1.45; 95% CI: 1.10 to 1.91), left atrial volume index $40 ml/m 2 (HR: 2.03; 95% CI: 1.48 to 2.77), PALS <18% (HR: 1.60; 95% CI: 1.18 to 2.17), HF with preserved ejection fraction (HR: 1.47; 95% CI: 1.11 to 1.95), and no beta-blocker prescription at discharge (HR: 1.48; 95% CI: 1.14 to 1.92). A weighted score based on these variables was used to create a composite score, HAS-BAP (H ¼ hypertension; A ¼ age; S ¼ PALS; B ¼ no beta-blocker prescription at discharge; A ¼ atrial volume index; P ¼ HF with preserved ejection fraction [range 0 to 6] with a median of 3 [interquartile range: 2 to 4]). The probability of NOAF increased with HAS-BAP score. CONCLUSIONS In patients with HF and sinus rhythm, 16.1% developed NOAF, and PALS could be used to predict the risk for NOAF. The HAS-BAP score allows determination of the risk of NOAF. (Strain for Risk Assessment and Therapeutic Strategies in Patients With Acute Heart Failure [STRATS-AHF] Registry; NCT03513653) (J Am Coll Cardiol Img 2020;13:2071-81) Heart Failure) registry, 2,461 patients with sinus rhythm and LA strain value were analyzed. During the 5-year follow-up, 397 (16.1%) patients developed new onset AF. AF ¼ atrial fibrillation; LA ¼ left atrium. J A C C : C A R D I O V A S C U L A R I M A G I N G , V O L . 1 3 , N O . 1 0 , 2 0 2 0 Park et al. O C T O B E R 2 0 2 0 : 2 0 7 1 -8 1 LA Strain for NOAF in HF 2073 Values are mean AE SD or %. BNP ¼ B-type natriuretic peptide; BP ¼ blood pressure; BUN ¼ blood urea nitrogen; DT ¼ deceleration time; LA ¼ left atrium; LAVI ¼ Left atrium volume index; LV-GLS ¼ left ventricular global longitudinal strain; LVEF ¼ left ventricular ejection fraction; LVEDD ¼ left ventricular end-diastolic dimension; LVMI ¼ left ventricular mass index; MRA ¼ mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist; NT-proBNP ¼ N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide; NYHA ¼ New York Heart Association; PALS ¼ Left atrial global longitudinal strain; RAS ¼ renin-angiotensin system; RVSP ¼ right ventricular systolic pressure. Park et al. T he incidence of atrial fibrillation (AF) and heart failure (HF) is increasing worldwide (1) . AF is the most common arrhythmia and predisposes patients to embolic stroke, whereas HF is associated with high morbidity and mortality (2) . Because both AF and HF share common risk factors and pathophysiology, many patients have both AF and HF (3) . In addition, AF can trigger and complicate HF by increasing hospitalization and mortality (4, 5) . Approximately 20% to 30% of patients with HF have AF, whereas the remaining 60% to 70% have sinus rhythm at discharge (2, 6) . Nonetheless, a substantial number of patients with HF and sinus rhythm develop AF during follow-up (7) . Because AF has a crucial impact on the course and treatment of HF, including anticoagulation therapy, accurate prediction of new-onset AF (NOAF) is of clinical interest. Myocardial strain is based on the speckletracking method and measures the myocardial deformation directly, which reflects myocardial contractility. It reliably assesses the systolic function (8) and predicts the outcomes of HF independent of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) (9) . Anatomic and functional alterations of the left atrium (LA) are well-known predictors of the development of AF (10, 11) . Because strain is a sensitive measure for detecting subclinical impairment (12) , it may be used to predict the development of NOAF. In this study, we sought to evaluate whether left atrial (LA) strain can be used to predict NOAF in a large cohort of patients with acute HF with sinus rhythm. Patients underwent echocardiography during index admission (median time interval between admission and echocardiography: 1 day; interquartile range [IQR] : 0 to 2 days). Standard techniques were used in accordance with the American Society of Echocardiography guidelines (13) . In brief, echocardiographic images were obtained and analyzed using Image-Arena, version 4.6 (Tomtec Imaging System, Munich, Germany), a vendor-independent program that allows strain analysis, at the strain core laboratory (14, 15) . Receiver-operating characteristic curve analysis was used to determine the optimal cutoffs for PALS to predict the 5-year NOAF using the Youden index. The In receiver-operating characteristic curve analysis, the area under the curve of the PALS to predict NOAF was 0.56 (95% CI: 0.53 to 0.59; p < 0.001) with the best cutoff value of 18%. Using this cutoff value, patients with PALS #18% had a higher 5-year NOAF than those with PALS >18% (Figure 2A ). In addition, PALS #18% was associated with a 1.72 hazard for NOAF (HR: 1.72; 95% CI: 1.23 to 1.98; p < 0.001). When stratifying the patients according to HF type, patients with PALS #18% had a higher NOAF, both in HFrEF and HFpEF ( Figure 2B ). By contrast, when stratifying the patients according to LAVI, a PALS <18% was associated with an increased risk for NOAF in patients with a LAVI $40 ml/m 2 but not in those with a LAVI <40 ml/m 2 ( Figure 2C ). OF NOAF. To create a score system that predicts the risk for NOAF, we divided the patients into 2 datasets. Then 1,710 (70%) patients were randomly selected for generation of a score system (a derivation set), and the remaining 751 (30%) patients were used for its validation. Using the derivation set, we first identified independent predictors of NOAF. To determine whether the number of independent risk factors was linearly associated with the risk of NOAF, we estimated the individual risk for NOAF depending on the number of No beta-blocker at discharge 0.004 1.48 1.14-1.92 CI ¼ confidence interval; HR ¼ hazard ratio; NOAF ¼ new-onset atrial fibrillation; other abbreviations as in Table 1 and Figure 2 . for the derivation set, validation set, and all patients, respectively. As expected, the probability of NOAF increased with the HAS-BAP score (chi-square test: p < 0.001; linear-by-linear association: p < 0.001). The 5-year incidences of NOAF was 0%, 13%, and 39% for a HAS-BAP score of 0, 3, and, 6 respectively ( Figure 3B ). A score system excluding LA strain was less discriminatory (Supplemental Figures 1 and 2 ). AF is important in HF because it complicates the course of HF by increasing morbidity and mortality (5, 17 congestion with increased LV filling pressure leads to an increase in LA wall stress, causing atrial electrophysiological remodeling (18) ; 2) the neurohumoral overactivation, especially the renin-angiotensinaldosterone system, may promote fibrosis via angiotensin II (19) ; and 3) increases in inflammatory cytokines and oxidative stress also contribute to fibrosis in LA (20) . Therefore, patients with HF are at increased risk for the development of AF. As a hemodynamic effect of AF, the loss of atrial kick decreases the cardiac output by up to 25% and contributes significantly to diastolic dysfunction (21) , which can aggravate HF. The most important complication of AF is embolic stroke. HF fulfills all 3 criteria of the Virchow triad and is prone to thrombus formation: HF is an inflammatory hypercoagulable state with impaired flow and endothelial dysfunction. In addition, the loss of atrial systole and stasis in LA substantially increases the risk for thrombus formation and the risk of stroke (22) . Thus, NOAF can critically complicate HF, and the identification or prediction of NOAF is a critical issue in the management of HF. PREDICTORS OF NOAF. To understand NOAF in HF, the first step is to identify patients at the highest risk for NOAF. We identified 7 independent predictors of NOAF. Age was an important predictor, and both AF and HF are very common in the elderly (4) . Hypertension causes LV and LA remodeling, which can lead to development of both AF and HF. In this study, a severely enlarged LA (LAVI $40 ml/m 2 ) was associated with a 2-fold increased risk for NOAF. LA enlargement occurs in response to persistent elevation of the LV filling pressure and is associated with electric instability. In addition, the LA size predicts the treatment outcome after radiofrequency catheter ablation (23) , the incident AF among patients with HF (24) , and mortality (25) . A higher LVEF or HFpEF was a strong risk factor, and in general, AF is more prevalent in HFpEF than in HFrEF (26, 27) . Furthermore, the incidence of HF was 1.5-fold higher in HFpEF than HFrEF (24) . Although the mechanism for the different predominance of HF according the HF type is not well understood, both HFpEF and AF share common risk factors, such as advanced age and hypertension, and patients with HFpEF are older and more hypertensive than those with HFrEF (28) . Another important finding was that the prescription of beta-blockers at discharge was associated with a reduced risk for NOAF, emphasizing the importance of beta-blocker therapy. This finding is in line with a previous finding by Nasr et al. (29) , who showed that the use of betablockers appeared to effectively prevent NOAF in a large meta-analysis including 11,952 patients with systolic HF. We introduced the HAS-BAP score, which includes 6 easily obtainable clinical and echocardiographic variables. In our study population, one-third of the patients had 3 points, which confers a 13% 5-year NOAF incidence. Interestingly, patients with 0 and 6 points had a 0% and 39% 5-year NOAF incidence, respectively. The HAS-BAP score can be used to not only identify patients at extremely low and high risk for NOAF but also to determine the risk for NOAF. It is of note that inaccurate measurement of atrial strain and atrial volume may result in over-and underestimation of NOAF risk, which can be challenging to physicians who are not familiar with these measurements. The current practice guideline does not recommend oral anticoagulation therapy to patients with HF with sinus rhythm (30, 31) . Nonetheless, we reported that patients with HF without AF had an increased risk of stroke, and the risk increased with CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc score (22) . Considering the high stroke risk in HF with apparent sinus rhythm, one should consider the possibility of NOAF and/or paroxysmal AF. Thus, it might be interesting to investigate whether patients with a high HAS-BAP score may benefit from anticoagulation therapy. In addition, whether the HAS-BAP score can predict the outcomes after radiofrequency catheter ablation should also be considered when designing future studies. Using a vendor independent software (Tomtec Imaging System, Munich, Germany), they measured PALS using the mean value from 2 apical views using R-R gating. The authors are to be commended for a meticulously performed study with a high feasibility of LA strain performance. They demonstrated that approximately 16% of patients developed NOAF and that PALS #18% independently predicted new AF, among other risk factors. By using linear-by-linear association analysis, an intuitive scoring system (called the HASBAP score: H ¼ hypertension; A ¼ age; S ¼ PALS #18%; B ¼ no beta-blocker prescription at discharge; A ¼ atrial volume index >40 ml/m 2 ; P ¼ HF with preserved ejection fraction) to predict NOAF risk was constructed based on the aforementioned 6 risk factors (range 0 to 6). Results were internally validated by using a randomly selected validation cohort. The 5-year incidences of NOAF were 0%, 13%, and 39% for HAS-BAP scores of 0, 3, and 6, respectively (6) . The present study emphasizes that some additional information potentially important to patient outcomes is captured from assessment of LA strain, perhaps more than atrial size alone. Study strengths include the relatively large sample size and the wellphenotyped patient population. The main study limitations include the retrospective nature and the lack of external validation. As acknowledged by Park et al. (6) , the load-dependent nature of LA strain means that the results cannot be generalized to individuals with chronic rather than acute HF. Other important limitations include the use of intermittent electrocardiograms rather than continuous monitoring to detect AF as well use of the definition of HF with preserved ejection fraction using an ejection fraction cutoff of 40% rather than 50%. Furthermore, given the East Asian patient population and wide variety of commercially available software packages with known variation in LA strain measurements (7) , it remains unclear for the reader if the reported PALS cutoff (#18%) can be broadly applied ( Figure 1 ). What are some important challenges of applying PALS as an isolated metric of LA function? LA strain is not only load dependent but also influenced by LV function. A major determinant of LA expansion is LV systolic contraction with downward displacement toward the apex (5, 8) . Therefore, any condition that influences LV myocardial function is expected to influence PALS. Strain, being a measure of deformation, is also influenced by baseline LA enlargement, which, all else being equal, would be expected to result in reduced PALS (8) . There is also evidence that PALS is higher in women and lower in the presence of increasing age and higher blood pressure (9) . Thus, although having a single cutoff value is desirable, it seems to be an oversimplification because it may not fully capture how the aforementioned variables influence strain measurements. Indeed, as an example in the present study (6) , applying the same PALS cutoff value (#18%) to those with normal LA volumes (<40 ml/m 2 ) did not appear to significantly influence the risk of new AF. There is a long history of scores for predicting disease or adverse outcomes in cardiovascular medicine. These scores, the original personalized medicine, permit patient-specific prediction via weighted combination of all available data. The question is, is there a need for yet another scoring system? Before there is adoption of this score to routine use, its prognostic value needs to be externally validated. In addition, the clinical benefit of some form of early intervention (e.g., with anticoagulation therapy) for those with an increased HAS-BAP score has to be established. Two prior multicenter, randomized trials have shown no convincing evidence that anticoagulation using vitamin K antagonists reduces mortality or vascular events in patients with HF in sinus rhythm (10, 11) . Nevertheless, the study with CAD (8) and/or HF with either reduced (9) or preserved (10) resting left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) (11, 12) . A "wet lung" with appearance or increasing B-lines is more often found with ischemic regional wall motion abnormalities (RWMA) and/or diastolic dysfunction associated with increase in pulmonary wedge pressure (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) . The present study hypothesis is that patients with and/or HF, referred for clinically-driven stress echocardiography (SE) in accredited laboratories of the network of the international, multicenter, prospective SE 2020 (Stress Echo 2020) study (14) . No patient was discarded due to poor-quality LUS study at rest or during stress. All patients underwent SE testing as part of a clinically-driven work-up (15) (16, 17) . All patients underwent exercise or pharmacological SE according to the protocol recommended by the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging guidelines (16) . Exercise protocol was semisupine in these patients (post-treadmill was also allowed). We used dipyridamole dose up to 0.86 mg/kg, dobutamine starting from 5 to 40 mg/kg/min with atropine coadministration up to 1 mg, and adenosine up to 0.14 mg/kg/min over 6 min. Electrocardiogram (ECG) and blood pressure were monitored continuously. ECG leads were positioned so as not to interfere with previously marked acoustic windows. Criteria for interrupting the test were severe chest pain, diagnostic ST-segment shift, excessive blood pressure increase (systolic blood pressure $240 mm Hg, diastolic blood pressure $120 mm Hg), limiting dyspnea, maximal predicted heart rate, significant arrhythmias. or limiting side effects (17) . The ABCDE SE protocol was used. Step A for Asynergy and regional wall motion abnormalities, step B for Blines, step C for left ventricular Contractile reserve, step D for Doppler-based coronary flow velocity reserve (CFVR) and step E for heart rate reserve based on ECG. Each laboratory completed the upstream Rest B-lines 0 (0-4) 1.5 (0-13)* 3 (0-11)* † 6 (0-35)* † ‡ 0 (0-35) <0.001 Peak B-lines 0 (0-1) 3 (2-4)* 6 (5-9)* † 14 quality control process (18) . Echocardiographic imaging was performed from the parasternal long-axis view; short-axis view; and apical 4-, 3-, and 2chamber view, using conventional 2-dimensional echocardiography. Step A included assessment of wall motion abnormalities and was performed in all patients. Wall motion score index (WMSI) was calculated in each patient at baseline and peak stress, in a 4-point score ranging from 1 (normal) to 4 (dyskinetic) in a 17-segment model of the left ventricle (19) . The A criterion was considered positive in presence of stress-induced RWMA (WMSI stress > rest) when at least 2 adjacent segments of the same vascular territory of the left ventricle showed an increment of at least 1 point of segmental score during SE (19) . Step B of protocol included the assessment of B-lines with lung ultrasound (20) . The B criterion was considered positive in the presence of stress or rest B-lines $2 U (12) . Step C of protocol included the force-based assessment of left ventricular contractile reserve (LVCR) as the stress/rest ratio of force, calculated as systolic blood pressure/end-systolic volume (21) . Stress-specific abnormal cutoff values for force-based LVCR were: #2.0 for exercise and dobutamine, and #1.1 for dipyridamole and adenosine (13) . CFVR (step D) was assessed during the standard SE examination using intermittent imaging of wall motion and LAD (2) . Coronary flow in the mid-distal portion of the LAD was imaged from the low parasternal long-axis view and/or modified apical 2-, 3-, or 4-chamber view under the guidance of color Doppler flow mapping (13) . At each timepoint, 3 optimal profiles of peak diastolic Doppler flow velocities were measured, and the results were averaged. CFVR was defined as the ratio between hyperemic peak and basal peak diastolic coronary flow velocities. A CFVR value #2.0 was considered abnormal based on previously defined diagnostic and prognostic cutoff values (13) . The last imaging-independent step of the ABCDE protocol was the "E" step, based on ECG. Heart rate reserve (step E) was calculated as the peak/rest heart rate from 12-lead ECG (22) . A blunted heart rate reserve (HRR) is a prognostically relevant index of reduced sympathetic reserve and abnormal cardiac autonomic function (22) . The "E" criterion was considered positive in the presence of HRR <1.80 for exercise and dobutamine, and #1. 22 for vasodilators (23) . Beta-blockers reduce resting and peak heart rate but do not affect HRR and its cutoff value for outcome prediction (22, 23) . Basic Life Support and Advanced Cardiac Life Support. The procedure for acquisition between centers was standardized through a web-based learning module before starting data collection. All readers (1 for each center) underwent a quality control as previously described (13, 19, 24) . synchronously with lung sliding. We adopted the 4site simplified scan (20) . We analyzed the anterior and lateral hemithoraces, scanning from midaxillary to midclavicular lines on the third intercostal space. Detailed description of the scanning procedure and scanning sites is also available in a 4-min movie from our laboratory on YouTube (25) . The sequence of scanning sites is shown in Figure 1 . All readers passed the quality control for B-lines reading upstream to starting data collection (24) . The LUS study started at the end of exercise and beginning of recovery within 1 to 2 min after termination of stress, or just at the moment of antidote administration in pharmacological stress. B-lines recover slowly after test interruption, and still persist at 5 min of recovery after termination of exercise (10) . OUTCOME DATA ANALYSIS. This is the interim analysis of the pre-specified evaluation of long-term outcomes to be completed by the end of 2023 (13, 14) . Deaths were identified from the National Health Service Database. To avoid misclassification of the cause of death, overall death was considered. Assessors were blinded to clinical, TTE, and LUS results (13, 14) .  The main clinical characteristics of the 2,145 study patients are described in Table 1 . The employed stress 3.7%). TTE AND LUS RESULTS. Interpretable TTE and LUS images were obtained in all patients at peak stress, with an overall feasibility of 100%. According to B-lines at peak stress, patients were divided into 4 different groups: group I, absence of stress B-line (score: 0 to 1; n ¼ 1,388; 64.7%); group II, mild B-line (score: 2 to 4; n ¼ 428; 20.0%); group III, moderate B-line (score: 5 to 9; n ¼ 209; 9.7%) and group IV, severe B-line (score: $10; n ¼ 119; 5.4%). The main clinical, echocardiographic characteristics of the 4 groups are described in Table 1 . All functional and coronary anatomic indexes of disease severity were more advanced in group IV compared with the other 3 groups, including extent of angiographically assessed CAD, history of myocardial infarction, and severity of mitral regurgitation ( Table 1) . When only all-cause mortality was considered, the 2-year survival was 2% in patients of group 1, 2-fold higher in patients of groups II and III, and 8-fold higher in patients of group IV ( Figure 4 ). Dual imaging TTE-LUS during SE is feasible and simple, with 100% success rate for B-lines and only a minimal increase in imaging time. A greater number of peak stress B-lines indicate a less benign functional profile, consisting of a worse regional left ventricular function, weaker global force-based LVCR, blunted CFVR during stress, and more frequently abnormal cardiac autonomic function mirrored by blunted heart rate reserve. Outcome is worse in patients with higher number of peak stress B-lines (Central Illustration). The likely underlying pathophysiological mechanism is the stress-induced change of pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, which is the driving force for fluid filtration and correlates with B-line number at rest (26) and during stress (9, 12) . In a healthy cardiovascular response, left ventricular end-diastolic pressure decreases, the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure similarly decreases, and B-lines are absent. In an unhealthy cardiovascular condition, left ventricular enddiastolic pressure increases, the pulmonary capillary (8, 9, 11, 12, 27, 28) or vasodilator stress (29) . We and others have previously repeatedly shown that the presence and number of stress B-lines is related to stress E/e' during exercise SE (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) , with an R value of 0.71 observed by Scali et al. (9) in 103 patients with HF and depressed EF. COMPARISON WITH PREVIOUS STUDIES. The 100% feasibility is consistent with reports from our group and others (9, 10, 11, 12, 22) . It has been previously shown that B-lines can appear or increment during exercise or pharmacological stress in patients with known or suspected CAD and/or HF (12) . In patients with HF and reduced EF, the number of peak stress B-lines is tightly correlated with indexes of functional severity such as peak oxygen consumption (20) . We used a semiquantitative B-line scoring system that was previously validated versus physiological and prognostic standards (1, 3, 9) , although the original version based on 28-site scan was here adapted to the simplified 4-site scan (20) . The B-line score integrates the horizontal (number of sites with B-lines) and vertical (number of B-lines per site) dimensions of pulmonary congestion. This approach is conceptually similar to the assessment of inducible ischemia with WMSI, which integrates horizontal extent (number of involved segments) and vertical severity (hypokinesia, akinesia, or dyskinesia) of RWMA to generate a prognostically powerful peak stress score. We pooled the data of different physical or pharmacological stress modalities. They have different mechanisms of action, but similar accuracy and prognostic value, and are used interchangeably in most laboratories to provide a flexible and versatile approach to all patients (16) . The final common hemodynamic pathway for all stresses increasing B-lines is the increase in left ventricular end-diastolic pressure and the increase in pulmonary wedge pressure, due for instance to ischemia or diastolic dysfunction, mitral insufficiency, or afterload mismatch (12) . As data mature with larger sample sizes and longer follow-up, it will be possible to make a separate analysis for different conditions (CAD vs. HF) and different stresses (exercise vs. pharmacological). Different stressors showed similar patterns of stress Blines, with severe peak stress B-lines detectable in 6% of patients during exercise, 5% with dobutamine, and 4% with vasodilators ( Table 1) . Coronary angiography was performed in a subgroup of 980 patients, and showed that stress severe B-lines pattern was associated with more extensive disease compared with absent, mild, or moderate B-line patterns ( Table 1) . This is an additional biomarker of a more advanced disease associated with peak B-lines, but certainly lung water estimate is a poor predictor of CAD. B-lines at rest or after stress are not-and cannot be conceptually-a diagnostic (7). Figure 1 . (22) . Similarly, in a cohort of patients with aortic stenosis, (13, 14) . Early studies done in patients with a history of atrial fibrillation showed that LA strain was related to the presence of atrial fibrosis (15) . The most common method for measuring LA strain is through the use of speckle tracking echocardiography. Several potential pitfalls of this methodology are worthy of mention. One concern is that there may not be enough speckles to accurately track LA deformation because the atrial walls are only 1 to 2 mm thick. Another potential limitation is that the continuity of the LA wall is interrupted by the orifices of the LA appendage and each of the pulmonary veins; speckles cannot be tracked in these regions. A third concern relates to the actual direction of fiber BACKGROUND Accurate noninvasive diagnosis of LV diastolic dysfunction in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) remains challenging. METHODS Nineteen HFpEF patients (14 female, 65 AE 16 years of age) without primary cardiomyopathy were prospectively enrolled. Cine, late gadolinium enhancement cardiac magnetic resonance, and triple-slice T 1 mapping using a modified Look-Locker inversion recovery sequence were performed at 3-T. Extracellular volume (ECV) was quantified from pre-and post-contrast T 1 values of the blood and myocardium with hematocrit correction. LV stiffness constant (beta) was assessed by calculating the slope of the end-diastolic pressure-volume relationship curve during vena cava occlusion. Biopsy samples were used for quantification of collagen volume fraction (CVF) and myocardial cell size. Six patients showed focal scar on late gadolinium enhancement. There was no significant difference in histological CVF between patients with and without focal myocardial scarring (p ¼ 0.2). Septal ECV rather than native T 1 was a better surrogate marker for detecting histological CVF (r ¼ 0.54; p ¼ 0.02, and r ¼ 0.44; p ¼ 0.06, respectively). Global native T 1 and ECV, but not native T 1 and ECV in the septal myocardium, correlated well with the beta of passive LV stiffness, and had similar ability for predicting LV stiffness to histological CVF (r ¼ 0. 54 values as heart rate and T 1 increase. Therefore, we corrected the T 1 value for heart rate by using the empiric correction formula derived from our previous phantom study (16) . ECV was calculated as follows: ECV ¼ (1 À hematocrit) Â {(1/T 1 myocardium-post À 1/T 1 myocardium-pre ) / (1/T 1 blood-post À 1/T 1 blood-pre )} Â 100% (17) . A blood sample was obtained on the CMR scan date to measure hematocrit. ASSESSMENT Values are mean AE SD, n (%), or median (interquartile range). ACE ¼ angiotensin converting enzyme; ARB ¼ angiotensin II receptor blocker; BNP ¼ B-type natriuretic peptide; eGFR ¼ estimated glomerular filtration rate; hs-CRP ¼ high sensitivity C-reactive protein; PCI ¼ percutaneous coronary artery intervention. Omori et al. (20) . The end-systolic elastance (Ees), a marker of intrinsic systolic performance, is sensitive to changes in the contractile state but is relatively insensitive to changes in loading conditions. The effective arterial elastance was calculated as ESP divided by stroke volume (21) . The monoexponentialbased time constant (tau) of the isovolumetric fall in LV pressure was calculated assuming that pressure decayed to a nonzero asymptote (22) . Stroke work, the external mechanical work achieved by the LV to eject the stroke volume, was calculated as the area inside the pressure-volume loop, and normalized according to body surface area (stroke work index) (3). The diastolic pressure-volume relation was described by an exponential equation; P ¼ P 0 þ a(ℯ bV À 1), where P is LV pressure, P 0 is pressure-offset, a is curve fitting constant, V is LV volume, and beta is the chamber stiffness constant used to quantify passive stiffness (23) . A beta of <0.015 was considered normal (2, 4, 24) . Table 2) . Catheterization and histological data are shown in  In this study, we assessed the feasibility of CMR T 1 mapping parameters to detect load-independent LV chamber stiffness by histological confirmation using 3-T CMR system. We demonstrate the following: 1) ECV rather than native T 1 can be a better surrogate marker for detecting histological CVF in HFpEF cohorts; 2) global native T 1 and ECV, but not native T 1 and ECV in the septal myocardium, similarly correlate well with the beta of passive LV chamber irrespective of patients at risk of HFpEF or with clinically manifest. Although the underlying pathophysiology of HFpEF is multifactorial, cellular changes at myocardial tissue level such as diffuse myocardial fibrosis may precede clinical HFpEF diagnosis and therefore can be a potential therapeutic target. However, the prevalence of moderate-tosevere renal dysfunction in patients with chronic heart failure has ranged from 30% to 60% in large clinical studies (29) . Furthermore, there are recent safety concerns regarding GBCA deposition in the brain and other organs (14) , and GBCA is contraindicated in patients with moderate-to-severe renal dysfunction. Given that GBCA retention is also related to the number of doses administered over time (30) , repeated GBCA use for CMR scans, particularly when closely spaced, needs to be minimized or avoided. Native T 1 mapping can be derived without a need for GBCA and has the potential to follow serial changes in the myocardium over time and be useful for cost-effectively identifying patients with HFpEF who are at risk for adverse events. Further studies are needed to determine whether CMR T 1 mapping assessment provides better risk KEY WORDS cardiovascular magnetic resonance, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, histological collagen volume fraction, left ventricular stiffness, native T 1 Omori et al. (10) . They also display greater myocardial fat content, including epicardial adipose tissue deposition, which is associated with greater disease severity (11) . In patients without HF, obesity and increases in visceral adipose tissue are associated with heightened intramyocardial fat content, which is also associated with increased ECV content (7), as well as abnormalities in myocardial metabolism (4) . It would be interesting and important to further evaluate these relationships in a cohort of patients with the obese phenotype of HFpEF in future studies. To make progress in the treatment of HFpEF, we need to better ways to characterize patients through high-resolution phenotyping across the entire BACKGROUND Patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy are at risk from both myocardial ischemia and heart failure. Invasive testing is often used as the first-line investigation, and there is limited evidence as to whether stress testing can effectively provide risk stratification. METHODS In this substudy of a multicenter registry from 13 U.S. centers, patients with reduced LV ejection fraction (<50%), referred for stress CMR for suspected myocardial ischemia, were included. The primary outcome was cardiovascular death or nonfatal myocardial infarction. The secondary outcome was a composite of cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, hospitalization for unstable angina or congestive heart failure, and unplanned late coronary artery bypass graft surgery. LGE led to improved model discrimination for the primary outcome (change in C statistic from 0.715 to 0.765; p ¼ 0.02). The presence and extent of ischemia were associated with higher rates of use of downstream coronary angiography, revascularization, and cost of care spent on ischemia testing. METHODS SPINS REGISTRY. The details behind the design, rationale, and infrastructure of the SPINS registry have been previously described in detail (11, 12 In addition, subsequent performance of all noninvasive tests for CAD (exercise stress testing, stress echocardiography, nuclear perfusion imaging, coronary computed tomographic angiography, repeat stress CMR), as well as invasive coronary angiography and revascularization procedures, was also collected. The cost of downstream testing for myocardial ischemia was determined as previously described Ischemic segments (number) LGE 277 (48) 0 277 (86) <0.001 LGE segments (number) Values are median (interquartile range), mean AE SD, or n (%). Comparison between groups was performed using Student's t-test or the Wilcoxon rank sum test for continuous data and the chi-square or Fisher exact test for categorical data. Event-free survival was estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method and compared using a log-rank test. Univariate Cox regression models were used to estimate the unadjusted hazard ratios (HRs) of selected clinical and CMR covariates for primary and secondary outcomes. To determine the independent prognostic value of CMR parameters, we first constructed a multivariate Cox model for the primary outcome by the inclusion of significant clinical covariates on univariate screening using a stepwise forward selection algorithm (p < 0.05 for model retention). We a priori forced LVEF into the model because of its recognized prognostic importance. We then added the presence or absence of ischemia and LGE to determine whether they each provided incremental prognostic value. The goodness of fit of each model (À2 log likelihood) was calculated and compared using the likelihood ratio test, and discriminative capacity was determined according to Harrell's C statistic at baseline and after the addition of CMR-assessed ischemia and LGE. In addition, to evaluate the ability of stress CMR to reclassify patients, we calculated net reclassification improvement and integrated discrimination improvement (19) using pre-determined AHA/American College of Cardiology guideline-based risk categories of <1%, 1% to 3%, and >3% per year event rates of cardiac death or acute MI (20) , to define low, moderate, and high risk for the primary outcome. We tested for a significant interaction between LVEF, as a continuous variable, and CMR-detected ischemia or LGE. The proportional hazards assumption was evaluated using visual inspection of the log-log survival curves and the Schoenfeld residual test. All statistical analyses were performed using SAS version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina), and a p value <0.05 was used to establish statistical significance. Overall LVEF 40%-50% LVEF <40% Annualized rates of primary (left) and secondary (right) outcomes, stratified by presence versus absence of ischemia and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 40% to 50% versus <40%. Ge et al. Table 1 . LGE. Ge et al. Ge et al.  presenting with moderate or severe dysfunction. We must take into account that all the CMR ex- aldosterone-renin ratio >64 pmol/mUI, and plasma aldosterone concentration >500 pmol/l in patients on treatment not interfering with the renin-angiotensin system (e.g., alpha-blocker, calcium-channel blocker, or central antihypertensive drug) for at least 15 days, as previously described (16, 17) . Table 2 ). CARDIAC TISSUE CHARACTERIZATION. One PA and 1 HTN patient had nonspecific junctional late gadolinium enhancement by CMR and no myocardial infarction was found. Native and post-contrast myocardial T1 relaxation times did not differ between groups ( Table 2) . ECV and ICV fractions differed significantly between groups in the analysis of variance, with no significant difference in pairwise analyses ( Table 3) . ECM index was markedly higher in patients with PA than in the 3 other groups, which had similar values (Table 3, Figure 2 ). For the overall population (n ¼ 80), in univariate analysis, both mean BP and plasma aldosterone were associated with ICM index and ECM index. In multivariate analysis, the effect of aldosterone on ECM index was no more significant in the overall population after adjustment for mean BP (Supplemental Table 2 ). However, in multivariate analysis restricted to the hypertensive groups (PA and HTN), the effect of aldosterone on ECM index remained significant after adjustment for mean BP (Supplemental Table 3 ). ICM index was higher in PA patients than in HTN patients and higher in both PA Table 1 . and HTN patients than in BG patients and HS ( Table 3) Table 1) . To decipher the respective contribution of the direct or indirect effects of aldosterone on the human heart in vivo, we studied 4 groups of subjects with contrasting aldosterone and BP levels. We used CMR to noninvasively identify differential patterns of intracellular and extracellular myocardial mass components (22) . This technique has been well validated in humans, with a good concordance between ECV derived from CMR T1 mapping and histological ECV (23) . We found that the increase in cardiomyocyte mass was the prevailing response to increased afterload In the present study, ICM and ECM fractions measured in our healthy population were very close to values reported in histology studies for the normal myocardium (73% vs. 75% and 27% vs. 25% for ICM and ECM, respectively) (27) . However, we did not find significant differences between native and postcontrast T1 values across groups. We observed a gradual increase in global LVM index and ICM index from BG patients, presenting with low preload and LV hypotrophy; to HS, with normal loading conditions; to HTN patients, with increased afterload; and PA patients, who were the most hypertensive ( Table 3 , Figures 1 and 2) . This is consistent with the fact that the main stimulus for cardiomyocyte hypertrophy is increased afterload or preload or both. The systolic function was found to be normal and unable to discriminate between groups, and differences in diastolic function parameters were mainly because of differences in LV filling, hence preload conditions. By contrast, ECM index was similar in HS and BG and HTN patients but notably increased by 30% in PA patients ( Table 3 , Respective and additive effects of aldosterone and hypertension in the overall remodeling of the left ventricle (LV) and each of its intra-and extracellular components. Redheuil et al. prevented by low nonantihypertensive doses of mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist (27  We demonstrated that the differential effects of aldosterone and HTN on intra-and extracellular myocardial components could be quantified noninvasively in humans using CMR (Central Illustration). Although increase in intracellular mass is primarily a response to increased afterload, significant extracel- Al'Aref et al. Al'Aref et al. Al'Aref et al. The aforementioned approach could provide a method for determination of atherosclerotic plaque stability, which could help with therapy selection and downstream testing. In their paper, Al'Aref et al. (6) (14, 15) . The ECV increases moderately with diffuse fibrosis but massively with amyloidosis (16) . Our group has previously validated ECV quantification by CT imaging (ECV CT ) against CMR and histology (endomyocardial biopsy) in severe AS (17, 18) and against CMR in cardiac amyloid (18) . Unlike recommended CMR acquisition, the ECV CT acquisition for cardiac amyloid can be performed earlier at 5 min rather than 10 min post-contrast (18) . In the current study, we hypothesized that ECV CT as part of routine TAVR evaluation CT imaging would be able to detect AS-amyloid. To improve workflow, we also sought to optimize the scanning protocol in terms of dose and timing (shortened scan delay). These control patients were included to provide an estimate of "normal" ECV CT and were not used in the screening calculations. ELECTROCARDIOGRAM. As we have described previously (19), Sokolow-Lyon criteria were calculated as the sum of the amplitude of the S-wave in lead V 1 and the R-wave in lead V 5 or V 6 (whichever was greater) (20) . The voltage/mass ratio was defined as the  DHU is the change in Hounsfield unit attenuation precontrast and post-contrast (i.e., HU post-contrast À HU pre-contrast ) (18, 30, 31) . This information was loaded into prototype software (Cardiac Function, Siemens Healthineers), which allowed the ECV CT map to be superimposed on the CTCA image, the myocardial contours to be edited, and the results to be displayed as a 17-segment polar map (Figures 1 and 2) . When calculating total ECV CT , focally elevated ECV CT (e.g., likely myocardial infarction) were not excluded, but American Heart Association segments with significant beam-hardening artifacts from adjacent pacing wires In AS-amyloid, parameters reflecting LV thickness and mass were higher, whereas the MCF was lower. Global longitudinal strain was impaired in both ASamyloid and lone AS but did not differ. Both hs-TnT and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide levels were higher in AS-amyloid ( Table 1) . ECV CT findings. ECV CT was feasible for measurement in all patients for whom data were obtained. ECV CT was 32 AE 3%, 34 AE 4%, and 43 AE 6% in those patients with Perugini grades 0, 1, and 2, respectively, using a 3- as predictors of AS-amyloid ( Table 1 . nonacademic and pressingly so, with the availability of 3 novel, potential, but costly medical therapies for cardiac amyloidosis (10) (11) (12) that have yet to be validated in patients with AS-amyloid. Clearly, an individualized treatment strategy is going to be needed, and answers will hopefully prove more forthcoming with the increasing availability of bone scintigraphy that will enable increased diagnostic rates and research activity. The fact that pre-existing RBBB is associated with cardiac amyloidosis is intriguing and may prove relevant in the TAVR cohort given that we know RBBB is associated with a higher likelihood of post-TAVR pacemaker implantation (38) and worse outcomes (38, 39) . Although the authors did not investigate for the presence of concomitant cardiac amyloidosis, it is possible that the presence of RBBB at baseline might be an ominous sign that deserves further investigation. We propose CT imaging as a technique to increase AS-amyloid detection and present a diagnostic algorithm ( Figure 5) . Because ECV CT is easy to implement, and the patient is already in the CT scanner, we think We propose different thresholds for onward referral depending on how important grade 1 versus 2 is discovered to be, and whether specificity or sensitivity becomes the priority. A lower threshold of 29% using a 3-min post-contrast acquisition would never miss a case (sensitivity 100%) but would probably result in an unacceptably high referral rate for bone scintigraphy (specificity 19%). A threshold of 31.4% would have a sensitivity of 94% and not miss DPD grade 2 cases but would miss a proportion of DPD grade 1 cases (1 of 5 in our cohort); however, the trade-off is that fewer cases would be referred for an unnecessary DPD (specificity 48%). Technological developments often result in new insights into established techniques. We were not surprised to find that AS-amyloid was hard to detect based on ECG (e.g., small voltages) or echocardiographic (e.g., reduced MCF) changes because both AS and amyloid can have widely different influences on heart muscle. RBBB being associated with AS-amyloid is interesting and may prove important given that we know it is both common in patients with TAVR and is associated with worse outcome (including higher likelihood of post-TAVR pacemaker insertion) (38) . Another interesting finding is that a combination parameter of both ECG and echocardiography, the voltage/mass ratio, performed exceptionally well for amyloid detection compared with parameters derived from just one technique. This is perhaps not surprising as ECV CT Recent studies have shown that older patients with severe AS undergoing TAVR have a 15% prevalence of transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis (TTR-CA), which was identical to the prevalence found in the 109 patients (mean age 86 years) enrolled in this study (7) . This is usually the wild-type TTR cardiac deposition that occurs in older male patients (male:female ratio 25:1), previously termed senile amyloidosis. It is now appreciated that prevalence of CA in the community is higher than was previously suspected; in one study from Spain, 13% of patients aged >60 years being admitted for heart failure with preserved ejection fraction had wild-type TTR-CA (8) . Occasionally, however, amyloid fibrillogenesis is driven by an underlying gene mutation. One such mutation (V122I) occurs in w4% of all African-American subjects in the United States. Not surprisingly, the coexistence of both CA and AS increases with age, and worsens the prognosis compared with either condition alone (9); thus, early detection of CA in such patients is important. One reason is that effective drug therapy is now available. For example, the TTR tetramer stabilizer tafamidis has been shown to improve survival and reduce heart failure hospitalizations (10) , and other drugs such as patisiran, inotersen, and AG10 are also being studied in this regard. Second, it is possible, although yet unproven, that earlier intervention than usual for AS may have benefit in patients who have this dual pathology. In this study (6) , a simple addition to the usual TAVR-scanning CT protocol (axial shuttle mode systolic acquisitions) allowed calculation of the volume of the myocardial extracellular compartment using the equation, whole-heart computed tomographymeasured extracellular volume (ECV CT ) ¼ (1 À hematocrit) Â post-contrast À pre-contrast change in the attenuation of myocardium/blood. We know that expansion of this interstitial volume occurs in a wide variety of diseases producing fibrosis (macroscopic scar from old myocardial infarction or diffuse increase in collagen content from pressure overload) and in infiltrative diseases (e.g., amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, Fabry disease) (11, 12) . Traditionally, the study of myocardial interstitium has been the forte of cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR), which is able to use relaxation properties of protons to probe tissue architecture, but CT imaging has recently also been successfully deployed for this purpose. One of the strengths of using CT imaging is that the relationship between iodine and attenuation values is more linear and thus more accurate compared with the relationship between gadolinium and T1-shortening due to the rapid flux of protons. Furthermore, the study can be completed within 3 to 5 min with 2 breath-holds with superior spatial resolution, whereas a conventional CMR requires 30 to 45 min and w50 breathholds. CMR also has the well-known difficulties in patients with ferromagnetic materials or claustrophobia or lying supine for this length of time (which is often an issue in these older TAVR patients). Lastly, the ECV CT value can be obtained without the need to administer any additional iodinated contrast. Given the high prevalence of renal disease in this cohort, avoiding an additional CMR study that requires gadolinium administration and extra cost is an added benefit. A growing number of small studies have now validated ECV CT against CMR-measured ECV (ECV CMR ) and found good correlation in both control subjects and in patients with heart failure, amyloidosis, or aortic stenosis (13, 14) , including a small subset in which comparison was performed against the histological gold standard of collagen volume (15) . Notably in these studies, ECV CT was higher in CA than in AS alone or in control subjects. Increasing levels of ECV CT or ECV CMR are also correlated with higher levels of N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide and troponin, wall thickness, and with worse diastolic and systolic function (16, 17) . In the current study (6) with light chain-CA will have normal voltage (23, 24) . Moreover, the presence of AS itself alters the QRS voltage and regional strain patterns such that electrocardiography and echocardiography are of reduced utility when AS coexists with CA. Despite its promising utility, ECV CT is not without some limitations: accurate assessment can be hampered by beam hardening and streak artifacts. CT imaging also has the downside of radiation exposure, which is less of an issue in older patients, however. Iodine produces less of a signal than gadolinium, and this fact can make distinguishing myocardium from blood pool challenging on delayed acquisitions, especially in cases such as dilated cardiomyopathy in which the myocardium is thin. This study (6) did not collect data on apical sparing strain pattern by echocardiography, which has good accuracy, and thus a comparison between that and ECV CT is not available (25) . Second, the gold standard used was DPD scintigraphy, which has a specificity of 80% to 90%, and false-positive findings do occur, especially with lower Perugini grades or chronic kidney disease (26) . Direct correlation with endomyocardial biopsy findings was not performed but is somewhat impractical due to its invasive nature; in addition, it is not foolproof due to sampling error.  Myocardial amyloid infiltration on top of the increased afterload creates a one-two punch in such patients whose survival is worse than those with AS alone (8) . The mechanistic basis is likely to be in part due to the fact that TTR fibrils impair myocardial contractility and drive a persistent lowgrade inflammatory state, thus worsening the mechanics of an overburdened left ventricle (27) (8, 9) . Pharmacological stress was performed using dipyridamole, and dobutamine stress was used in those with contraindications to vasodilator stress. Dipyridamole was infused at a rate of 0.14 mg/kg/min over 5 min in all cohorts as per local practice, as previously described (10, 11) . Patients who did not achieve target heart rate with exercise stress were subsequently converted to pharmacological stress. In occasions where pharmacological stress was Table 1 External cohort PET image acquisition has been previously described (6) . patients who underwent PET ( Table 2) . Based on the multivariable analysis ( Abbreviations as in Table 1 . Conversely, normal studies were identified with a specificity of 70.6% in men and 87.1% in women ( Table 5 ). The predicted and observed probability of having an abnormal SPECT per clinical score is presented in Figure 2 . Rouhani et al. Table 5) . Model score and corresponding proportion of men and women with normal (blue) and abnormal (red) single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) studies. Percentage of normal studies indicated for each score. Rouhani et al. Stress-first protocols have been adopted to improve patient experience, reduce radiation exposure, and optimize resource use. Specifically, stressfirst imaging has been shown to reduce radiation exposure to patients by 25% to 80% (16, 17) , and technologists and nurses by 40% to 50% (18) . As the current radiation reduction goal of ASNC is to reduce median doses to <9 mSv (9) , and a combination of stress-only imaging with CZT cameras is shown to achieve radiation reduction to 1 mSv (19, 20) , such protocols will assist in minimizing patient harm and meeting these goals (21) . By minimizing the need for rest imaging, this would potentially reduce cost and allow for increased patient throughput as well (16, 17) . Identifying patients that would potentially benefit from a stressfirst protocol would allow labs to achieve these goals. Integration of such models into an electronic medical record would improve patient selection and patient care. Co-registration of the IVUS and X-ray imaging data was feasible in all the lesions that also had a lipid-rich phenotype and length >9 mm Co-registration of the IVUS and X-ray imaging data was feasible in all the lesions that also had a lipid-rich phenotype and length >9 mm Table 2 ). Values are median (interquartile range) or n (%). *Renal failure was defined as an estimated glomerular filtration rate of <60 ml/min/1.73 m 2 . BMI ¼ body mass index; CAD ¼ coronary artery disease; MACE-R ¼ major adverse cardiovascular event Àrevascularization; NSTEMI ¼ nonÀST-segment elevation myocardial infarction; PCI ¼ percutaneous coronary intervention; RAAS ¼ renin angiotensin aldosterone system; STEMI ¼ ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. (13) Values are median (interquartile range) or n (%). 3D-QCA ¼ 3-dimensional quantitative coronary angiography; CFD ¼ computational fluid dynamics; DS ¼ diameter stenosis; EEM ¼ external elastic membrane; ESS ¼ endothelial shear stress; MACE-R ¼ major adverse cardiovascular events-revascularization; MLA ¼ minimum lumen area; MLD ¼ minimum lumen diameter; PB ¼ plaque burden; TCFA ¼ thin cap fibroatheroma; VH-IVUS ¼ virtual histology intravascular ultrasound. Tables 1 and 2 . Figure 2A , lesions with a high-risk plaque morphology exposed to high ESS had worse prognosis than lesions exposed to high ESS with a low-risk morphology or those exposed to low ESS. The results were not different when a high-risk plaque phenotype was defined as the presence of MLA Table 4 ). Patients who had lipid-rich plaques with $2 high-risk plaque characteristics that were exposed to high ESS (>4.95 Pa) had worse prognosis than those with high-risk plaques exposed to low ESS ( Figure 5 ). The pressure gradient across the lesion also appeared to provide additional prognostic information to plaque morphology; patients with lesions with $2 high-risk plaque characteristics that exhibited a pressure gradient >2.31 mm Hg had the worst prognosis compared with the other groups. Similar results were reported when high-risk lesions were defined as those with MLA #4 mm 2 and a PB $70%. Thin-capped fibroatheroma (TCFA) (þ) indicates the lesions with a TCFA phenotype, minimum lumen area (MLA) (þ) the lesions with MLA #4.0 mm 2 , plaque burden (PB) (þ) the lesions with PB $70%, and endothelial shear stress (ESS) (þ) the lesions exposed to high maximum ESS (>4.95 Pa). (8, 9) and others suggesting a protective effect (5, 10) . Recent data using coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA) (4) and three-dimensional quantitative coronary angiography (3D-QCA) (11) have shown that high WSS is associated with future major adverse event(s) (MACE) and myocardial infarction, respectively. Importantly, the combination of anatomic lesion severity, adverse plaque characteristics, and adverse biomechanical characteristics is significantly incremental in predicting future MACE (4, 11) . Just as we came to understand that the thickness of a fibroatheroma's cap does not contain the summation of the histological or anatomic plaque features associated with vulnerability, recent investigations have explored the roles of other biomechanical forces. These include axial plaque stress (APS), the axial component of the force acting on plaque (4, 12, 13) , and plaque structural stress, the internal stress within the plaque (14) (15) (16) . High APS and plaque structural stress have been associated with future MACE and ruptureprone coronary plaques (4, 14, 16) . Further investigation is warranted to extend these findings and to refine the biomechanical indices so that they can be incor- The authors also showed that lesions with a high-risk plaque morphology exposed to high ESS had a worse prognosis than the lesions exposed to high ESS with low-risk morphology or those exposed to Several important limitations of the study (17) should also be acknowledged. First, there is the concern of selection bias from the data used in the The pathophysiology of initial cardiac injury with local cell activation and differentiation to myofibroblasts, progression to extracellular matrix, and finally to collagen fiber type 1 proliferation with reactive and replacement fibrosis as the arrhythmogenic substrate with its different mechanisms is depicted. Cardiac magnetic resonance can image ischemia and fibrosis using late gadolinium enhancement, T1 mapping, and extracellular volume fraction. Current treatments are using preventive measurements and pharmacological antiremodeling/antifibrotic medications or ablate the arrhythmogenic substrate and implantable cardioverter-defibrillator. fibrosis is usually localized endocardial or transmural after myocardial infarction (13) . In reactive interstitial fibrosis, fibrosis is diffusely and progressively distributed across the myocardium and appears after myocardial infarction in the remodeling zone of the noninfarcted area (14) and in aortic valve regurgitation and aortic stenosis. Of note, reactive fibrosis has been observed to regress from diuretic agents therapy or angiotensin receptor blockade (15, 16) . In view of the different mechanism of arrhythmogenicity, several diagnostic approaches have been developed to better predict lethal ventricular arrhythmias. Echocardiography with strain imaging, nuclear scintigraphy, and cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) offer unique noninvasive risk assessment; they are summarized in Table 1 . ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY. As a cornerstone in the workup of patients with heart failure, echocardiography has been widely available and adapted in assessing global left ventricular (LV) function toward crude risk discrimination of SCD. However, its ability to differentiate the risk of SCD from pump failure is limited. Global longitudinal strain in echocardiography has (19, 20) . An abnormal ratio of uptake between the heart and mediastinum has been associated with an increased risk of spontaneous sustained VT, resuscitated cardiac arrest, or appropriate ICD shock in the ADMIRE-HF (AdreView Myocardial Imaging for Risk Evaluation in Heart Failure) study (21) . But, 123 meta-iodobenzylguanidine SPECT did not provide adequate patient risk stratification to guide toward the benefits of ICD therapies (22) . However, a prospective, multicenter trial using C-meta-hydroxyephedrine PET assessing sympathetic denervation in patients with IHD demonstrates a promising association with sudden cardiac arrest incremental to LVEF and infarct volume (23) . in CMR (28, 29) . However, because of a lower accuracy than CMR and increased radiation exposure, LGE by extent, pattern, infarct gray zone, native and post-contrast T1 mapping, and extracellular volume fraction (ECV) toward quantitation of interstitial fibrosis (Table 2, Figure 2 ). Recent reports ( Table 3) and ongoing studies have identified potential CMR risk markers for SCD ( LGE EXTENT. In addition to the dichotomous categorization of patients according to the presence or absence of LGE, a dose-response effect between LGE extent (in mass/proportion or transmurality) and risk for an arrhythmic event has been evaluated (36, 37) . Increasing LGE transmurality proved to be associated with an increased risk for arrhythmic events. Indeed, in a study including patients with IHD undergoing clinically indicated ICD implantation, the number of in the myocardium is brighter than twice the SD above a normal myocardium (42 LGE GRAY ZONE AND ITS EXTENT. Within an infarcted or scarred region, not all myocytes are dead. Some myocytes are viable with intact cell membranes, and, therefore, gadolinium contrast is absent. This infarct tissue heterogeneity, besides the aforementioned partial volume effects, accounts for the differences in LGE signal intensity. To better characterize the scar itself, the LGE signal has been further differentiated into the LGE infarct core and the LGE infarct gray zone (i.e., the peri-infarct zone) (45) . The LGE gray zone was defined as a myocardium with signal intensity $35% but with <50% of the maximum signal intensity. In patients with previous myocardial infarction, the LGE gray zone was the strongest predictor of appropriate ICD therapy, outperforming the total LGE extent (45) . Other studies have confirmed these results or at least identified the LGE gray zone as an independent predictor of arrhythmic events (46, 47 however, an expanded ECV may also represent extracellular protein deposition and to a lesser degree Furthermore, other intracellular deposition (i.e., iron and glycogen compounds) also has an important impact on native T1 (53) . Besides its diagnostic value, evidence is encouraging that T1 mapping and ECV may identify patients at increased risk for outcome (54, 55) . Compared with native T1 values, ECV appears to provide risk stratification with a higher degree of precision (56) . However, these are preliminary data, and future studies including patients with IHD need to investigate its predictive value for VT and SCD. Imaging fibrosis by CMR is on the horizon as the primary target of improving risk stratification for SCD. Besides the prognostic value of LGE and the LGE gray zone, T1 mapping, ECV, and feature tracking are emerging as novel techniques to directly or indirectly assess fibrosis. However, the impact of these features on patient management and its cost-effectiveness has yet to be revealed. In addition, myocardial fibrosis is a complex process, and its arrhythmogenic potential is dependent on numerous factors. Therefore, it is unlikely that 1 single CMR feature will optimize patient selection for prophylactic ICD implantation, but rather a number of clinical, functional, and morphological parameters will presumably be combined. Furthermore, the target population for CMR assessment has yet to be defined, and in an era of individualizing treatment, not only its identification but also the monitoring of the treatment response could be improved by CMR. More evidence will be generated by the CMR Therefore, future randomized studies need to assess (specifically prospectively) arrhythmia endpoints in order to evaluate ICD benefit. Because of its potential to stimulate triggers, create vulnerable conditions for re-entry, and produce a pro-  Sudden cardiac death remains a leading cause of cardiovascular deaths in patients with ischemic heart disease, and current risk stratification is limited. Further studies are needed for a better risk stratification in these patients. Fibrosis is an arrhythmogenic substrate in patients with ischemic heart disease, and cardiac magnetic resonance is the modality of choice to display scar and diffuse fibrosis. Cardiac magnetic resonance is a promising tool to improve risk stratification in patients with ischemic heart disease. Abbreviations as in Figure 1 . Abbreviations as in Figures 1 and 2 . Table 1 ). Multimodality imaging could help improve the diagnosis, and therefore, the management of these patients and their outcomes. Figure 1 . calcification load was moderate-to-severe (median Figure 1 ). This study is the first to quantitatively map AVC in AS, providing insights into AS pathophysiology. Additionally, our novel image processing in patients with contrast CT allowed displaying the spatial rela- For providers evaluating syncope patients, our findings suggest that a prior normal TTE should not be reassuring, regardless of the time interval, suggesting that for patients presenting with syncope, there is no TTE "warranty period" during which providers can be reassured by a normal prior result. As expected, a prior abnormal TTE should increase suspicion that interim progression of findings to potentially explain syncope will be found on a repeat TTE. Given recent guidelines and published data favoring the selective use of TTE in syncope (3), we had hypothesized that information from a prior TTE could allow providers to better risk-stratify patients, and thereby improve diagnostic yield and reduce the need for a repeat TTE for those with a prior normal TTE. We had anticipated this because, aside Previous studies investigated LA strain in AFD by speckle-tracking echocardiography but did not explore the relationship between LA dysfunction and severity of LV involvement ( Glycosphingolipid storage in the atrial myocardium has been previously reported in histological studies, regardless of LVH or enzyme replacement therapy (1, 4) . As observed in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, atrial myopathy in AFD seems to affect primarily LA compliance rather than atrial contractility. The atrial myopathy appears to progress in parallel with the ventricular features of AFD cardiomyopathy as well as its extracardiac manifestations, regardless of male sex or presence of a classic mutation. In particular, a good correlation was found with native T1 values, which in pre-hypertrophic patients with AFD had been shown to provide prognostic information (5) . In conclusion, this study contributes to the characterization of the pre-hypertrophic phenotype of AFD, introducing LA total strain as a potential novel Moving from control subjects to group 3, a progressive reduction in left atrial (LA) total strain (ε s ) and conduit strain (ε e ) with lowering of T1 values and increase of left ventricular mass can be observed. LA booster strain (ε a ) is preserved also in the last stages of cardiomyopathy. LGE ¼ late gadolinium enhancement. indicator of early cardiac involvement and a possible tool to personalize management decisions in these patients. Computed territory, lesion location, size of side branches, and vessel dominance (2 ( Figures 1E and 1F) . Using the existing FFR CT model, the APPROACH FFRCT score provides clinicians with a simple and highly reproducible method for estimating and visualizing the ischemic myocardial burden and therefore has the potential to complement FFR CT Figure 1B) . To our knowledge, this study is the first to indicate that myocardial strain by feature-tracking CMR is related to myocardial T2*. In patients with myocardial iron overload, longitudinal strain seems to be the most sensitive parameter for early prediction of Noninvasive imaging of myocardial function has limitations as a readout of myocardial biology and therefore as the basis for cardiomyopathy treatments. Measuring scar by using cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) adds value but does not inform about non-scarred myocardium, the key therapeutic target in cardiology. The extracellular volume fraction (ECV%) is an intuitive measure of tissue remodeling and is elevated due to edema, amyloid, and fibrosis. ECV% and the derived intracellular volume When quantified (Figure 1) , in vivo CMR median ECV% was 28.3% (24.8% to 32.3%), with ICV% therefore 71.7%. Whole biopsy 2D analysis revealed a median CVF% of 11.6% (4.2% to 25.8%). According to confocal microscopy, the equivalent ECM fraction was 16.9% (10.0% to 23.7%), and the cell volume fraction was split into a myocyte volume fraction of 70.8% (59.6% to 78.4%) and a nonmyocyte volume fraction of 13.3% (9.3% to 16.7%). There was limited correlation (Spearman's) of confocal parameters, with only total confocal cellular volume correlating with late gadolinium enhancement (rho ¼ 0.57; p ¼ 0.048) and left atrial area (rho ¼ 0.74; p ¼ 0.047); they did not correlate with CVF% A deep learning-based system was used to segment EAT. The system consisted of 2 consecutive U-Nets to localize and segment the pericardial sac, followed by an attenuation-based mask to render EAT ( Figure 1A ). Using standard methods, our core laboratory also manually measured coronary artery Figure 1B) . The elderly and those with ASCVD risk scores $7.5% had more EAT but lower EAT attenuation compared with younger subjects and those with ASCVD risk scores <7.5%. Regarding CAD, EAT volume increased and attenuation decreased proportionally to the CAC score (p < 0.001 for both). Likewise, patients with SIS $4 or HRPF had higher EAT volume and lower attenuation compared with those with <4 stenotic segments or absent HRPF (p < 0.001 for all) ( Figure 1B) . Previous work showed lower accuracy of the septal E/é ratio in patients with regional wall motion abnormalities (2) . Aside from patients with coronary artery disease, it is important to know how prognostic associations fare in older adult patients with risk factors for heart failure because most patients with heart failure with preserved EF belong to this group. In that regard, a recent study did not show a In contrast, measurements of LA reservoir strain (LARS) and LA contractile strain are feasible and intuitive (5) , and the ability to measure atrial strain using echocardiography or cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) with equal predictive value (6) has led to a substantial body of work in the last decade (7). LA strain adds value (8) over and above other parameters, including the HbA1c value of the atrial LA volume (9) . Differential changes in reservoir function and conduit function may provide finer insights (10) Normal ranges of LARS (39%; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 38% to 41%) and LA contractile strain (17%; 95% CI: 16% to 19%) have been defined (11) . Normal LARS far exceeds the levels (18% to 24%) associated with various adverse outcomes, suggesting that there is considerable reserve. The 2 major clinical applications of LA strain are the assessment of diastolic function or LV filling pressure and the assessment of risk of atrial fibrillation. In this issue of iJACC, 2 important papers explore the ability of LA strain imaging to integrate the assessment of LV function and AF risk (6, 12) .  
