9958bc217413474be9454710714745f8b4dc5ebc
Slide session: Surgical Site Infection O1 THE EFFECT OF POSTOPERATIVE CONTINUATION OF ANTIBIOTIC PROPHYLAXIS ON THE INCIDENCE OF SURGICAL SITE INFECTION: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW AND META-ANALYSIS
  Geneva S  De Jonge Q  Boldingh J  Solomkin P  Dellinger M  Egger G  Salanti B  Allegranzi M  Boermeester 

Amsterdam UMC Amsterdam UMC University of Cincinnati University of Washington University of Bern University of Bern Amsterdam UMC 
Introduction: Direct observation is the gold standard in the detection of hand hygiene compliance, although known biases influence quality of data. In this study, data of motion detection sensors was examined with mathematical algorithms to assess the value of improved technological opportunities in hand hygiene monitoring. Objectives: The goal of the study was to detect four properties concerning relevant parameters for hand hygiene monitoring in a laboratory setup: 1. Are patients' beds occupied by patients or not? 2. If patients are present, is it possible to observe direct contact of healthcare professionals (HCPs) with patients as a surrogate for a moment of hand hygiene? 3. Can information be gathered without wearable devices? 4. Can data be gathered without personalization of patients and healthcare professionals? Methods: Motion detection sensors were mounted over patients' beds. Presence of patients and the treatment of healthcare professionals were recorded in an operationalized setup. 67 recordings took place which lasted between 2 to 5 minutes. In some recordings, there were duplications of observed cases (bed occupied and direct contact with patient). When HCPs were closer to patients than 10 cm, direct contact was noted. No wearable devices were used to gather data. Data was analyzed with an algorithm, which was developed for the purpose of the study. Direct observation took place simultaneously to the recordings to validate the results of the algorithm. Results: In 53 recordings, the presence of the patient in the bed had to be defined. In 52 out of 53 recordings, the presence of the patient could be detected (98,1% of cases compared to 100% by direct observation). There was one false negative case. In 26 recordings, direct contacts of HCPs were examined. In all 26 cases, direct contacts of HCPs could be determined (100% compared to 100% by direct observation). In no case patients' or HCPs could be identified out of the recorded data (0% compared to 100% by direct observation). No wearable devices had to be used in the study. Conclusion: The results show that algorithmic analysis of motion detection data can lead to information which can be used in the evaluation of hand hygiene compliance. Further studies will be necessary to identify if Artificial Intelligence can detect the 5 moments of hand hygiene out of motion detection data with an acceptable deviation. Disclosure of Interest: E. Khaljani, MBA Shareholder of: The author is a shareholder of the HygNova GmbH which uses motion detection technology to approximate the 5 WHO moments of hand hygiene in hospitals., S. Slama Shareholder of: The author is a shareholder of the HygNova GmbH which uses motion detection technology to approximate the 5 WHO moments of hand hygiene in hospitals., T. Ebeling Shareholder of: The author is a shareholder of the HygNova GmbH which uses motion detection technology to approximate the 5 WHO moments of hand hygiene in hospitals. Methods: SmartRub® is composed of an electronic wristband and an electronic cylinder inserted into a pocket-sized ABHR dispenser. Each HCW has their own designated device. A vibration is activated in the dispenser when the HCW reaches the targeted ABHR volume customized to their hands' surface, giving HCW FB on the volume. A vibration activated in the wristband after a defined time following the start of the HH gesture, giving HCW FB on the duration of the action. The FB can be fully parametrized, including being activated or not. SmartRub® is compatible with both rinse and gel ABHRs. Results: To assess the precision of the measures, 5 HCWs performed 2200 ABHR uses and 70 HH friction gestures. The error on the volume measurement averaged -0.02 + (SD) 0.1 mL and the error on the duration -0.1+ (SD) 1.4 sec. SmartRub® was tested in a tertiary hospital for its ability (sensitivity/specificity) to detect HH actions in: (a) laboratory conditions, (b) a simulated path in a clinical ward, and (c) real-life conditions in a clinical ward (overall sensitivity to detect "true" HH actions, 96.8%; specificity, 98.3%). The effect of SmartRub® has been demonstrated in a clinical trial; the quality of the HH gestures improved when FB was used: the average volume of ABHR used increased from 1.4 mL to 2.1 mL and duration of friction increased from 9.3 to 11.1 sec. SmartRub® acceptability was tested among HCWs; the majority found it easy to use and useful; half of them affirmed its use made them change their HH behaviour. Conclusion: SmartRub® allows HCWs to know in real-time whether the quality of their HH action is appropriate in terms of volume of ABHR used and duration of friction. It encourages them to improve their own performance continuously, thus helping to implement behavior change. Introduction: Infection prevention and control organizations encourages health care personals(HCPs) to take a pledge on infection prevention topics such as hand hygiene (HH) to create awareness & actively engage them in infection prevention. Social networking services like WhatsApp are increasingly used by HCPs and organizations to share medical knowledge and to disseminate health information to wider HCP community. However, research is limited on the effectiveness of WhatsApp in promoting HH awareness pledge among HCPs. Objectives: Our objective was to evaluate the effectiveness of What-sApp in promoting HH awareness pledge among HCPs. Methods: This observational study was conducted from May 5 to May 19, 2019 among HCPs belonging to randomly selected different WhatsApp networks operating from India with majority of members engaged or working in Indian health care industry. In the first part of study from May 5 to May 12 education on hand hygiene and the importance of promoting hand hygiene within health care were circulated daily. In the second part from May 12 to May 19, members were encouraged to take HH pledge with periodic daily remainders. The rate of HCPs taking HH awareness pledge was calculated in percentage and reasons for not taking HH pledge were analyzed. Results: 1111 HCPs belonging to nine WhatsApp networks participated in this study. Majority (718/1111, 3/9 Groups) of the members were belonging to physicians WhatsApp groups. The effectiveness of HH awareness pledge were highest among Infectious disease (ID) physicians (13/23, 56.52%) group followed by hospital based groups (38/115, 28.14%) & Clinical microbiologists (50/187, 26.73%). The HH WhatsApp awareness pledge campaign failed to create awareness among ID trainees and physicians networks in this study. The effectiveness of WhatsApp networks HH awareness pledge campaign was 13.27% (129/972) among different HCPs What-sApp groups in India. The reasons for high acceptance to HH awareness pledge in certain groups and failure to create awareness in other groups need to be analyzed in detail to identify ideal What-sApp networks for future infection control & HH awareness campaigns. Introduction: We believe that monitoring the hand hygiene behavior should be done automized and objectively. These characteristics have been considered during the development of the hand hygiene monitoring "NosoEx". Objectives: It is the overall goal to reduce hospital-acquired infections. Since our hands are the transmission path number one for germs awareness for hand hygiene must be increased. Direct feedback to healthcare workers is essential because they often overerstimate themselves or do not feel addressed during hygiene trainings. Consequently, NosoEx provides data about the status quo and the development of the hand disinfection numbers over time. This data can be divided into job groups like doctors, nurses and therapists. Ultimately, hygiene trainings can be performed more directly. Methods: Every existing dispenser model (wall dispensers, point of care dispensers, individual bottles of hand rub) can be upgraded with NosoEx sensors. Moreover, every healthcare worker gets a badge that can be worn at the clothing. The badges have different colors that represent the job groups. Associated with that, the compliance with data protection laws and work councils is ensured. In addition to that, all collected data is visualized in a user-friendly software. There the hospital ward map is digitized and the position of dispensers are shown. Consequently, additional key figures like filling level and use frequency can be seen for every dispenser. Results: Our client "Hospital Lüneburg" increased the disinfectant use by 35% after NosoEx has been installed. This was important because the selected wards have been under average. Moreover, data patterns have been identified. For example, the use of dispensers on the corridor has been much higher than the use of dispensers in the patient room. The recommendation was that this area of the ward should be analyzed more deeply during the compliance observation. In addition to that, the NosoEx system has been recognized that certain job groups did not reach the minimum amount of 3ml per disinfection. Followed by that, trainings about the correct hand disinfection have been realized. Conclusion: Hand hygiene monitoring solutions have to be seamlessly integrated into the infrastructure of the hospital and into the job routines of the healthcare workers. Direct feedback with jobgroup related data can be more sustainable. Moreover, providing the data automized might reduce the workload of data analysis that is done by infection control officers. Objectives: To characterise the antimicrobial activity of AM developed coatings to combat nosocomial infection transmission. Methods: Polymer metallisation via cold spray and 3D printing was used to develop various copper, silver and zinc coatings. Two independent, in vitro assays were conducted using the prevalent pathogens: Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC 25923), Enterococcus faecalis (ATCC 29212), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (ATCC 27853), Klebsiella pneumoniae (ATCC 13887) and a yeast Candida albicans (ATCC 10231); as well as the associated resistant strains: gentamicin-methicillinresistant S. aureus (ATCC 33592), P. aeruginosa (DSM 46316) and a clinically resistant C. albicans. A diffusion assay evaluated coating efficacy based on the extent of inhibition zones, while an adapted time kill assay simulated pathogenic exposure via touch-contact in a dry environment, evaluating the rate of antimicrobial efficacy. Results: Effective, particle-embedded, cold spray coatings were achieved. Against standard pathogens copper-zinc blended coatings exhibited synergistic activity under diffusive test conditions; while under touch-contact conditions copper coatings repeatedly achieved complete microbial elimination within a 15 min. exposure period on polymer substrates and within 7 min. on copper substrates. The addition of 5wt% silver to the latter coating brought microbial elimination down to just 5 min., against the resistant pathogens. Copper metal, in comparison, achieved 92.9% and 85.4% microbial reduction for each respective pathogen type over 3 hrs. Conclusion: The innovative and adaptable surface coating technology showed enhanced antimicrobial activity and so, its potential use for the mitigation of surface contact transmission of infections was confirmed. Introduction: In recent years, more attention has been paid to the importance of the environment in the transmission of microorganisms from one patient to another. Applying a silicon dioxide (SiO2) nanocoating, with particles ≤1 millionth of a millimeter, could facilitate the cleaning of surfaces by making the surface antistatic and hydrophobic, preventing water and dirt from adhering. Objectives: This study aimed to determine whether nanocoated patient rooms with SiO2 achieve better cleaning results compared to non-coated patient rooms. Methods: After a thorough cleaning, a SiO2 nanocoating was applied to different surfaces of two patient rooms. Among other things, parts of the floor, bedside table, toilet flush button, toilet seat, medical trolley and light switch were provided with a SiO2 nanocoating. In order not to influence the cleaning results, the cleaning staff were not informed about which rooms were coated. The SiO2 nanocoating itself was also invisible to the naked eye. One week, 4 weeks and 12 weeks after applying the SiO2 nanocoating, the surfaces on the coated and uncoated patient rooms were checked by 2 measuring methods. First, the degree of contamination of the surface was determined by means of ATP measurements (Hygiena Ultrasnap™ for surface tests in combination with a Hygiena systemSURE II device). The result was expressed in relative light units (RLU). Subsequently, a determination of the total aerobic bacterial count was performed by sampling with a non-selective nutrient medium (RODAC™). This result was expressed in the number of colony forming units (CFU). The measurements and sampling were always carried out immediately after the final cleaning when the patient was allowed to leave the hospital. Results: A total of 206 measurements were made. The results of the coated patient rooms were not significantly different from the patient rooms where no SiO2 nanocoating were applied (chi squared test, p = .379 for CFU and p = .204 for RLU). Conclusion: The added value of applying the SiO2 nanocoating could not be demonstrated in this study. However, this needs to be further investigated, before general conclusions are drawn. Slide session: Burden of healthcareassociated influenza Introduction: Whereas the incidence of seasonal influenza infections in healthcare settings is underestimated, the risk of Nosocomial Influenza (NI) outbreaks is real. Objectives: The objective of this prospective surveillance study was to describe epidemiological characteristics of patients and healthcare workers (HCWs) with Influenza Like Illness (ILI) and compares NI and community-acquired influenza (CAI) over 13 influenza seasons. Methods: Patients and HCWs were included during influenza seasons (October-April 2004-18) in 46 wards (medicine, surgery, geriatric), in a 1000 beds hospital (Edouard Herriot university-affiliated Hospital, Lyon). A nasal swab was obtained and analyzed by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction in order to detect influenza viruses. An ILI case was defined as temperature ≥37.8°C without prior use of antipyretics, and/or cough or sore throat. A NI was considered if symptoms appeared at least 72 h after admission while CAI was defined if symptom onset until 24 h after admission. Results: Overall, 837 patients and 274 HCWs were included. 76.9% of ILI patients were hospitalized in geriatric ward, 20.9% in medical ward and 2.2% in surgical ward. Baseline characteristics of these patients were different according to the hospitalization ward. The sex ratio was 1.25 in surgical vs 0.52 in geriatric ward. Influenza vaccine coverage was 55.4% in geriatric vs 27.8% in surgical ward. A total of 247 people (22%, 188 patients, 59 HCWs) were influenza laboratory-confirmed. Among patients, 59 (31.4%) had NI with a median symptom onset of 12 days; 18.6% presented their symptoms 3 to 5 days after admission and 16.9% between 46 and 71 days. Influenza vaccine coverage among NI cases was 37.9% vs 42.9% for CAI cases. All-cause mortality rate was 3.4% in NI cases vs 3.6% in CAI cases. Conclusion: The results demonstrated the importance of implementing surveillance of influenza in hospitals to estimate the proportion of NI and to emphasize the need to improve infection control measures implementation and vaccine use for high-risk patients and HCWs. Introduction: Influenza is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in elderly. They are at high risk of complications after influenza virus infection. Data on the epidemiology of influenza within nursing homes (NH) are limited. Objectives: The purpose of this prospective study was to better describe the burden of influenza among residents of NH of canton of Vaud, Switzerland, with influenza-like illness during 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 influenza seasons. Methods: First, we determined the proportion of influenza-like illness due to influenza in NH residents. We specifically assessed the impact of a positive influenza PCR on clinical features, morbidity and mortality, 30 and 90 days after diagnosis, as compared to a negative influenza PCR. Moreover, influenza vaccination rates of the residents and the healthcare workers within each nursing home were assessed at the end of each influenza season. Results: A PCR test was performed on 509 residents from 61 NH. 227 influenza virus infections were diagnosed; 181 influenza A and 46 influenza B. Compared to residents without influenza virus infection (IVI), residents with IVI were more often feverish with a high fever (69.1% and 88.5% respectively, p<0.0001) are significantly more frequently hospitalized within 30 days after diagnosis (17.6 % vs 7.1%, p=0.0003). Any cause mortality at 30 days was similar in both groups (12.8% vs 10.6%, p=0.48). Only 18.1% of IVI residents were treated with an antiviral and 60.4% of them received antibiotics. Influenza vaccination rates of the healthcare workers and residents were respectively 50% and 82%. Conclusion: During influenza season, the feverish residents should be suspected to have influenza virus infection. Residents should be diagnosed (PCR) and treated with an antiviral where appropriate to limit the risk of hospitalization. Healthcare workers should be encouraged to be vaccinated against influenza in order to acquire a better herd immunity within the NH which will limit the spread of influenza. Introduction: To effectively control the pathogenic bacteria spread in hospital settings it is critically important to develop accurate and reliable protocols of isolates' comparison between different patients and departments. However, traditional typing methods may be insufficient in the cases of multi-drug resistant strains with high level of genome variability. Objectives: Facilitate the developing of a reliable procedure for distinguishing pathogenic bacteria strains based on their whole genomes. Methods: 6 isolates of Klebsiella pneumoniae, 5 of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 4 of Staphylococcus aureus were obtained from peripheral blood, urine and soft tissues of 81-year old female patient of intensive care unit in Moscow hospital during the period of four months. Genomic DNA was isolated with DNeasy kit (Qiagen) and used for paired-end library preparation with Nextera Kit (Illumina) and sequencing on Hiseq platform. Genome assemblies were made using SPAdes program and genomic comparison were performed using roary, dnadiff and custom software. The isolates were classified using MLST-based scheme and, in addition, capsular gene scheme (K-and O-loci) for K. pneumoniae. Results: Although the bacterial isolates of each species did have the same types (ST11,KL27,O2v2 for K.pneumoniae, ST2613 for P.aeruginosa and ST8 for S.aureus, respectively) and similar coregenome composition, the numbers of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) between the pairs of isolates have significantly exceeded the thresholds previously proposed for strain discrimination in literature (23-31 vs. 18 for K.pneumoniae, 70-85 vs. 37 for P.aeruginosa, 30-53 vs. 15 for S.aureus, respectively). At the same time, the number of SNPs between the isolates of the same MLST-type from different patients were always above 100 and sometimes exceeded 1000. Conclusion: Our results suggest that although the number of coregenome SNPs proves to be useful measure for distinguishing distant bacterial strains, more research is needed to establish appropriate thresholds for it. We believe that the results obtained will be useful for developing new standards of NGS-based epidemiological surveillance of healthcare-associated infections since they allow to define new strain distinguishing thresholds based on genomic sequences. Introduction: Surgical site infections (SSIs) complicate approximately 2% of primary total hip (THA) or total knee arthroplasty (TKA). Accurate and timely identification through surveillance is essential for targeted implementation and monitoring of preventive interventions. The availability of electronic health records facilitates (semi)automated surveillance, enabling high-quality large scale surveillance. Objectives: This study assesses the validity of a previously published semiautomated surveillance algorithm for deep surgical site infections after THA or TKA, relying on retrospective routine care data. Methods: Multicentre retrospective cohort study in four independent hospitals in the Netherlands. From all adult patients who underwent a THA or TKA, the following data were extracted from the electronic health records: microbiology results, antibiotics, (re)admissions, and surgical procedures within the 120 days following the primary surgery. Patients were classified with a low and high probability of having developed a deep SSI after THA or TKA, according to a previously developed algorithm. Sensitivity, positive predictive value (PPV) and workload reduction as compared to the traditional (manual) surveillance reported to the national surveillance database PREZIES were calculated. Results: Four hospitals each extracted data from at least 1000 THA and TKA surgeries performed between 2012-2018. Preliminary analysis for one centre, based on 2395 records, demonstrates 77.4% sensitivity, 75% PPV and a workload reduction of 98.7%. Discrepancy analysis and analysis for the other centres are currently ongoing. Conclusion: The results of this validation study are a prerequisite for successful broader implementation of semiautomated surveillance for SSIs after THA or TKA in the near future. Methods: Escherichia coli data are collected from Antibiotic Resistance Surveillance (ARS) for humans, Zoonosis-Monitoring for nonclinical food-producing animal isolates and German Resistance Monitoring for Veterinary Medicine (GERM-Vet) for clinical animal isolates from 2014 to 2017. Human data originated from outpatients, general wards and intensive care units. Food-producing animal data were stratified by animal type and clinical vs. non-clinical origin. Three human origins and thirty-eight animal origins (e.g. broilers from slaughterhouse-non clinical, pigs-clinical, etc.) were analyzed. Ampicillin, cefotaxime, ciprofloxacin and gentamicin were the four antibiotics that were included, since they were frequently tested throughout these three systems. Cluster analysis was run based on sixteen resistance combinations; e.g. all susceptible (0000); using hierarchical clustering (Euclidian; average) in R. Results: Three different clusters were detected based on the resistance combinations in isolates from each origin. Clinical human isolates clustered together (outpatient, general ward and intensive care unit). The cluster was closely related with isolates from pigs (weaners, clinical piglets, clinical and non-clinical sows, pork, growers < 50kg and fattening pigs). All isolates that having low resistance rates (< 20%) against these four antibiotics clustered together (mostly nonclinical food-producing animals). All poultry isolates (turkeys and broilers) except broilers from organic farms grouped together with clinical isolates from pigs and bovines <1 year. Conclusion: This study is the first study on cluster analysis using the data from national surveillance and monitoring systems for AMR for humans and food-producing animals in Germany. Detecting the closest relationship based on the resistance combination might be helpful for infection and prevention control. However, further analyses to better understand the clusters are necessary. Introduction: Manual active surveillance of healthcare-associated infections (HAIs) based on monitoring of all inpatient admissions and outpatient visits is very demanding and time consuming. Various automated methods have been introduced, e.g., monitoring positive microbiological cultivations. Not all HAIs are confirmed microbiologically however, as some relevant information for HAI detection might be hidden in unstructured clinical notes written by physicians and nurses. Sips et al. (2017) presents an overview of automated surveillance methods based on natural language processing (NLP) which allows analyzing unstructured texts. The authors state that NLP shows promising results, but needs further exploration. Objectives: We measure the impact of NLP on the surveillance of HAIs. Methods: Cooperating with Hospital Jihlava, treating about 25,000 inpatients annually, we have developed a technology based on NLP, which automatically detects potential HAIs by reading all available electronic health records. Potential HAIs are validated by members of the infection prevention team in Hospital Jihlava and this feedback is used to further improve the performance of NLP analysis. Results: The technology has been deployed for more than a year. We have collected data on 920 confirmed HAIs during the past 12 months (1.5.2018 -30.4 .2019). 35.7% (328 cases) of those HAIs were initially not detected microbiologically, thus showing serious limitations when using traditional monitoring of positive lab results. Conclusion: Methods based on NLP have proved the effectivity of detecting HAIs hidden in the unstructured texts, as well as those microbiologically confirmed. NLP does require reliable electronic health records that are not always readily available, but the trend of digitization is undeniable and before long most of the health data will be electronic. Therefore, NLP brings an enormous potential for automating the surveillance of HAIs. Introduction: Clostridioides difficile (CD) is a leading cause of health care associated infections. The role of asymptomatic carriers in the shedding and transmission of C. difficile is unclear. This study is a nested study in a larger CD carriage surveillance study. Objectives: Here, we aimed to determine the burden of environmental shedding of C. difficile among asymptomatic carriers in an inpatient non-epidemic setting. Methods: CD carriage was determined upon admission in asymptomatic patients by PCR for CD toxin of a rectal swab. Environmental contamination of rooms inhabited by either CD carriers, CDI, or non-CD carrier patients was assessed by obtaining environmental specimens from 10 high-touch sites in the patient's room and bathroom. Specimens were cultured and toxigenic strains were identified by PCR. We created a contamination scale designating each room a level of environmental contamination combining the total number of colony forming units and the number of contaminated sites in the room. Results: 117 rooms were screened; 70 rooms inhabited by carriers, 30 by active CDI patients and 17 by non CD-carriers (control). In the control group, 94% of the rooms were clean, with no colonies discovered, and one participant (6%) had a medium scale contamination. In the carrier group 27 rooms (39%) had more than residual contamination, from which 14 rooms (20%) had heavy contamination. In the CDI group 10 (33%) rooms had more than residual contamination from which 3 (10%) had heavy contamination. In a multivariate analysis adjusted for age, gender, Independency in ADL activities, and antibiotic use the contamination score of carriers' rooms was significantly higher than those of none carriers (p=0.028). The contamination score of active CDI patients was higher than that of the non-carriers bud did not reach statistical significance (p=0.083), yet, most (75%) of the CDI patients were treated with anti-CDI antibiotics on the day of screening. Patient's bathrooms were not more contaminated than the rooms themselves. Conclusion: Here we showed that the environment of CD carriers is significantly higher than patients who were non-carriers and at least as contaminated as that of patients with an active CD infection (after initiation of treatment). Introduction: Recent data on appropriateness of antibiotic therapies in Swiss hospitals are lacking and the extent of room for improvement is unknown. Objectives: In the context of the NRP72 on antimicrobial resistance, we initiated the OPA project in eight Swiss hospitals located in the French-speaking part of Switzerland consisting in the evaluation of the impact of weekly clinical audits and multifaceted feedback strategies on reducing the use of anti-Gram-negative antibiotics that deserve a restrictive prescription: quinolones, 3rd-and 4th-generations cephalosporins, piperacillin/tazobactam and carbapenems. We report here the preliminary results on appropriateness. Methods: Internal medicine, general surgery and intensive care units of participating hospitals were allocated to either intervention or control group. The intervention consisted in one-day weekly audits of protected antibiotic prescriptions over six months by a tandem of an infectious diseases specialist and a senior physician in charge of the patients, using a standardized checklist, followed by immediate feedback to prescribers and monthly reports to the medical team. Additionally, a website with didactic material dedicated to prescribers was created. Results: Among a total of 9565 in-patients charts reviewed, we identified 1681 (18%) patients receiving a protected antibiotic targeted by the study. The auditing tandem proposed an optimization of the antibiotic therapy in 398/1681 (24%) patients including 167 (42%) stops, 87 (22%) switch to the oral route and 86 (22%) deescalations.The adhesion rate to the propositions made by the tandem was 54%. Conclusion: Preliminary results showed that there is room for improvement in prescriptions of protected antibiotics in the Swiss hospital setting. Special attention should focus on shorter durations, early switch to the oral route and de-escalations. Medical directors, head physicians and pharmacists of participating hospitals are aware of antibiotic resistance threat and support local initiatives aiming at antibiotic use optimization. Objectives: In this study, we aimed to compare the efficacy of combination of ceftizoxime with ampicillin-sulbactam versus combination of gentamicin with ampicillin-sulbactam as prophylactic antibiotic regimens used to prevent early bacterial PTIs in LT recipients. Methods: All consecutive patients aged 18 years old and over who underwent LT at the Abu-Ali Sina transplantation hospital in Shiraz, Iran from July 2018 to April 2019, were included prospectively in this study. Randomization was performed in permuted blocks. We randomly assigned participants to receive two prophylactic antibiotic regimens: either combination of intravenous ceftizoxime and ampicillin-sulbactam (ceftizoxime group) or gentamicin and ampicillin-sulbactam (gentamicin group). These regimens started one hour before surgery and continued for 48 hours after LT. The rate and type of bacterial infections, the length of hospital and intensive care unit stays, mortality rate and renal function status were assessed during one-month period after LT. Results: Totally, 230 participants were equally allocated to two groups. One participant in the gentamicin group and five in the ceftizoxime group were excluded due to expiring earlier than 3 days after LT. The rate of bacterial PTI during the first month after transplantation was 25.4% which was significantly lower in gentamicin group (13.16%) than in ceftizoxime group (38.18%) (p-value <0.01). The lengths of ICU and hospital stays and mortality rate were significantly lower in gentamicin group (p-value <0.01). There was no statistically significant difference in renal function status between the two groups. (p-value= 0.16). The results showed that gentamicin can serve as a promising agent in a prophylactic antibiotic regimen in patients undergoing LT. Introduction: Performing urinalyses and urine cultures in asymptomatic patients is one of the most common reasons for inappropriate antibiotic use. However, de-implementing this practice has been difficult, especially for clinical scenarios deemed to be high risk for infectious complications, such as among patients with delirium or those undergoing orthopedic implant surgery. Objectives: Using the dual process theory framework "Developing De-Implementation Strategies Based on Un-Learning and Substitution," an educational intervention citing new Infectious Diseases Society of America guidelines and providing a pneumonic "ABCs of ASB" was created and delivered didactically to providers. The goal was to increase performance of evidence-based prevention actions in place of low-value urine screening and treating of asymptomatic patients. Methods: Clinical providers and staff (physicians, nurses, nurse practitioners, trainees) in 3 different levels of care (acute inpatient, long term, and outpatient) were included. A web-based anonymous and confidential pre and post question format was delivered to assess influence on provider behavior. Results: Responses from a range of 250-279 unique providers were collected. For scenario #1 (patient with delirium and a positive urine culture and no other infectious symptoms), the choice to give antibiotics was reduced from 45% pre to 4% post, Chi-square p < 0.01). For scenario #2 (patient having knee replacement and positive preoperative urine culture, no other symptoms) the choice to give antibiotics was reduced by the same magnitude (~50%) but a lower absolute number (67% pre and 33% post, chi-square p < 0.01). Changes in predicted behavior were similar across levels of care. Conclusion: Substituting evidence-based practices in place of low value practices is an appealing framework for influencing provider behavior. Our work demonstrates that education can successfully reduce the intention to use antibiotics for asymptomatic patients with positive urine cultures. Introduction: The rational use of antimicrobials is the key to curb down antimicrobial resistance. Makassed General Hospital adopted an Infectious Diseases specialist (IDS)-led antimicrobial stewardship program (ASP) in September,2016. Previously, broad-spectrum antibiotic (BSAB) dispensing was restricted through an institutional policy set by the hospital Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee. Objectives: We studied the effect of this IDS-led ASP on BSAB consumption levels, expenditure, resistance in pathogens causing nosocomial bacteremia. We also assessed the ASP effect on in-hospital and Intensive Care Unit (ICU) mortality. Conclusion: Our IDS-led ASP succeeded in controlling BSAB prescription rates and in decreasing the incidence of resistant pathogens causimg bacteremia without compromising pt outcome, not to mention its economic effect in reducing AB expenditure. Introduction: In previous studies, we have shown that a simplified method for hand hygiene (HH; 15 sec rubbing with a hand size-adjusted volume of alcohol and fingertips first followed by the rest of the hands) can lead to a reduction of approximately 2 log 10 on hands artificially contaminated with either Escherichia coli or Staphylococcus aureus. Objectives: We evaluated the efficacy of this simplified HH method in a laboratory experiment simulating WHO moment 2 (before aseptic procedure). Methods: Twenty nurses were enrolled in the study. After handwashing with soft soap, 10 μl of a 10 8 cfu/mL S. aureus NC10788 suspension was deposited on each of their fingertips and let dried for 3 minutes. They then simulated injection in an infusion set, both with and without previous HH with isopropanol 60% (v/v) according to our simplified method (see above). They manipulated the 3-way stopcock integrated in the infusion set and the flowregulating clamp. The whole procedure lasted approximately 3 minutes. The 3-way stopcock and the flow-regulating clamp were then cut, placed in 100 ml tryptone soy mixture, shaken vigorously, and both dilutions and filtration of the recovering solution were inoculated on agar for 48 hours. We had previously established that our method was able to detect a contamination of those 2 parts of the infusion set inferior to 30 cfu. The number of colonies was counted and Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to test the difference between the results with and without HH. The Hodges-Lehmann estimator was applied to estimate the difference between the medians. Results: The median amount of baseline S. aureus on the fingertips of the volunteers was 10 6.8 cfu. Without HH, bacteria were detected after all 20 experiments (range: 25 to 25 800 cfu), whereas with HH, bacteria were not detected after all 20 experiments. The difference between estimated medians was 351 cfu (95% CI 193-570; p = 0.0001). Conclusion: Even with a high contamination of the fingertips with S. aureus, when HH was performed with this simplified method before an aseptic procedure, no bacteria were recovered from 2 critical parts of the infusion set, allowing safer care and patient safety. Introduction: Hand hygiene (HH) compliance by healthcare professionals has been recognized as the most important factor in preventing transmission of healthcare-associated infections to patients (1) . Objectives: We report here the outcome of the seventh Belgian national hand hygiene campaign organized in 2016. The campaign was mainly focused on healthcare workers having contact with patients in hospitals (acute, chronic and psychiatric), and also for the first time on the patients themselves (patient questionnaires). Compliance to hand hygiene guidelines was measured using a standardized observation roster (2) . An online tool (NSIHweb 2.0) was used to collect the individual or aggregated compliance data, with the possibility to obtain immediate feedback. The patient questionnaire was filled out in paper format and manually introduced in a databank. Results: A total of a total of 235,816 hand hygiene opportunities were registered from 170 participating hospitals. At the national level, all specialties combined, the compliance (= hand hygiene opportunities with soap and/or alcohol / total number of hand hygiene opportunities observed) was 71.6% before the campaign and 78.0% after the campaign. Ninety-seven Belgian sites / hospitals voluntarily forwarded patient inquiries and 17,454 received questionnaires were included in the analysis. The survey showed that 59.0% of the participants reported being aware that the hospital was participating in the hand hygiene campaign. Conclusion: The seventh national campaign was another success in terms of very high participation rates, and a compliance rate tending to approach a 80% margin during post-campaign. Patient empowerment was for the first time positively stimulated. Introduction: Hand hygiene is a gold standard for the prevention of health-care associated infections (HAIs). However, compliance rates are generally poor among healthcare workers (HCWs) in routine practice. Objectives: We aimed to assess the efficacy of WHO multimodal strategy for improving hand hygiene (HH) compliance in a middleincome country. Methods: The WHO multimodal HH improvement strategy has been implemented since 2004 in a referral university hospital in Turkey. The intervention consisted of introducing alcohol-based hand rub at bedside and nurses' treatment and dressing rooms; monitoring HH compliance; providing performance feedback; educating staff; posting reminders in the workplace; and promoting an institutional safety climate. A bundle strategy has been implemented for the prevention of device-associated infections in intensive care units (ICUs). HH compliance in medical, anaesthesiology and ICUs, hand rub consumption and HAIs rates were evaluated at baseline and at follow-up. Results: The compliance of HH increased in medical, anaesthesiology and ICUs in all five moments. Also, the usage of alcohol based hand rub has increased from 195 litres in 2003 to 11543 litres in 2018. Point prevalence studies revealed a decrease in HAIs from 8.2% to 5.7% between 2007 and 2018. Device-associated infection rates (ventilator-associated pneumonia, catheter associated blood stream infections, catheter associated urinary tract infections) in ICUs also decreased during the time. Furthermore, multi-drug resistant pathogens (Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumonia, Escherichia coli) incidence rates decreased. Small bowel operations, colon, gastric, cholecystectomy, craniotomy, fusion, cranial shunt infection rates decreased over the time. Conclusion: The WHO multimodal improvement strategy has shown to be effective in improving HH compliance and decreasing HAIs rates in a middle income country with limited nurses and heavy workload. Introduction: Institutional safety climate (ie, the safety aspects of organizational culture) is an essential component of the World Health Organization's (WHO) multimodal hand hygiene (HH) improvement strategy for sustained health systems quality. Objectives: We sought to explore the key elements representing the institutional safety culture. Methods: We developed a survey based on the WHO Hand Hygiene Self-Assessment Framework (HHSAF). A convenience sample of infection control preventionists (ICPs) from more than 100 countries attending the International Conference on Prevention and Infection Control (ICPIC) in June 2017 was invited by email to complete the survey. The survey included questions regarding the following subcategories within the HHSAF: 1) commitment of leadership; 2) champions and role models; 3) patient participation; 4) system for accountability 5) HH compliance targets and 6) reporting. Results: 198 ICPs from 71 countries across all WHO regions completed the questionnaire (14% Africa; 11% Americas; 5% South East Asia; 43% Europe; 9% Eastern Mediterranean and 18% Western Pacific). Only 9% of respondents reported having all six elements in place. 36% reported that facility leadership made a clear commitment to support HH improvement and undertook leadership hospital walkabouts. 38% had a designated system of HH champions (HHC), primarily nurses. Significantly less doctors and almost no housekeepers were designated HHC (p= 0.007). It was almost non-existent for patients to challenge nurses (3.7%) and doctors (2.1%) about poor hand hygiene practices. 44% of respondents claimed some form of HH accountability systems was present. However, programmes that reward good HH practices and disincentivize non-compliance were only reported by 26% and 12%, respectively. 42% reported established HH institutional targets, of which only 24% were required to publicly report them. Conclusion: Our findings demonstrate that there is a general lack of inclusion of key elements constituting institutional safety climate within HH programmes worldwide. Unless political and leadership determinants are addressed, sustained and genuine HH improvement is unlikely. Introduction: Healthcare workers (HCWs) are at high risk of developing hand dermatitis (HD). Current guidelines on HD prevention recommend use of emollients however adherence is poor. Compliance to hand hygiene (HH) guidelines depends on several factors including skin health. Objectives: To assess whether provision of emollient cream, electronic monitoring and feedback on consumption can improve skin care in HCWs and to consider the relationship between improved skin health and HH compliance. Methods: A cluster randomized controlled trial was conducted on 19 academic hospital wards, including 501 HCWs, for 12 months. Intervention wards were provided with hand cream dispensers equipped with an electronic system to monitor use, regularly communicated using posters. Process measures were self-reported and electronically measured cream use in the intervention group (IG) vs control group (CG). Primary and secondary outcomes were change from baseline in Hand Eczema Severity Index (ΔHECSI) and Natural Moisturizing Factor (ΔNMF). HH compliance was audited independently and trends later compared. Results: Self-reported cream use at follow-up was significantly higher in IG than in CG before and during shift. At baseline there was no difference between groups. In IG, electronically measured cream use averaged 0.4 events per shift per HCW. HECSI reduced in IG by -6.2 and in CG by -4.2 points. There was no difference in ΔHECSI or ΔNMF between groups however relative improvement was significantly higher in IG (56% vs. 44%). In a subgroup of HCW with mild HD, IG showed significantly larger HECSI decrease than CG (P<0.001). HH compliance on IG wards increased from 55% (Q3 2015) to 70% (Q2 2017) during the project. Conclusion: The intervention improved hand cream use, however consumption remained low. Although there was no significant effect on the primary outcomes, the intervention showed overall positive effects on HECSI and may be considered a practical means to promote skin care in HCWs. Reported HH compliance increased during the study. While causality cannot be assigned, this suggests a relationship and highlights the importance of HCW skin health in infection prevention strategies. Introduction: Multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria (MRGN) are a concern worldwide. We analyzed data from a targeted hospital admission screening in order to assess trends over time and to identify risk factors for MRGN colonization. Objectives: Detection of risk factors could lead to a risk-based screening. Methods: Patients hospitalised abroad within the last 6 months were rectally screened after admission. Additional Conclusion: Over 5 years, the proportion of detected colonization with carbapenemase-producers and non-E.coli ESBL remained stable among patients who were recently hospitalised abroad. The predominant risk factor for colonization was hospitalisation in a high-risk region. A negligible proportion of patients hospitalised in low-risk regions was colonized with MRGN, questioning the utility of our screening program for this population. Results: During the study period, a total of 1'484 ESBL-EC bacteriuria occurred corresponding to 889 cases. The mean incidence was 0.15/ 1000 patients-days (pd) in P1 and 0.36/1000 pd in P2 (p<10E4). Among them, 488 (54.9%) cases occurred >48h after admission; their mean incidence was 0.09/1000 pd [0.08 -0.10] in P1 and 0.19/1000 pd [0.17-0.21] in P2. Time series analysis did not show a significant association between contact isolation discontinuation and changes in the incidence of ESBL-EC bacteriuria occurring >48h after admission (p = 0.47). Similarly, the mean incidence of cases at admission was 0.06/1000 pd (95% CI: [0.05 -0.07]) in P1 and 0.17/1000 pd [0.15-0.19] in P2. Conclusion: Following the discontinuation of contact isolation, no significant change in the evolution of the incidence of ESBL-EC bacteriuria occurring >48h after admission has been identified. The parallel increase in ESBL-EC bacteriuria detected at admission supports the hypothesis of a predominantly community reservoir. Results: MICs and PCRs shown that 4.41% (296/6709) strains were resistant to colistin and carrying the mcr genes, with ratios of 96.28 % (259/269) and 3.71% (10/269) for mcr-1 and mcr-3, respectively. The genomic analysis of the 74 mcr-1-bearing Typhimurium Salmonella and its variant serotype revealed that the ST34 is the dominant type (70/74), followed by ST19(4/74). The prevalent plasmids carrying mcr-1 gene are IncHI2(69/74), IncX4(3/74), and IncI2 (2/74). Multi-drug resistance to beta-lactams, FFL, fosfomycin and quinolone was observed as well. Meanwhile, all the 10 mcr-3positive Salmonella strains belong to ST34, and the mcr-3 gene was located on IncA/C-ST3 plasmids (7/10) in size of 140~160 kb and chromosome (3/10). Interestingly, this IncA/C plasmid is hybridized with IncFII plasmid and dissemination of mcr-3 is possibly mediated by IS26 or IS15DI. Conclusion: In this study, we found Typhimurium Salmonella variant has a higher resistant rate to colistin. Differently from Escherichia coli, mcr-1 genes were mostly carried by IncHI2 plasmid instead of IncX4 plasmid, and for mcr-3 was bearing by IncA/C plasmid most frequently. Being one of the Highest Priority Critically Important Antimicrobial for human medicine, colistin is often used as the last therapy available for serious bacterial infections in clinics. The discovery of plasmid-borne mcr genes in Salmonella poses a threat to public health globally and further prevent and control strategy is definitely needed. Introduction: The role of the hospital environment is increasingly recognized in the transmission of Gram-negative rod (GNR) pathogens. Enhanced terminal room cleaning with ultraviolet C (UVC) disinfection has become more commonly used as a strategy to reduce the incidence of Clostridioides difficile or vancomycin-resistant enterococci, but its effectiveness in reducing GNR infections has not been evaluated. Objectives: We aimed to assess the association of UVC disinfection during terminal cleaning with the incidence of hospital-onset (HO) GNR bloodstream infection (BSI) within the nationwide Veterans Health Administration (VHA) System in the United States. Methods: We obtained information regarding UVC disinfection use and timing of implementation at each hospital through a survey of all acute care hospitals within the VHA system. Episodes of HO GNR BSI (defined as at least 48 hours of acute inpatient stay before the first positive blood culture for GNR) between 1/2010 and 12/2018 were identified, and bed days of care (BDOC) was used as the denominator. We analyzed the association of UVC disinfection with incidence rates of HO GNR BSI using a non-randomized, step-wedge design, using negative binomial regression model with hospitalspecific random intercept, the presence or absence of UVC disinfection use for each month, baseline trend, and seasonality as explanatory variables. Results: Among 143 VHA acute care hospitals, 136 hospitals (95%) responded to the survey and were included in the analysis. UV-C use was reported from 42 hospitals with various implementation start dates (range: 6/2010-6/2017). We identified 14,427 episodes of HO GNR BSI and 25,614,888 BDOC from the 136 hospitals during the study period. In addition to a baseline declining trend (-0.42% per month), UV-C use was associated with a lower incidence rate of HO GNR BSI (incidence rate ratio: 0.915; 95% confidence interval: 0851-0.984; p=0.016). Conclusion: In this large quasi-experimental analysis within the VHA System, the enhanced terminal room cleaning with UVC disinfection was associated with an 8.5% lower incidence of HO GNR BSI. This finding suggests that UVC disinfection at time of patient discharge is a potentially effective component in infection prevention bundles targeting HO GNR BSI. Introduction: Sepsis is the leading cause of infectious morbidity and mortality among hospitalized neonates. In high-resource pediatric and adult intensive care units, use of aqueous chlorhexidine (CHG) solution has been associated with reduced risk of bloodstream infections (BSI). Objectives: To assess the impact of admission bathing of neonates with 2% CHG on BSI, sepsis, and mortality in a low-income hospital setting. Methods: We conducted a secondary analysis of data from the Sepsis Prevention in Neonates in Zambia (SPINZ) study, a prospective observational cohort study performed at a large public referral hospital in Lusaka, Zambia. The SPINZ study assessed the impact of an infection control bundle (consisting of alcohol hand rub, SMS hygiene reminders, enhanced environmental cleaning, and CHG baths) on sepsis, BSI, and all-cause mortality. Episodic shortages in study staffing resulted in some enrolled babies not receiving a CHG bath. Using the Mantel-Haenszel log-rank test to compare the stratified Kaplan-Meier curves,we compared inborn babies enrolled during the study intervention phase who did and did not receive a CHG bath within the first 3 days of life. Results: The majority of inborn, enrolled babies >1.5 kg received a CHG bath within 3 days of NICU admission (864 of 1233, 70%). Using survival analysis, we found that neonates who received a CHG bath within the first three days of admission had significantly lower rates of suspected sepsis (p=0.0003) and BSI due to a pathogenic organism (p=0.001), but not statistically significant lower rates of death (p=0.07). Comparing CHG-bathed to not-bathed babies, the hazard ratio for suspected sepsis was 0.66 (CI: 0.53, 0.83; p=0.0003), for BSI due to a pathogen was 0.46 (CI: 0.29, 0.77; p=0.002), and for death was 0.77 (CI: 0.58, 1.03; p=0.08). Conclusion: In our single center study, CHG bathing at admission was associated with a reduced risk of suspected sepsis and BSI due to a pathogenic organism. Future analysis is required to determine whether this association persists after adjustment for severity of illness and likelihood to receive a CHG bath. Introduction: Chlorhexidine (CHX) oral topical application has been extensively used for preventing respiratory tract infections among critical patients, despite controversial effectiveness demonstrated in different clinical trials. More recently, this practice has been found suspect of enhancing mortality in hospitalized patients, for reasons not clearly understood. Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) was hypothesized as a pathway for this association. Objectives: To reassess data from a clinical trial evaluating oral care in the intensive care unit (ICU), in order to search for potential pathways for the CHX-associated mortality. Methods: This is a post-hoc analysis of a randomized clinical trial (RBR-89CP93) evaluating a dental care intervention aimed to prevent respiratory tract infections in the ICU setting, funded by two non-profit foundations (FAPESP and FAEPA). We analyzed data from adult patients who were assigned to receive dental care provided by a dentist (experimental group) or routine oral care provided by the nursing staff (control group). Both groups used 0.12% CHX oral solution, if fully conscious, or 2% CHX oral gel, if unconscious, three times a day throughout their ICU stay. Adverse events potentially related to CHX use were reassessed and their relationship with in-ICU death was evaluated through a logistic regression model. Results: Among the 254 patients included, 18 (7.09%) developed CHX-induced oral mucositis, which was independently associated with age (OR=1.05; 95%CI: 1.02-1.09) and the intervention (OR= 6.53; 95%CI: 1.74-24.48), and inversely associated with being edentulous (OR=0.09; 95%CI: 0.02-0.45). On the other hand, CHXinduced oral mucositis was an independent risk factor for death (OR= 5.62; 95%CI: 1.94-16.25) and death due to respiratory tract infections (OR=3.27; 95%CI: 1.18-9.08). No death due to ARDS was reported. Conclusion: CHX-induced oral mucositis was found to be a relevant risk factor for death in this clinical trial and may be a clinical pathway explaining why CHX enhances mortality among critical patients. Intensivists should be very cautious when prescribing CHX for critical patients and should immediately suspend it when any sign of oral mucositis is observed. Introduction: Identifying routes of transmission among hospitalized patients during a C. auris healthcare-associated outbreak can be tedious, particularly among patients with prolonged and complex hospital stays. Currently there are few data available on the effectiveness of interventions to prevent and control the transmission of C. auris. Engagement, education, execution, and evaluation were the cornerstones used by a hospital in New York to develop a C. auris prevention protocol (CAP). Objectives: To evaluate the post-implementation of the CAP to quell the transmission of C. auris during a period of high incidence in a New York City Hospital. Methods: A review of patients with C. auris from January 2016 to April 2019 at our hospital was conducted after the CAP bundle was implemented January 2017. The bundle included four elements: engagement, education, execution and evaluation. Education and engagement strategies included multidisciplinary work, debriefing sessions, live simulations, and leadership involvement. Execution strategies standardized the interventions into simple tasks to facilitate seamless comprehension. These consisted of hand hygiene, special contact precaution, dedicated staff and equipment, routine terminal cleaning of a patient's room and equipment with bleach, secure waste and linen disposal, and hospital-wide communication. Evaluation strategies used a benchmark approach to appraise adherence with interventions and patient outcomes. Cleaning compliance was monitored and 100% compliance was required. This was followed by UV light disinfection. Results: A total of 42 patients in our facility from January 2016 to April 2019 were noted to be colonized/infected with C. auris. Of the 42, 5 patients were noted to be associated with exposure to in our facility. Findings reveal that there were no new C. auris cases when compliance to cleaning methods was above average (76.9%) and execution of special contact precaution and hand hygiene was above average (69.2%). Conclusion: The CAP bundle fortified multidisciplinary teamwork, increased staff/patient knowledge, standardized and simplified infection prevention processes, and created a verification and feedback process. The lessons learned at our facility maybe applicable to other hospitals facing the burden of C. auris around the globe. Objectives: We report an outbreak investigation guided through molecular approaches. Methods: Roommates' screening (July & Nov 18, May 19), and environmental screening and disinfection (May 19) in the concerned patient room were performed. Following Illumina iSeq sequencing, the relatedness between 4 NDM isolates was assessed by cgMLST and cgSNP analyses. Results: Spatiotemporal analyses identified the simultaneous passage of 2 patients in a newly opened surgical step-down unit in July 18, and staggered passage of 3 patients in the same room on a private floor from Nov 18 through Apr 19. As of today (May 25), 20 environmental samples and all further contact screening swabs have been negative. Sequencing analysis confirmed crosstransmission with E. coli ST354 NDM-1 (<10SNPs). Standard precautions were reinforced in the concerned units. We implemented a computerized readmission alert system of all contact patients with potential exposition, requiring mandatory screening at re-admission. One of the patients died of surgical complications unrelated to E. coli NDM-1 carriage. Conclusion: To our knowledge, this cluster represents the first nosocomial NDM-producing E. coli outbreak in Switzerland, with late outbreak detection due to hidden transmission despite strict contact precautions for the index case. This E. coli ST354 clone has so far mostly been reported from animals, and was rarely associated with carbapenemases. This outbreak confirms the high nosocomial transmission potential of these ultraresistant Enterobacteriaceae. Introduction: Global resurgence of measles resulted in outbreaks in international airports, communities, and hospitals. However, a direct linkage of measles transmission from airport to hospital has not been well described. Objectives: We reported an outbreak of measles with a clear epidemiological link from Hong Kong International Airport (HKIA) to the hospital. Methods: Epidemiological investigation for the outbreaks in the HKIA and Hospital A were conducted. Infection control preparedness to prevent nosocomial transmission of measles in 43 hospitals under the governance of Hospital Authority included isolation of suspected case with epidemiological link to airborne infection isolation rooms, contact tracing for exposed patients and healthcare workers (HCWs), provision of MMR vaccination, and timely education forum to HCWs. Environmental and air samples were tested for measles RNA. Phylogenetic analysis of hemagglutinin gene of measles virus isolates collected from infected case in the HKIA, Hospital A, and the community was analyzed. Results: Twenty-nine staff working at the HKIA of diverse rank and working location were infected with measles from 4 March 2019 to 3 April 2019. A significantly lower proportion of affected staff had history of travel compared with non-HKIA related measles cases in Hong Kong (9/29, 31% vs 27/36, 75%, p<0.01). During their incubation period, seven (70%) of 10 staff who could recall the exposure history had visited self-serviced food premises at the HKIA. The food trays were not adequately disinfected after use as observed during the epidemiological field investigation, although measles RNA was undetectable in the environmental and air samples. One baggage handler was admitted to a general ward in Hospital A before the onset of rash, with two HCWs, who had received two doses of MMR vaccine, being infected requiring subsequent contact tracing of 168 persons (97 patients and 71 HCWs). Phylogenetic analysis showed that the measles virus isolated in two infected HCWs was closely related to the HKIA outbreak strain, which was genotype B3. Objectives: Here, we evaluate the cost-effectiveness of this intervention in a model that compared whole genome sequencing plus current practice versus current practice alone. Methods: A UK cost-effectiveness study was conducted using an early model from the perspective of the National Health Service (NHS) and personal social services. Effectiveness of sequencing was based on the relative reduction in total MRSA acquisitions in a cohort of hospitalised patients in the year following their index admissions. Resource use and costs were reflective of the UK NHS. Sensitivity analysis was used to illustrate and assess the level of confidence associated with the conclusions of our economic evaluation. Results: A cohort of 65,000 patients were ran through the model. Assuming that sequencing would result in a 90% reduction in MRSA acquisition, 290 new MRSA cases were avoided. This gave an absolute reduction of 28.8% and avoidance of five MRSA-related deaths. Base case results indicated that the use of routine, proactive MRSA sequencing would be associated with estimated cost savings of over £728,290 per annual hospitalised cohort. The impact in total quality adjusted life years (QALYs) was relatively modest, with sequencing leading to an additional 14.28 QALYs gained. Results were most sensitive to the probability of an MRSA negative patient acquiring MRSA during their hospital admission. Conclusion: We showed that proactive genomic surveillance of MRSA is likely to be cost-effective, with the model results indicating that routine MRSA sequencing would result in fewer MRSA cases and have a small, positive impact on health-related quality of life. Routine prospective MRSA sequencing could be used to detect outbreaks and prevent unnecessary action in the event of a pseudo-outbreak. Further evaluation is required in the context of a prospective study. Introduction: Rapid and precise diagnosis of newly colonized patients during an outbreak with vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) is of utmost importance for infection control. Currently, molecular-based methods lack specificity to identify vanB-VRE from rectal swabs. Additionally, it is unknown whether a molecular-based method can predict a positive culture in followup swabs. Objectives: The aim of this study was to answer these questions by testing swabs following inoculation in a selective enrichment broth. Methods: Prospective study between July and August 2018 during an vanB-VRE outbreak. All consecutive rectal swabs were tested by both conventional culture and a molecular-based method. Swabs were inoculated in a selective enrichment broth (4.5 mg/L vancomycin, 2 mg/L meropenem, 16 mg/L amoxicillin) at 35°C for 20-25 hours. We then used the Xpert®-vanA/vanB assay to detect the vanB gene. For conventional culture-based testing, the broths were plated on selective/chromogenic plates. We identified colonies by MALDI-TOF MS and confirmed the presence of vanB with the Xpert®-vanA/vanB assay. For data analysis we used pROC package in R. Results: We included 597 rectal swabs from 396 patients. 32/597 swabs (5.4%) were culture-positive vanB-VRE. Sensitivities and specificity, using culture as the gold standard, per PCR cycling time threshold are shown in Figure 1 . The calculated ROC area under the curve was 0.99 (95%CI: 0.98-1). The negative predictive value at a cycling time of 33 was 99% (95%CI: 98%>100%). 128 (32%) patients had a median of 1 (range 1-4) follow-up screenings. In 6/128 (4.7%) patients with >1 screen, a follow-up swab was culture-positive. Preceding cycling time values were not indicative of subsequent culture positivity ( Figure 2 ). Conclusion: The use of the Xpert®-vanA/vanB assay with prior enrichment in selective broth yielded an excellent specificity for the diagnosis of vanB-VRE and a high negative predictive value for ruling it out. During an outbreak this approach is attractive in that it can quickly exclude VRE carriers. However, the molecular method is unable to predict culture-positive VRE in follow-up swabs. Results: Prior to the intervention, the HA-MRSA rate was significantly declining (b=-.004, p=0.001). There was no change in the slope during the rollout or post-intervention periods (p=.54 and p=0.22, respectively). No significant level (intercept) changes were observed during the same periods (p=0.58 and p=0.91, respectively). Rates of CoNS were stable before and after the intervention Conclusion: We found a decreasing HA-MRSA trend but no further statistical decrease in trend associated with the expansion of the MRSA initiative to LTC facilities. Future work will assess whether the observed downward trend is due to decreasing importation following the implementation of the program in acute care facilities in 2007 or other factors, and account for hand hygiene and environmental cleaning activities. Introduction: All Veterans admitted to a VA hospital are tested for MRSA carriage and positive patients are placed in contact precautions. An additional strategy for prevention of MRSA transmission is decolonization using an antimicrobial agent such as mupirocin, chlorhexidine, or povidone iodine. Objectives: Our goal was to perform a cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) of adding decolonization to the current strategies using a dynamic, agent-based simulation model. Methods: Our simulation model tracked patients according to MRSA carriage, clinical infection, and detection status and their movement through 3 wards (intensive care unit, surgery, or other) in an acute care hospital over a 1-year period (roughly 22,000 inpatient admissions). We assumed patient-to-patient transmission of MRSA was more common between patients in the same ward than different wards. Rates of MRSA acquisition were calibrated to data from VA acute care hospitals from 2007-2015 and we varied the assumed effectiveness of decolonization in eradicating MRSA from 0-100%. For the CEAs, the effectiveness outcomes were life-years (LYs) gained and HAIs prevented and costs were taken from the VA perspective. We used values for the pre-discharge cost ($24,726, 95% CI: $11,204-$38,249), post-discharge cost ($11,676, 95% CI: $6,260-$17,091), and relative risk of mortality (2.77, 95% CI: 2.39-3.21) associated with MRSA HAIs from published studies using VA data. We ran 10,000 iterations of the model with and without decolonization drawing parameter values from pre-specified distributions. Results: Decolonization was dominant (i.e., both more effective and less costly) relative to the VA's current MRSA Initiative in 43.7%, 74.9%, 96.6%, and 99.8% of the 10,000 iterations for which decolonization effectiveness ranged from 0-25%, 25-50%, 50-75%, and 75-100%, respectively, for the HAIs prevented effectiveness measure. For the LYs effectiveness measure, it was cost-effective at a willingness-to-pay threshold of $100,000/LY in 54.3%, 56.8%, 61.4%, 64.5% of the 10,000 iterations of the same ranges for decolonization effectiveness. Conclusion: Our CEA results using a dynamic transmission model suggest that decolonization of MRSA carriers may be a cost-effective strategy for prevention of MRSA transmission and infections in the VA healthcare system. Methods: This retrospective, observational study was performed in a large Dutch teaching hospital. In accordance with the national guideline, all HCW who had been in close and unprotected contact with an MRSA carrier were included in contact tracing. When there had been a long period of unprotected admission prior to an MRSA finding, or when the index case was a HCW, than the entire (nursing) team was tested.All samples of HCW who were tested for MRSA carriage as part of contact tracing from 2010 until 2017 were included. A pooled nose, throat and perineum swab was collected using the eSwab medium (Copan) and inoculated on chromID MRSA agar plates (bioMérieux) after enrichment in a broth. Molecular typing was performed using multiple locus variable number of tandem repeat analysis (MLVA Introduction: Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic pathogen that cause serious conditions in immunocompromised patients. Contaminated water systems have been reported to contribute to P. aeruginosa transmissions in healthcare settings. Objectives: The purpose of this study is to investigate the source of a cluster of P. aeruginosa bacteremia in immunocompromised patients. Methods: An ongoing prospective surveillance is conducted in the oncology floor at the American University of Beirut Medical Center. Central Line Blood Stream Infections (CLABSI) was diagnosed using the CDC/NHSN (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/National health and Safety Network) methodology. Water samples and environmental cultures from patients' rooms and sinks were collected when a potential environmental source for CLABSI was suspected. Relatedness of environmental results to CLABSI organisms was studied using phenotypic Antimicrobial Susceptibility (AMS) profiles and molecular typing methods using random amplification of polymorphic DNA (RAPD). Elements of the CLABSI prevention bundle were reemphasized for staff assigned to these units. Results: Three patients developed CLABSI with P. aeruginosa within a period of 2 weeks during October 2018. One water culture grew P. aeruginosa, whereas negative results were reported from all the remaining environmental cultures during the same period. While molecular typing results showed identical RAPD patterns in both the clinical and the environmental isolates, substantial differences were noted in the phenotypic AMS profiles/patterns among the same isolates suggesting that these isolates are not related. Conclusion: Hospital water systems can be potentially contaminated with P. aeruginosa and may cause infections in vulnerable patients in healthcare settings. The investigation of this cluster did not reveal the source but was halted following infection control interventions at multiple levels. The isolated organisms were not thought to be related based on different AMS despite their identical RAPD patterns. Such findings dictate the need for more sensitive and discriminatory molecular test such as Pulse Field Gel Electrophoresis (PFGE), multilocus sequence typing (MLST) or Maximum-entropy Linear Discriminant Analysis (MLDA). Introduction: Antimicrobial resistance, especially in health care setting, is a growing, serious, and potentially preventable public health problem worldwide. Objectives: We aimed to investigate the antimicrobial resistance pattern of Gram-negative bacteria (GNB) isolated from patients with bloodstream infections (BSI) at a tertiary care hospital in Iran. Methods: We conducted a cross-sectional study of blood cultures submitted to the Professor Alborzi Clinical Microbiology Research Center at a 1000-bed university-affiliated hospital in Shiraz, southern Iran. All GNB isolated from August 2014 to September 2018 were included. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was done by Kirby bauer's disc diffusion method. Extended-spectrum βlactamase (ESBL) producers were detected by double disc synergy test (DDST). The data entry and analysis were performed using the WHONET 5. 6 Conclusion: GNB were the predominant bacteria isolated from patients with BSI. The high antibiotic resistance rate of these bacteria is a warning about a serious health problem. We need immediate actions including implementations and adhesions to infection control practices and antibiotic stewardship programs to overcome this serious health problem. Background: Patients with haematological malignancies hospitalised for myelosuppressive chemotherapy are at high risk of serious healthcare-associated infections. Chlorhexidine (CHG) bathing decreases incidence of bloodstream infections at intensive care units, but its effect has not been assessed in patients with haematological malignancies at non-critical-care units. Methods: This is a prospective, concurrent controlled, cohort study at a university medical centre. Adults with haematological malignancies hospitalised for cytotoxic chemotherapy at noncritical-care units were offered daily 2% CHG bathing. We compared outcomes of patients chose to take CHG bathing (CHG group) and that of those chose not to take (usual care group). The primary outcome was gram-positive cocci, skin-flora-related, or central-lineassociated bloodstream infections. The negative-control outcome was gut-origin baecteremia. Outcomes were monitored by a rulebased healthcare associated infections surveillance and classification system. Multivariable Cox regression analyses were used to adjust covariates. (registration no: #201508030RIPD) Findings: The CHG group (n=485) had a crude incidence rate of primary outcome 60% lower than that in the usual care group (n= 408) (3·4 vs. 8·4 per 1,000 patient-days, p< 0·001) but had a similar crude incidence of negative-control outcome (4·5 vs. 3·2 per 1,000 patient-days, p=0·297). In multivariable analyses, CHG bathing was associated with a 70% decrease in the primary outcome (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 0·3, p<0·001). In contrast, CHG bathing had no effect on the negative-control outcome (adjusted HR=1·0, p=0·923). CHG bathing was well tolerated by participants in the CHG group. Interpretation: CHG bathing is a highly effective approach to prevent gram-positive-cocci /skin-flora/central-line-associated baecteremia in patients with haematological malignancies hospitalised for cytotoxic chemotherapy at non-critical-care units. Introduction: Surgical site infections (SSI) are the most common healthcare associated infections. A large fraction of these can be prevented. Objectives: In parallel with the existing Swissnoso SSI surveillance, a pilot study was set up in 10 acute-care hospitals, aiming at implementing a nationwide SSI intervention module measuring compliance with SSI prevention process parameters. Methods: From April 2017 to March 2019, every participating hospital set up an interdisciplinary working group and collected data on its compliance with the three major elements of preoperative management: hair removal, skin disinfection and perioperative antimicrobial prophylaxis. Each hospital had to monitor a minimum of 10 operations per quarter. Compliance with the individual elements and the overall compliance were determined according to the process parameters observed. Poisson regression was used to determine increase with compliance throughout the pilot period. Results: A total of 590 observations were performed. The overall compliance measured in 8 hospitals increased from 55% (95% CI, 45-67) in Q2 2017 to 78% (95% CI, 65-92) in Q1 2019 (p=0.029). The relative increase per quarter was 5.2% (95% CI, 0.5-10%, p=0.029). The lowest compliance rate was observed for perioperative antimicrobial prophylaxis in Q3 2017 with 68% (95% CI, 56-80). Errors were particularly due to incorrect redosing practice. Best compliance was achieved with hair removal in Q1 2018 with 100%. Conclusion: The introduction of the bundle for prevention of SSI led to a continuous and significant increase of the overall compliance. This module will thus be proposed to all Swiss acute care hospitals that already participate in the Swissnoso SSI surveillance aiming at reducing SSI rates on a national level. Introduction: Multidisciplinary teams allow to join forces and improve the healthcare outcomes, it is important the implementation of the institucional bundles to reduce incidence of surgical site infection (SSI) Objectives: To determine the colo-rectal surgical site infection (SSI) incidence after the implementation of a specific bundle. Methods: Colo-rectal SSI was 25% and 26% in 2013 and 2014 in our Hospital. In 2014 a multidisciplinary team was created to improve results which included General Surgeons, Anaesthesiologist, nurses from the operating room (OR) and surgical ward and infection control practitioners. The team measured the following measures: pre-surgical body hygiene, hair removal, perioperative normothermia, normoglycemia, antibiotic prophylaxis, laparoscopic approach and aseptic measures in the OR. Moreover the measures below have been implemented: During this period a nurse has been hired to manage the cases. The team maintaines quarterly sessions to follow up the evolution of the different indicators and the incidence of SSI. Results: The SSI incidence, adequate antibiotic prophylaxis and normothermia are summarized in the Five District Health Board hospitals perform publicly-funded cardiac surgery. Compliance with the process measures was high from the start of the programme suggesting that spread of best practice beyond the orthopaedic operating rooms may have occurred in these hospitals. There has been a high level of engagement with the programme by the respected surgical services supported by timely feedback of process and outcome measures. Introduction: Surgical site infections (SSI) are among the most prevalent nosocomial infections in Germany [1] . Despite national recommendations [2] , evidence both on compliance with pre-, intraand postoperative measures and interventions to promote compliance is lacking. Objectives: To present the rationale and protocol of the WACH-trial ("Wundinfektionen und Antibiotikaverbrauch in der Chirurgie"), funded by the German Introduction: Infection control and prevention is one of core elements of healthcare quality improvement. Objectives: To investigate the etiology of surgical site infections (SSIs) in elderly patients with intestinal obstruction after emergency surgery in order to reduce their occurrence. Methods: We conducted a retrospective study of all patients aged≥60 years with an ileus who underwent an emergency surgery from Jan 2014 to Feb 2019 in a tertiary teaching hospital in western China. Clinical variables included age, sex, NNIS indexes, prophylactic use of antimicrobial agents, perioperative hemoglobin levels, serum albumin levels, hemorrhage and postoperative morbidity. Multivariate analysis was used to identify variables independently associated with SSIs. SSI was defined by the criteria of the Chinese national guideline for the prevention and control of SSIs persistent wound discharge or dehiscence, visible abscess or gangrene and bacterial contamination confirmed by discharge liquid culture. Results: One hundred and eleven ileac patients aged≥60 years were included. All had documented antimicrobial prophylaxis of more than one dose; initial doses were not determinately administered within 30 min to 1 hour before the surgical procedures. Thirty-four patients were diagnosed with SSIs. A total of 38 bacterial strains were isolated from SSI patients, mainly Escherichia coli (15/38), Enterococcus (7/38), Proteus species (6/38) and other enterobacter (5/38). Multivariate logistic regression analysis indicated that the classification of incision site was an independent risk factor for SSI. Hospital length of stay of patients with SSIs was significantly longer than those without SSIs (30.91± 10.91days vs 23.94±10.64 days, respectively; P=0.008). Conclusion: Prevention kits and reasonable prophylactic use of antimicrobial agents should be introduced to reduce SSIs in the setting of elderly ileac patients undergoing an emergency surgery. hospital death of infected patients was 13%. Hospital days of stay in non-infected patients: mean=21; median = 9, std.dev. = 28; hospital stay in infected patients: mean =34, median =27, std. dev. = 37 (p= 0.025). Three main risk factors identified by logistic regression model: age beneath two years (Odds Ratio = 3.20), preoperative hospital length of stay greater than four days (OR = 2.02) and surgical procedures besides ventricular shunt. 31% of all patients were <2 years old. 430 patients had more than four preoperative days. If a patient two years old has surgery four days post hospital admission, the risk of meningitis is increased from 9% to 18% (p=0.026). From 71 meningitis, in 45 (63%) the etiologic agent was identified: Staphylococcus aureus (33%), Staphylococcus epidermidis (22%), Acinetobacter sp (7%), Enterococcus sp (7%), Escherichia coli (7%), Pseudomonas sp (7%), and other (18%). Conclusion: We identified two intrinsic risk factors for meningitis after ventricular shunt, age less than two years and multiple surgical procedures, and one extrinsic risk factor, the preoperative length of hospital stay. As a starting point for the development of tailored IPM, the preintervention phase of the study was used to analyse which body parts after surgery (SX) and which patient groups entail a particular risk of postoperative wound infections (SSI). In order to identify SSI, clinical signs of infection were recorded according to KISS and CDC definitions. For this purpose, data of previous illnesses as well as of current and previous infections from the hospital management system, admission forms, discharge letters and nursing documentation were aggregated with current patient data and laboratory findings. In addition, early visits were made three times a week to record signs of infection that had not yet been documented. For the evaluation "infections brought along" (165 SX) as well as multiple surgeries from the time of the occurrence of the SSI (91 SX) were excluded and only new infections (42 SX) were considered. In the pre-intervention phase of the study, 1978 surgeries were executed (in 469 cases several surgeries on the same patient) with a total SSI infection rate (InfR) of 2.44% (CI 95% 1.7; 3.1) for the surgeries. The body parts with the most surgeries were the knee (552 surgeries) with an infection rate of 1.44%, lower leg (487) InfR = 4.22%, hip (311) InfR = 3.49%, shoulder (179) InfR = 1.21%, forearm (153) InfR = 2.82%, thigh (89) InfR = 2.49%. A χ²-test showed that the risk of getting an SSI with a lower leg surgery was significantly higher (p = .008) than with all other surgeries. The evaluation of wound infections by sex (♂ = 1171 SX; ♀ = 807 SX) showed a higher probability of men receiving SSI for all surgeries (♂ = 37 SSI; ♀ = 10 SSI) (p = .024). This was also shown in relation to SSI only for lower legs (♂ = 325 SX, 16 SSI; ♀ = 152 SX, 1 SSI) (p = .019). The analysis of the patient data identified two risk groups with an increased risk to develop an SSI. When developing preventive measures, these risk groups should be specifically targeted. were resistant to current antibiotic therapy. In multivariate analysis, repetitive debridements were associated with new SSIs (odds ratio regarding the "second look" 13.7, 95%CI 8.8-21.2). These new and resistant pathogens were Gram-positive in 64% and Gram-negative in 36%. We failed to identify a predicative microbiological pattern. Likewise, we failed to identify an optimal theoretical antibiotic prophylaxis during re-debridement for cases that were already under treatment. Conclusion: In our single-center large cohort and regarding multidebrided orthopedic infections, new SSIs with resistant pathogens occurred in 20%; and already after the 2nd look; with no ideal supplementary prophylaxis regimen identified. Introduction: Peri-operative hyperglycemia is identified as a significant risk factor for deep sternal wound infection. During HIC surveillance, a higher than usual SSI rates were noted.A preliminary audit done showed poor Post-OP glycemic control among patients who developed SSI despite of having an established in-hospital protocol.-Gaps in adherence towards the glycemia protocol were identified and the protocol was re-introduced.All CABG patients were tracked via watsapp messenger to ensure RBS <200mg% at home during their post-op period,up to 2 weeks. Objectives: The Objectives of this project was to assess the adherence towards Glycaemic management among CABG patients during pre and post implementation phase and to assess the association of post discharge Glycemic management and Occurrence of sternal site infections among CABG patients. Methods: A prospective data collection method with Purposive sampling and PDCA Cycle was adopted for the entire framework of this project. All CABG patients with sternal site infections from January 2018 to June 2018, were taken as the control group. All CABG cases between the months of October 2018 to December 2018 were taken as study samples during the process of study. Point surveillance of those CABG patients, prior to surgery, entire peri-op period and post discharge follow up via watsapp messenger up to 2 weeks, was done to ensure RBS < 200mg%. The patients who acquired sternal site infections between the months of October 2018 to December 2018 were considered as the experimental group. Results: During the course of post implementation phase, Weekly feedbacks on perioperative glycemic control were given to the respective departments to improve their outcome. Tracking of discharged CABG patients via watsapp messenger ensured the patients compliance to RBS< 200mg/dl. Adherence towards Glycemic management protocol in post-op period was improved in the post implementation phase (82.195%).In the Post-Implementation Phase,the average sternal site infections reduced to 0.33%.The study conducted concluded that, there is a significant association between sternal site infection rates and the post discharge glycemic management, as 'p'-value (P = < 0. 001) was significant. Conclusion: This project demonstrated that post discharge glycemic control is an important risk factor which can be favorably modified by patient education and engagement. Introduction: Surgical site infection (SSI) in bariatric surgery can lead to devastating outcomessuch as peritonitis, sepsis, septic shock and organ space infection. Objectives: The objective of our study is to answer four questions: a) What is the SSI risk after bariatric surgery? b) What are the risk factors for SSI after bariatric surgery? c) What are the main outcomes to SSI in bariatric surgery? d) What are the main bacteria responsible for SSI in bariatric surgery? Methods: A retrospective cohort study assessed 8,672 patients undergoing bariatric surgery between 2014/Jan and 2018/Dec from two hospitals at Belo Horizonte, Brazil. Data were gathered by standardized methods defined by the National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN)/CDC procedure-associated protocols for routine SSI surveillance. Outcome: SSI, hospital death and total length of hospital stay. 20 preoperative and operative variables were evaluated by univariate and multivariate analysis (logistic regression). Results: 77 SSI were diagnosed (risk = 0.9% [C.I.95% = 0.7%;1.1%]). Mortality rate in patients, without infection was 0.03% (3/8,589) while hospital death of infected patients was 4% (3/77; RR = 112; p < 0.001). Hospital length of stay in non-infected patients (days): mean = 2, std.dev.= 0.9; hospital stay in infected patients: mean = 7, std. dev. = 15.6 (p < 0.001). Two main factors associated with SSI after bariatric surgery were identified by logistic regression: duration of procedure (hours), OR = 1.4;p=0.001, and laparoscopy procedure, OR = 0.3;p=0.020. From 77 SSIs, in 28 (36%) we identified 34 etiologic agents. The majority of SSI (59%) was caused by species of Streptococcus (32%), Klebsiella (15%), and Enterobacter (12%). Conclusion: SSI is rare after bariatric surgery, however, when it happens, it's a disaster for the patient and is mainly caused by species of Streptococcus. The incidence of SSI can be reduced significantly when laparoscopy procedure is used and the surgeon is able to perform a rapid surgery. Introduction: Surgical site infection post cesarian section (CS-SSI) is a major cause of prolonged hospital stay and poses a burden to the health care system Objectives: To determine risk factors associated with CS-SSI in order to improve patient care Methods: A prospective study was conducted for all women undergone caesarean section procedures during 2018 in King Faisal Medical Complex-Taif, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Patients' sociodemographic and clinical data were collected from patient's file. CS-SSI was identified and incidence rate was calculated using the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN, USA) criteria based on ongoing and readmission surveillance methods. Risk factor for CS-SSI was assessed and analysed using SPSS version 18. Results: In total, 30 patients developed CS-SSI among 3268 women underwent CS in 2018. The cumulative incidence rate of CS-SSI was 0.82 % (ranged from 0.24-2.21%). CS-SSIs were classified as superficial (66.7%), deep (30%) and organ (3.3%) infections. More than half of SSI (53.3%) occurred during the first week following the CS. The most frequent risk factors for CS-SSI revealed in our study were: immediate emergency CS (83.3%) followed by higher body mass index (BMI > 30 kg/m2) with standard dosage of cefazoline 2 gram prophylactic antibiotic within 60 minutes before incision (76.7%), multiple gravida patients (60%), general anesthesia (60%), previous CS (40%) and Premature rupture of membrane (33.3%). Conclusion: Our incidence rate of CS-SSI is lower than NHSN hospitals and risk factors revealed in this study are mostly associated to population characteristics and are worldwide documented. However, more research regarding adjustment of antibio-prophylaxis dose to BMI are needed. Introduction: Infection in colon surgery, and all surgery, is very harmful for the patient. Better understanding of its risk factors may help improve patient safety. Objectives: This quantitative, multicentered study calculates surgical site infection (SSI) risk, describes risk factors, average hospital length of stay, compares length of stay in infected and non-infected patients, infection impact on mortality rates in colon surgery. Methods: Data was collected between 2012 and 2017 from 12 hospitals from Belo Horizonte, a major city in Brazil (2.5 million inhabitants). Outcome variables were: SSI, hospital death and total length of hospital stay(days). The 23 independent variables were analyzed using Epi Info and applying statistical two-tailed test hypothesis with significance level of 5%. Results: A total of 8,261 surgeries were analyzed and 284 patients presented SSI, a risk of 3.4% (Confidence interval (CI) of 95%=[3.1%;3.9%]).The variables associated to SSI risk were: patient age above 70 years (Relative Risk (RR)=1.9;p<0.001), general anesthesia (RR=7.9;p<0.001), ASA Score above 2 (RR=2.2;p<0.001), surgery duration above 2h (RR=4.8;p<0.001), emergency surgery (RR1.7;p=0.022), concomitant surgical procedure (RR=4.4;p<0.001), first hospitalization of the patient(RR=0.65;p=0.002), postoperative hospital stay above 4 days (RR=2.6;p<0.001). The average time of hospital stay in infected patients was 25 days (standard deviation-SD=30.5 days). In non-infected patients, average time was 7 days (SD=16 days; p<0.001). The mortality among patients with SSI was 22%, observed to be 4% in non-infected (p<0.001). General anesthesia, with the highest associated relative risk, is the main risk factor for SSI in colon surgery. Conclusion: There is a 95% chance of incidence of infection in 3 out of 100 patients. The average length of stay in infected patients was 3.6 times higher, and mortality rates in infected patients is 5.5 times higher. Lengthier surgery time (>2hours) is a risk factor for SSI. Evidence suggest that healthcare professionals should be concerned about SSI, and surgeons should look forward to reduce the time of surgery when possible, without neglecting patient safety. Introduction: The purpose of this paper is to report the power of predictions of surgical site infections (SSI) in obstetrics, using neural networks based on MLPs (Multi Layer Perceptron). Data were collected from hospitals in Belo Horizonte city (Brazil) between 2016 and 2018. Objectives: This paper aims to statistically evaluate the profile of surgeries and test the predictive power of SSI of pattern recognition algorithms, in the case of Artificial Neural Networks of the type MLP (Multilayer Perceptron). Methods: A data collection in 6 different hospitals was performed and filtered noisy records, which enabled a statistical analysis of the profile of the evaluated hospitals. Thus, an SSI prediction power of five types of MLPs (Backpropagation Standard, Momentum, Resilient Propagation, Weight Decay and Quick Propagation) was made with configurations: 3, 5, 7 and 10 neurons in the hidden layer; a division of the database for the resampling process 65% (or 75%) for learning, 35% (or 25%) for validation; and a comparison by measuring the AUC (Area Under the Curve -ranging from 0 to 1). Results: A total of 7,698 records (with 46 characteristics) were collected, with 3,517 consistent evaluated. It was recorded: average of 33 years of the patients; 80% the surgical accomplishment occurred in the first hospitalization; the majority of surgeries had estimated durations between 44 minutes and 88 minutes; potential contamination around 90%; 73.1% of emergency surgeries; 99.6% of cases with 2 professionals and 2.5% of SSI. The MLPs reached AUCs of 0.98. Conclusion: Despite the high noise index of the database, it was possible to sample relevant for the evaluation of the profile of hospitals in Belo Horizonte. The predictive process presented an accuracy of extreme relevance, reaching 0.98 for the SSI prediction power. Introduction: This research represents a trial of surgical site infection (SSI) in patients submitted to general surgery procedures in hospitals in Belo Horizonte, a 3,000,000 inhabitants city from Brazil. Objectives: The objective is to statistically evaluate these incidences and to enable a study of the SSI prediction power of pattern recognition algorithms, in the case of Artificial Neural Networks of the type MLP (Multilayer Perceptron). Methods: Data collection on SSI was performed in 5 different hospitals between July 2016 and June 2018 and performed three procedures: a preprocessing of the database collected for valid sample use; a statistical analysis on the profile of the hospitals collected and; an evaluation of the predictive power of five types of MLPs (Backpropagation Standard, Momentum, Resilient Propagation, Weight Decay and Quick Propagation) for SSI prediction. The MLPs were tested with 3, 5, 7 and 10 neurons in the hidden layer and with a partitioning of the database for the resampling process (65% or 75% for test, 35% or 25% for validation). They were compared by measuring the AUC (Area Under the Curve -ranging from 0 to 1) presented for each of the configurations. Results: 13,383 data were collected and 7,566 records were usable where: 2.0% of SSI; the predominance of patients' ages was between 35 and 62 years; the mean duration of the procedure was 101 minutes; the mean hospitalization time (without SSI) was 4 days, versus 17 days in the positive cases. The predictive power of the proposed settings was between 0 and 0.6. Conclusion: Despite the high noise index of the database, it was possible to sample relevant for the evaluation of the profile of General Surgery Service patients. However, for the predictive process, although there are results higher than 0.5, the database requires more SSI case samples, since only 2% of positive samples unbalanced the database. Introduction: This paper demonstrates an initial experiment to predict the risk of surgical site infection (SSI) after Orthopedic procedures in Belo Horizonte, a 3,000,000 inhabitants city from Brazil. Objectives: The objectives are: collect data in 6 hospitals between 2016 and 2018; filtering the resulting database; benchmarking statistical assessments; to submit the resulting database to an initial experiment with MLP (Multilayer Perceptron) based pattern recognition algorithms for the evaluation of SSI occurrence prediction power. Methods: The data were collected and the resulting database was filtered for use of intact samples. A statistical analysis was applied defining the behavioral profile. An evaluation of the SSI predictive power of five types of MLPs (Backpropagation Standard, Momentum, Resilient Propagation, Weight Decay and Quick Propagation) was performed. The MLPs were tested with 3, 5, 7 and 10 neurons in the hidden layer; a resampling process of 65% (and 75%) for learning and 35% (and 25%) for validation; and measuring the AUCs (Area Under the ROC Curve -between 0 and 1). Results: 10069 records were collected with 46 variables each. Only 3673 were intact for study, where: 77 contracted SSI; length of hospitalization ranged from 0 to 186 days (mean 5 days for normal and 22 for SSI cases); 29 cases of death; duration of surgeries of 125 minutes (the majority concentrated between 90 and 190) and the mean age of the patients is approximately 50 years old. The initial experiments for SSI prediction showed a maximum AUC of 0.5845. Conclusion: Despite the high noise index of the database, a relevant sample was obtained for the hospitals evaluated. However, for the predictive process, despite some results higher than 0.5, the database requires more SSI case samples, since only less than 1% of SSI samples generated an unbalance of the database. Introduction: This paper proposes a pattern-based analysis to predict the probability of surgical site infection (SSI) in cardiac surgeries in four hospitals in Belo Horizonte (Brazil), according to a data collection between 2016 and 2018. Objectives: As specific objectives this work is to carry out a data collection and processing process; perform a statistical evaluation on the data involved and then a battery of experiments based on Multilayer Perceptron to analyze the probability of SSI prediction. Methods: After the data collection: a filtering of the database collected for use of intact sample was performed; a statistical analysis on the profile of the hospitals collected; and finally, experiments to evaluate the SSI predictive power of five types of MLPs (Backpropagation Standard, Momentum, Resilient Propagation, Weight Decay and Quick Propagation), each with: 3, 5, 7 and 10 neurons in the hidden layer; a resampling process with 65% (and 75%) data for learning, 35% (and 25%) for validation; a comparison by measuring the AUC (Area Under the Curve -ranging from 0 to 1) for accuracy. Results: 3078 records were collected, each with 46 variables, where 459 were used. It was found: average age of 65 years; approximately 250 surgeries with general anesthesia; the average time of surgery in 183 minutes (between 95 and 280 minutes); post-surgery hospitalization time ranging from 0 to 115 days (average 13 days); incidence of SSI 4.1% (these patients remained on average 29 hospitalized days) and a mortality rate of 10.0%. The predictive power ranged from 0.46 to 0.73. In spite of the high index of noise in the database, it was possible an interesting sample for the evaluation of the profile of the hospitals. The predictive process, had achieved results higher than 0.5, figuring a very promising technique for predict process. The MLP's were tested with 3, 5, 7 and 10 neurons in the hidden layer. In the resampling process, the configurations of 65% (or 75%) for testing and 35% (or 25%) for validation were executed. They were compared by measuring the AUC (Area Under the ROC Curve -ranging from 0 to 1) for each configuration. Results: From 3882 collected records, 2286 were intact. In a behavioral analysis: 2.4% present SSI; almost 80% of the cases vascular surgeries were in the peripheral regions of the body, 90% were not of urgency or emergency; cases of limb amputation reached 462 (approximately 25% of cases). Finally, the 40 experiments with MLPs showed AUCs between 0.85 and 0.996 for SSI prediction. Conclusion: SSI values are lower than 2.5%, confirming the low degree of life risk, due to the time it takes to perform procedures to clean the surgical sites, which avoids contamination and because they are low impact surgeries. life of the patient. The database was useful for the prediction process of SSIs with AUCs of 0.996, allowing for intelligent software for monitoring with prediction of considerable SSI assertiveness, even with a considerable noise index and with imbalance (only 2,4% of SSI cases) for such surgery. We conducted a retrospective cohort study of all positive tests for C. difficile in the US Department of Veterans Affairs health system in 2016. Episodes were classified as healthcare-acquired (HA), community onset-healthcare associated (CO-HCA), or presumed community-acquired (p-CA) based on Centers for Disease Control surveillance criteria. All clinical notes within the 7 days before and after the positive test were selected. Mentions of diarrhea were extracted using an ontology and dictionary-based natural language processing pipeline built using the V3NLP framework. Two reviewers manually classified 600 asserted snippets as true positive or false positive. NLP performance was measured using the positive predictive value (PPV). Results: In 2016, there were 11,826 positive laboratory tests for C. difficile. Of these, 2,735 (23%) were HA, 3,576 (30%) were CO-HCA, and 5,515 (47%) were p-CA. The positive predictive value of the NLP tool was 86.4%. We identified mentions of diarrhea within 2 days before or after a positive test in 7,361 (62.2%) of all episodes: 1,803 (65.9%), 2,524 (70.6%), and 3,034 (55.0%) of HA, CO-HCA, and p-CA episodes, respectively. Removing duplicates within 14 days of a prior positive only slightly increased the yield (62.9% of all episodes). 60% of mentions occurred between 2 days before to 2 days after the positive test. Conclusion: Extraction of diarrheal symptoms from clinical note text has the potential to enhance studies of the epidemiology and transmission of CDI. We identified evidence of diarrhea within 2 days of a positive test in approximately 62% of episodes. Further work is needed to determine whether the absence of diarrhea mentions reflects inappropriate testing of patients without diarrhea, underdocumentation of diarrheal symptoms, or other factors. Introduction: C. difficile infection (CDI) weighs heavily on healthcare system due to increased incidence, morbidity and mortality, as well as costs. CDI is mainly considered as a health-care associated (HCA) after exposure to broad-spectrum antibiotics. However, CDI has been reported outside health care institutions in people previously thought to be at low risk. Objectives: The objective of this study was to compare characteristics of CDI cases regarding the infection presumed acquired in the community or in the hospital. Methods: Between November 2006 and December 2018, a prospective surveillance study of CDI was conducted in a 900-bed French university hospital. National and European definitions of CDI case, relapses and origin of acquisition were applied. Standardized questionnaire was used for data collection. Results: A total of 931 (=989 episodes) patients were included with a mean incidence rate of 2.3 per 1000 hospital-stays. Most of episodes were HCA (76.5%). The remaining cases were community-acquired (CA) (18.3%) or unknown origin (5.2%). The mean age of patients was 60.1 and 67.5 years for CA and HCA cases respectively (P<0.001) and 30.7% of CA patients were ≤45 years (P<0.001). In CA cases, women were more prevalent (59.2% vs 48.9% in HCA-CDI, P=0.01). CA-CDI group had lower rate of recent antimicrobial exposure (41% vs 79%, P<0.001), proton pomp inhibitor (39.5% vs 61.7%, P<0.001) and gastrointestinal surgery (2.37% vs 7.8%, P=0.008). Fever (>38°C), abdominal pain and ileus were significantly more frequent in CA cases (37.3% vs 26.6%; 45.5% vs 24.1% and 4.3% vs 1.2% respectively). Pseudomembranous colitis was more frequent in CA group compared to HCA cases (7.7% vs 4.5%, P=0.07). However, relapses and death were more frequent in HCA-CDI (8.5% vs 5.7% and 11% vs 6.6% respectively). Conclusion: We found that approximately 20% of all CDI cases were CA with most of half not exposed to antimicrobial or proton pomp inhibitor drugs. Monitoring and active surveillance of CDI is needed to improve our understanding of the changing epidemiology of the disease. Introduction: Clostridioides difficile infections are currently one of the most important public health threats in developed countries. In Poland, during last 10 years, hospital C. difficile infections increased significantly, reaching over 15,000 cases per year associated with high morbidity, mortality, and economic costs. Objectives: In order to reduce the incidence of hospital C. difficile infections, we performed the prospective, single center observational study, on the assessment of the effectiveness of multi-component strategy. Methods: Study setting: secondary acute 650-bed hospital Study period: 2014-2018 Study method: single center, prospective, observational study Bundle intervention: multi-component strategy consisted of hand hygiene implementation according to WHO guidelines, environmental cleaning improvement, fumigation of isolation rooms with hydrogen peroxide after patient discharge, regular quality control of cleaning procedures by using fluorescent marking gel (UV-DAZO), single room isolation of infected patients, antibiotic stewardship and medical staff education with regular feedback. Results: During study period we observed significant, gradual, 4-fold decrease of hospital C. difficile infections (145 vs 38 cases), with increase of hand hygiene procedures as measured by alcohol hand rub usage (5,4L vs 27 L/1000 patient days) and improvement in cleaning high-touch surfaces as measured by removed fluorescent gel marks (45% vs 98%). Conclusion: The bundle intervention significantly reduced C. difficile hospital infection rates. Results of our study support effectiveness the multi-component strategy based on hand hygiene, environmental cleaning, isolation procedures, antibiotic stewardship and staff education. Objectives: We conducted a retrospective study to evaluate the incidence and epidemiology of CDI in an Italian tertiary care hospital and we reclassified CDI cases using a cut-off of 4 days. Methods: All laboratory diagnosis based cases of CDI of a 3 years period were reviewed. Each case was classified according to ECDC criteria as HA CDI, Community -acquired CDI (CA CDI) and indeterminate and reclassified using a cut-off of 4 days as HA CDI and non HA CDI. Results: Out of 183 CD positive patients, 120 cases referred to hospitalized patients and were analyzed. Incidence remained stable around 3,20/10.000 patient days; 42,5% of patients had previous admission to hospital in last 4 weeks and 74% came from home. For HA CDI, median interval to diagnosis was 10,7 days. According to ECDC definition 80,8% of cases (97/120) were HA CDI , 16,7% CA-CDI, 2,5% indeterminate. Among the HA-CDI onset of symptoms was in the community in 27 cases, for 70 cases onset was in hospital. Using the classification based on a 4 day cut-off, HA CDI drop to 57 (47,5%) and not hospital related CDI increase to 63 (52,5 %). Lacking 13 CDI cases developed at 3 and 4 day and can be probably imported from community. Conclusion: Our study showed variability of CDI in terms of characteristics, origin, incubation time. This study applied the 4 days cut-off classification, showing that half of the HA cases developed very late in the hospitalization. More analysis are required to verify if these cases classified as hospitals cases were rather already colonized and coming from the community. Introduction: In our hospital contact-droplet isolation should be applied to adult patients with influenza (flu) and influenza like symptoms (ILS) of unknown cause. During the flu season isolation beds are scarce and acceleration of diagnosis and patient flow is preferred. Objectives: Objectives were (1) to determine if introduction of a rapid polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for flu virus (Xpert Flu) would reduce isolation days per flu negative patient with ILS by comparing flu season 2017-2018 to 2018-2019,(2) the number of patients admitted to correct wards (pulmonary/internal medicine) and (3) frequency of reassignment to different wards/rooms. Adult patients who underwent a flu test were included. During December 2017-April 2018 (season 1, S1) an in-house viral respiratory PCR panel, including flu A/B, was performed (24-48 hours). In December 2018-April 2019 (season 2, S2) the Xpert Flu was performed (2 hours). Information on hospital admittance and duration of isolation per patient, based on labelling of patients was retrieved from the electronic patient record (EPR). Results: 429 (S1) and 478 (S2) patients were included in the analysis. Comparing S1 and S2: 70% (100/142) and 72% (96/133) flu positive admitted patients were labelled for isolation, mean isolation duration was 83 hours (±14,8 95% confidence interval (CI)) and 129 hours (±64,2 95% CI), one flu negative patient and zero patients were labelled for isolation, 64% (239/374) and 70% (374/408) were admitted to the correct ward, and the mean frequency of bed reassignment per patient was 0.54 (±0.08 95% CI) and 0.46 (±0.07 95% CI). Conclusion: The effect on isolation could not be determined because labels were incorrectly placed in the EPR, therefore not accessible for automatic analysis. Frequency of admittance to correct wards, and mean frequency of reassignment to different wards tended to be improved in S2, however not significantly. Overall, patient care seems to be improved in the rapid-PCR season, however data are biased by differences in influenza prevalence and other improvements in patient care, moreover isolation should be registered differently in order to evaluate quality of care. Introduction: Influenza virus is a major public health concern, causing high morbidity and mortality every year. As virus transmission could be mediated by healthcare workers (HCW), their vaccination remains the main prevention measure. In France, despite recommendations to be vaccinated annually, the vaccination rate of HCW remains poor in healthcare facilities (around 25%). However, few data are available in office based practitioners (OBP). Objectives: To assess vaccine coverage among OBP and identify barriers to vaccination. To evaluate knowledge and attitudes regarding influenza transmission and preventing methods. Methods: A descriptive study was performed during the 2018-2019 flu epidemic based on an online questionnaire sent to office based physicians, midwives, nurses and physiotherapists in Paris area. They were asked to report their influenza immunization status and reasons for accepting or refusing vaccination. The survey also assessed knowledge and attitudes regarding influenza virus transmission and prevention methods (masks and vaccination). Results: A total of 556 practitioners completed the survey, mostly nurses (56%) and physiotherapists (43%). Neither physicians nor midwives responded to the study. The overall reported influenza vaccination coverage (95% CI) was 63% [59. 3-67.5 ]. The main reasons for being vaccinated were to protect themselves (51%) and to protect patients (37%). Among HCW refusing influenza vaccination (n=182), the 3 most common reasons were: using other prevention methods (37%), doubts regarding the efficacy of influenza vaccination (30%) and opposition to influenza vaccination (30%). HCW refusing vaccination had more misconceptions about the vaccine. Only 59% of them knew that the vaccine was not able to transmit the flu whereas 79% of vaccinated people knew that fact (p<0.0001). Conclusion: The influenza immunization coverage of OBP is higher than those reported in healthcare facilities. However, barriers against vaccination remain important issues, especially misconceptions regarding the vaccine efficacy or safety. Addressing these knowledge gaps in both initial formation and continuing medical education of HCW could lead to better protection and reduced morbidity among patients. Introduction: It is common knowledge that influenza can kill and the best way to prevent its spread is through vaccination. However, it is often noted that "belief" which exists around the effectiveness and side effects of flu vaccines hinders uptake by healthcare workers. Even though education is delivered year on year to counter these "beliefs", however, health promotion conducted during non-stormy waters do not impact or change perspectives. Objectives: In order to further increase uptake for this year, various measures over the past year were designed to examine the real reasons behind staff's refusal of vaccination, with the ultimate aim of steamrolling the reasons to increase uptake. Methods: At the kick-off of the 2017/18 Staff Flu Vaccination Campaign, the infection control team(ICT) created various educational opportunities encompassing booth games in the staff canteen supplemented by on-site education followed by interviews of staff by means of using iPads. A survey was designed to be offered in both English and Chinese and was launched online and staff who refused to receive a flu jab during the 2017/18 campaign were invited to complete it. Results: 72 submissions with 7% claiming that they did not know where to receive a jab. In examining the "beliefs", 35% answered "others" as reasons for refusing which included "no time to get a jab", "being sick at that moment" or "the lack of vaccine stock during that particular period". 20% indicated "a fear of side effects". Same number of staff (18%) claimed "the fear of needles" and "ineffectiveness of vaccine demonstrated by past experience". Conclusion: With all feedbacks attained over the year, ICT concluded that the main reason of refusal was because of a lack of knowledge on influenza. Thus to kick start the 2018/19 campaign, a microbiologist was invited to give an educational talk on influenza to counter "beliefs" in relation to side effects, effectiveness etc. were all addressed supported by scientific data and etiology. Learning from past experience, more stock of vaccines was purchased to prevent insufficient supply. To allow more opportunities to receive a jab, ICT set up a vaccination booth in staff canteen and provided on-site injection in a bi-weekly basis. As a result of these series of improvement strategies, the overall staff flu vaccination compliance rate increased steadily to 60% in 2018/19. Introduction: Influenza vaccination is important to prevent influenza transmission and associated morbidity among patients in all healthcare facilities (HCF). Despite French recommendations for all healthcare workers (HCW) to be vaccinated annually against influenza, the vaccination rate is suboptimal. Objectives: To assess vaccine coverage among HCW and identify barriers to vaccination in order to promote specific measures that could improve vaccination coverage. Methods: A descriptive study was conducted during the 2018-2019 flu epidemic based on an online questionnaire sent to all hospital infection control teams in Paris area. Participants were asked to report their HCW influenza immunization coverage and select potential barriers of influenza vaccination as identified from the literature. They were also invited to assess the effectiveness of various strategies known to improve influenza vaccination compliance. 3 ] for nurses and nursing assistants. Low compliance with seasonal influenza vaccination among HCW was primarily attributed to doubts regarding the efficacy of influenza vaccination (86%), followed by concerns regarding vaccine safety (66%) and social media influence (45%) (n=141). The most effective strategies proposed to increase influenza vaccination uptake were 1) being vaccinated directly in the hospital wards by a colleague (n=119; 79%), 2) use a mobile vaccination cart (n=79; 78%), 3) set up a vaccination stand (n=62; 61%). Conclusion: Although slightly in progress as compared to previous years, the influenza immunization coverage among HCW remains below expectation in these healthcare settings. The identification of barriers suggests the need for better information on flu vaccine towards healthcare professionals in addition to implementation of active vaccination campaign. Objectives: improve staff influenza vaccination rates to above 90% and sustain it. Methods: A multidisciplinary team approach was developed to promote influenza vaccination as a Patient Safety initiative. Compliance with influenza program included vaccination, provide proof of medical contraindication from a Medical Provider, provide proof of vaccination at another location, or declination. Influenza vaccine clinic was made available. Departments were allowed to administer vaccine to staff, egg free vaccine was made available, promotional campaign was implemented, email updates and letters of non-compliant staff. Attendance of a physician led face to face education was mandatory prior to declination. Questionnaire was provided to employees before and after the lecture to asses barriers to vaccination. Introduction: Vaccination against seasonal influenza is the cornerstone of protection for both patients and hospital staff (HCW). Various actions are recommended to increase hospital staff adherence to seasonal influenza vaccination: information campaigns, management support, and vaccination available directly in patient care wards, day and night, at no cost. Despite the implementation of these measures, the vaccination rate of our institution remained stable at around 24% for a decade. As Swiss law does not allow vaccination to be mandatory, an alternative solution was tried: the obligation for staff to choose between vaccine and wear of a mask during the epidemic period. Objectives: To describe the evolution of the vaccination rate among HCW, following the introduction of a strategy that consists in choosing between vaccination and the wear of a mask during the epidemic period. Methods: The vaccination campaign takes place every year from late October to mid-December, with the option for the hospital staff vaccinated until the peak of the influenza epidemic. Vaccination is offered by dedicated and trained staff. Personal information and hospital sector of the vaccinated persons are systematically collected. Results: From October 2011 to February 2019, seasonal influenza vaccination was offered to 91,181 people. During this period, the averaged vaccination rate increased by 9.7% for all staff (season 2011/2012: 29.3%; season 2018/2019: 39.0%), by 11.6% for medical staff and by 6.2% for the rest of staff. The champions of this evolution were doctors (+11.6%) and social workers (+11.5%). This increase differs from one sector to another: max. +18.5% for the gynaecology/obstetrics department; min. +3.9% for the operations department. Conclusion: The requirement to choose between the vaccine and wearing a mask during an epidemic increases adherence to influenza vaccination. However, the effect of this measure is inhomogeneous: a detailed analysis of the results is necessary to plan additional measures. Introduction: Influenza vaccination of healthcare workers (HCWs) remains one major preventive measure against nosocomial Influenza. However, many HCWs still decline vaccination. Our University Hospital have implemented an active promotion of this vaccination. Objectives: To evaluate the impact of a multimodal strategy to promote Influenza vaccination in HCWs. Methods: A multimodal strategy has been implemented in 2015. It was based on i) posters throughout the hospital, ii) a 'treasure hunt' (stickers with QR codes opening short videos) and iii) messages on intranet and in internal newsletters. Access to the vaccine has been facilitated through several vaccination points located at strategic places (changing rooms, hospital entrances, cafeterias, etc.), and the deployment of 'vaccine delegates' in each ward (n = 100). The number of vaccines administrated was collected to calculate the vaccination coverage (VC). During the Influenza season, an institutional directive obligates to wear a mask by all unvaccinated HCWs in contact with patients. The evolution of VC and the proportion of putative nosocomial influenza cases were monitored. Results: Between the 2011-12 and 2018-19 Influenza seasons, the VC of HCWs in contact with patients increased from 29.5% to 50% (p<10-6), in both nurses (+75%) and physicians (+57%). Physicians'VC remained higher than nurses'VC (respectively 55% vs. 42%). The proportion of vaccinations carried out by vaccine delegates was 36% in 2018-19. The proportion of nosocomial Influenza was 22% and 18% respectively over the last two seasons. The campaign tools were shared with partner hospitals. Conclusion: Since the implementation of this multimodal strategy to promote Influenza vaccination, we observed a significant increase in VC. Strong support from the hospital direction seems to have been a factor of success. This experience reinforces the interest for a multimodal strategy. Objectives: This research provides a public report, and benchmarks for the resistance rate of gram-negative MDR, XDR and PDR bacteria causing HAI's in 12 ICU's from Belo Horizonte, a brazillian city with aproximately 2,5 million inhabitants. Methods: Data was collected between Jan/2013 to Dec/2017. All hospitals complied with ECDC HAI surveillance protocols. Antimicrobial resistance from 6 gram-negatives were evaluated: Acinetobacter sp., Klebsiella sp., Proteus sp., Enterobacter sp., Escherichia coli, and Pseudomonas sp.. Benchmarks were defined as p10, p20, p50 and p70 percentiles for total multi-resistance rate, or TMR (MDR+XDR+PDR = TMR Antibiotic resistance in Acinetobacter spp., particularly Acinetobacter baumannii, is increasing rapidly. A. baumannii possesses two intrinsic b-lactamase genes, in addition to weak permeability and efflux systems, that together confer a natural reduced susceptibility to antibiotics. The aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence of ESBL and MBL encoding genes among A. baumannii isolates. In this study, 300 A. baumannii strains were isolated from ICU wards of three hospitals of Erbil City, Iraq in 2019. Phenotypic identification of the production of ESBLs and MBLs has been carried out by using DDST methods. PCR technique was used for amplification of the ESBL and MBL encoding genes, namely: CTX-M, SHV, TEM, OXA-51, VIM-Family, IMP-Family, SPM-1, SIM-1, and GIM-1. Eighty seven (87%), 95 (95%), 98 (98%) and 95 (95%) out of 100 A. baumannii isolates were resistant to imipenem, meropenem, ceftazidime and cefotaxime, respectively. Also, 99% and 7% of the isolates were MBLs and ESBLs produced phenotypically. Ninety (30%), 60 (20%) and 180 (60%) out of 100 A. baumannii isolates have been confirmed to harbor the bla-VIM -family, TEM and SHV genes, respectively. Our results show no significant relationship between the detected gens with production of MBLs and ESBLs in spite of high prevalence of MBL encoding and drug resistant A. baumannii. Probably some other genes rather than what we studied are involved in phenotypic production of MBLs and ESBLs and subsequent drug resistance in Kurdistan area, Iraq. Introduction: Lack of local data concerning causative pathogens and resistance patterns results in suboptimal empirical treatment and unfavorable clinical outcomes. Objectives: to characterize antimicrobial resistance patterns of Gramnegative bacteria isolated from hospitalized patients with febrile infections in Central Ethiopia. Methods: In total, 684 Patients ≥1 year of age admitted to the Asella Teaching Hospital with fever from April 2016 to June 2018 were included. Blood and other appropriate clinical specimens were cultured. Susceptibility testing was performed using the Kirby-Bauer method and VITEK2. Confirmation of species identification and identification of resistance-genes were conducted using MALDI-ToF-MS and PCR at a microbiology laboratory in Düsseldorf, Germany. Results: In total, 684 study participants were included; 54% were male and the mean age was 26.7 years. At sample collection, 57.2% (391/684) patients received antibiotic therapy. Ceftriaxone was the most commonly prescribed antibiotic (78%). The overall culture positivity rate was 7.5%. Of 83 cultured organisms, 38(46%) were Gram-negative, 43(52%) Gram-positive and 2(2%) Candida species. Among the 38 Gram-negative isolates, 16 (42%) were E. coli, 15 (39%) K. pneumoniae and 4 (11%) P. aeruginosa. Resistance against commonly used antibiotics for Gram-negative bacteria at the study site was: piperacillin/tazobactam 48%(13), ampicillin/sulbactam 93%(25), cefotaxime 89%(24), ceftazidime 74%(20), cefipime74%(20), and amikacin 4%(1). Of 27 Gram-negative bacteria available for resistance-gene detection, bla NDM-1 was detected in one K. pneumoniae isolate and bla NDM-1 plus bla OXA-51 in A. baumannii. 81% (22/27) of the Gram-negative rods were confirmed to contain ESBL-genes as follows: TEM 17 (77%), CTX-M-1-group 15(68%), and SHV-6(27%). Conclusion: We found a high prevalence (81%) of ESBL-producing bacteria and 7.4% carbapenem-resistance. The 3rd generation cephalosporin were the most prescribed drugs at the study site. Strengthening of antimicrobial stewardship programs is required in order to face the threat of multidrug-resistant bacteria. Methods: This is a subanalysis within a retrospective clinicalmicrobiological study of 125 BSI due to KPC-KP during 2014-16 at HSP (one isolate per BSI). AST was determined by agar dilution (EUCAST interpretation). BSI cases caused by KPC-KP non-susceptible (NS) to aminoglycoside (both amikacin and gentamicin) were compared to the remaining cases. PFGE of all isolates and WGS (Illumina, MinIon long-reads) of a subset of isolates were carried out. Clinical data was compared between both groups. Results: Forty-nine (39%) of 125 KPC-KP isolates were amikacin and gentamicin NS (>128mg/L MIC for both in 45 cases). Among NS isolates, PFGE analysis coupled with in silico MLST identified 40 isolates belonging to ST258, 6 to ST11, 2 to ST16 and one to ST437. Among those, a subset of 31 were sequenced showing 84% positivity for rmtB 16S-rRNA methylase gene (ST258 isolates N=24, ST11 N=1 and ST16 N=1). No other 16S-rRNA methylase was identified. Genomic assembly of one ST258, one ST11, and one ST16 isolate showed highly similar 177 kb IncA/C2 plasmids, harbouring rmtB. Outcome analysis showed 65% allcause 30-day mortality for the cohort, 61% in the aminoglycoside-NS group vs 66% in the aminoglycoside susceptible group (p=0.6). Conclusion: We report the burden and clonal spread of a KPC-2 rmtB+ ST258 KP clone in a tertiary hospital, and in two cases probable horizontal acquisition of an IncA/C2 plasmid by ST11 and ST16 KPC-KP isolates. Although we did not identify an impact on mortality, the dissemination of 16S-rRNA methylase rmtB plasmids in an endemic setting for KPCproducing CC258 clones, providing resistance to most available aminoglycosides including new therapeutic options as plazomicin, is worrisome. , imipenem (67.9%), gentamicin (58.5%), amikacin (50%), fosfomycin (1%) and colistin (0.3%). Faecal carriage of bla NDM was 28.3% (198/700); bla NDM variants were bla NDM-5 (n=165), bla NDM-1 (n=17), bla NDM-7 (n=13) and bla NDM-4 (n=3). Patients visited to OPD had no history of antibiotic intake during sample collection, however, 88.7% (340/383) of inpatients were on antibiotics. E. coli harbouring bla NDM-5 was isolated from inpatients more than outpatients (p<0.1). There was a significant association in burn patients (p< 0.00001). We observe a high prevalence of bla NDM-5 (38/223, 17.4%) among clinical E. coli. Faecal NDM-5 positive E. coli was distributed in 28 different sequence types (STs); the majority belonged to ST167 (n=38) followed by ST405 (n=18). There was association between faecal NDM-5 positive E. coli and ST167 (p< 0.01). Similarly, clinical NDM-5 positive E. coli were significantly related to ST167 (p<0.001). We did not observe any relation between plasmids of specific size and clonal type. Conclusion: Gut colonization of bla NDM-5 is a reservoir for clinical infections by MDR bacteria via horizontal transfer in selective antibiotic pressure along with clonal spread. Introduction: Ongoing dissemination of carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae (CPE) represents a public health issue. Early detection and infection prevention and control strategies are key in limiting spread of CPE within healthcare systems. Objectives: The study aimed to investigate the genomic epidemiology and clonal relationships among the carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae isolated. This is important in evaluating the effectiveness of infection prevention and control programs and provides information for the development of new antimicrobial targets. Methods: Between May 2016 and May 2017, 10 isolates(5 rectal swabs and 5 blood stream infections) were obtained from patients admitted to intensive care unit in Durban, South Africa.Following phenotypic microbial identification and antibiotic susceptibility tests,isolates were subjected to whole genome sequencing. Results: All isolates were extensively drug-resistant with detectable phenotypic and genotypic resistance to tested β-lactams. Resistance to carbapenems were conferred by NDM-1 mediated by the acquisition the p18-43_01-like multi-replicon [ColRNAI, IncFIB(pB171), Col440I, IncFII, IncFIB(K) and IncFII(Yp)] plasmids. Interestingly, all the ten isolates had the same plasmid multilocus sequence type (IncF[K12:A-:B36]) and capsular serotype KL149, affirming the epidemiological linkage between the K. pneumoniae clones. All but one isolate belonged to ST152 sequence type. A novel sequence type, ST3136 differed from the primary clone by a single-locus variant in the rpob allele. Findings suggest an independent plasmid acquisition followed by local dissemination revealing horizontal spread of this blaNDM-1-bearing plasmid structure. Conclusion: The acquisition of resistance-encoding plasmids, horizontal transfer and clonal dissemination facilitate the spread of carbapenemase genes in a public hospital. The valuable information provides a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms and spread of drug-resistant strains within healthcare settings Introduction: Hospital environments are potential reservoirs of bacteria associated with nosocomial infections. Carbapenems producing Gram-negative bacteria (CPE-GNB) can survive on inanimate surfaces for months, thus serving as a transmission source to healthcare workers and susceptible patients. Objectives: In this study we assess the occurrence of carbapenems producing Gram-negative from hospital environment in Slovakia. Methods: Multicentre national study was performed to monitor prevalence of carbapenemases-producing Gram-negative bacteria from January 2015 to December 2017. The bacterial ability to produce these enzymes were analysed with rapid imunochromatographic assay (NG-Test Carba 5) and with rapid molecular assay (Gene Xpert Carba-R). Results: Overall 2114 samples from hospital environment (Klebsiella spp., Pseudomonas spp., Escherichia coli, Enterobacter spp., Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococcus spp.) were analysed. Of all Gram-negative environmental bacteria (n=985) were confirmed 57 (5,8%) resistant to meropenem. Isolates were further tested for ability to produce carbapenemases. Molecular testing with Gene Xpert Car-baR method identified 5 blaVIM possesing Pseudomonas spp. and 3 blaNDM possessing Klebsiella pneumoniae. Immunochromatographic method NG-Test were identified 11 carbapenemases-producers, 5 VIM producers (Pseudomonas spp.), 3 NDM producers (Klebsiella pneumoniae), and 3 IMP producers (Pseudomonas spp.) respectivelly. CPE-GNB isolates were detected from sink (6), manometer cuff (2), aspirator (2) and one ready to use whipes respectively. Conclusion: Detection of carbapenems producing Gram-negative bacteria from various sampling sites indicated decontamination processes failures and the surfaces in the hospitals were potential exogenous sources of nosocomial infection. Introduction: Extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing Gram-negative bacteria have become a serious threat to global health. To date, regular surveillance of multidrug-resistant (MDR) pathogens is lacking in Ethiopia. Objectives: To summarize and analyze published data regarding ESBL-producing bacteria in different regions of Ethiopia. Methods: A systematic search was conducted on PubMed, PubMed Central, and Google Scholar until March 2019. Eligible studies were selected using the following criteria. A random effect model estimated the pooled proportion of ESBL-producing Gram-negative bacteria. The publication bias and the variation in proportion estimates attributed to heterogenicity were also assessed. Results: Totally, 1782 Gram-negative bacteria isolated from 5191 clinical samples were included. The pooled proportion estimates of ESBL-producing Gram-negative was 52% (95% CI: 49-54%; P< 0.01).There was a high level of heterogeneity, random model methods (I 2 = 95%, P <0.01). Among different species, ESBL rates were 65.7% (262) Klebsiella spp., 60.6% (n=20) for Enterobacter spp., 47.8% (n=22) for Citrobacter spp., 47.0% (n=383) for E. coli, 45.7% (n= 85) for Salmonella spp., 28.6% (n=14) for Proteus spp., 16.7% (n=4) for P. aeruginosa, and 14.3% (n=3) for Acinetobacter spp. A total 81 isolates were positive for the ESBL-encoding genes: 82.7% (67/81) CTX-M-1 group, 17.3 %(14/81) bla TEM were reported. Two studies reported mortality associated with infections by ESBL-producing pathogens or resistant to the 3rd generation cephalosporins was12 of 14 (86%) of patients infected with ESBL-producing bacteria died. Conclusion: In this meta-analysis, the pooled phenotypic prevalence of ESBL-producing pathogens is high and is associated with a high mortality, however the available data is scarce. This highlights the need for establishing and upgrading clinical microbiology laboratories in the country for routine antibiotic susceptibility testing. CTX-M-1 group is the highest predominantly detected resistant genes. The capacity to detect ESBL genes is desirable for continuous surveillance of MDR. Objectives: We report here the antimicrobial resistance results for 3 major Gram-negative species and stratify the results by sample and laboratory type. Methods: EARS-BE methodology is described in detail elsewhere (1) . Briefly, all Belgian laboratories (hospital and non-hospital) that performed routine antimicrobial susceptibility tests (AST) in 2017 were invited to transfer their results to Sciensano. For each patient, only the 1 st specimen within the study year was included. Results: 31 hospital labs submitted results for blood/CSF while 24 (19 hospital & 5 non-hospital labs) participated for urine samples. Within hospital labs, levels of resistance for E. coli isolates from urine samples were only slightly lower as compared to blood/CSF isolates. For K. pneumonia, all antibiotic resistance levels are very similar between both sample types. Concerning P. aeruginosa, lower levels of resistance were observed in urine isolates for ceftazidime (5.3% vs 7.2%), carbapenems (6.3% vs 8.2%), but slightly higher for aminoglycosides (9.5% vs 7.7%) and fluoroquinolones (13.7% vs 10.4%). Concerning urine isolates, much lower levels of resistance were observed in nonhospital labs in comparison to hospital labs, except for the fluoroquinolones in P. aeruginosa (14.6% for non-hospital labs vs 13.7% for hospital labs). Conclusion: For urine isolates analyzed in hospital laboratories, overall resistance levels of Gram-negative bacteria followed more or less those of blood/CSF isolates. These bacteria from non-hospital labs are in general more susceptible. This shows the interest to include urine isolates in EARS-BE given the size of collected data and the opportunity to monitor the antimicrobial resistance in non-hospital settings. The results of this study showed; A) high rate of antibiotic resistance among Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates from burn patients, B) Colistin is the best choice for treatment, C) the frequency of rmtA gene is higher than aac (6') gene among these bacteria and D) the newly designed multiplex PCR was qualified to detect concurrent existence of qnrB, aac(6') and rmtA resistant genes in these bacteria in just one reaction. (74) and Acininetobacter(46). Resistance of K. pneumoniae and E. coli to cefotaxime and ceftazidime was high at > 60%. Imipenem resistance was also high at >50% for both organisms. Resistance to piperacillin-tazobactam was seen in 36.1% of E.coli and 48.6% of K.pneumoniae. Resistance of P. aeruginosa to ceftazidime, piperacillin -tazobactam, amikacin and meropenem was 27.2, 25, 26.1 and 22.2 % respectively. Among Acinetobacter spp, resistance to cefotaxime, piperacillin-tazobactam, meropenem and amikacin was high at 78.2%, 60.9%, 52.1 and 67.4% respectively. Vancomycin resistance (VRE) was seen in 6.8% of Enterococci. Of the S. aureus isolates, methicillin resistance was seen in 38.1% (MRSA). Conclusion: There is a high degree of antibiotic resistance among commonly isolated Gram negative bacteria such as E.coli, K. pneumoniae and Acinetobacter spp to cephalosporins, βlactam/βlactamase inhibitor combinations, fluoroquinolones and carbapenems in our setting. Introduction: Several antibiotics were routinely used in the treatment of healthcare associated infections, and may have contributed to the emergence of antibiotic-resistant strains in our context. Widespread resistance severely complicates management of infections Objectives: we assess the activity of three antibiotics doxycycline, trimethoprim -sulfamethoxazole and meropenem during the management of infection control program. Methods: Using standard microbiological methods for identification of microorganisms, all clinical bacterial isolates from inpatients received in hospital laboratory during an 18 months' period (december 2015 to Jun 2017) were recorded and analyzed. Antibiotics susceptibility was performed using agar disk diffusion method on Mueller Hinton. Mycobacteria and anaerobic bacteria were not included in the study. Results: A total of 3478 bacterial isolates were collected of which 64% (n = 2226) were Gram negative (2005 Enterobactericea and others 221) and 36% (n = 1252) Gram-positive. The proportions of the strains varied depending on the types of infection. Almost 37% of the collected strains originated from Bloostream, followed by strains of venous and urinary catheter infection 35%, wound infection after clean surgy 10% and others 13%. A high proportion of strains showed resistance to doxycycline 60%, trimetroprim/sulfamethoxazol 87% and meropenem 7%. No significant difference in the antibiotic resistance of the strains based on their origin. A disk diffusion method is not optimal for testing certain important resistance. Conclusion: Reasonably priced antibiotics such as, doxycycline, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole are now of limited benefit in the treatment of Healthcare Associated Infections. The surveillance generate valuable information on antibiotics resistance, which can be used to prepare locally applicable recommendations. Ahoyo T. A., Bankolé H., Adéoti F., Attolou A., Assavedo S., Amoussou-guenou M., Kindé-gazard D. and Pittet D. Introduction: This study has done to monitor antimicrobial prescribing and resistance rates in Iran Objectives: To measure the prevalence rate of antimicrobial prescription at hospital level To address the quality of antibiotics prescription Methods: A uniform and standardized method for surveillance of antimicrobial use in hospitals was used to assess the variation in antimicrobial prescribing in West Azerbaijan province, Iran. PPS was conducted in 2018, in child and neonatal wards in a teaching and general hospital. The survey included all inpatients receiving an antimicrobial on the day of the PPS. Data collected included details on the antimicrobial agents, reasons and indications for treatment as well as a set of quality indicators. A web-based application was used for data-entry, validation and reporting as designed by the University of Antwerp (www.global-pps.com). bioMérieux provided unrestricted funding support for the survey. Results: The overall prevalence rate was achieved as 60.6%. Among the different specialized wards, the lowest and highest prevalence rates was related to Haematology−Oncology Medical (30%) and Neonatal Medical (77.8%) Wards, respectively. The most antibiotic use in Pediatric and neonatals wards were other beta-lactams and Penicillins, respectively. Pneumonia, prophylactic urinary tract infection, and prophylaxis of central nervous system infections, were the three most common diagnosis treated with therapeutic antibiotics. Overall, the reason for treatment was recorded in 84.97% of antimicrobial prescriptions, and a stop or review date in 3%. Local antibiotic guidelines were missing for 88.6% of the prescriptions. None of the patients received a targeted antibacterial treatment for systemic use. The findings indicate that Iran has the highest prevalence rate of antibiotic prescription related to child and neonatal wards among all countries studied in Global PPS study. In addition to, the indicators confirmed the low quality of antibiotic prescription. Introduction: Antibiotic is a sugarcoating poison as it saves many lives from fatal infections. It can also be a potential bomb if it is being misused and will lead to the growth of antibiotic-resistance in human. Objectives: To prevent most infections from being incurable in the future, our hospital has set up an Antibiotic Stewardship Programme (ASP) with a team to monitor the usage of Big Gun (BG) antibiotics. Our ASP team is composed of the executive medical director (EMD), infection control officer (ICO), pharmacist, infection control coordinator(ICC) with a microbiologist as our honorably consultant. Methods: In hardware, we have a BG Prescribing form. In software, we have a computer system which audits on the usage of BG antibiotics with indication, patient's diagnosis, medical history, culture result, inflammation markers recorded. Once a BG antibiotic is prescribed, pharmacist will attach the form together with MAR in the dispensing process. The physician has to complete the form before ICC's collection who will then input the data into the system. Afterwards, an email will automatically be sent to the case physician and the ASP team. EMD and ICO act as auditors and will send feedback to the physician on the appropriateness of the prescription with reference to IMPACT, a local antibiotic guideline, and according to patient's information given. Results: From September 2018 to March 2019, 54 BG was antibiotics have been recorded. Most (44%) were prescribed by family doctors. Among the types of BG prescribed, Piperacillin & Tazobactam (25%) is mostly prescribed. Most indications are respiratory infection(36%) followed by orthopaedic(20%). The purpose of prescription are recorded as 55% empirical, 27% pathogenic and 18% prophylactic. 67% are regarded "appropriate", with 24% "not-appropriate" and 9% "don't know". 9% of physicians replied disagree to the audit outcome with the remaining either agree or no comment. Conclusion: Seeing the high prescription rate from family doctors, the issue has been discussed and evaluated in doctors' meeting. Physicians are open to feedback the rational for their prescription if it is regarded as Not Appropriate or Don't Know. The audit allows for discussions between the auditors prior to finalizing a 'verdict' which reduces the likelihood of wrongly affecting clinical practice. ASP raised physicians' awareness and a decrease of BG prescription is noted. Introduction: Point prevalence study of antibiotics is the audit of judicious antibiotic use in accordance to local and national antibiotic guidelines. Inappropriate antibiotic use is associated with prolonged hospitalization, increased healthcare costs and development of antimicrobial resistance. Objectives: To determine the rate of antibiotic compliance in accordance to local and national antibiotic guidelines across various disciplines in a tertiary hospital. Methods: All antibiotic prescriptions from 43 wards of various disciplines were audited daily over a span of 2 weeks. Screening of prescriptions started at 8am using information obtained from case notes for indication and diagnosis pertaining to each antibiotic. Any discrepancies were discussed with the primary discipline team and infectious disease consultant. Data collected was then analyzed for compliance to local therapeutic guidelines, appropriateness of therapy in terms of dosage, spectrum of coverage, duration and choice by a team of pharmacists and infectious disease consultant. Results: Of the 346 cases screened, obstetric and gynaecology was shown to have the lowest level of compliance to local guidelines for empirical antibiotic use (33.3%, n=15), followed by orthopedics (36.0%, n=25), surgery (42.4%, n=59), medical (52.6%, n=95), pediatrics (54.2%, n = 35), and intensive care (60.0%, n =5). Conclusion: Compliance to local and national antibiotic guidelines was seen to be lowest among obstetricians for empirical use. Lack of up to date knowledge on antibiotic guidelines was seen as the possible barrier for appropriate antibiotic use. The study was conducted as part of a nationwide project headed by the Philippine Antimicrobial Point Prevalence Survey team. A descriptive analysis of the prevalence of antimicrobial use was reported along with relative frequencies of antimicrobials. Findings were compared using chi-square test. Results: The prevalence of antimicrobial use was 49.83% and 47.73% in 2017 and 2018, respectively (p=0.21). A significant decline in antimicrobial use was noted in the neonatal and pediatric ICU (p<0.05), while usage increased in the neonatal medical ward (p=0.02). Antimicrobials were prescribed mostly for community-acquired infections, and as empiric therapy, with pneumonia being the most common infection requiring antimicrobials. About three fourths of antibiotics for surgical prophylaxis were given for >24 hours, with cefuroxime being the preferred agent. In 2017, cefuroxime was the most prescribed antibiotic, but was surpassed by meropenem in 2018. Broad-spectrum antibiotics were used often in critically-ill, and in medical patients. Physician documentation of indication for antimicrobials improved from 68.80% in 2017 to 74.74% in 2018 (p<0.05). Guideline compliance increased from 63.50% to 74.96%, though not statistically significant (p=0.40). Nearly half of noncompliant prescriptions were for surgical prophylaxis. Documentation of antibiotic stop-date was not common practice, that is <30% in two years of survey. Introduction: Healthcare-associated infections (HAI) are a safety concern globally for both patients and healthcare providers. Healthcareassociated infections are a major threat for patient safety and the impact on health and well-being are longer duration of illness, longer treatment, higher mortality, treatment with expensive medicines, increased burden on the health system and huge economic impact. Surveillance of HAIs is an important infection control activity and also an indicator of quality patient outcomes. Knowledge of the prevalence of antibiotic resistance is a pre-requisite for infection prevention and control and is essential for healthcare policy makers to conduct effective responses. Objectives: The main aim was to gather baseline data and information required for the development of an HAI and AMR strategy in Sierra Leone and to determine the prevalence of healthcare-associated infections Methods: The point prevalence survey was conducted at four regional hospitals in Sierra Leone. A questionnaire-based survey was designed to collect information on the prevalence of HAI, antibiotic prescribing patterns and capacity of the health facility to promote an antibiotic stewardship program. The multi-disciplinary surveillance team included doctors, nurses, pharmacists and laboratory personnel. A questionnaire-based survey was designed to collect information on the prevalence of HAI, antibiotic prescribing patterns and capacity of the health facility to promote an antibiotic stewardship program. Results: Data from 327 patients were collected out of 441 inpatients. About 114 patients were not included in the survey as they did not meet the inclusion criteria. The most common type of antibiotic prescribed was Ceftriaxone (54%) followed by Metronidazole (49%). Overall the prevalence of antibiotic use was 73.7% (95% CI: 69.3-77.7). Highest antibiotic use was in neonatal unit followed by ICU and paediatric wards across all hospitals Conclusion: The survey has demonstrated that a point-prevalence survey methodology can be applied successfully to surveillance of HAI and antibiotic use across hospitals in Sierra Leone and the results can identify targets for patient safety and quality improvement. Introduction: Antibiotic overuse or misuse is one of the main antimicrobial drug prescription problems in low income countries, which leads to substantial modification of the bacterial ecology in health care facilities. In African hospitals, the list of essential antibiotics available is very restricted and contains less than ten antibiotics. However, resistance to older antibiotics is increasing and the development of new molecules has stalled. Objectives: To monitor the using of antimicrobial in the D R C facility Methods: We conducted a cross-sectional study to determine the prevalence of patients who received one or more antibiotics during their hospitalization. Data were collected on two different days in a 2-week period at Nyankunde Hospital, Beni city, in the province of North Kivu, DR Congo. Results: In this study, the overall antibiotherapy rate was 43.2% (59/ 137 inpatients). Patients with antimicrobial therapy were aged between 4 months and 84 years; gender included 29 women and 30 men. Patients receiving antimicrobial therapy were admitted to different wards, as follows: Surgery (5%), Obstetrics (9%), Pediatrics (18%), Internal Medicine (30%), VIP ward (18%), Emergencies (11%) and Intensive care (6%). The common first diagnosis was sepsis syndrome (59%), and 47% of inpatients had also a second associated diagnosis. No bacterial culture tests were performed on any patient. However, 19% of patients had positive Widal Felix serodiagnosis testing and 15% had positive malaria rapid diagnostic tests (RDT). For those receiving single antibiotics (n=27), patients received mainly ceftriaxone (n=22, 37%) or ampicillin (n=20, 34%). Those receiving two antibiotics (n=32) usually had gentamicin (n=21, 35%) added, and for those who received three antibiotics (n=6) metronidazole (n= 5, 8%) was the most common addition. Conclusion: At this DR Congo hospital, 43.2% of inpatients had antibiotic therapy. The main reason was sepsis (proven or suspected), either as first or second syndrome. Microbial cultures are not feasible, and only RDTs of malaria and Salmonella infectious diseases are available. In these conditions, it is not possible to monitor antimicrobial resistance Introduction: Bacterial resistance to antibiotics is a public health problem that spares no health system in the world. Antibiotics misuse in health facilities is one of the main factors behind the emergence of this antimicrobial resistance. Good reconstitution practices contribute to the proper use of injectable antibiotics in hospitals. Objectives: The aim was to evaluate antibiotic dilution and administration techniques in the pediatric service and specifically to identify dilution solvents, their volumes and modes of administration. Methods: The study was prospective and focused on children hospitalized in the pediatric service between March and September, 2016. Data were collected by direct observations of care practices associated with additional informations by interviewing care staff. Results: A total of 2737 replenishment and administration sessions were collected. Distilled water was the most used solvent (87.9%) followed by sodium chloride 0.9% injectable solution (with 6.60%), glucose 5% injectable solution (2.10%), glucose 10%solution (with 1.7%) and sodium lactate, compound injectable solution (1.5%). Solvent volumes between 2.5ml and 10ml were the most used for reconstitution and were used for direct intravenous administration. The prescribed dilution volumes and dosages were respected in 77.34% of cases. Ceftriaxone was the most reconstituted antibiotic (65.07%) followed by amoxicillin (12.46%). Combinations of antibiotics or with other products in the same syringe have been reported (495 cases or 18.08%): ceftriaxone + gentamicin (96.16%) Ceftriaxone + Gentamicin + dexametaxone (2.22%) Cefotaxime + Gentamicin + Methylprednisolone (0.81%). Combinations of drugs in the same administration syringe were contrary to medical prescription guidelines. A single vial of solution (sodium chloride 0.9%, glucose 5% or glucose 10%) was used to reconstitute the several antibiotics for different children and was used by all teams with risks of contamination. Conclusion: The shortcomings identified made it possible to formulate recommendations for better patient care, which will enhance the care quality. Introduction: Antimicrobial stewardship programs (ASPs) have been shown to improve the appropriate use of antimicrobials, especially in high-income countries. However, ASPs are relatively less well implemented in low-or-middle income countries. To improve the effectiveness of ASPs in these settings, it is important to determine the core actions and targets for improving antimicrobial use. Objectives: To describe the prevalence and patterns of antibiotic use at a tertiary care hospital in Tanzania. Methods: Consecutive patients admitted to an adult medical ward at a tertiary care hospital, Kilimanjaro Christian Medical Centre in Moshi, Tanzania were enrolled from June 2018 to March 2019. The medical record was reviewed for data regarding antibiotics prescribed, indications for use, and microbiologic testing ordered. Results: Of 1103 patient's enrolled majority were males (663, 60.1%), with the median age being 54 years (IQR 39-70). About one-third (390, 35.4%) of the patients received antimicrobials during hospitalization, with pneumonia being the leading indication for antimicrobial use (158, 40.5%). Most commonly used antibiotics included ceftriaxone 285 (73.1%), metronidazole 155 (39.7%), and amoxicillin/ampicillin 46 (11.8%) patients. Median duration of antimicrobial use was 5 days (IQR 3-7). Few patients on antimicrobials (27, 6.9%) had culture results, of which half (15, 55.6%) were positive for an organism and a minority (8, 29.6%) were susceptible to the antibiotics being used. Overall mortality in the cohort was 22.7% and median duration of hospitalization was 5 days (IQR 3-8). Conclusion: Antibiotics were used in a substantial proportion of admitted patients. However, in most cases, treatment was empirical with limited use of culture results. Future ASP efforts can target the improved use of microbiologic cultures to target antimicrobial use. Introduction: The Global-PPS is a standardized tool to assess antimicrobial use (AMU) and resistance and helps to establish antibiotic stewardship programs. Objectives: We aim to report results of the survey in 9 hospitals in Togo. Methods: The standardized Global-PPS method was used to assess variation in antimicrobial prescribing in 9 hospitals in December 2018. The survey included all inpatients receiving an antimicrobial on the day of the PPS. Data included details on antimicrobial agents, reasons and indications for treatment and a set of quality indicators. bioMérieux provided unrestricted funding support for the survey. Results: Of the 9 hospitals, 2 were tertiary care hospitals. The survey included 713 patients of which 89.8% were treated with at least one antimicrobial. Top 3 indications for AMU were malaria (32.2%), other undefined (17%) and gastro-intestinal infections (6.3%). Out of 1062 antimicrobials, 16.9% were antimalarials and 74.7% antibacterials for systemic use of which ceftriaxone (27.2%), amoxicillin (17.8%) and metronidazole (11.7%) were most frequent prescribed. Therapeutic prescribing (n=716) accounted for 67.4% of which 95.8% for a community and 4.2% for a hospital acquired infection. Antimicrobials used for medical or surgical prophylaxis (SP) accounted for 13.8% and 17.4%. Ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin and amoxicillin were most often prescribed for SP (30.2%, 19.2%, 17.4% respectively). Prolonged SP (≥1 day) in adults and children was common (69%). The reason for antimicrobial prescription was documented in 83.3% of cases while a stop/review date was only documented in 25.0% of cases. Guideline compliance reached 98.1%. No patients were reported to have received a microbiology−based treatment. Conclusion: This survey was the first conducted in the country. It is important setting-up a tailored antimicrobial stewardship program in each hospital. The challenge remains reinforcement of infection prevention and the medical bacteriology lab capacity by offering antimicrobial susceptibility testing to monitor prescription. Results: The survey included 1190 inpatients. Overall antimicrobial (AM) prescription rate was 71.8% with highest rates found in newborn wards (89.2%). Prophylaxis in neonates (12.4%) and digestive tract infections (11.9%) were the most common indications. Out of 1080 AMs, systemic antibacterials (78.9% of which 26.8% ceftriaxone), antiparasitics (13.4% of which 9.5% artesunate), and antimycobacterials (3.2%) were the most prescribed antimicrobial classes. Community acquired infections were common (85.2%). Healthcare-associated infections accounted for less than 5% of antimicrobials and included mainly surgical site infections (55.6%) and infections on invasive materials (27.8%). Surgical prophylaxis (n=62 antibiotics; 5.7%) lasted mostly for more than 2 days (87.1%). The reason for the antimicrobial prescription was documented in 82% of cases, but this corresponded only half to national or international guidelines (52.9%). A stop/review date was rarely reported (6.2%). Most antimicrobials were prescribed empirically (99%). Antimicrobial therapy was oriented towards ESBL (3 cases/7), MRSA (2cases/7) and non-fermenter gram negative bacilli producer of ESBL (1case/7) only. Conclusion: Antimicrobial prevalence in hospitals in Burkina Faso is high. Continued education of caregivers on rational antimicrobial use and improved access to microbiological investigations is needed. We will expand the study to all health regions to provide a picture of the national situation and needs. Introduction: Despite advances in HAP and VAP, they continue to account for 22% of all HAIs. In an effort to minimize patient harm and unnecessary antibiotics and reduce antibiotic resistance development a recommendation is generate local antibiograms to guide healthcare professionals to the optimal choice of antibiotics and antimicrobial stewardships programs be implemented. Objectives: The Global-PPS (www.global-pps.com) [G-PPS] aims to assess variation of antimicrobial prescribing worldwide. We describe antibiotic treatment for Hospital-Acquired Pneumonia (HAP) in Mexico. Methods: A standardized surveillance of antimicrobial use assessed HAP prevalence and variation in antimicrobial therapy in 8 Mexican hospitals. The G-PPS was conducted from May 2018 and April 2019, in 6 tertiary and 2 secondary care hospitals. Data collected included antimicrobials, indications for treatment and quality indicators. Results: The G-PPS included 2,181 patients on antimicrobials, 1,930 on adult, 193 on pediatric and 58 on neonatal wards.Of all treated adults, 315 patients (16.3%) were diagnosed with pneumonia, 57.5% (n=181) had HAP.For adult HAP patients, 36.5%of prescriptions were targeted, of which 49.1% against at least one multidrug resistant organism (MDRO). Of all targeted prescriptions, 37% were targeting ESBL Gram-negatives and 18.5% targeted other MDROs. In the adult ward,reason for prescription was documented in 95.6% of cases and 83%complied with local guidelines. Biomarkers were used to progress treatment in 41.4% of cases. Overall, the most commonly prescribed antibiotics were meropenem (23%), linezolid (8.8%) and vancomycin (7.4%). Conclusion: These finding show the need to implement antimicrobial stewardship in all hospitals to improve antibiotic prescribing by reducing carbapenem use, enhancing compliance to guidelines and performing post-prescription review. Introduction: Hospitalized children often receive inappropriate antibiotics. However, scant data are available on antibiotic use in congenital heart surgery (CHS), particularly from low-middle income countries (LMICs). Objectives: We assessed antibiotic use trends in patients undergoing CHS in Guatemala, a LMIC. Methods: From Jan 2015 to Mar 2019 we measured days of therapy (DOT), length of treatment (LOT), and antibiotic-free days (AFD). All rates were adjusted to 1000 patient-days. Trends for DOT rate per antibiotic family type and quarterly series were analyzed using Pearson correlation. Analyses were done in STATA. Results: 1335 children underwent to CHS, using a total of 11351 days of antibiotic therapy in 14172 patient-days. Mean rates were 801 DOT, 477 LOT, and 523 AFD per 1000 patient-days. DOT (r = -0.25, p= 0.32), and LOT (r = -0.49, p= 0.04) rates showed a downward trend. The observed mean DOT rates by antibiotic family per 1000 patient-days were: 167 for anti-pseudomonal penicillins, 148 carbapenems, 136 vancomycin, 85 amynoglucosides, 84 cephalosporins, 44 fluoroquinolones, and 32 fosfomycin. A downward trend was observed for piperacillin-tazobactam (r = -0.50, p = 0.03), aminoglycosides (r = -0.48, p = 0.049) and fluoroquinolones (r = -0.41, p = 0.04). An upward trend was observed for cephalosporins (r = 0.54, p = 0.02), and fosfomycin (r = 0.6, p = 0.01). Carbapenems (r = -0.12, p = 0.63), and vancomycin (r = 0.07, p = 0.78) maintained a stationary trend. Conclusion: Our findings suggest that DOT rates are similar in Guatemala to those reported in high-income countries, however carbapenems and vancomycin had greater DOT rates. Interventions are needed in order to decrease inappropriate antibiotic prescription in this resource-limited setting. Results: Of 73,080 adults on systemic antibiotics, 2.6% were being treated for sepsis, 51.7% of which were on antibiotics for a healthcare-associated (HA) sepsis, ranging from 38.5% in Africa to 77% in South America. Overall, 21.7% of HA sepsis cases were related to the use of invasive devices. Microbiological results were used to inform treatment in 26.7% of prescriptions. Of all patients, 69.3% were on single-agent therapy, ranging from 48.7% in South America to 80.4% in Europe. A penicillin/β-lactamase-inhibitor was the most common regimen (25.7%), followed by a carbapenem (12.1%) and a 3 rd generation cephalosporin (10.1%). Overall, 12.1% of sepsis patients were being treated with one or more Reserve antibiotic, ranging from 7.7% in Africa to 25.6% in South America. Stop/review date and reason for treatment were documented in 35.9% and 80.7% of prescriptions respectively. Guideline compliance was reported to be up to 79.8%, yet guidelines were missing in 22.9% of prescriptions. Conclusion: These data illustrate challenges related to antibiotic prescribing for sepsis patients, such as the use of broad-spectrum agents, low documentation of stop/review date, sub-optimal use of microbiology to inform treatment and a high proportion of Reserve prescribing. The use of Reserve antibiotics was particularly high in South America, with 1 in 4 sepsis patients exposed to these lastresort drugs. PPS results can support local stewardship teams in designing contextualised interventions, even for critical conditions such as sepsis. Introduction: Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is predominantly due to inappropriate use of antibiotics, so it is mandatory for healthcare facilities to monitor antimicrobial consumption. Objectives: Assessment of antibiotic use and AMR in intensive care units (ICUs) of Georgian hospitals through point-prevalence survey. Methods: Point Prevalence Survey (PPS) of Antimicrobial Consumption and Resistance was conducted according to the Global-PPS protocol in ICUs of 10 multi-profile hospitals of three biggest cities of Georgia (Tbilisi, Kutaisi, and Batumi). PPS was performed in June, 2018. Results: On the day of the survey, total number of beds at the ICUs was 176, with 119 patients (bed occupancy percentage of 67.6%). Antibiotics were administered to 74 patients (62.2%). 46 (62.2%) patients received empirical antibiotic therapy. Among them, 16 (34.8%) had administered two or more antibiotics. Empirically, the following antibiotics were used most frequently: Ceftriaxone -17 (37.0%), Vancomycin -8 (17.4%) and Carbapenems 6 (13.0%). Only 28 (37.8%) patients have received etiotropic antibiotics therapy, moreover, 15 (53.8%) patients have received it with two or more antibiotics. Healthcare-associated infections were seen in 34 patients (28.6% of ICU patients), including: ventilator-associated pneumonia -22 cases (64.7% of all nosocomial infections), surgical site infection -7 cases (20.6%), catheter-associated bloodstream infection -2 cases (5.9%), catheter-associated urinary tract infection -2 cases (5.9%), C. difficileassociated infection -1 case (2.9%). Among enrolled patients, following multi-resistant strains were isolated and identified from clinical samples: 5 ESBL-producing nonfermenting gram negative bacilli, 4 ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae, 3 carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae, 3 carbapenemresistant non-fermenting gram negative bacilli, 1 methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Conclusion: PPS revealed the necessity of interventions in several directions in order to improve quality of antibiotic prescriptions. In the future PPS can be used as a forceful tool to monitor appropriate use of antibiotics. Introduction: Pneumonia is a frequent reason for antibiotic use and a common cause for hospitalisation, both in children and adults. Objectives: We aimed to assess antibiotic prescribing patterns for pneumonia in Georgian hospitals to identify potential targets for antimicrobial stewardship. Results: In total 79 wards with 895 inpatients were surveyed of which 77.8% were admitted to hospitals in Tbilisi. Of all patients on antibiotics, 29.8% were treated for pneumonia, with the highest rates on paediatric intensive care units (18.9%) and paediatric medical wards (45.3%). Up to 98.6% of pneumonia, cases were communityacquired infections (CAI). Regarding the antimicrobial quality indicators, documentation of the reason of prescription was 100%, yet the stop/review date was missing in 93.1% of cases. Overall compliance to antibiotic guidelines was 91.9% and treatment was mostly empiric (87.0%). Of targeted prescriptions, 75.0% was for treatment of MRSA. CRP was used in the decision to treat in 98.1% of patients. CRP levels in blood were 123 mg/L on average. For adults, commonly prescribed antibacterial drugs for systemic use (ATC J01) were ceftriaxone (26.4%), followed by cefepime (10.7%) and meropenem (9.1%). In paediatric and neonatal units, the top 3 consisted of ceftriaxone (31.0%) ampicillin/enzyme inhibitor (25.4%) and meropenem (14.3%). Conclusion: The high proportion of CAI pneumonia, empirical prescribing and the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics are worrisome findings. In addition, documentation of the stop/review date is remarkably low, yet high use of CRP in the decision to treat indicates an attempt to rationalise antibiotic use. For optimisation it is essential to plan specific stewardship interventions such as introduction of a cut off policy after 72 hours, increase of targeted treatment and availability of updated guidelines. Objectives: We aim to evaluate the impact of the Global-PPS on local AMS programmes and assess health care professionals' educational needs and barriers for implementing AMS. Methods: An internet-based survey containing 24 questions was disseminated within the Global-PPS network, including contacts from participating and non-participating hospitals. Responses were collected from February up to May 2019 and were descriptively analysed. Results: A total of 250 respondents from 73 different countries completed the survey, 198 of which were Global-PPS participants. Up to 70% (n=176) of responses were from low-and middle-income (LMIC) countries. When asked which AMS components were present in their hospital, 69.2% (HIC 89.2%; LMIC 60.8%) replied they had local prescribing guidelines and 50% (HIC 70.3%; LMIC 41.5%) reported the presence of an AMS committee. Of the Global-PPS participants who reported AMS activities (n=187), 69% stated that one or more of those activities was initiated as a result of PPS findings. Prolonged surgical antibiotic prophylaxis was the most common (63.6%; n=126) target for improvement, identified from Global-PPS findings. Out of 18 possible barriers, a lack of time was most commonly (33.8%) reported as the number one barrier for implementation of AMS in HIC, as compared to a lack of cooperation from prescribers (13.1%), time (12.5%) and qualified personnel (12.5%) in LMIC. Overall learning needs were: skills to optimise therapeutic (62%) and prophylactic antibiotic use (54.8%), followed by the design of PPS-based interventions (52.7%) in HIC and the management of multidrugresistant infections (44.3%) in LMIC. Conclusion: These results will inform the development of a dedicated e-learning course, targeting Global-PPS participants worldwide and focused at the translation of PPS-findings into locally tailored AMS interventions, thus contributing to a sustained response to AMR in hospitals worldwide. Introduction: Antimicrobial stewardship is a multimodal strategy to optimize adequacy of antimicrobial prescription, crucial in the approach to decrease antimicrobial resistance. Objectives: To assess the adequacy of antimicrobial prescription in a university hospital and to compare the adequacy in departments with or without antimicrobial stewardship interventions. Methods: We performed a cross-sectional study based on the point prevalence survey rules from WHO. One third of the patients in each department were randomly selected. After selection, we classified the adequacy of each antimicrobial prescribed (considering necessity of treatment, spectrum, dose, administration route and duration of therapy), according to local recommendations and, in its absence, national/international guidelines. We compared antimicrobial prescription adequacy in departments with specific ongoing antimicrobial stewardship interventions (Cardiothoracic Surgery, Haematology, Orthopaedics, Plastic Surgery, Urology, Vascular Surgery) and those without such interventions. Results: On the day of the study, 898 patients were hospitalized. We randomly included 316 (35%). Of those, 119 had at least one antimicrobial prescription (37,7%), corresponding to 172 antimicrobials (33 (19,2%) were prescribed as prophylaxis and 139 (80,8%) as treatment). Table 1 depicts some variables of interest. We considered antimicrobial prescription as adequate in 107 patients (62,2%). Comparing departments with and without antimicrobial stewardship interventions, we noticed a statistically significant difference: 76,6% vs. 56,8% (p=0,021; Chi Squared test). Conclusion: Antimicrobial stewardship is a multimodal strategy with a positive impact in the adequacy of antimicrobial prescriptions. Objectives: To explore risk factors of AMU and HAI in Irish LTCF. Methods: Data for the HALT study are collected at institutional level, which provides aggregated prevalence and makes in-depth analysis difficult due to low numbers. To increase the power of the study, all LTCF participating in HALT 2016 were contacted to ask for additional data on all current residents; age, sex, urinary catheter use and presence of disorientation. The individual data was matched to the existing 2016 HALT database and multilevel analyses were performed. Results: The prevalence of AMU and HAI in Irish LTCF in 2016 was 9.8% and 4.4% respectively Prophylactic AMU (40%) was identified as a particular concern in the LTCF setting, more often recorded for females, residents living in LTCFs for more than one year, residents with an intellectual disability, and residents with a urinary catheter. We recommend collecting periodic retrospective data for discussion in the A-team, prior to pharmacotherapeutic consultations to achieve a learning effect for future quality of the antibiotic prescriptions overall. In addition to the A-team activities, it's essential to involve nurses and patients/family members in the AMS program. As our project was limited to 4 locations, the generalizability and expected workload need further evaluation. Introduction: Antimicrobials are commonly used in long-term care facilities (LTCFs) and may contribute development of antimicrobial resistance. Particular concern is inappropriate use of prophylactic antimicrobials. Objectives: We investigated current use of antimicrobials in LTCFs in Finland, with special emphasis in prophylaxis. Methods: Antimicrobial use of LTCFs was investigated as a part of the third European point prevalence survey (HALT) coordinated by European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. All residents present in LTCFs and receiving at least one systemic antimicrobial on the day of the survey were included. Local data collectors completed questionnaires including data on resident characteristics, antimicrobials and their indications. Information on antimicrobial policy was gathered using institutional questionnaire. To identify factors associated for prophylactic antimicrobial use, we conducted a multivariate beta-binomial regression model with logit link. Results: In total, 175 LTCFs with 6762 eligible residents participated in the survey during September-November 2017. On the day of the survey, 462 residents received at least one antimicrobial agent (6.8%; range by LTCFs, 0-42%). Antimicrobials were more frequently prescribed for prophylaxis than for treatment (62% vs. 38%) and vast majority (88%) for prophylaxis of urinary tract infection (UTI). Methenamine (43%) was the most common UTI prophylaxis, followed by trimethoprim (38%) and nitrofurantoin (11%). There was no documented end date for 77% of prophylactic agents; 72% were prescribed in the current facility. Presence of written guideline for appropriate antimicrobial use (odds ratio (OR), 0.34; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.16-0.73) and therapeutic guideline for UTIs (OR, 0.69; 95% CI, 0.47-0.99) were associated with less use of prophylactic antimicrobials. Conclusion: Prophylactic antimicrobial use was common in Finnish LTCFs and most were prescribed for UTI prophylaxis. Increasing awareness and easy access to the national Current Care Guidelines for UTI could decrease inappropriate UTI prophylaxis and the use of methenamine. Objectives: Aiming at co-implement an ABS network within the Portuguese-speaking setting (CPLP), by enabling the evidence translation and second opinion between the countries, we surveyed Cape Verdean (CV) health professionals' (HP) perceptions about AR prevention and control, assessing ABS opportunities. Action Research approach establishes a contextualized ABS participatory process 1 . This mixed-method study addressed the first 2 stages, the problem and objectives. Quantitative study considered the HP's answers (56 HP; 2 hospitals) to a questionnaire, about their perception on AR and ABS. Qualitative study set-up 10 open-ended structured interviews, clinical shift observation in 2 pilot-services (1 hospital), and meetings with key-elements for ABS, including leadership. Results: Key-stakeholders for ABS multidisciplinary teamwork were identified. Preliminary results are: 1. HP reveal some knowledge but lack of awareness on AR and ABS (eg. 34% don't recognize the AR local threat); 2. The absence of guidelines and lack of access to key-information affect prescribing confidence (eg. only 46% HP consider microbiology results in deciding antibiotherapy); 3. Priorities for a pilot service are the lack of qualified HP, the need to optimize material resources management and stock procurement, and the need for better access to patient's clinical and prescription information; 4. Digital resources and telemedicine system can be facilitators. Topdown communication and support are essential for the ABS process sustainability. Conclusion: A Global (Portuguese-speaking) ABS network can be important in promoting prevention and effective control of AR, reducing differences between the CPLP countries. In CV, an educational program to support the co-design of ABS service and a decision-support information system are identified priorities. Digital health, like telemedicine, can be ABS facilitators. International ABS guidance documents recommend that all hospitals should regularly update the treatment guidelines. Objectives: In this study we aimed to review the recommendations for antibiotic use for 3 commons infectious pathologies in Swiss academic hospitals and to explore the differences among these guidelines. Methods: We reviewed the treatment recommendations for community-acquired pneumonia requiring hospitalization (CAP), hospital-acquired pneumonia and uncomplicated urinary tract infections (UTI). We analyzed the guidelines from the 6 largest hospitals in Switzerland, which consider all the university hospitals and the largest non-university hospital. Further, we have take into account aspects such as molecules recommended, dose, administration mode and duration. Results: The preliminary analysis of our data reveals significant differences among the guidelines. Although the antibiotic regimens are often similar, other parameters, such as the recommended dose, duration and the degree of detail of the recommendations (e.g. differentiating between different subsets of pneumonia or taking into account allergies) show considerable variability. Furthermore, the number of subcategories within an infectious syndrome varied widely. With regard to CAP, we have observed 13 different categories (ranging from 3 to 7) increasing the complexity of the comparison. With the exception of lower uncomplicated UTI, institutional guidelines are not always aligned with the corresponding Swiss and/or Europeans guidelines. Conclusion: Our data show that there is a significant heterogeneity in the antibiotic treatment recommendations in large hospitals in Switzerland. This feature is not justified by differences in the epidemiology of infectious diseases. Efforts should be undertaken to harmonize the treatment recommendations in Swiss hospitals. Introduction: over-use of antibiotics by physicians at the end of life (EOL) in patients with advance care directives (ADs) contributes to the evolution of antibiotic resistance bacteria (ARB) which increases mortality, and healthcare costs. The present study investigated factors related to physician use of antibiotics, based on the Theory of Planned Behavior, which predicts an individual's intention to engage in a behavior. Objectives: 1. to investigate several factors (socio-demographic/ organizational, motivational, infectious disease physicians (IDP) consultation, burnout) associated with physician behavioral intentions (PBI) to withhold antibiotics in EOL patients with ADs 2. to compare study variables across medical specialties and professional status. Methods: a descriptive-correlational research in which 213 physicians were sampled in 27 wards, in acute and post acute-care hospitals. Results: PBI to withhold antibiotics in EOL patient with and without ADs was rated "sometimes"/"rarely" respectively. Mean positive attitudes towards withholding antibiotics in EOL patients with ADs, awareness of ARB, system-related barriers (lack of guidelines) and mean pressure from families to prescribe antibiotic, were above the average. Physicians reported fewer IDP consultations in EOL patients than in other patients. The overall rate of burnout among all physicians was 44.5%. Predictive/related factors for PBI were: managerial positions, seniority, board certification, type of hospitalization, system-related barrier, positive attitudes and consultations with IDP demanded by physicians, in EOL patient. Introduction: Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and its threats have long been recognised. Many countries have developed antimicrobial stewardship programmes with strategies to optimise antimicrobial prescribing, minimise AMR and improve outcomes. There remains a need for behaviour change interventions at clinician level to promote appropriate prescribing practice. Objectives: The aim of this review was to critically appraise, synthesise and present the available evidence for theoretical approaches in the development and evaluation of behaviour change interventions that improve clinicians' antimicrobial prescribing. Methods: Eleven electronic databases and search engines were searched for peer-reviewed, English language studies investigating theoretically based behaviour change interventions that improve clinicians' antimicrobial prescribing in any healthcare setting. The Theory Coding Scheme was utilised to evaluate the methods by which theories have been used. Clinical and methodological heterogeneity limited data synthesis. Results: The searches resulted in 4227 potentially relevant papers after duplicates removal. Screening of titles/abstracts led to retrieval and dual assessment of 38 full-text papers. Of those, 12 studies met the inclusion criteria and were included in the systematic review. Most of studies included were from the UK (n = 8) and most were published in 2012 (n = 3); none was published before 2008. The majority of studies were carried out in primary care settings (n = 10) targeting upper respiratory tract infections (n = 9). Theoretical approaches used to inform the design and choice of intervention varied across included studies. The most common included: Theory of Planned Behaviour, Social Cognitive Theory and Operant Learning Theory. Conclusion: This systematic review is the first to investigate theoretically based behaviour change interventions for antimicrobial prescribing. Only a small number of primary research studies involving theory in intervention development and evaluation were identified. There is a need for further research in this area. in the year during direct observation. Nine wards self-reported their average compliance rate within a 5% margin of the directly observed compliance, while 5 wards underestimated their performance by more than 5%, and one ward overestimated their compliance by more than 5%. Overall a significant positive correlation between selfreported and observed compliance was found (r = .549, p = .034). Conclusion: Self reported does correlate with directly observed compliance on a ward level, but might offer additional information on awareness of importance of hand hygiene. Introduction: Hand hygiene (HH) in maternity settings in low income countries is often low, despite its importance in preventing peripartum infection and sepsis. Malawi has a high maternal mortality ratio, and to date no study has adequately ascertained the baseline HH adherence and its associated factors in maternity settings at a tertiary level hospital. Objectives: To determine the baseline adherence to WHO standards of HH in maternity settings, assess ward infrastructure and assess the knowledge and behaviour of healthcare professionals. Methods: Data was collected on labour, gynaecology, antenatal and postnatal wards for 4 weeks, and antenatal clinic for 2 weeks. Adherence was determined using a modified version of the WHO Observation Tool and adherence rates calculated. Ward Infrastructure was assessed using the modified WHO Ward Infrastructure Survey and compared graphically over time and by ward. Behaviour was assessed using the WHO Healthcare Worker Knowledge Questionnaire that was modified to include questions assessing knowledge and behaviour in terms of capability, opportunity and motivation in keeping with the COM-B model. Results: HH Adherence to WHO guidelines in inpatient wards was 12.2%, and 57.1% in antenatal clinic. Adherence was lowest on labour ward (7.55%) and highest on antenatal (16.5%). Doctors had higher adherence than nurses (20% versus 13.5% p=0.160). Soap and water availability was higher in antenatal clinic (100% and 94.4% respectively) compared to inpatient wards (65.1% and 25.2% respectively). The majority of HH actions were hand rubbing (71.9%). Adherence did not correlate with soap and water availability by inpatient ward or over time. Healthcare worker knowledge was low, and doctors scored higher than nurses (61.4% versus 52.2% p=0.032). COM-B targets identified for behavioural change were psychological capability, physical opportunity and reflective motivation. Conclusion: Adherence to WHO standards of HH in maternity settings is low. Ward infrastructure does not correlate with adherence. Knowledge is poor but is greater among doctors than nurses, who also had better adherence rates. Physical opportunity, reflective motivation and psychological capability should be addressed to change hand hygiene behaviour. Improving education could therefore improve adherence. Introduction: Hand hygiene (HH) is acknowledged as the most effective safeguard against HAI and is of particular concern in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). The WHO five moments for hand hygiene has been widely adopted but HH compliance in the ICU is reported to be low. Objectives: To derive HH compliance according to the WHO guidelines in the ICU and explore differences by region, ICU type, healthcare worker (HCW), method of observation, and each 'moment'. Methods: Electronic searches were conducted using Medline, CINAHL, PsycInfo, Embase, and Web of Science. Information was extracted and compliance recorded. Mean compliance, effect size and heterogeneity was calculated overall and for each category. Results: More than 5,480 papers were screened of which 61 met the inclusion criteria for data extraction. The median number of opportunities observed per study was 903 (mean = 3,026). Overall compliance ranged from 1.4% to 100% and the weighted mean compliance was 60% (n=184,597 opportunities). The effect size for all studies was 0.47 (CI=.04-.05), but heterogeneity was extremely high (I²=99.7). HH compliance varied across geographic region from 65% in highincome countries to 9% in low-income countries. HH compliance also showed distinctive differences by ICU type; neonatal 67%, paediatric 41%, and adult 58%, and HCW; nursing staff 43%, physicians 33%, other staff 54%. Conclusion: HH compliance in the ICU appears notably lower than international targets. The data collated offers a benchmark when evaluating or improving HH compliance in ICUs internationally. Introduction: The WHO 'five moments for hand hygiene 'are the key moments for hand hygiene and provide the fundament to any hand hygiene improvement strategy. Objectives: We studied the baseline compliance and whether our tailored intervention is equally effective at all five moments. Methods: Taking into account the barriers and facilitators we developed tailor-made interventions for 23 LTCF in the Netherlands. In a stepped wedge design we observed the five moments of hand hygiene, using the WHO "my five moments" methodology, before and after this tailored intervention. Results: We observed 6365 opportunities for hand hygiene, of which moment 3 "after body fluid exposure risk" (n=2585) was the most common seen and moment 2 "before clean/aseptic procedures" (n=328) the least . The overall hand hygiene compliance increased with 17.5% from 18.2% before to 35.7% directly after the intervention. All five moments of hand hygiene improved following the intervention, however the compliance of moment 4 "after touching a patient" was the highest before the intervention (27.2%), highest after the intervention (54.5%) and increased the most (27.3%). The compliance "after body fluid exposure risk" was the lowest before (12.1%) and lowest after the intervention (25.2%) and also increased the least (13%). Conclusion: Our preliminary results show that our tailored intervention appears to improve overall hand hygiene compliance, however, not at all moments a substantial increase was achieved. Hand hygiene "after body fluid exposure risk" is the most common opportunity observed, but compliance is the lowest as is compliance improvement after the intervention. Although the overall hand hygiene compliance increased after the intervention, the five moments of hand hygiene should be considered separately when looking at the effectiveness of the intervention. Conclusion: Healthcare workers still believe hand hygiene is not relevant to them and they always relate it as an Ebola reduction measure and had no interest on it since Ebola era ended. There is need to set accurate targets for hand hygiene compliance and as the local production of alcohol-based hand rub has started using WHO formulation in two major hospitals in the country. More support is needed from our implementing partners. with Moment 1"before patient" by 59%, which was mainly due to a misuse of gloves. Qualitative analysis of the results reflected barriers to an optimal hand hygiene rate (set at 85%) such as: high turnover among nursing and residents, shortage of alcohol sanitizer in some months, reported skin irritation problems related to alcohol gel and poor engagement to HH. Conclusion: A steady increase in HH compliance was observed among the institution from 2017 to 2019.Efforts in improving the commitment of the staff to HH is needed as well administrative support and training (especially in the good use of gloves). Introduction: Covert hand hygiene (HH) observation was suggested as a tool to overcome the Hawthorne bias, which tends to overestimate the routinely observed compliance of HH. Objectives: As HH observation done secretly at our institution showed a low HH compliance, we thought to examine the professional and healthcare causes of non-compliance of HH. Methods: A cross-sectional study design was conducted among healthcare workers (HCWs) at King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia between October 2012 and July 2013. HH observation was done secretly by temporarily-hired professionally-trained observers. Non-compliance was defined as failure to perform hand rubbing (with alcohol-based formulation) or hand washing (with soap and water) during one of the WHO five-moment HH opportunities. HH observation was followed by a questionnaire about the possible causes of non-compliance of HH filled by the HCW and assessment of HH infrastructure at the service location reviewed by the observer. Results: A total 502 HCWs with a total of 5680 opportunities were observed in 28 service locations. The overall non-compliance was 54.1%. The factors that were significantly associated with noncompliance included lack of HH education/training in last 2 years, long working hours, lack of job recognition, lack of HH auditing, lack of alcohol hand rub pocket bottle, lack of conveniently placed water sinks and alcohol hand rub wall dispensers, non-frequent replacement of empty wall dispensers, and lack of nearby promoting posters. Incorrect HH technique was significantly associated with professional category, attending HH education/training, presence of HH auditing at the service location, and the place of alcohol hand rub wall dispenser. The current findings list a number of professional and healthcare factors associated with non-compliance of HH. The covert observation of HH done before the questionnaire is likely to avoid bias in estimating non-compliance and its causes. The findings may potentially help decision maker to identify specific work-environment factors that need to be modified to improve the compliance of HH. Further research may be required to assess the impact of these suggested changes on the compliance of HH. . Of these, 46% used a combination of ICPs and ward staff to perform HH compliance audits, 40% used only ICPs, 10% relied only on ward staff while 4% used a system of 'shoppers'/video cameras. HH monitoring was primarily performed overtly after informing ward managers (45%). Covert audits with no notification to ward leadership were done by 16% and after informing observed staff in 14%. HH audit results were fed back to key stakeholders in 67% of institutions. Conclusion: Significant challenges remain in implementing the HHSAF recommendations, even in HIC. However the problem is greatest in LMIC where increased infrastructures, resourcing and stability to implement robust IPC programmes are urgently needed. Objectives: To: Determine HH capacity in Ugandan HCFs. Establish HH compliance of health workers. Methods: A cross sectional survey was conducted in April 2018 at 14 regional referral hospitals (RRHs). 14 IPC leaders were interviewed to assess HH capacity and 412 health care workers observed for compliance to WHO 5 moments of HH. WHO standard tools: HH selfassessment frame work 2010 and HH observation tool 2009, were adopted and assessors trained before data collection. HH capacity was assessed using five components of the WHO multi-modal HH improvement strategy: system change, education and training, evaluation and feedback, reminders at the work place and institutional safety climate. Data were analysed using excel and epi info and summarised using scores, colour schemes and percentages. Results: Most RRHs attained the basic level (126 -250 out of 500) of hand hygiene capacity. Lowest performance was seen in the 'evaluation and feedback' component (24.3 out of 100). The best performing facility (Mubende RRH) had an intermediate level (330 out of 500), attributed to committed leadership, a vibrant IPC committee and innovations like local production of alcohol-based hand sanitizer. Overall HH compliance using WHO 5 moments was (mean, range) 21% (7% -54%). Highest compliance was seen for the measures 'after patient contact' (36%) and 'after body fluid exposure risk' (33%). Compliance to 'before touching a patient' and 'before clean/ aseptic procedure' were lowest (16%). Reasons for inadequate practice were; inadequate supplies, lack of awareness of standard policies of hand hygiene, lack of locally adapted monitoring and evaluation frameworks and poor health worker attitudes. Conclusion: Inadequate HH practice of health workers in Uganda is attributed to gaps in supplies, inadequate knowledge and poor attitudes. Scale up innovations such as local manufacture of alcohol based hand sanitizer and increased leadership commitment should be harnessed to improve practice. Introduction: Promoting handwashing in the general population is a key public health area not only in pandemics but also perennial infection prevention. [1] Thus, it is crucial to know how compliant the general population is, and perceives themselves to be. The German Federal Centre for Health Education (BZgA) has conducted thre relevant representative surveys. [2] Regarding single parameters of handwashing, self-reported compliance rates of up to 96% (indication "after using the toilet") were found. [2] However, comprehensive compliance (in terms of correct indications, duration ≥20 sec., AND technique using soap, washing between fingers, and drying off) has not been reported. Objectives: To provide comprehensive handwashing compliance rate estimates for German adults, and report associations with recalling handwashing instruction signs in public restrooms. Methods: In 2012, N=4483 residents living in a household in Germany aged 16-85 years were surveyed by computer-aided telephone interviews (response: 49.7%). [3] Handwashing \parameters were coded as (non-)compliant based on BZgA-recommendations. Respondents indicated whether they had ever seen instruction signs in public restrooms. Statistics were calculated and regression analyses conducted via IBM® SPSS® v24. Results: The rate of compliance defined as a pattern of selfreported duration of handwashing of ≥20 sec., correct technique, and washing hands in more than 6 of 9 indications, was 8% (men: 6%, women: 9%), while 31% were totally non-compliant (29%/33%). Compared to non-compliance, the odds of total compliance were more than twice as high among respondents recalling handwashing instruction signs in public restrooms (men: OR= 2.15) and women (OR=2.08; p<.0001), however with rates still being low (e.g. 10% in women). Conclusion: In 2012, self-reported handwashing compliance in the general population in Germany was low when defined by a pattern of compliant duration, technique, and situational indication. Intensified promotion is obviously needed, and may use instruction signs (e.g. in public restrooms) as a starting point. Introduction: Despite various efforts in the field of infection prevention and control regarding hand hygiene (HH) at hospitals, the level of HH compliance among healthcare workers (HCWs) is still not acceptable. In one study conducted in one of the Mashhad's hospitals in Iran, even warning signs of hand-borne infection in the elevators were more noticeable to the audience and statistics revealed that this was more effective than pamphlets. Objectives: We formulated a hypothesis about the best approach to succeed in HH educational program in hospital environment. Methods: A qualitative study identified the effects of HH education in the population. Results: Considering the history of HH, infectious diseases and Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis's practices, HH has been a challenging human behavior although it is very simple. Reasons for failing in healthrelated education, such as HH in hospitals, are categorized as: culture-related issues, inappropriate information system to achieve educational goals, non-realistic behavioral changes, inappropriate target population and inadequacy of teaching methodology. Educators of the health system believe that health-related education is only achievable by holding classes and providing brochures and guides. Perhaps it should be noted that the traditional teaching methods need to be transformed and they should be replaced by novel strategies such as using technological advances including emojis, cartoons, and games. Social behaviors hinge on a larger social system, and sustainable changes in health-related behaviors such as HH require altering behavior starting from lower age groups and supportive changes across a community as a system by using modern learning methods. Conclusion: Based on our findings, we recommend this hypothesis to be be tested in a community trial and results observed in a prospectively followed cohort subject to a community intervention. Abstract video clip: The National workong group for hand hygiene is a self-governing and voluntary association bringing together people working or related to work in the field of public health with a focus on promoting hand hygiene or training health and non-health workers in this area to pursue and fulfill common interests and goals, namely:· Support and maintain the development of the highest possible standards of hand hygiene· setting up the system of education of employees of individual professions in the area of health care in the hands· supporting scientific research activities and putting new knowledge into practice · by submitting proposals to the authorities of state authority and other organizations and institutions. Group was based in 2018, the goal is to present practice, experiences, achievements, options. In 2018, as part of the World Day of Hand Hygiene, we focused on septic conditions, where hand hygiene is a key prevention factor in order to alert the professional and lay public to the importance of hand hygiene and to influence not only these serious conditions through good hand hygiene practice. We held a press conference on this subject. Introduction: Hand hygiene (HH) is fundamental to prevent healthcare-associated infections (HAI), is promoted by WHO through the Multimodal HH Improvement Strategy (MHHIS) implementation. A useful tool to identify the promote hospitals capacity to HH is the HH Self-Assessment Framework (HHSAF), that serves as a diagnostic to identify key issues for improvement and to facilitate action plans formulation. A very useful tool to standardize training and intensify HH actions and interventions is the Train-The-Trainers (TTT) program, which contains promotional, conceptual and practical elements of HH implementation Objectives: To determine the level of HH promotion capacity of Mexican public hospitals through the HHSAF application and to monitor the TTT program impact Methods: It´s a prospective multicenter study using a mixed, quantitative and qualitative approach in 2017 and 2018. With a convenience sample of 23 public hospitals. TTT program was replicated in Nov/17 and May/18 to IPC teams members of the hospitals participating. Data were obtained through the HHSAF, that addresses 5 MHHIS elements, each with a maximum value of 100 points. The statistical analysis was descriptive and inferential, included measures of central tendency, frequencies and dispersion and the application of the Introduction: Hand hygiene is the most important way of preventing healthcare-associated infection but is poorly undertaken by health workers. A Cochrane systematic review published in 2017 demonstrated that interventions to improve adherence to hand hygiene protocols are moderately effective but impact varies between organisations and sites. Objectives: Undertake thematic synthesis to identify what contributes to a successful hand hygiene intervention Methods: We undertook thematic synthesis to analyse interpretive information and commentary contained in the Cochrane-included publications to explore how hand hygiene interventions operate their effectiveness and suggest reasons for variations in success. Results: Twenty one papers were reviewed: eleven randomised trials, one non-randomised trial and nine interrupted times series studies. In twenty papers methodological limitations were perceived to affect ability of the intervention to exert its effects. The Hawthorne effect arising when hand hygiene is documented manually was the most important methodological challenge, followed by other sources of bias. In eleven papers need for the intervention to align with local context was perceived to be important. In eleven papers need for organisational support was perceived to be important. Conclusion: Thematic synthesis identified factors likely to affect the uptake of hand hygiene interventions and suggested new directions for research. More accurate and detailed reporting of contextual information in epidemiological studies could help explain how hand hygiene interventions operate in specific settings and help to identify messages to inform sustainability and transferability. Much could be learnt from the emerging disciplines of implementation science and quality improvement. Combining traditional systematic reviews with thematic synthesis maximised understanding of how hand hygiene interventions operate. This approach could improve understanding of how other infection prevention interventions exert their effects. Introduction: Hand hygiene (HH) is the most effective practice for health associated infections (HAI's) prevention; however, this simple gesture is not always respected by healthcare workers (HCW's) Objectives: aimed to assess the effect of a multimodal improvement strategy on hand hygiene compliance in the Hassan II University Hospital in Fez, Morocco Methods: We conducted a before-and-after interventional study between January and June 2018, in four wards of the University Hospital; two medicine wards, a chirurgical ward and a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), direct observation was used to evaluate the effectiveness of a multimodal improvement strategy on the compliance of HH according to the "My 5 Moments of Hand Hygiene" defined by the World Health Organization (WHO). The intervention consisted of providing alcohol-based handrub dispensers at points of care, designing educational and training sessions on HH for all HCW's, placement of general and individual reminders in the workplace and providing feedback on HH performance. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 21 for Windows (SPSS, Chicago, IL), and differences between variables were analyzed using the χ2 test Results: A total of 1837 opportunities for HH were observed, with 921 opportunities at baseline and 916 opportunities at follow-up. The overall HH compliance improved significantly from 33,3% at baseline to 49,8% at follow-up (p<.05). Compliance of nurses increased from 33,9% to 53,5% (p<.05), and compliance of physicians improved from 30,3% to 50% (p<.05), however, compliance of nursing assistants (35,9% to 43,5%, p= 0,3) was low and did not improve significantly. When stratified by indication, compliance with HH improved for all indications after intervention (P<.05) except for "before touching patient" and "after touching patient's surroundings" Conclusion: The implementation of a multimodal improvement strategy has significantly improved the HH compliance of HCW's in the Hassan II University Hospital Introduction: Central-Line associated Blood Stream Infection (CLABSI) is the main quality indicator for pediatric hospitals, especially in neonatal units, and Hand Hygiene (HH) is the primary prevention measure for Health Careassociated Infections (HCAI), but guaranteeing its implementation in the various assistance situations, has been a great challenge. Analyzes of costs of are still little practiced by infection control teams, but their reduction can make investment in prevention possible. Objectives: Analyze the impact of the improvement in the quality of the alcohol-based handrub in CLABSI desinties in three Intensive Care Units of a pediatric hospital and to calculate the possible savings costs that this prevention may bring. Methods: The densities of IPCS were compared in the three ICUs: Cardiac, Pediatric and Neonatal. After the post-implantation (2016-2018) of better quality alcoholic solution in pediatric reference hospital. The cost of the IPCS was composed by the analysis of the number of extra days of hospitalization multiplied by the average cost / day of the patient in each ICU. Results: Comparing the period before and after implantation of the new alcohol-based handrub we observed a reduction in the densities of CLABSI: 57.2% Cardiac ICU, 47.7% Pediatric ICU and 43.5% Neonatal ICU. The alcohol-based handrub consumption showed an average increase of 10% when compared with the pre-implantation and post-implantation period. The mean cost of CLABSI in these ICUs ranged from US $ 2500 to US $ 9000.00 and the average number of extra days of hospitalization was 10.4 days. Although there are other factors that interfere with the occurrence of IPCS, as a technique for insertion and manipulation of the central catheters, we observed that with the improvement of alcohol-based handrub quality, there was better adhesion to HH in these units and it was associatedwith the reduction in CLABSI desinties. Cost analysis and its preventive potential should also be considered and may helpin the allocation of resources that are already scarce in the health area, for the incorporation of better products and medical-hospital materials. Conclusion: According to our results, the consumption/distribution of ABHR should not be considered as an indicator for HH compliance. It reflects the distribution of ABHR in a healthcare facility and should be interpreted according to the circumstances and the stage at which the HH promotion strategy is. Introduction: Observation of healthcare workers is considered the golden standard to evaluate hand hygiene compliance (HHC). However, HHC can be threefold higher in eyesight of an auditor. Another indicator can be the consumption of alcohol based hand rub (ABHR). Objectives: The goal of this study was to get more insight in the hand hygiene performance in different hospitals and countries by using the ABHR indicator. Methods: Nine hospitals were asked to collect data on ABHR usage and patient days. The number of disinfection moments performed by patient day was calculated by dividing the volume of ABHR per patient days by the volume of ABHR per disinfection moment (approximately 2.5 ml). Results: ABHR consumption data was collected over a period of time of at least 6 months, in 3 university hospitals (12 wards) and 3 general hospitals (12 wards). Three hospitals were not able to deliver data. The median number of disinfection moments per patient day was 10, with a range of 4 to 20. The median number of disinfection moments per day was significantly higher in university hospitals (13) than in general hospitals, 6 (p<0.001). The median amount of disinfection moments per patient day differed per medical specialty, however not significantly (cardiology and internal medicine 6; orthopaedics 10; surgery and urology 11; pulmonary diseases 13 and geriatrics 14). Conclusion: This study showed that the majority of the hospitals (6) were able to collect consumption data of ABHR and gain objective information about HH performance. Large differences in ABHR use and number of disinfection moments between hospitals were found, with a significant difference between university and general hospitals. Objectives: To demonstrate that HHr compared to HHC rates is a better index of resistance to changes in HH conducts and thus a better marker of the efficacy of HHBs implementations, using evidence from real-life implementation of HHBs in Mexico. Methods: We conducted a 3-year follow-up in three medical facilities in which HHBs were implemented. Monthly direct observation measurements were carried out by trained personal according to WHO's HH moments and health personnel. HH actions were registered as HR with alcohol solution, HW, omission and inappropriate use of gloves. The HHr was calculated as well as HHC rates during follow-up. Results: During the first 12 months of follow-up we observed a significant increase in HHC with steady increases from baseline HHC between 10-20% to rates ranging 45-55% (R 2 =0.6579) with an average HHr of 1.8. The second period of assessment from months 12-24 saw a decrease in the rate of HHC increases from 45-55% to 55-65% (R 2 =0.1099, an 18% increase); in contrast, the HHr had an average of 3.5 actions of HR per HW actions, representing a 94% increase from the previous period. Finally, during the third year HHC rates remained steady, oscillating between 55-70% in all facilities (R 2 =0.0034); nevertheless, we observed a steady increase in the HHr (R 2 =0.5538) with an average of 4.5 HR per HW actions, representing a 28.6% increase. When assessed by personnel category, nurse personal had steadier increases in HHC rates but not HHr (p<0.001), indicating higher resistance to change compared to physicians and in-training personnel. We observed no direct relationship between HHC rates and the HHr in any of the evaluated facilities. Conclusion: HHBs for the implementation of the multimodal strategy of WHO to increase HHC has the potential to offer strategic recommendations per service, personnel category and HH moment using the HHr as an indicative of resistance to change instead of HHC rates. Introduction: A national hand hygiene programme (HHNZ) across all publicly-funded hospitals started in 2011. Public reporting of performance started in July 2012. HHNZ provided coordination, communication expertise, clinical leadership and auditor training. In February 2016 it was felt that the necessary structure was in place for HHNZ to be self-sustaining and funding was reduced. Three years later we reflect on the outcome of this decision. Objectives: We reflect on the essential requirements to sustain a successful national hand hygiene programme. Methods: Qualitative information was gathered from webinars held with hand hygiene coordinators in 2017, follow-up interviews with individual hand hygiene coordinators in late 2017-2018, feedback at a national workshop in 2018, discussions at regional meetings, and through discussion with hand hygiene coordinators unable to sustain nationally agreed auditing requirements. This allowed the key challenges to sustaining a successful programme at a local level to be identified. Results: The success of the regional networks was variable. Outside of the main centres the geographical distance between some hospitals was an impediment to participating in regional networks. As a result the support for training of auditors by the regional network was limited. Equally, there were limited auditor training opportunities throughout the year and the demand exceeded the capacity for auditor training. For smaller hospitals, if key staff left, they often struggled to maintain the programme. Without national coordination, oversight of gold auditors was not optimal; annual validation was not always undertaken, nor did newly trained gold auditors remain active auditors suggesting that the selection of auditors may not be optimal. Public reporting and national leadership for activities such as World Hand Hygiene Day and Patient Safety Week were seen as key drivers for changing behaviour. The key elements required to support the HHNZ programme were identified. These include a nationally-led process to support the training of gold auditor trainers and of gold auditors and also to ensure annual validation by gold auditors. Regular updates, either via online meetings or face-to-face workshops, are necessary to ensure hand hygiene remains a priority regardless of staff turnover. Introduction: Hand hygiene (HH) is the primary measure to reduce infections. Improving HH compliance and implementing sustainable interventions constitute major challenges in healthcare. Objectives: To provide an overview of a successful HH program that improved HH compliance for healthcare workers (HCW) and increased HH awareness in community. Methods: Beginning in 2016, new multimodal strategies for HH improvement based on the World Health Organization (WHO) initiatives were implemented. These included adopting the WHO HH surveillance tool, introducing interactive HH training tools, developing goals for compliance, using visual HH reminders, ensuring leadership support, providing performance feedback, rewarding compliant HCWs, conducting massive HH awareness campaigns and introducing mobile app technology for direct observations in all units. Hospital-wide HH observations were collected and analyzed. Patient feedback on HCWs' HH practices was obtained through Press Ganey surveys. Z-test was used to compare the percentage change and a p-value less than 0.05 was considered significant. Community HH activities included booths in the facility, visits to schools, universities and parks. In May 2018, an attempt to achieve Guinness World Record (GWR) for the largest HH lesson was made. In May 2019, the campaign was concluded by forming a large human image of a hand. Results: The overall HH rate increased from 76% in 2015 to 87% in 2018 (14.5% increase, p-value<0.05) and has been maintained above that level till date. HH compliance increased by 24% for both doctors and nurses, 32% for technicians and 39% for other HCWs. Patient satisfaction with HCW's HH practice increased from 75% in 2015 to 89% in 2018 (19% increase, p-value<0.05). Community campaigns covered 6,300 individuals, achieved GWR with 714 participants and included 300 persons forming the largest human image of a clean hand in Saudi Arabia. Conclusion: Multimodal innovative approaches to HH measurement, monitoring and education have been successful in improving HH compliance rates, maximizing community coverage and resulting in sustained improvement. Introduction: Nosocomial infections are the most frequent adverse events in healthcare worldwide, with limited available evidence suggesting highest burden in resource-limited settings. Recent epidemics emphasize the disastrous impact that spread of infectious agents within healthcare facilities can have, accentuating the need for improvement of infection control practices. Hand hygiene (HH) measures are considered to be the most effective tool to prevent nosocomial infections. However, HH knowledge and compliance are low, especially in vulnerable settings such as Guinea. Objectives: To assess knowledge and compliance with HH, improve HH and strengthen hospital performance by incorporating the WHO HH Strategy including the local production of alcohol-based handrub (ABHR). Methods: All currently contracted healthcare workers in the Faranah Regional Hospital (HRF) were invited to participate. A baseline assessment of HH knowledge, perception and compliance was performed 12 months before the intervention. The tailored intervention consisted of a training adapted to the needs identified in the baseline assessment and the reintroduction of local production of ABHR. A first follow-up assessment was conducted directly after the intervention, with a second planned at the six month interval. Effectiveness of the implementation was assessed via before-and-after comparison. Results: The survey included a vast majority of all health care workers. Baseline knowledge and compliance were low (52.4%; 23.4%, respectively), but showed a significant increase (75.6%; 71.3%; respectively) upon follow-up. The reintroduction of ABHR production resulted in a four-fold increase of monthly hospital consumption. The WHO HH Strategy was rated to be effective in perception surveys throughout. Conclusion: This study demonstrated that the WHO HH strategy is an adaptable and effective method to improve HH knowledge and compliance in the resource-limited setting of HRF. Local production is a feasible method for providing self-sufficient supply of ABHR to regional hospitals such as HRF. Participatory approaches, such as hygiene committee ownership of regular trainings and project-specific tasks, enhance prospects of sustainability. Introduction: The hospital has enrolled in an international accreditation system for quality and patient safety. To date no HH compliance data have been published in Romania. Objectives: We describe our HH improvement programme and compliance trends between 2013-2018. Methods: Between 2013 and 2016, we developed checklists for the quality audits, including a programme for HH. In 2017, HH compliance data were collected regularly based on the WHO HH observation form by trained practitioners. Alcohol based hand rub (ABHR) was introduced at the point of care at the start of the HH programme and the number of ABHR dispensers has increased progressively. In 2018, the Ministry of Health pledged to join the WHO Clean Care is Safer Care to promote best HH practices in the country. The hospital registered for the WHO Save Lives: Clean Your Hands campaign and has applied for the Hand Hygiene Excellence Award (HHEA). Results: The Joint Commission International (JCI) accredited the hospital in 2014 and 2017. Reducing the risk of healthcare-associated infections through hand hygiene is one of the six mandatory International Patient Safety Goals of JCI. A total of 400 HH opportunities were observed in 2013, while a three-fold increase was recorded in 2018 (1500). We developed educational materials and HH courses for healthcare workers. Audit sessions showed increased compliance in 2014 (90%), the year of an international accreditation, and lower rates in the following years. At the introduction of WHO observation form, in 2017, HH compliance averaged 74%, peaking at 87.5% before a re-accreditation visit. The highest compliance rate (95%) was achieved in 2018, at the time of the HHEA experts visit. ABHR has increased to more than 40L/1000 pt-days. The programme at our hospital has extended throughout the entire network (hospitals and outpatient). Conclusion: The international accreditation process and the HHEA enrollment have been instrumental in improving HH compliance, but sustainability is a continuous challenge. Continuous initiatives and leadership commitment are significant. Methods: We conducted a before and after study from January to March with a pre and post-intervention period of 2 weeks. The intervention was an adaptation of the WHO MHHSI to the local requirements. It consisted of introducing a locally manufactured alcohol-based handrub (ABHR), designing an educational program for health care workers (HCW), providing monitoring and feedback and posting reminders at workplaces. We evaluated HCW knowledge and perceptions; ABHR access; HH 'WHO 5 moments' and prerequisite compliances and ABHR consumption. Results: HCW knowledge increased with an average score of 61% before and 83.5% after the educational program. Even if HCW have a good understanding of HH theoretical prerequisites (average mark of 82%), only 44% apply it correctly after our intervention. HH compliance increased from 18% before to 35% after our intervention (p<0.0018). In March 89% of HCW said they had better access to ABHR due to 30% reduction in price for patients and a monthly free endowment of 100mL per HCW. ABHR consumption enhanced from 0.95L/month to 6L/month. Conclusion: Setting up WHO's MHHSI promotion campaign allowed us to make HCW aware of HH, to increase ABHR's provision in the ICU, and also their compliance to HH.However we need to continue to promote HH and extend this project to the entire hospital. To maintain and pursue this project, we must introduce an institutional safety climate with regular teaching courses and audits throughout the hospital. Introduction: The WHO guide lines 2017 posed question, how significant is the problem of infection s in the health care across the world and suggested that the problem is huge, and estimated that about 1.4 million cases of hospital acquired infections among others surgical site infections and said it was likely to be low due to lack of proper surveillance. Most cases these infections are attributed to poor hand hygiene among other causes. Hand hygiene compliance is still a challenge in Kabale Regional Referral Hospital, with 24% compliance rates in 2016 to 2018. METHOD: Introduction of quality improvement project on hand hygiene compliance by staff and students which identified the following tested changes at various service delivery points. Training of the appointed staffs on how to manufacture locally Alcohol Based Hand Rub (ABHR), Installation of the ABHR Dispensers, monthly continuous medical educations, monthly monitoring of hand hygiene compliance using the World Health Organization (WHO) standard checklist and Monthly feedback to the various wards. RESULTS: Proper hand hygiene compliance among staff and students has resulted in reduced levels of hospital acquired infections and reduced risks of contracting contagious infections in wards with 50% improvement in 2019. DISCUSION: Hand hygiene compliance is the first and easiest way of addressing the risks of contracting contagious infections reduction on the levels of cross infections and also has reduction on antimicrobial resistance in Kabale Regional Referral Hospital. Introduction: Finding new ways to increase compliance with hand hygiene (HH) and avoid campaign fatigue is central to sustain improvement. Implementation of interventions that target healthcare worker behavior change is challenging. As the largest patient safety initiative in the world, the global HH promotion campaign SAVE LIVES: Clean Your Hands has been a leader in creative approaches to keeping a worldwide audience engaged. Objectives: To create a song for promoting HH worldwide and to implement an assessment approach to compare several HH campaign communication tools. Methods: This year, in honor of World HH Day on May 5th, the WHO Collaborating Center on Patient Safety at the University of Geneva Hospitals composed an original song incorporating key messages and slogans defined by WHO. We produced a video and shared it on YouTube with our contacts around the world. We studied the diffusion of the video on several social media and compared it to prior initiatives and tools we developed in the past. Results: The video for "It's in Your Hands" was posted online on 24 April 2019, and has been seen over 28,000 times (28,342 as of 25 May; www.tinyurl.com/ItsInYourHands). Numerous countries have already requested the translations; and a hospital team in Vietnam even translated and recorded the song and made a music video in Vietnamese. Currently, we are working on a promotion strategy and on making subtitles in different languages so that people around the world can adapt the message to fit their own social context. Data will be presented to highlight the spread of the song, as a marker of the HH campaign endorsement, and compared to other indicators of the SAVE LIVES: Clean Your Hands campaign spread at 1, 2, 3, 4 months, and include predictions at 6, 12, 18 and 24 months. Comparisons will be made between the spread of the song "It's in Your Hands" launched in 2019 and the HH dance (> 0.5 million view on YouTube; launched on the first World HH Day, 5 May 2009). Conclusion: Incorporating innovative tools such as songs can be an effective way to help engage healthcare workers and institutions. A possible next step would be to quantify the impact that such an engagement. Methods: A quasi experimental study was conducted in 2 intervention and 1 control hospitals of Bangladesh. Data were collected at baseline, endline and the consecutive weeks following implementation of each MMI component (system change, education and training, visual reminder, feedback/incentive) in sequence. Doctors and nurses were directly observed practicing HH in the FPMs: (1) before touching a patient, (2) before aseptic procedure, (3) after risk of fluid exposure, (4) after touching a patient and (5) Introduction: Although misinformation has always existed, the scope and speed at which fake news can reach even the most remote corners of the globe is a modern phenomenon. In the field of infection prevention and control (IPC), we like to believe that our dedication to the field and the process of conducting science protects us from the ravages of 'bad buzz' and fake news. This misconception leads medical professionals to underestimate the negative effects of misinformation on public health. Objectives: To create a protocol for evaluating and categorizing misinformation. Methods: We conducted a literature search of the role of fake news in general and in IPC, and of ways that is being addressed by governments, the media, and the scientific community. We then thoroughly analyse different instances of bad buzz in IPC that affected us directly, and began developing a standardized protocol of systematically evaluating analysing, reporting, and reacting to misinformation. Results: The resulting protocol has two parts, one that helps readers analyse all types of media around a certain piece of misinformation and includes steps to analyse the hypotheses put forward, assertions made, implied associations, causality, clinical relevance, etc. in a systematic way. The second part is a reporting template that would help homogenize the resulting analyses in a form that could be compiled and organized easily, even if written by different people. Multiple examples will be given, ranging from misinformation to intentional fake news, and their analysis presented. Conclusion: We would like to validate this protocol and make it an implementable tool for IPC researchers to use when trying to combat the detrimental effects of bad buzz and fake news. In the future, it would be desirable to create an online repository for this information, where IPC researchers from all over the world could upload their work and have it be organized by subject. We believe that this would greatly strengthen the response to disinformation and help to reduce the potential damage to patients. staff. So, we tested a few interventions -what will better motivate them to change this risky behavior. Methods: a) Periodic evaluation meetings, usually relying on professional reprimands (still a tactique in former soviet countries). b) Using a "paper requests" with inserted nice reminder about hand washing at the end (for every "visiting" staff in unit. c) 15th October action "a flower for clean hands". Results: Qualitative measurement by provider: -Colleagues from "visiting" scaled the interventions they considered more willing to be subjected -the best was "paper requests" & the action "a flower for clean hands", and worst -unpleasant meetings. Introduction: Despite several guidelines that recommend measures to prevent surgical site infections (SSIs) [1] , there is a high prevalence in abdominal surgery [2] . Also, compliance with these measures is often insufficient [3] . At the same time, there exist several implementation interventions to promote compliance with preventive measures [4] . Objectives: The aim of this systematic review is to identify implementation interventions that are used in the field of abdominal surgery to prevent SSIs, and determine associations between implementation interventions and reductions in SSI-rates. Methods: Literature was searched in April 2018. Implementation interventions were classified using the Cochrane Review Group Effective Practice and Organisation of Care's "EPOC Taxonomy" [3] . In addition, an effectiveness analysis was conducted on the association between number of implementation strategies and reduction of SSIrates. Results: Forty studies were included. Implementation strategies used most frequently were audit and feedback (80% of the studies), organisational culture (70%), monitoring the performance of healthcare delivery (65%), reminders (53%), and educational meetings (45%). Twenty-nine studies used a multimodal strategy with ≥3 implementation interventions. There was a tendency for strategies with 3-5 strategies to be most effective in reducing SSI rates, however starting from a comparably high baseline level. Introduction: The "patient zone" concept was introduced in 2007 to guide infection prevention and control (IPC) efforts and to anchor indications for hand hygiene. Objectives: The present study aims to understand how the patient zone is interpreted and applied by healthcare providers (HCP). Methods: Ten nurses and physicians allocated 30 items from the healthcare environment to "inside" or "outside" the patient zone with simultaneous verbal think-aloud. Allocations were subsequently compared with those of two IPC-experts. Utterances from the think-aloud process were included in a content analysis to understand HCPs' interpretations of the patient zone. Results: A total of 68% of item allocations were consistent with expert consensus and seven out of thirty items achieved a 100% agreement among participants. Our content analysis revealed ambiguity and variation in participants' interpretations of the patient zone and its practical implications. Participants often interpreted that items with direct patient contact should be allocated to "inside" the patient zone or they interpreted the zone as a physical perimeter, where all objects inside, i.e. a patient room, were allocated to "inside" the patient zone. Furthermore, participants often deduced allocation based on the observed need to disinfect hands and objects. Furthermore, participants interpreted that an item's allocation could change depending on the context of the item's use. Conclusion: Variation in HCPs' interpretations of the patient zone led to low agreement with expert consensus and discrepancies among participants. HCPs' interpretations were based on simplifying concepts, such as equating the patient zone to a physical perimeter or to items with patient contact, and thus failed to accurately capture the concept's subtleties. Our results provide first insights into how the patient zone is interpreted and applied by HCPs. Our findings suggest that a revised concept and didactic strategies may be promising approaches to improve understanding and application of the patient zone. Objectives: To increase awareness on the importance of SP and to identify knowledge gaps, a questionnaire was addressed to HCW involved in patient care. Methods: A 15-item survey with single and multiple-choice questions was distributed by e-mail. Two reminders were sent out to enhance participation. Depending on the importance of the respective question, one to three points were awarded for each correct answer (3 points = highly important). HCW were also asked to rate their overall competence in SP on a scale from 1 to 4 (1 = feeling overburdened, 4 = competent). After completion, the correct answers along with the total score (max. 35 points) and a feedback about the overall performance were automatically displayed. Incidence rate, utilization ratio, benchmarking, and statistical analysis were carried out using the NHSN recommendations. NPSIP was introduced in January 2018 using three steps strategy; 1) identify indicator based on NHSN benchmark, 2) assess risk factors using Society Healthcare Epidemiology of America/Infectious Diseases society of America (SHEA/IDSA) basic practice recommendations, and 3) perform gap analysis strategy for intervention. Results: CLABSI incidence rate is between 50th-75th percentile benchmarking to NHSN despite of higher in utilization ratio. CAUTI incidence rate is between 25th-50th percentile benchmarking to NHSN with lower in utilization ratio . VAP incidence rate was declined from 5.0-to 3.19/1000 ventilated days but still above 90th percentile with same in utilization ratio 0.28. The CS-SSI incidence rate is lower than the NHSN using re-admission surveillance method. Conclusion: KFMC-Taif successfully achieving the NHSN, USA benchmark using the three strategy method. Not applicable. Results: Out of 2465 hospitalized patients, 135(5.5%) were diagnosed with HAI. The rate if HAI was 4.5%, 5.1% and 6.9% in 2016, 2017 and 2018 respectively. The medical department had the highest rate of HAI (24.4%) followed by surgical (21.5%) and the intensive care unit (15.9%). The most common HAI was pneumonia (37.8%), followed by bloodstream infection (BSI) (19.3%) and surgical site infection (SSI) (10.4%). The prevalence of hospital acquired pneumonia (HAP) and BSI were found reducing from 2016 to 2018. The rate of HAP reduced from 40% to 35.6% in 2016 and 2018 respectively; BSI decreases from 31.4% in 2016 and 10.9 % in 2018. HAI was higher in males (57.8%), prolonged hospitalization (65.2%) and those who had intravenous lines (74.8%). Pseudomonas Aeruginosa-non multidrug resistant (12.6%) was the most common pathogen followed by extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) producing Klebsiella pneumonia (8.9%). Conclusion: The study found the prevalence of HAI in our hospital is similar to previous studies across Asia, especially due to HAP, BSI and SSI. Interventions focusing on reduction of these HAIs in healthcare facilities should be prioritised to ensure patient safety while receiving care in acute care hopsitals. Introduction: Surveillance of HAI and antimicrobial use is an essential part of infection prevention and antimicrobial stewardship. It drives action by planning and implementing more effective, evidence based policies, surveillance and strategies Objectives: Prepare hospital teams for the best knowledge of case definition for HAI and prepare for setting up and strengthening the Infection Prevention and Control programs. Methods: The PPS will follow the standardized protocol and methodology devised by ECDC. The selection of hospitals in Albania, at least one general hospital will be enrolled. Hospital participation is voluntary. Results: The consultant in close cooperation with the WHO Local Offices in Albania and a representative of the Institute of Public Health identified a national coordinator and a coordination center that will managed the PPS rollout in Albania. The national coordinator in cooperation with the consultant identified the trainees at the national level and at the national level. Coordinator assisted in providing training. Two hospitals, Tirana University Hospital Center and the Durres Regional Hospital were selected. The national coordinator in cooperation with the coordinators of each hospital appointed the team of the hospital. The Durres hospital team consisted of 6 people, 3 physicians and 3 nurses. The Tirana hospital team consisted of 6 physicians and 5 nurses, in total 11 persons. During the training, people learned to look at participating hospitals: the prevalence of HAI and antimicrobial use in acute care; describes patients, invasive procedures, infections (sites, microorganisms including antimicrobial resistance markers) and the described antimicrobials. Much important in training was the standardization of HAI definition of cases and the recognition of participants with these definitions. The information in this survey will help create policies and procedures to reduce HAIs, to improve methods to collect data on HAIs, support appropriate use of antimicrobial drugs and strength the implementation of Infection Prevention and Control programs at national and local levels. The results obtained with this survey will assist national and local IPC teams to identify series of priorities for the prevention of HAIs and antimicrobial resistance in the selected hospitals. The prevalence of patients with at least one HAI and the overall prevalence of HAI were 6.3% and 7.5% in 1998, 3.1% and 3.5% in 2005, 4.9% and 5.3% in 2010, and 4.3% and 4.6% in 2017. While three PPSs were conducted in autumn season, the second survey was conducted in May, and the lowest prevalence was recorded in this study, which pointing to the possible seasonal variation of HAI. The most frequent were surgical site infections (SSI) in first study (34.1% of all HAIs), and urinary tract infections (UTI) in the other three surveys (29.0%, 25.9% and 21.3%). After first study, first national HAI guidelines were prepared and started to implement in the practice. Validity survey which was organized along with 4 th PPS, showed that sensitivity of HAI detection was 85.1% and specificity 99.1%. Introduction: Healthcare-associated infections are a major public health problem, threatening the safety and well-being of patients. In Burkina Faso, HAI are common in health care facilities but their epidemiology is poorly described namely in regional hospitals. Objectives: to perform a situational analysis through an epidemiological description in country's regional hospitals Methods: We conducted in September 2018, a cross-sectional survey in three regional hospitals. All eligible inpatients admitted for at least 48 hours on the day of the survey were included. HAI was diagnosed based on CDC Atlanta's definition. The information was collected by physicians using the paper CRF and the patients' folder served as sources of information. Bacteriological samples were taken for the isolation of the germ and the sensitivity testing if needed. Data were analyzed with STATA 13 and R software. Univariate analyzes and a multi-varied logistic regression were performed to determine associated factors. Introduction: Healthcare Associated Infections (HAIs) is a global public health scourge for which there is little reliable data available in Africa. The prevalence survey is currently the most accessible and realistic method in Africa, to have quantified data on the impact and put in place appropriate preventive measures. Objectives: The objectives were to have quantified estimates of the prevalence rates of the main HAIs, the main bacteria responsible and resistance levels, but also to evaluate the practices in the antibiotics prescription. Methods: The 2017 CDC and ECDC protocols were used as benchmarks and were adapted to the local context by a local technical working group, supported by experts from WHO and CDC. Ten hospitals were selected on the basis of criteria of representativeness, but also of functionality. Results: Overall prevalence: 6%, although the collection of suspected cases by referring physicians gives 23%. Predominance of surgical site infections (52%) and low laboratory input with only 28% of cases where a sample for bacteriological diagnostic purposes was performed. Bacteriological aspects marked by the multi-resistance, even if the number of strains was low (11 strains of Klebsiella pneumoniae of which 20% resistant to carbapenems). Antibiotic patients on the day of the survey or the day before: 65% of patients included, of whom 22% had no documented infection or substantiation, thirdgeneration cephalosporins being the most prescribed class. The 48th / 72nd hour assessments were not documented in 84% of cases and the justification for continued treatment beyond the first week was not documented in 75% of cases. Surgical antibiotic prophylaxis exceeded 24 hours in 65% of cases. Conclusion: The prevalence is broadly comparable to previous studies, with rates underestimated, due to lack of information in patient records. The innovation of collecting the suspected cases by the treating physicians has allowed getting a clearer idea, and better reflecting the reality of the scourge in the African context, hence the importance of involving these staff in the survey, but also improving the quality of patient records. The study also confirmed the predominance of infections in surgery, the low contribution of bacteriological diagnosis, as well as the misuse of antibiotics and the tendency towards bacterial multiresistance, even with respect to carbapenems. Introduction: The prevalence of HCAIs is arguably the most plausible indicator to measure effectiveness of health facility Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) programs. However, HCAI burden remains largely unknown in Uganda because no national system is in place for comprehensive and routine investigation. Objectives: To establish HCAI surveillance systems in Public hospitals in Uganda. Methods: In partnership with Ministry of Health a project was initiated to establish HCAI surveillance systems at select health care facilities. We reactivated and trained IPC committees at 8 regional referral hospitals (RRHs) to support HCAI investigation and drive necessary improvements. In April 2018, the first national HCAI Point prevalence survey (PPS) was conducted in 14 RRHs. Assessments were conducted using a World Health Organisation (WHO) 2002 PPS tool. Survey teams were pre-trained and site assessments conducted for 1 day per HCF for admitted patients. HCAIs were classified as 1. Systemic defined as presence of two or more of the following: Heart Rate > 90 beats/min, Fever >38°C, Hypothermia < 36°C, hypotension < 90/60 mmHg, altered mental status, tachypnea > 25 breaths/min at least 48 hours after admission 2. Surgical Site Infections (SSIs); defined as contaminated, dirty or infected wounds for a surgery performed during the current hospitalization. Survey results including prescription findings were summarized using descriptive statistics and disseminated at facility and national level to inform improvement. IPC Committees used results to design and implement improvements at respective health facilities. Results: In the 14 RRHs,1100 patients were included in the survey. Mean prevalence (range) of HCAIs was 14% (6% -24%). SSIs occurred most frequently at 44% then line related infections 13%, pneumonia 6%, blood stream infections 5%, urinary tract infections 2%. Microbiology investigation was not conducted. Most of the HCAIs (38%) were treated with a third or fourth generation cephalosporin; mostly intravenous ceftriaxone. Conclusion: The project demonstrates feasibility of setting up HAI surveillance systems in a low-income country. We recommend integrating HCAI surveillance indicators into national monitoring and evaluation frameworks and to develop linkages with microbiology testing. Introduction: Healthcare associated infections in limited resources countries is a major patient safety problem, it is essential to understand the magnitude of the problem and address it. Objectives: To assess the rate of health care associated infection and pathogen associated with it. Methods: Active surveillance was carried for all inpatient who had been in the hospital for at least 48 hours, trained nurses were assigned for data collection, blood, urine and wound swabs were collected to determine the causative microorganism. Sample size was 504, calculated using the equation of z2 p q/d2. Conclusion: The study reveals that many patients with ERCP associated BSI did not receive recommended antibiotic prophylaxis. This study indicates the need to improve prophylaxis through a standardized preprinted order for antibiotic prophylaxis that was developed, along with a high risk patient evaluation tool to evaluate patient's risk factors prior to ERCP. These post-preventative measures implemented need to be evaluated for the outcome. visitors were required to wear face masks when accessing HDU as directed by the Infection Control (IC) team. All exposed patients received prophylactic oseltamivir. Exposure management for HCWs was also initiated. Exposed HCWs were referred to Employee Health Clinic (EHC) for medical assessment and work restriction when indicated. Results: A total of 11 patients out of the 100 HD enlisted patients (11%) were confirmed to have Influenza A infection during the outbreak period. 10 out of the 11 patients were hospitalized (91%) and all patients recovered. 5 patients gave a positive history of flu vaccination. The flu vaccination uptake rate for the 100 patients was 66%. One patient developed influenza despite prophylactic oseltamivir. Moreover, 6 of the 8 exposed nurses developed flu like illnesses, but none were tested. None of them had received vaccination and all were restricted from work until cleared by EHC. Introduction: From June-October 2018, the Tshwane Academic Microbiology lab cultured 38 Achromobacter dentrificans patient isolates (baseline was 1-2 isolates per month) from the Steve Biko Academic Hospital (SBAH). The majority of the isolates were cultured from blood (n=23). Objectives: To determine the source of the Achromobacter dentrificans outbreak Methods: A line list was developed for each case. Each case had an interview conducted with the attending clinician, the patient and the person who collected the lab specimens. A common feature was that for all procedures, the antiseptic used was chlorhexidine and water solution prepared at the hospital pharmacy. The chlorhexidine and water solutions from various wards were collected for investigations. The pharmacy was visited and swabs were taken from empty bottles and caps of the bottles used for chlorhexidine and water solutions, water used for the preparation, the stock chlorhexidine solution, the solution colourant, utensils used in the preparation, the dispenser nozzle used to dispense the solution into the bottles and the final product. The chlorhexidine and water solutions as well as the swabs were plated on to 5% blood agar, chocolate agar and MacConkey agar and incubated at 35-37 o C for 48 hours. Final identification and antimicrobial susceptibilities (AST) of colonies was done using Vitek 2 (Biomerieux, France). REP-PCR was performed to determine molecular relatedness of the isolates. Results: Growth of Achromobacter dentrificans was noted from all chlorhexidine and water solutions tested from the wards as well as the dispenser nozzle from the pharmacy. According to REP-PCR, two strains of Achromobacter dentrificans were identified from the pharmacy. Both these strains were identified in patient samples. The majority of patients were not clinically septic. Results: In total, HALT survey covered 175 LTCFs with 6762 residents and RAI 1369 LTCFs with 21 943 residents. The proportion of residents over 85 years of age, females and usage of urinary catheter did not differ between the two surveillance systems. In HALT and RAI, 5% and 6% of the residents received at least one antimicrobial (other than methenamine) and the proportion of residents using methenamine was 2% and 3%, respectively. In HALT the most common infection type was UTI. UTI prevalence was higher in RAI than in HALT (5% vs. 1%). Conclusion: Although the data collection methods differed, the two surveillance systems provided rather similar estimates for AMU. AMU and UTI prevalences were lower than in the previous study which was also based on RAI data. RAI-LTC could be used as an alternative tool for data collection on AMU and HAI in LTCFs. However, adding or implementing case definitions/or implementing case definitions for HAIs would improve the data. Results: Among residents, sixteen cases were identified with three close contact cases. Moreover, one case engendered two contact cases in healthcare workers. A treatment was given to the sixteen cases, the three close contacts among residents and the two healthcare workers. We describe the special situation of a NH with seventy-two residents on four floors and two healthcare workers teams (floors 1-2 and floors 3-4). In December 2018, a case of Norwegian scabies in a hospital was confirmed. The case and two healthcare workers as secondary cases were diagnosed and treated accurately. All the residents and healthcare workers of the same floor (second floor) received a treatment. In January 2019, three residents (to the first and second floor) were diagnosed with Norwegian scabies; none contact case was identified. Unfortunately, the treatment of the forty-four contact residents was not concomitant (time differential from 1 to 5 days due to the availability of drugs). In March 2019, four cases were diagnosed (first and third floor), without reported contact cases. The treatment was once again given to all the forty-four contact residents and to all the healthcare workers of the institution. Within three months, all residents and healthcare workers had to take the treatment at least two times, which represents more than 150 treated people. Introduction: Infection control is becoming more and more important in long-term care facilities (LTCF) like nursing homes and residential homes. This is not only due to the demographic development and the associated changes in the health situation of the population, but also because changes in hospital care with earlier discharge of patients, increasingly complex treatments as well as the emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria outside of hospitals lead to higher demands on infection control in these facilities. The objective of this study is to assess environmental and behavioral risk factors associated with neonatal sepsis in maternal and post natal wards Methods: Two public healthcare facilities (HCF) in Kampala, Uganda with contrasting differences in water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) conditions and infrastructure were purposively selected. They were classified as WASH poor and WASH good HCF. A qualitative approach was adopted to understand what patients, caregivers and health care staff come into daily contact with that may lead to neonatal exposure to pathogens in the health facility environment. Structured and unstructured observation were conducted to understand who frequently come in touch with neonates and their frequency of contact with surfaces and equipment's to inform environmental sampling and exposure pathways. Structured observation was subsequently conducted using the checklist for 3 hours each in the morning, afternoon and evening for 2 weeks by trained enumerators Results: In the post natal wards, bedsheets (26%) and the walls (21%) were the most frequently touched in the WASH good HCF whilst in the WASH poor HCF, the most frequently touched were mobile phones (10%) and delivery kits (9%). In the delivery and labor ward, fetal scope (16%) and bedrail (13%) were the most frequently touched in the WASH good HCF whilst in sink faucet (7%) and bed lining (6%) were the most frequently touched in the WASH poor HCF Conclusion: This information was used to target environmental sampling to determine pathways of exposure that may have the greatest risk to neonates. Analysis of the sampling results in conjunction with the behaviors observed will be useful in planning evidence based interventions in the healthcare facilities. Results: Forty-three cases (2.1%) of Pseudomonas infections were collected among 2,061 inpatients. The sex ratio was 0.95. The mean age was 43 ± 16. Nearly half of the patients (21 cases) had HIV infection. Bacteremia and urinary tract infections were the most common with 18 cases, followed by lower respiratory tract infections (5 cases) and skin and soft tissues (4 cases). The isolated strains were Pseudomonas aeruginosa (68.8%), Pseudomonas spp (28.8%) and one strain for Pseudomonas oryzyhabitans (2.2%). Antibiotic resistance was higher for Aztreonam, piperacillin-tazobactam and fosfomycin with 19.4%, 12.9% and 9.7% respectively. One strain producing carbapenemase (3.2%) and another one resistant to colistin (3.2%) were isolated. Also, only one strain was resistant to ciprofloxacin. All strains tested were sensitive to amikacin. More than 6 out of 10 patients (61.2%) had received probabilistic antibiotic therapy. The lethality was 30.2%. Conclusion: Pseudomonas infections are common in our context and have high mortality. They pose the problem of their management with the appearance Pseudomonas to imipenem and colistin. Strategies for rational use of antibiotics must be implemented. Introduction: Healthcare-associated infections are a major public health concern. These infections are marked by an increase frequency, their gravity, not to mention the medico-legal aspect raised, as well as the economic increase generated. Results: Inadequate training and supervision, insufficient resources and poor infrastructure were found to be limiting facility cleaners from maintaining a safe and hygienic health care environment. Soapbox's participatory training package (TEACH CLEAN) was developed to address this gap, and first pre-tested in The Gambia. It has since been acknowledged by major international agencies, and applied in several countries, including Cameroon, Myanmar and the United Republic of Tanzania. Recent inclusion of indicators in global best practice and monitoring platforms has resulted in TEACH CLEAN being recognised as a ready resource. Increasing concern of the antimicrobial resistance burden and the need to improve water, sanitaion and hygiene in healthcare facilities has meant that this NGO's novel contribution is informing action to prevent HAI in maternity units and exceeding reasonable expectations that it can play a crucial influential role in global and country partner work. Conclusion: The role of NGOs in supporting global IPC initiatives is often not dependent on size of the organization but rather the timeliness of its activities and the opportunity to align with local and global partners. The Soapbox Collaborative has highlighted the neglected role of cleaners and cleaning in the prevention of HAI in maternity units in LMICs and provided a sustainable training package, accepted at global and nationla level, to improve hygiene practices which will result in an impact on HAI. Introduction: Healthcare-associated infections (HAIs) are currently a global public health problem. However, there are very few concrete and effective actions to sustainably improve the situation in African hospitals. We report here the example of the Fann hospital in Senegal where an initiative was taken in this direction Objectives: After many previous attempts to improve current IPC program in situation of lethargy, the objective was to provide the hospital with a functional IPC committee and to develop a concrete and sustainable action plan, adapted to local needs. Methods: The methodological approach was very inclusive, with the participation of all stakeholders, both technical services and the administration. The following activities were carried out with the technical and financial support of partners (WHO and CDC): -Information and awareness meeting chaired by the Hospital General Director to inform all staff -Evaluation of the PCI situation using WHO's IPCAF tool [1] , including an analysis of strengths and weaknesses, but also opportunities and threats -Inclusive and participatory development of an operational action plan based on core components recommended by WHO, and a follow-up plan on the activities to be carried out Results: A concrete and realistic operational action plan was available since July 2018, but no planned activity has been implemented so far, one year after.The hospital is waiting for potential partners to fund the activities. Conclusion: This IPC project, as many of others, stops at the withdrawal of partners, and goals were not achieved. The causes are undoubtedly numerous and intricate in the context of limited resources. In any case, at the hospital level, serious consultation between the technical services and the administration is needed, while at the national level it is time for African countries to make IPC a national priority for public health. This must result in the development of a national IPC policy validated by the authorities and implemented in concrete terms by a program equipped with the necessary means of action. The WHO-CDC Africa project to develop recommendations on minimum standards for IPC will certainly have to bring a new dimension to the fight against the scourge in the continent. Introduction: This study presents the results of a 20-years surveillance program involving the prospective follow-up of health-care workers (HCWs) in the Antwerp University Hospital exposed to blood-borne viruses (hepatitis C virus (HCV), hepatitis B virus (HBV) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)). Objectives: To evaluate the risk of transmission of blood-borne viruses to health-care workers. Methods: From 1998 through 2018, all HCWs reporting an occupational exposure (through sharp objects, bites, mucous membrane exposure or damaged skin) to blood-borne viruses were included in the surveillance. After the exposure a serum sample from the patient whose blood caused the contamination was tested for viral markers: HIV 1&2 As/Ag, HBsAg and anti-HCV. Only if one these markers was positive the HCW was also tested and a postexposure follow-up for six months was done. No postexposure follow-up was done for HBV of HCW with anti-HBs levels higher than 10 IU/ml. Postexposure prophylaxis for HIV (a co-formulation of elvitegravir, cobicistat , emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate) was offered to the HCW if the source was positive for HIV as recommended by the Belgian Superior Health Council. All HCWs with anti-HBs levels of less than 10 IU/mL were vaccinated against hepatitis B virus infection. Introduction: Safety of employees should be one of the top most concern for any organization. Accidental exposure to any pathogens carries risk of infection and is responsible for transmission of fatal diseases. Health care workers (HCWs) occupational exposure to various communicable diseases must be an area of concern for all infection preventionists. Objectives: The objectives of this study were as follows: -To reduce health care workers exposure rate to infectious/communicable diseases atleast by 60% from 6.7 to to 2.5 in next one year. -To decrease the cost of investigation incurred by the organization after an employee is exposed to infectious disease. To minimize risk of acquiring infectious diseases to the employees. -To reduce the cost of investigation incurred by the organization after an employee is exposed to the infectious diseases -To identify causes of noncompliance to institutional policies Methods: Define Measure Analyze Improve Control (DMAIC) six sigma methodology of quality Improvement was utilize. Each step were done systematically, after defining the problem, data was measured and analyzed to target the interventions. In improve phase major actions were taken and implementation of each action was done on ground and finally controls were set in the systems to ensure sustainability of the project. Results: Results showed significant reduction in the overall rate of exposure of health care workers to infectious diseases i.e. from 6.7 to 1.5 %. Particularly TB exposure decreased from 16 to 3.3, Measles from 3.6 to 2.4, Chickenpox from 10 to 3.6, CCHF from 3.8 to 0.3, Pertussis from 3.5 to 1.5 etc. Ultimately reduced the cost incurred by organization after employee exposure also decreased. Conclusion: Health care workers exposure were decreased significantly, employees safety was optimized by minimizing the risk of acquiring infectious diseases. In addition the cost incurred post exposure for post exposure prophylaxis also decreased. Residents tend to encounter a NSI the most "while handling contaminated needles" 73.8%, (P<0.018); in contrast to nurses, who were found to be exposed to a NSI more often "before using the needle" 54.6%, (P<0.001). 70.3% of the participants were vaccinated with three doses of hepatitis B vaccine. Residents experienced more exposure to blood and body fluids of a patient with Hepatitis B than nurses did (P<0.019). Out of the exposed 56 (30.2%) residents, 9 (4.9%) received post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) against hepatitis B. 55.2% of the affected individuals reported the occurrence of an accident, with more nurse compliance to the notification process (P<0.013). Conclusion: There was a high prevalence of occupational exposure among the sample population. This emphasizes the need of promoting training and education for HCWs, stressing on the importance of adherence to precautionary measures against occupational exposures. Introduction: Percutaneous injuries constitute the major health hazards among the nursing personnel. NACO has provided guidelines for prevention of 'Occupational exposure and post exposure prophylaxes. Objectives: To estimate the prevalence and assess factors related to percutaneous injuries and adherence to "Occupational exposure and post exposure prophylaxis" guidelines among nursing personnel. Methods: This descriptive study was conducted among bedside nurses working in a tertiary care hospital. The data was collected over a period of one month using a pre-validated survey proforma, questionnaire and a checklist. Descriptive and inferential statistics was used to analyze the data. Results: Seven hundred and forty seven nursing personnel were enrolled in the study. Around one fourth (26%) nurses were ever exposed to percutaneous injuries. 13.8% of the workers did not want to be evaluated. Significant differences were observed (p <0.001) in the prevalence of immunity pre-assessment(75.3%) and postassesment (81.2%). Conclusion: The data of workers obtained was insufficient; probably the accessibility of records and motivation/perception of risk could be influencing. The percentage of protected workers is lower than that recommended (>95%),so is the importance of reviewing these data in all health personnel and promoting vaccination among these workers becomes more important. The questions themselves were modelled upon and categorized according to the major factors outlined in the theory of planned behaviour put forward by Icek Ajzen and Martin Fishbein, Results: Of the major variables aforementioned, the greatest factor influencing influenza vaccine uptake pertained to normative beliefs and subjective norms i.e. the extent to which environment and peer influences motivate subject intention to engage in the target behaviour. Within the context of attitudes surrounding behavioural beliefs, some of our participants were doubtful about the efficacy and side effect profile of the vaccine. There also appears to be a broad misunderstanding among some HCWs regarding the need to take the vaccine, with a third saying that if they did contract influenza, it would not be severe enough to warrant immunization. Conclusion: In conclusion, interventions to address this issues would involve increasing social pressure on HCWs by the means of encouragement by senior staff members, roadshows, education and the display of posters and promotional material, and increased availability of vaccines in the wards. Introduction: Globalization has increased the risk of spread of highly contagious and very severe diseases, such as viral hemorrhagic fever. There is a lack of studies and guidelines how to design hospital isolation rooms for these patients and what their technical requirements should be. Objectives: The aim of this study was to create building requirements for hospital isolation rooms with anteroom to optimize hospital care for patients with these infectious diseases combined with ensuring safety for health care workers and admitted patients. Methods: We performed a literature search to find existing national and international guidelines, reports, laws and scientific articles on building requirements for hospital isolation rooms suitable and safe to take care for patients with highly infectious diseases. Additionally, we checked the references of these reports, and guidelines on level 3 and 4 biosafety laboratories. The following information was extracted: type of material of floor, wall and ceiling covering; size of the room and anteroom; requirements and design of sanitation; airflow control including prevention of in-and outdoor air contamination; requirements for an automated room decontamination device (ARDD); security measures; clinical waste handling, and observational equipment. Results: Several national and international institutions have published recommendations on building requirements. However, details of these recommendations differ considerably within and per target population. We found detailed requirements on airflow control, prevention for air contamination and clinical waste handling. Recommendations for sanitation, requirements for an ARDD, security measures and observational equipment were mentioned by several institutions but were less abundant and less detailed. Little information was given on type of material of floor, wall and ceiling covering and optimal size for the room and anteroom. Conclusion: Studies on the impact of design on safety were absent and on technical requirement were sparse. Using published national and international recommendations on isolation suites, we proposed minimum building requirements for isolation suites for patients with highly infectious diseases. The result of this study will be shown in a comprehensive overview of requirements. Objectives: The touchless functionality of a novel eMGSLS was evaluated to determine user acceptance and reductions of microbial load in an acute care medical ward. Methods: eMGSLS switches were installed as replacements of toggle switches with accompanying signage and information on use, but without active enforcement or monitoring of use. User perceptions were assessed through qualitative semi-structured stakeholder interviews. A visual analogue scale (VAS) was used to provide a score ranging from 0-10 for each of three attributes of technology acceptabilitysafety, efficiency, and overall satisfaction. Interview results were analyzed using deductive thematic analysis and scores from VASs were verified using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistical test. Semi-quantitative microbiological load testing was performed by culturing swab samples from eMGSLS and toggle light switches (TLS) to determine the presence of skin flora and hospital pathogens in standard single-bed patient rooms. Results: User interviews indicated that stakeholders generally perceived the eMGSLS as safe and efficient with an overall score of 6.81 out of 10, but a learning curve was encountered by 72% of users. Conclusion: The OR cleaning program, with pre-and postimplementation measurements for cleaning effectiveness, microbial burden on surfaces, cleaning time and disinfectant use provided an objective way to assess cleaning in the OR suite. Significant improvements were seen in all areas, following the introduction of training of staff, cleaning regimes and user-friendly cleaning equipment. These improvements allowed staff to have more time for other activities. This resulted in a high level of staff engagement, which has positive benefits in staff satisfaction and retention. Objectives: We determined the incidence of XDR-AB/1000 ICU days (d), risk factors of acquisition (RFA), and the optimal time interval to routinely perform ETD post-ICU evacuation. Methods: This is a retrospective chart review of patients (pt) admitted to ICU between January 2016-May 2018. They were divided to 3 groups(G): G1: pt who acquired XDR-AB 48 hours after admission till d-7 post-ICU discharge, G2: pt who did not (control), G3: pt who previously harbored XDR-AB before ICU admission. RFA were determined through comparing G1 and G2 through univariate and multivariate (MV) analysis. The dates where ETD was performed were plotted on a calendar and the days of the study were divided into weeks according to ETD dates. In each week post-ETD, we determined the incidence of XDR-AB acquisition/1000 ICU d. The incidence versus weeks was plotted on a graph and a trend was determined. We set hypothetical breakpoints (week) where we observed a visual increase in the incidence of acquisition. These breakpoints were included in the analysis of RFA to determine the optimal time for ETD. Results: 335 patients were included and 13% of the them acquired XDR-AB(G1). Independent RFA were: mechanical ventilation >2d(OR=4.11,P= 0.003), use of urinary catheter >5d(OR=3.72,P=0.05), wound presence (OR=3.72,P=0.05), and XDR-AB contact pressure >3d(OR=5.51,P<0.0001). As for the longitudinal variation in the incidence of XDR-AB acquisition, we observed an ascending trend(P=0.003) with a potential breakpoint at week-7 post-ETD. Patients who resided in ICU after week-7 had a higher chance of acquiring XDR-AB compared to those who resided before it through MV model(OR=1.48,P=0.35). Conclusion: The optimal schedule for performing ETD is every 7 weeks. Adherence to Infection Control guidelines and bundles of care would help decrease the rate and risk of XDR-AB acquisition in our ICU. Objectives: Objective of the study was to monitor environmental microbial contamination after implementation of a new enzymatic sanitizer(StayClean) using Surface Recovery kit (SRK, COPAN Italia) sampling method. Methods: Microbial contamination survelliance was performed for four weeks on Geriatry and Dyalisys departments through sampling of items, equipment and general sites in bed spaces and rooms for a total of 900 points after sanitization with the new enzymatic detergent (t=0) and after 24 h. The first week was used to define the baseline of microbial contamination on surface pretreated with the routine detergent. After collection, the FLOQSwab was broken within the transport tube containing 1 mL of diluent solution and sent to the laboratory for analysis.The whole 1 ml was used to inoculate Columbia Agar+5% sheep blood plate at 35°C up to 48h. Total Colony Count (TCC) at t=0 and after 24h have been monitored. The bacteria identification was performed by MALDI-TOF massspectrometry. Results: in the first week of monitoring inGeriatry the average of TCC at t= 0 and after 24h was 30 and 201 CFU respectively while, after three weeks of treatment with the new detergent the average of TCC at t=0 and after 24h was 17 and 151 CFU respectively. During the first week of monitoring in Dialysis the average of TCC at t=0 and after 24h was 11 and 31 CFU respectively. After three weeks of new treatment the average of TCC at t=0 and after 24h was 6 and 27 CFU respectively. Staphylococcus aureus, MRSA, Enterococcus faecalis and Aspergillus fumigatushave been identified only before sanitization. Conclusion: The enzymatic detergent was associated with a stable decrease of surface pathogens compared to conventional sanitation system used. Introduction: In order to avoid respiratory infections caused by the use of small volume nebulizer(SVN) , it's important to maintain the sterilized of the nebulizer device. Many studies have shown that the rate of bacterial colonization by the use of SVN at home is more than 50%. The pathogen is Pseudomonas aeruginosa,Staphylococcus aureus, the literature review found that most of the cleaning methods for patients at home, there are not many studies in the hospital. Some studies have pointed out that it should be immersed and then cleaned to achieve the effect, but it's also cannot be implemented clinically. Objectives: The purpose of this study was to compare the difference in bacterial colonization after every 6 hours of use and after every 24 hours of use. Methods: The study was conducted in a regional hospital with a chest ward.The period of acceptance was 2019/1/1-2019/12/31, and the patients who were admitted to COPD or Pneumonia ,and were excluded influenza and tuberculosis. It is estimated that 60 participants. The SVN is usually treated every 6 hours. After each use, the device needs to be disassembled and rinsed with sterilized water, and then covered with sterilized towel. We will simplify the cleaning process and inject it with sterilized water after every 24 hours. After the SVN is shaken and rinsed, the SVN device is directly placed upside down and covered with the sterilized towel, which is performed by trained nurses. Conclusion: This study based on a randomised controlled trial, it's an objective result and will provide a new method of improving the hospital to simplify workflow and ensure the patient safety. Introduction: Robust environmental cleaning is a critical infection prevention and control (IPC) practice in healthcare facilities, but implementation is complex and can be expensive. An online survey administered to key stakeholders across Africa in 2018 identified significant gaps and weaknesses, including a lack of accessible and appropriate technical guidance. In response, we developed guidance specific for RLS to improve environmental cleaning practices. Objectives: To define best practices for healthcare facility environmental cleaning programs in resource-limited settings. Methods: A committee of experts in environmental cleaning in resource-limited settings was convened to review current available best practices and standards from selected high-resource settings. Using a consensus-driven strategy, the expert committee identified and compiled the most relevant and feasible best practices for resource-limited settings. Results: A best practices manual was developed and includes three major sections. The first describes best practices for environmental cleaning supplies and equipment, including guidance on the preparation and use of the most widely available and appropriate chemicals and equipment used in cleaning. The second section addresses environmental cleaning procedures in all major facility areas, including outpatient, general inpatient and specialized care wards. Detailed guidance and emphasis is placed on wards with increased healthcare-associated infection risk, such as maternity wards and intensive care units. The final section addresses implementation of environmental cleaning programs, including the importance of integration within IPC programs and the use of defined multi-modal strategies. A toolkit was developed which will guide the step-wise implementation of the best practices guidance. Conclusion: Key resources for environmental cleaning in RLS were developed. They will be refined and updated through pilot evaluations, which will document usability, feasibility and impact on processes and health outcomes. Introduction: An efficient cleaning and disinfection practice plays a crucial role in preventing cross-contamination in nosocomial environment. The binding of quaternary ammonium compounds (QACs) on cellulosic material which may fail the disinfection process hinder the broad use of pre-impregnated disinfecting wipes (ready-to-use disinfectant wipes) in hospital. Moreover, ageing of disinfectantimpregnated wipes may affect the products' disinfection performance later in practice but very little research was performed regarding this issue. Objectives: The purpose of this study is to evaluate the adsorption change and antimicrobial activity due to the ageing of the disinfecting wipe over storage time with and without atmospheric Double Barrier Dielectric (DBD) plasma pre-treatment. The main questions to be answered are: i) How does the adsorption of active ingredients onto textile substrate change with storage time; ii) How does the antimicrobial efficacy vary by time. The study of the adsorption of QACs in storage is important to ensure hospitals daily workflow and to complement the products' user manual of disinfectant and wipes in the market. Methods: Plasma-treated and untreated commercial wiping materials of polyester (PET), 55% cellulose/45%PET and 100% cotton were immerged into QACs solution with a certain liquor ration for 30 min, 3, 7, 15 and 30 days. The absorption and adsorption of quats onto wiping material were measured by UV spectrophotometer. Standards ASTM E 2149-13a was carried out to assess the antimicrobial efficacy. Results: There was evident increase of QACs adsorption in all wipes including plasma treated ones in function of the storage time. Plasma-treated PET showed a small increase in adsorption (~5%) while cotton wipes display a decrease in QACs adsorption (~5%). Surprisingly, the plasma-treated blend wipes are able to adsorb almost the double of the untreated ones (from 15% to around 30%). Cotton sample shows the lowest antimicrobial effect in all the cases. In PET and blend wipes the storage time has a significant influence on the Log reduction of E.coli. in both untreated and plasma treated samples. Conclusion: The use of blend wipes is recommended due to the best performance between adsorption and antimicrobial effect. Moreover, plasma treatment can significantly improve Gram-negative bactericidal effect if necessary. Introduction: An environmental cleaning program on hightouch surfaces in the hospitals is recommended, considering that the spread of microorganisms causing healthcare-associated infections is related to contamination of near-patient surfaces and equipments. Objectives: We have developed activities to improve the environmental cleaning program. Methods: A multidisciplinary team for standardization of environmental cleaning practice was formed and carried out as part of manual, education and evaluation system. The manual was produced in the form of a checklist of 7 places by determining the hightouch surfaces and cleaning frequencies through a literature review. Customized education contents for each job group were developed. After terminal cleaning, its effectiveness were evaluated using adenosine triphosphate (ATP) monitoring method. Below 500 RLU (Relative Light Units) was judged as "Pass", and the result was fed back to the environmental cleaning service department. Results: A total of 81 hightouch surfaces were evaluated. The pass rate increased from 21.0% to 51.9% after intervention, and the average ATP value decreased (2636 vs. 1089, P <0.0001). The ATP pass rate for all departments has increased and the average ATP value has significantly decreased for the ward, intensive care unit and operation/procedure rooms. Among major hightouch surfaces, the average ATP value decreased most strongly for lamp switch and handwash sink. The level of knowledge of the environmental cleaning service staff has also risen after intervention. Conclusion: Implementation of the standardized protocol for environmental cleaning and an evaluation for its effectiveness using ATP monitoring showed an increase in the degree of environmental cleaning and the level of knowledge of the performers in the hospital. Introduction: Insertion of a central venous catheter (CVC) is a common invasive procedure performed in hospitals in order to provide intravenous treatment and hemodynamic monitoring. One of the possible complications of a CVC is a central line associated blood stream infection (CLABSI), which is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality. The CVC insertion site is one of the factors that impacts the incidence of CLABSI-as the femoral site is associated with higher CLABSI rates than the subclavian or jugular sites, especially in obese patients. Objectives: Our aim was to decrease the rate of femoral site insertion of CVCs and the ensuing CLABSI events at our medical center. Methods: This prospective study was conducted from 2015 to 2018 in the 2 internal medicine wards, general intensive care unit (ICU) and cardiac ICU (ICCU) at the Padeh-Poria medical center, a 350 bed general hospital in northern Israel. We constructed a program for decreasing femoral CVCs that included prospective monitoring of CVC insertion, educational staff meetings, instruction of medical staff concerning insertion techniques of subclavian and jugular catheters and use of ultrasound guided CVC insertion, and quarterly yearly feedbacks of femoral CVC insertion rates and CLABSI rates. Introduction: Can a PICC securement device provided a significant lower risk of overall harm in terms of catheter dislodgment, migration or malposition, alleviating the potential risks to develop catheterrelated thrombosis and device-related infection? Objectives: CLABSI is a large global concern that often leads to higher morbidity and mortality in hospitalized patients and finding ways to further reduce risk and identify causal factors is crucial to improve quality of healthcare. All factors including patient diagnosis and insertion related factors, were scrutinized to rule out insertion related risk factors. Factors related to care and maintenance of lines was also assessed and equivalent in the two groups over the 4-year period with exception of the securement type. Methods: A single center, 4-year, retrospective review performed at a large academic medical center with the use of a subcutaneous securement device and adhesive stabilization in 7,779 PICC procedures to establish the correlation and impact of catheter stabilization and securement methods to central line associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI). Results: This quality data analysis process found that a subcutaneous securement device offered a reduction of overall risk of 49-51% for central line associated bloodstream infection rates assessment over the adhesive securement devices. Risk reduction was consistent over the four years, highlighting that improved catheter stability can lead to lower infection rates by reducing intravascular bacterial ingress through subcutaneous tissue when the catheter is stabilized from the point of implantation to explant without catheter movement. Conclusion: The use of a subcutaneous securement device also provided a significant lower risk of overall harm in terms of catheter dislodgment, migration or malposition, alleviating the potential risks to develop catheter-related thrombosis and device-related infection. Introduction: The surgical site infection is one of the most frequent healthcare associated infections, including post-cesarean wound infection which is a cause of prolonged hospital stay and a burden to the healthcare system. In july 2018, our department was notified of a suspected increase in the number of post-cesarean surgical infections, in which we took action. Objectives: Describe the evaluation of the situation, the intervention carried out and the outcomes. Methods: An epidemiological investigation was conducted. Simultaneously, an intervention was performed, by providing informative sessions regarding the prevention and control of infections programs, and by presenting a preliminary report. Finally, the periods pre and post-intervention (1 April to 20 July and 21 July to 31 October) were compared to detect risk factors. Results: A total of 229 cesareans were included (115 in the preintervention period; 114 in the post-intervention period), and no outbreak was detected. Nevertheless, there was a decrease in the surgical site infections in the post-intervention period from 11,3% to 4,4% (OR 0.4, 95% CI 0.1 -1.0), with the verification of the change to chlorhexidine at 2% for the preoperatory skin preparation. The lack of antibiotic prophylaxis when indicated was identified as a risk factor for infection (OR 7.3, 95% CI 1.5 -37.0). Conclusion: Although no outbreak was detected, we identified modifiable risk factors related to healthcare activities. By improving the compliance of the control and prevention of infections programs, we were able to diminish the impact of these factors and decrease the surgical site infections. Nonetheless, scope to improve remains and, as shown by this study, relies on the contribution of the healthcare professionals. Methods: A desk exercise was undertaken to critique the relationship between the WHO improvement strategy for hand hygiene with SSI interventions. Collation of experiences from the field and a review of the concept was undertaken by a virtual engagement exercise with 18 experts between July and December 2019. Results: This first of its kind global implementation manual features an approach used for each one of the WHO 29 SSI prevention recommendations, framed within the five-element multimodal strategy and within the context of a broader surgical safety climate. It outlines a range of implementation and practical steps that reflect real-life experiences. It proposes a cyclic framework for rolling out a SSI prevention programme to ensure that the entire facility is ready to undertake the intervention/change required based on a preparation step, a baseline situation analysis, planning, impact measurement and sustainability evaluations. Conclusion: This operational, adaptable manual is a comprehensive resource for countries and healthcare facilities and fills an implementation gap in this field. It has the potential to influence improvement of IPC practices and SSI reduction over time. Other important achievements will be improved SSI knowledge and awareness among the key players. Introduction: The air quality of the operating microenvironment may be an important contributor to prevent surgical site infections (SSIs). Both mixing ventilation (MV) systems and laminar air flow (LAF) systems have been used in operating rooms (ORs) to tentatively reduce the CFU (Colony Forming Unit) density. The recently published WHO guideline suggests that LAF systems should not be used to reduce the risk of SSI for patients undergoing total arthroplasty surgery, but the conclusion is disputed and based on low to very low quality of evidence. The OR contains numerous transient phenomena that may cause significant changes to the time resolved indoor air distribution patterns. Objectives: The objective of this study was to compare the performance of laminar airflow systems and mixing ventilation in operation rooms. Methods: Measurements of CFU and experimental measurements of airflow distribution were performed in different orthopedic operating rooms equipped with a LAF and MV systems at St. Olavs hospital. Results: Under many operating conditions, the airflow distribution from the laminar airflow system was disrupted more than with mixing ventilation method. Lower CFU levels may be achieved in ORs with Mixing ventilation when using proper surgical clothing with lower activity intensity. Conclusion: This study showed a complex relationship between the local indoor air quality and airflow distribution in the operating microenvironment of a lying patient. Air distribution changed significantly under various conditions involving the presence of different heat sources, including surgical lamps, the patient, surgical staff and various monitors in the orthopedic OR. Our study indicates that LAF may be disturbed under operating conditions. However, this does not seem to increase CFU levels around the surgical site. Introduction: Surgical Site Infections (SSI) are associated with a rise in mortality, hospital stay duration, and medical costs. In Operating Rooms (OR), air ventilation and filtration are important factors in preventing SSIs, but to identify how precisely variations in the ventilation and filtration systems influence air quality in the OR requires specific and tailor-made measures and analyses. Objectives: The purpose of this study is to explore how two different positions of a mobile air filtering system affect air quality in the OR. Methods: We conducted a descriptive study in April-May 2018 in the Teaching Hospital of Siena (Italy). The inflow and outflow air ventilations of an OR were measured, together with a novel mobile air decontamination-recirculation system with a high efficiency particulate air filter and a patented crystalline ultraviolet C reactor. The Solidworks 2017 3D software was used to simulate the OR and the airflows interactions based on the measured experimental data. The device was simulated: 1) next to the main OR entrance with its airflow facing the surgical bed; 2) next to the surgical bed, with its airflow facing the main OR entrance. Results: Based on our simulation results, the device interferes with the main flow generated by the ceiling vents and creates a low pressure effect, dragging the air also towards possibly contaminated surfaces. To locate the device with its air intake next to the OR door means to facilitate the entrance of particulate into the OR, enhancing the risks of contamination due to the opening of the door and reducing the effects of the OR positive pressure. We modeled an orientation of the device intake of air towards the surgical table, in order for the device airstream to not cause any possible contamination and to hamper the entry of contaminants in a door opening simulation. Conclusion: Extra flows of a mobile air filtering device can significantly affect the air dynamics in an OR. Ad hoc environmental measures are needed in order to determine its ideal positioning to maximize the effects in potentially preventing SSIs. Introduction: Hospital Acquired Infections (HAI) are a severe public health problem and also represent a high economic burden. About $40 billion have been spent annually for HAIs in hospitals in the US and EU, and Surgical Site Infections (SSI) in particular are a relevant part of this spending. It is well known that bacteria responsible for SSIs can also be carried by air particulate in the room. Objectives: Our goal in this study is to investigate whether a mobile unit for air particle filtering in the operating room (OR) can improve the environmental airborne conditions. Methods: A cross sectional study was conducted in March 2018 in Siena's Hospital (Italy). We tested a novel air decontaminationrecirculation system unit provided with a patented crystalline ultraviolet C (C-UVC) reactor and HEPA filter, that could be moved around in an OR. In order to evaluate the environmental contamination, air samples were taken in 4 spots of an OR's periphery during a surgical intervention, and at each spot 4 different phases have been considered: I) Illuvia off and OR at rest; II) Illuvia off and OR in operational; III) Illuvia on and OR in operational; IV) Illuvia off and OR in operational. The evaluation was performed through particle counting of six different sizes: 0.3, 0.5, 1.0, 3.0, 5.0, and 10 μm. The statistical analysis used the Wilcoxon rank test, and was carried out with the statistical software Stata 12, setting the significant level at p<0.05. Results: Particulate matter of all sizes had fallen significantly (p<0,05) passing from phase II (Illuvia off and OR in operational) to phase III (Illuvia on and OR in operational). Switching the device off, particles of 3,0 μm or smaller were statistically significantly higher (p<0,05). Objectives: The aim of the study was to evaluate the impact of operating room ventilation technology on clinical outcome parameter. Methods: A retrospective analysis of 1,000 consecutive cases of primary total joint arthroplasty (hip, knee) before and 1,000 consecutive cases after the installation of an ultraclean airflow ventilation system (temperature controlled Airflow TcAF System Opragon AB, Avidicare Sweden), in the same operating room was performed. Clinical outcome was evaluated using length of stay and infection rates as endpoints. The proper function of the TcAF system was checked by intraoperative measurement using active air sampling (blood agar plates, Klotz Impactor FH6). Results: The intraoperative airborne contamination was always below 5 cfu/m 3 of air, which is the threshold demanded according to the Swedish SIS standard for ultraclean air in operating theatres demonstrating proper function of the system. Ultraclean air provided by the TcAF system was associated with a decrease in mean postoperative hospital stay from 11.0 to 8.64 days, a decrease in percentage of patients who stayed inpatient over 14 days after surgery from 7.3 to 2.2 %, and a decrease of infectious complications from 3. Introduction: Microbiological burden of room-air in operating theatres is a known risk factor for surgical site infections. However, it is unclear how to best evaluate the different ventilation technologies regarding efficacy and efficiency under routine clinical conditions with respect to reduction of this risk factor. Objectives: The aim of the study was to evaluate active air sampling methodology for performance qualification of operating room ventilation technology. Methods: 10 installations of the temperature-controlled ventilation system (TcAF) Opragon (Avidcare AB, Sweden) were assessed during live surgery according to the Swedish SISTS 39: 2015 standard using active air sampling (blood agar plates, Klotz Impactor FH6). The spectrum of procedures included general surgical interventions and trauma / orthopedic procedures. Colonies were counted as colony forming units per cubic meter (cfu/m³). Results: There were on average 6 persons in the room with a median (M) 6, mean (MW) 6.2 and standard deviation (SD) 1.3. Measurements showed values of median (M) 0 cfu/m³ over all measuring points in the room, mean value (MW) 1.8 cfu/m³, standard deviation (SD) 4.5 cfu/m³. In detail, the following germ counts were obtained: In the area of the surgical field median (M) 0 cfu/m³, mean value (MW) 0.4 cfu/m³, standard deviation (SD) 0.8 cfu/m³, in the range of the instrument table median (M) 0 cfu/m³, mean (MW) 1 cfu/m³, standard deviation (SD) 1.9 cfu/m³ and in the periphery median (M) 2 cfu/m³, mean (MW) 4 cfu/m³, standard deviation (SD) 6.7 cfu/m³. Conclusion: Active air sampling according to the Swedish SISTS 39: 2015 standard is suitable to assess the efficacy of ventilations systems for operating rooms in a routine clinical setting. Our results show that the requirements of the Swedish standard were met or significantly excelled by the TcAF system. The temperature-controlled airflow reliably and robustly ensures "ultra-clean" air (<10 cfu/m³) in the entire operating theatre and therefore is capable to reduce the risk of airborne microbial transmission under routine clinical conditions. Objectives: The study sought to determine the aetiological agents, risk factors and rates of VAP during pre-and post-implementation of a multifaceted infection prevention and control (IPC) intervention ("VAP bundle") in adult ICU. Methods: A before-and-after study design was conducted over 9 months from 1 st May 2018 to 31 January 2019. All patients admitted in adult ICU were evaluated daily for the diagnosis of VAP using clinical, radiological and microbiological criteria. Data were collected using an identical tool in the pre-intervention and post-intervention periods. The "VAP bundle" consisted of a multifaceted intervention as defined by the South African "Best Care Always" quality improvement campaign. All microbiological samples were processed for microscopy, cultures on routine solid media and VITEK 2 automated system (Biomérieux, USA). Results: 66 and 64 patients were part of the pre-intervention and post-intervention surveys, respectively. The baseline VAP rate showed an incidence of 36.0 per 1000 ventilator-days as compared to 22.6 per 1000 ventilator-days post-intervention. Risk factors associated with VAP in pre-intervention period consisted of patients aged ≥35 years (p = 0.003), who had an endo-tracheal tube in place (p = 0.001), and whose length of stay in ICU was ≥6 days (p = 0.028). A reduction of VAP rate was observed, from 34.8% (23/66 patients) in the pre-intervention period to 20.3% (13/64 patients) in the postintervention period with a relative risk (RR) of 1.7 (with 95% CI:1 -3.1; p = 0.07). The commonest aetiological agents causing VAP in pre-and post-intervention periods were mainly Gram negative bacteria mainly Acinetobacter baumannii, followed by Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Among the Gram-positive bacteria, Coagulase negative Staphylococci was the main organism isolated, although its true implication as a pathogenic agent for VAP remains controversial. Conclusion: Results indicated that the incidence of VAP is high in the adult ICU, Gram negative bacteria were the most prevalent causing pathogens, and that "VAP bundle" intervention is effective in reducing VAP rate, hence improving the quality of care. Introduction: Current situation of hospital associated infection (HAIs) in Vietnam is still high alarm for infection. A lot of researches in worldwide as well as Vietnam showed HAIs increased hospitalized time, antibiotics consumption, medical fees, and high mortalities. Current Vietnam has not been systemic researches of role HAIs surveillance and giving suitable interventions. Therefore, we applied systemic approaches for HAIs surveillances, including longitual and continuous HAIs surveillances. We found that ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) rate was significant higher than those blood stream infection (BSI), urinary tract infection (UTI), and surgical site infection (SSI). Hence, we would like to assess the efficient VAP care bundle for VAP patients in ICUs. Objectives: Assessment the effect of VAP care bundle on VAPs patients in ICU at Cho Ray hospital Methods: Patients with intubation in ICUs from April 2018 to December 2018 Using intervention study by apply VAP care bundle Results: Result of HAIs surveillance showed VAP rate of hospital was significantly decreased from 28.4 to 24/1000 mechanic ventilator (MV)-day (P = 0.0004); VAP rate of ICU from 32.8 to 24.4/1000 MVday (P = 0.0055); and VAP rate of NICU from 29.5 to 16.3/1000 MVday (P = 0.0001) after conducting VAP intervention. In addition, the result of study also revealed that antibiotics consumption rate of inpatients in 2018 was decreased by 15.9% compared to 2017. Futhermore, the average antibiotics consumption expense for each patient was also reduced by 4.1%. Conclusion: VAP care bundle intervention induced significantly decreasing VAP rate and antibiotics consumption expense in ICUs. Objectives: To reduce VAP benchmarking to National Safety Network (NHSN, USA). Methods: A prospective study was conducted in 27-bed medical/surgical intensive care unit of King Faisal Hospital, Taif-Kingdom of Saudi Arabia from January 2015 to August 2018. Two prevention models were introduced to reduce VAP. The first one is Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI) implemented in 2016. The second one is the basic recommendations of Society Healthcare Epidemiology of America/Infectious Diseases Society of America (SHEA/IDSA) used in 2018. VAP was identified using the NHSN criteria. Incidence rate, ratio, benchmarking, and statistical analysis were carried out using the NHSN recommendations. VAP Bundle program was implemented during the study period. P-value <0.05 (2 tailed) was considered statistically significant. Bacterial identification and antimicrobial susceptibility of isolates were determined according to Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) guidelines. Results: VAP incidence rate was declined from 4.81-to 3.62 /1000 ventilated-days with utilization ratio 0.31 to 0.27 and from 4.87-to 3.67/1000 ventilated days with utilization ratio from 0.31 to 0.26 using IHI and SHEA/IDSA prevention models, respectively. There was no significant difference between two prevention models (p-value is 0.915). VAP bundle compliance rate was above 90% through-out interventions. Two major risk factors were contributed VAP; pair spontaneous breathing trials with spontaneous awakening trials and provide endotracheal tubes with subglottic secretion drainage ports. Multi-drug resistance Acinetobacter baulmannii was the most common causative HAI-VAP. Conclusion: Pair spontaneous breathing trials with spontaneous awakening trials and provides endotracheal tubes with subglottic secretion drainage ports are very important factors to reduce VAP. Introduction: Pneumonia and lower respiratory tract infections are the most common hospital-acquired infections and the burden of disease among inpatients is higher in non-ventilated than in ventilated patients. While multiple aspects -including risk factors -of ventilator-associated pneumonia are well studied, literature on nonventilator-associated hospital-acquired pneumonia (nvHAP) is scarce. Objectives: Understanding of modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors for nvHAP is key for the development of effective prevention measures and to tailor prevention strategies to patients at highest risk. Therefore, we aimed to identify risk factors for nvHAP. Methods: In this retrospective cohort study we included patients ≥ 18 years of age who were discharged during a 2 year period from the University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland. A total of 37 potential risk factors -both constant and time-varying -were extracted from electronic medical records, including demographic data, comorbidities, signs and symptoms (including daily nursing assessments), procedures, and devices. Hazard ratios for nvHAP were derived from univariable and multivariable Cox proportional hazard models. Results: We included 69,717 cases of whom 481 (0.07%) had nvHAP. Median age was 57 years (IQR: 39-72), and 34,657 (49.7%) of patients were male. Independent risk factors were male gender (Hazard ratio (HR) = 1.63, 95% Confidence interval (CI)= 1.33 -1.99), age >65 years (HR = 1.43, CI = 1.16 -1.76), impaired consciousness (HR = 1.78, CI = 1.23 -2.57)), impaired activity and mobility (HR = 3.37, CI = 2.37 -4.78), acute moderate to severe pain (HR = 1.83, CI = (1.43 -2.35), breathing problems (HR = 1.95, CI = 1.45 -2.61), swallowing difficulties (HR = 1.56, CI = 1.13 -2.15), vomiting (HR = 1.68, CI = 1.14 -2.46), history of intubation or tracheostomizing (HR = 1.44, CI = 1.05 -1.97), and monitored anaesthesia care (HR = 2.66, CI = 1.06 -6.68). Conclusion: We found impaired activity and mobility to be the strongest independent risk factor for nvHAP. This condition is often present in multimorbid, postoperative and medically sedated patients. It is a potentially targetable condition that can be approached by purposeful mobilization by physiotherapy, nursing, or patient participation. Results: A total of 49,348 patients were included in the network. Of whom, 13,457 (35%) patients didn't have invasive mechanical ventilation and 123 (0.9%) patients developed NP. The median age was 65 (51-75) years and there were more men than women (62% vs 38%; P=0.015). The median length of stay was significantly different between patients with NP and patients non-infected (10 and 4 days respectively; p<0.001). The most frequently isolated micro-organisms were S. aureus (n=22, 19.3%) with 37% resistant to methicillin, P. aeruginosa (n=20, 17.5%) with 55% resistant to Carbapenem and/or Cephalosporin's third generation. Objectives: To conduct a systematic review to identify risk factors associated with acquisition of waterborne healthcare-associated infection (HAI) and/or colonization. Methods: A systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted. PubMed, Web science and Embase were searched to identify cohort and case-control studies that had reported on the risk factors associated with acquisition of waterborne-HAI and/or colonization from 1966 to 10 July 2018. Three investigators independently screened titles and abstracts for relevant articles, and two screened full-text articles. Summary estimates were obtained using random effect model. Results: Ten relevant studies met the inclusion criteria for the systematic review (5 cohort studies and 5 case control studies). We identified no point-of-use filter installed on the sink faucet (OR: 5.79, 95%CI=1.29-30.62) and exposure to invasive ventilation (OR, 5.79; 95% CI: 1.29-30.62) as risk factors in neonatal population. Be admitted to a room with a contaminated tap (HR=1.76, 95% CI=1.09-2.84) or contaminated sink (OR:11.2, 95% CI= 1.92-65.68), exposure to invasive ventilation >10 days (HR: 2.56, 95% CI= 1.46-4.50) and require hemofiltration (OR: 22.9, 95% CI= 1.63-203.91) were identified as risk factors in adult population. The case-control studies contributed to a meta-analysis. Waterborne-HAI and/or colonization was positively associated in neonatal population with CVC exposure (pooled OR: 8.02, 95% CI= 2.19-29.31, p=0.002). Umbilical catheter exposure (pooled OR: 2.41, 95% CI= 0.20-28.33, p=0.49) and total parenteral nutrition exposure (pooled OR: 11.52, 95% CI= 0.55-240.94, p=0.12) were not associated with acquisition. Length of stay before colonization was positive associated with an increased risk of waterborne-HAI and/or colonization acquisition in adult population. Duration of antibiotic treatment in ICU was identified as a protective factor in adult population. Conclusion: In this meta-analysis, CVC exposure in neonates and length of stay in adult population were associated with an increased risk of waterborne-HAI/colonization. Children Hospital and KAASH implemented Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI) prevention model. CLABSI and VAP incidence rates in Children hospital were declined from 11.18-to 4.02/1000 central line-days (p-value is 0.003) and from 4.02-to 2.12/1000 ventilated-days (p-value is 0.14) despite of higher in utilization ratio (0.14 vs 0.21 and 0.65 vs 0.82, respectively). In KAASH, VAP incidence rate was declined from 6.27 to 4.85 per 1000 ventilated-days (p-value 0.51) despite of higher in utilization ratio (0.42 vs 0.50). No significant reduction of CLABSI incidence rate with same in utilization ratio. Conclusion: There is reduction of CLABSI and VAP incidence rates despite of high in utilization ratio. However, VAP incidence rate is still above 90th percentile benchmarking to NHSN. Objectives: This study was performed to identify the clinical impacts of CAUTI on patients with indwelling urinary catheter in the intensive care unit (ICU) settings in China. Methods: Using the prospectively collected ICU nosocomial infection target monitoring database, a 3-year prospectively cohort study design from April 2015 to March 2018 was applied in all the 5 adult ICUs in a 5000-bed tertiary-care hospital in China. Adult patients with indwelling urinary catheter > 2 days in the ICUs were included. The exposure factor was CAUTI in ICU. The outcomes were duration of indwelling urinary catheter, length of stay (LOS) in ICU and in hospital, hospitalization costs, and all-cause deaths in ICU and in hospital. Propensity score matching (PSM) model (with the caliper value of 0.02 and matching ratio of 1:4) was used to assess the impacts of CAUTI. The potentially confounding factors included demographic characteristics, disease score, combined diseases and treatment operations. Results: A total of 11,163 patients with indwelling urinary catheter > 2 days (with 107,566 catheter-days) were included, 185 patients developed 192 CAUTI episodes (1.7 cases per 100 patients, 1.8 cases per 1,000 catheter-days). After PSM a new cohort with 185 cases in the exposed group and 671 cases in the non-exposed group was developed. Patients with CAUTI had 23-day longer duration of indwelling urinary catheter, 23-day increased LOS in ICU, 22-day increased LOS in hospital and 11.1-thousand yuan excessed hospitalization costs than those without (P<0.05). CAUTI was an independent risk factor for each of the 4 outcomes above (P<0.05), respectively. However, CAUTI did not increase the risk for all-cause death in ICU and in hospital. Conclusion: Although CAUTI could not increase the risk for hospitalization death, it is significantly associated with prolonged duration of indwelling urinary catheter, LOS in ICU and hospital and increased hospitalization costs, which lead to the waste of the limited medical resources in China. Therefore, it is necessary to take appropriate intervention measures to prevent and control CAUTI. Objectives: The purpose of this study is to compare clinical characteristics and antimicrobial susceptibility of healthcareassociated acute pyelonephritis (APN) between E. coli and K. pneumoniae. Methods: We reviewed medical records of healthcare-associated APN with E. coli and K. pneumoniae between February 2014 and October 2017. Severe APN was defined as severe sepsis or septic shock due to APN. Results: A total 114 patients were enrolled with 64 of E. coli and 50 of K. pneumoniae. Mean age of E. coli was older than K. pneumoniae (74.22 ± 12.24 vs. 65.76 ± 14.73, p=0.001). Neurogenic bladder, obstructive uropathy and urinary tract stone were more associated with E. coli. Catheter associated APN and complicated APN were more observed in K. pneumoniae. Bacteremia and severe APN were more accompanied by E. coli. Extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) production was more observed in E. coli. Among ESBL, E. coli was more susceptible to piperacillin/tazobactam (75.0% vs. 46.9%, p= 0.01) and K. pneumoniae was more susceptible to ciprofloxacin (10.4% vs. 37.5%, p=0.005). Thirty-day mortality was higher in K. pneumoniae. Conclusion: E. coli was tended to be more associated with anatomical or functional urogenital problem, and K. pneumoniae was more associated with urinary catheter. The distribution of causative strains of catheter associated UTI was different from other studies. Even high rate of ESBL production, piperacillin/tazobactam can be used empirical treatment of healthcare-associated UTI. Still, ciprofloxacin and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole can be good option for K. pneumoniae UTI. 1.88, 95%CI 1.17-3 .01) and bacteraemia (OR 2.9, 95%CI 1.9-4.41). No particular microbiology, including presence of multidrugresistant Gram-negative bacteria (MDR-GNB), was associated with SS-SS. Overall 30-day mortality was low (8%), significantly higher in SS-SS group than in sepsis group (26.2% vs 5%, p<0.001). Among those who died (n=69), there was less percentage of infection source control measures than among those who did not (5.4% vs 10.6%, p= 0.35), although not statistically significant. Independent risk factors for 30-day mortality in patients with SS-SS were age, having a haematological malignancy, admission for a different reason than cUTI and a dependent functional capacity. Conclusion: Almost 18% of patients with cUTI presented with SS-SS. Significantly, no particular microbiology, including MDR-GNB, was associated with SS-SS. Mortality of patients with SS-SS was high, more related to the basal condition of patients than to an adequate antibiotic management and source control. Objectives: This study was conducted to determine the CAUTI risk factors and the resulting causative organisms. Methods: A prospective hospital-wide surveillance was conducted between January 2018 and March 2019 at the American University of Beirut Medical Center. CAUTI was diagnosed using the CDC/NHSN (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/National health and Safety Network) definition. All patients who developed CAUTI were recruited. A checklist was adopted which included most common risk factors for CAUTI. Results: 66 patients developed CAUTI during the study period of which 41 (62%) were females. 30 (45%) patients were above 65 years of age. The average duration of UC placement prior to CAUTI was 14 days with 53 (80%) of the cases occurring after day 5 of UC insertion. The majority of patients were bed ridden 58 (88%). 57 (86%) patients underwent one or more transfers for diagnostic procedures such as CT and MRI. CAUTI cases were most commonly identified in the neurosurgical ICU (15 [23%]). Antimicrobial treatment of > 5 days prior to CAUTI was identified in 46 (70 %) of the cases. Admission to a critical care unit before CAUTI was noted in 50 (76 %) cases. CAUTI organisms were predominantly Gram-negative bacilli (91%), with Escherichia coli (38%) being the most common causative organism (40% ESBL, 28% MDR); followed by Klebsiella pneumoniae (29%) with 21% ESBL and 16% MDR. Conclusion: Understanding CAUTI risk factors plays a major role in reducing CAUTI rates and can improve patient safety outcomes. Maintaining the UC bundle at all times can be instrumental in preventing CAUTI with strict implementation of all its elements and in particular the daily assessment of the need to keep the UC. Introduction: Urinary tract infection has long been considered the most common healthcare-associated infection (HAI). In USA, Catheter Associated Urinary Tract Infections (CAUTIs) are associated with an additional cost of $676 per admission and being preventable it was the first hospital-acquired conditions selected for non-payment by Medicare as of October 2008, and have been further targeted for complete elimination as a "never event,". High CAUTI rate was reported in first quarter of 2017 (6.2 / 1000 urinary catheter days) at Intensive Care Unit (120 bed ICU) at King Saud Medical City (KSMC). Objectives: ≥20% reduction of CAUTI rate annually till being ≤ National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN) pooled mean (2.2 /1000 catheter days). Methods: Multidisciplinary team formulated. Implementation of Evidence based practices listed in urinary catheter bundle of care was initiated and checklist was approved as part of medical record. Strategies conducted include: focus group discussion with nurses and physicians' team members, education about Foley's catheter care maintenance bundle, review process of urine sample collection to avoid contamination, empower nurses to review catheter necessity daily and removal of unnecessary catheter, and continuous auditing of bundle compliance by infection control staff. Ensure availability of Folly's catheter insertion kit with single used lubricant gel and availability of catheter type that has sample collection port was important to maintain closed system. Recommendation for improvement circulated categorized as high and low impact. Updated CAUI surveillance criteria based on Centre of Disease Control (CDC) was reviewed. Results: Around 50 % reduction of CAUTI rate was achieved by end of 2017 Conclusion: Implementation of urinary catheter bundle of care proved to be effective in reducing CAUTI. Continue education and bundle monitoring are essential for further rate reduction and sustaining the improvement. Involvement of front line staff in initiatives planning and implementation are critical to achieve the target. A project of applying simulation training for Folly's catheter insertion and care initiated in collaboration with nursing, it is impact on CAUTI prevention is expected to be evaluated soon. Results: A total of 557 responses were collected, of which 44.7% were HCWs and 51.2% other professionals (50% North Europe, 16.2% South-east Europe, 18.3% Australia, 8.8% North America, 1.6% South America). The top symptoms reported by respondents as reasons to stay at home and report sick from work were: fever (75.4%), cold chills (49%), and a pounding headache (44.3%). However, respondents reasons to stay at home, did not match with what they considered to be the most relevant influenza symptoms: fever (81.7%), muscle aches (61.4%), and cold chills (39.7%). Only 65% would get a flu vaccine annually. 37% of respondents claimed not to have had the flu in the past two years. 56% indicated that they would still go to work when experiencing flu-like symptoms and 62.8%, would stay at work while feeling sick. 62.6% would return to work despite still having some symptoms. Conclusion: To achieve successful strategies to prevent influenza transmission future awareness campaigns should be broadened to include policies on sick leave for HCWs with flu-like symptoms, while encouraging the uptake of influenza vaccine. Introduction: Vaccination is the cornerstone for the prevention against seasonal influenza (SI). In countries where vaccination cannot be made mandatory by law, an alternative exists for hospitals: during SI epidemics, obligation for healthcare workers (HCW) to be vaccinated or to wear a mask. In case of a high incidence of patients hospitalized with SI, mask wear may be temporarily made mandatory for all HCW and visitors. This strategy, called "zoning", has been adopted by HUG since 2009. Objectives: To describe SI epidemics (inclusive NOSO) and observance to recommendations in our university hospital from 2011/12 to 2018/2019 Methods: Suspected cases of SI (respiratory symptoms, fever with chills, muscular pain, or prostration) were screened using nasopharyngeal samples, which were analyzed by RT-PCR. Cases were defined as NOSO when symptoms occurred >72 h after admission. Regular audits were performed to assess HCW and visitors' compliance with recommendations. Hospital teams were regularly informed about the evolution of SI epidemics and the results of the audits. Methods: A case-control study was conducted to analyze the effectiveness of the influenza vaccine to prevent severe cases of influenza (SCI) in the seasons 2012-2013 to 2018-2019 from the data obtained from the surveillance system in the General Hospital from Alicante. All admitted patients were included as cases, with a positive result for A / B influenza confirmed by laboratory and with diagnosis of SCI. As controls, those patients diagnosed with influenza who do not meet the criteria of a severe case. As explanatory variables, those collected in the SCI survey will be included. For all patients, the SCI percentage with its 95% confidence intervals was calculated. For the association study, the Odds Ratio (OR) and its 95% confidence intervals were calculated. For the calculation of vaccine effectiveness the formula was used: (1-OR) x 100. Introduction: Healthcare-associated infections (HCAIs) represent a constant threat to patients' life and the treatment of these infections can be extremely expensive. The hospital environment itself is thought to be responsible for up to 20% of all HCAIs. The relationship between airborne pathogens, surface contamination and HCAIs remains undisclosed. Therefore, the aim of this study to validate mathematical equations that use to quantify the relationship between air and surface microbes. Objectives: To validate mathematical equations that are used to quantify the relationship between air and surface microbes. Methods: Two equations that connect the deposition rate of microorganisms to their concentration in the air were identified from related literature (Omelyansky, 1940; Whyte and Eaton, 2016). Both equations were derived to be given Y: deposited microbes on surface (CFU/m 2 /min) and have been validated using the given data of (Wong et al., 2011), who conducted both active and passive sampling for different parameters. Results: According to Omeliansky's equation, the predicted value of deposited microbes on the surface depends on the values of airborne microbes with a constant deposition rate of 20%. On the other hand, Whyte's equation suggests that the deposition rate is not linear (the change in deposition rate is not constant). Using bland-Altman plot, there is a significant difference (P=.017) between the two measurements. The actual data follows a pattern of Whye's equation. It gives lower values of deposition rate at a higher concentration of airborne increases; however, the standard deviation is very high. Physical and human factor could cause that fluctuation of deposition rate via the effect on survival rate, e.g. the evaporation of droplet that surrounds the microbes and air dynamic. Conclusion: The equations were found to show a positive regression relationship between the number of ACC in air and the number of ACC on surface. However, the field needs a more accurate mathematical model that characterizes the impact of the physical and human factors on the correlation between air and surface microbes. Methods: This cross-sectional study was conducted to investigate frequency of some of the respiratory viruses infection in patients presenting with ILI ( fever, runny nose, cough, sore throat, body aches, fatigue). These patients were referred to clinics and hospitals of Zahedan university of medical sciences in Sistan and Baluchestan province during autumn and winter of year 2015. All samples were tested by RT-PCR and those who were negative for Influenza virus, tested for other viruses which cause the same syndrome using to Multiplex-PCR. Results: Among 240 patients, 115 were male(47.9%) and 125 were female(52.1%). In 196 patients(81.7%), the sample was positive for influenza A. The highest number of influenza A patients was in the age group of 16-30. In 9 patients, the B-type influenza virus was detected (3.8%) and the highest number of cases was in the age group of more than 46 years. In the remaining 35 samples, none of the viruses were found. The results showed that the higher prevalence of influenza viruses, especially type A, in respiratory diseases. This study suggests continuing surveillance, infection control and annual vaccination for Influenza. Our hospital was one of the 12 healthcare facilities that were selected to participate. Methods: In order to achieve the "Stop Hospital Infection Project!" goals was carried out: Senior hospitals leadership commitment; Selected and adapted teams for each area; Learning Sessions: bundles use and PDSA construction, storyboard rounds and benchmarking; Extranet network availability where everyone reported the measures, with automatic graphing results. Results: After 2 years the evaluation showed a global 50% reduction of all HAI at participating hospitals, except in colon surgery (none facility was able to reduce infection in colon surgery). In ours facility, HAI reduction was: 84% in SSI -HKP (orthopedics ward), 74% in CAUTI (two general wards), 40% in VAP and we kept in 0% de CLAB (intensive care). This allowed us to save 783.610€ at this time. Mortality, absenteeism and other adverse effects costs were not studied. Conclusion: This collaborative, applying learning methodology with bundles and PDSA usage, disclosure of monthly results associated with intra/interinstitutional benchmarking, allowed to reduce HAI and associated costs. Other measures should be considered and studied to promote infection reduction in colon rectal surgery. Results: 468 patients were surveyed in 30 adult wards, of which 48.8% were on AM treatment (43% in medical wards, 47% in surgical wards and 71% in ICU). The top 3 antibiotics were amoxicillin and enzyme inhibitor (25.9%), cefotaxime (17.1%) and imipenem (10.3%). 45.1% of AM were used for community-acquired infections, 29.2% for HAI and 25.6 % for prophylaxis. The most frequently reported diagnoses for therapeutic use were pneumonia (22%) and intra−abdominal sepsis (21.3%). Reason for treatment and stop/review date were documented in 16,2% and 4.7% of cases respectively. Guidelines were missing in 90.8% of cases and 88.2% of the AM treatment was empiric. Prolonged prescribing for surgical prophylaxis (>24 hours) reached 98%. Of all patients, 11.1% (N=52) received AM treatment for a HAI, with imipenem (29.2%), ciprofloxacin (8.3%), metronidazole (7.3%) and amikacin (7.3%) as the most common antibiotics. 34.3% (N=33) of HAI prescriptions were targeted, of which 93% were against one or more multidrug-resistant (MDR) microorganisms, including 8 ESBLand 5 carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae. The most frequently reported HAIs were skin and soft tissue infections (25%) and pneumonia (22.9%). Conclusion: This Global-PPS showed the need to implement an Antimicrobial Stewardship Program in Tunisian hospitals to improve antibiotic prescribing (e.g. by reducing carbapenem use), thus controlling MDR microorganisms. Results: Among the overall 60 312 admissions to adult ICUs during the study period, total 1011 cases for potential PSM. Eventually, 368 pairs, significant differences were found in antibiotic cost (P<0.0001), overall hospitalization cost (P<0.0001), length of ICU stay (P=0.0005), and length of overall hospital stay (P=0.044). As compared to those in the non-MDRO-HAI group, we found that in the MRDO-HAI group, medical antibiotic cost was increased by 43%, overall hospital cost and length of ICU stay each by 15%, and length of overall hospital stay by 11%. The mortality rate between the 2 groups did not significantly differ (P=0.189). Objectives: We demonstrate weighting methods to correctly estimate incidence proportions from PPS data. Methods: To estimate the incidence proportion, we weight patients inversely to their length of hospital stay in a logistic regression model. We apply these methods to PPS data from Geneva (n = 1314) where additional follow-up information was available. We validate our methods using simulation data. Results: For the Geneva PPS sample, naive vs. weighted estimates resulted in 47 vs. 12 days overall length of stay, 29 vs. 13 days duration of infection and an incidence proportion of 17.0% vs. 6.1%. Also the estimates of risk factors differed. For instance, an ultimately fatal McCabe score had an effect on the prevalence odds ratio of 0.90 vs. 2.26 on the incidence odds ratio. This can be explained by the McCabe score's strong effect on the discharge rate for patients without HAI but weaker effect after patients acquire infection. Conclusion: Incidence estimates from a PPS can be grossly wrong when neglecting the length bias. Weighted regression models are a simple but powerful tool to allow incidence proportion estimation from prevalence data. Using imputation methods, results can be extrapolated to obtain results for the nationwide Swiss PPS study (n = 12931) where the necessary follow-up information was not available. Objectives: Our objective was to investigate a definition of HAI in HHC, their associated risk factors and recommendations for infection prevention and control (IPC). Methods: The study included three consecutive steps: i) a scoping literature review; ii) in-depth interviews with individuals involved in the field of HHC; and iii) a two-rounds Delphi survey online to reach consensus among experts on the results of the previous steps. Results: The review included 47 publications. No standard definition was broadly accepted, risk factors identified were limited by methodological flaws and recommendations were therefore inconsistent. The overall evidence was weak. Nineteen in-depth interviews were conducted, and supported the literature findings, highlighting the lack of agreed definitions, risk factors and guidelines. The Delphi survey included 21 and 23 participants in each round, respectively, and agreement was reached on the following: Definition: Any infection specifically linked with providing care, that develops in a patient who receives HHC from a professional healthcare worker, and occurs ≥48 hours after starting HHC. Conversely, 20 patients in total had MRSA positive specimens. Of these patients, 7 had been screened and were positive (as above), 4 had been screened and were negative, and 9 had not been screened. 6 of the 9 patients who were not screened did not meet hospital criteria for screening and were therefore appropriately omitted from screeningthis accounts for 30% of the total 20 patients. Conclusion: Several interesting conclusions can be drawn from these results. Firstly, the proportion of patients who screen positive to MRSA is low, but the relative percentage of these patients who have clinically relevant MRSA infection in the same admission is significant (26.7%). However, 65% patients with clinical MRSA infection were not identified on screening, due to negative screens or either inappropriate or appropriate omission from screening. Even if screening criteria had been implemented correctly throughout, 50% of patients would not have been identified. This could highlight both a problem with the sensitivity of the screen itself and the screening inclusion criteria. These findings are worth further consideration in our ongoing approach to MRSA control. With the current targeted screening strategy, only 3 patients were truly missed because they were correctly not screened. Of special concern are the 15 patients who never had a positive screening sample. In order to reduce the number of screening samples and thereby the costs and burden for the laboratory, further investigation of the positive patients on screening and those with clinical infection is needed to see if the target group can be further narrowed. Introduction: Staphylococcus aureus has been indicated to cause serious community and health care-associated infections, especially in developing countries where infection prevention and control practice is inadequate. Even though the bacteria colonizes the nasal and other human surfaces, risk of invasive type is high and it sometimes difficult to differentiate the source of its transmission between health care workers (HCW) that handle patients and members of community that attend the Infectious Disease Hospital (IDH) in Kano, Nigeria. Objectives: The study aim was to compare the prevalence of methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) carriage among HCW of IDH and 4 categories of community members that attend the hospital before having contact with HCW. Methods: A cross-sectional study of 250 participants, which comprised of HCWs, food vendors, rural dwellers, children and students. Questionnaires were given to the participants to fill and nasal swabs were collected with their consent. Swabs were cultured on mannitol salt agar for S. aureus isolation, and isolates were screened for MRSA using phenotypic and genotypic methods. Results: Of the total cultures made, 193 (77.2%) yielded growth. The overall prevalence of nasal carriage of S. aureus among the participants was 35.7% while other Staphylococcus species accounted for 64.3%. MRSA was detected in 46 participants (18.4%) phenotypically with 8 detections in HCW, 6 among students, 18 among rural dwellers, 12 among food vendors and 2 among children. MecA gene was detected in 31 out of 46 strains. The MRSA showed high resistance (>60%) to commonly used antibiotics, but were relatively susceptible to colistin (73%) and flouroquinolones (≈60%) Conclusion: In situation where infection control protocol is not followed, chances of acquiring and/or disseminating MRSA between HCW and community members, especially those attending the hospital for the first time and visitors is high. There is need for regular screening of new patients and implementation of infections prevention strategies to reduce acquisition and cross contamination to others. Extended spectrum beta lactamase (ESBL) producing E. coli before and after routine cleaning and disinfection process and to determine the suscebtibility of the isolated organisms to commonly prescribed antibiotics. Methods: Methods: For 7 days, two selected locations of restroom floors from male and female hostels were swabbed in the morning before and one hour after cleaning/disinfection. Culture, identification, antibiotic suscebtibility tests were performed using standard techniques. MRSA and ESBL-E.coli were detected using cefoxitin susceptibility and double disc synergy tests respectively. Results: Result: S. aureus and E. coli were isolated in the restroom floors. Restroom floors near the doors were more contaminated with S. aureus (60% in males; 52% in females) when compared with floors near the base of the toilet seats (36% in male hostels; 32% in female hostels). Overall prevalence of E. coli isolated in the study was 24%, and were mostly resistant to ampicillin (87.5%), co-trimoxazole (75.0%) and amoxicillin-cloxacillin (54.1%). About 96%, 80%, 75 and 60% of S. aureus were resistant to ampicillin, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, co-trimoxazole and cefuroxime. The total number of MRSA among the isolated S aureus was 25 (36.2%), about 64% of which are from male hostels. No ESBL production was detected among the E. coli. Restrooms floors were still contaminated with S. aureus, E. coli and MRSA one hour after cleaning and disinfection. The study showed high level of bacteria contamination of restroom floors before and after cleaning, which indicates ineffective disinfection. Risk of acquiring and transmitting the infectious and antibiotic-resistant agents among users is high, therefore adherence to and implementation of good sanitation and infection prevention measures are needed. Introduction: Untreated staphylococcal ocular infections may cause injuries in the ocular structure and lead to visual impairments, lesions in the anatomical ocular surface, and blindness. Objectives: The aim of the study was to describe the epidemiology and virulence factors of 90 Staphylococcus aureus (SA) ocular infections strains with a special emphasis on ability of biofilm formation and drug resistance. Methods: Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed by disc diffusion or the E-test method according to the current guidelines of the EUCAST. The MRSA, and MLSB phenotypes were detected. Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) was used to detect the mecA, and mupA genes. Erythromycin resistance genes (ermA, ermB, ermC, and msr) were detected by multiplex PCR. Using PCR, the presence of virulence genes were checked: lukE, pvl, tsst-1, etA, and etB. Biofilm formation was examined by the method with Congo red agar (CRA). On CRA, slime-producing strains formed black colonies, whereas non-producing strains developed red colonies. Results: A positive result of the CRA test was accomplished in 66.2% cases; significantly more often in hospitalized strains (73.4% vs 45.4% OR 3.3, 55% CI 1.2-9.3). The most frequent virulence genes were lukE (72.2%) and ermA (15.6%). 73.4% isolates were fully susceptible. In hospitalized patients the level of resistance to at least one antimicrobial category has been identified as 40.9% and 27.2% in outpatients. Among the tested strains: 5 (6.0%) had the resistance phenotype MRSA and 22 (26.5%) the resistance phenotype MLSB. Four strains manifested both mechanisms. Erythromycin's resistance equalled 25.3%, in those resistant to fluoroquinolones. Resistance to fluoroquinolones was 5 times more often found in ambulatory patients. All the tested isolates were vancomycin sensitive. Conclusion: Biofilm formation is an important risk factor for developmental staphylococcal hospital-acquired ocular infections. Our results indicates the high efficacy of chloramphenicol and fluoroquinolones treatments, as well as the need to implement new solutions due to the aforementioned bacteria's high resistance to neomycin and anatomic barriers difficulties. Methods: Twenty-eight clinical MRSA isolates were collected randomly from three referral hospitals in Taif, Saudi Arabia. Isolates were cultured and minimum inhibitory concentration of 17 antimicrobial agents were determined according to the British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy standards using Vitek2 system (BioMerieux, USA). Polymorphic region of the spa and seven housekeeping genes were amplified and sequenced. spa-typing and MLST were analyzed using BioNumerics v.5.1 (Applied Maths). All samples were screened for presence of PVL and mecA genes using polymerase chain reaction (PCR). CA-MRSA and HA-MRSA infections were defined according to centre for disease control and prevention/National healthcare safety network (CDC/HNSN, USA) criteria. Results: All isolates were susceptible to chloramphenicol, rifampicin, nitrofurantoin, teicoplanin, daptomycin and vancomycin. T4573/ST22 strains are most prevalent in Taif city (N=6, 21%). Three isolates (t363/ST240 strain) were resistant to eight antimicrobial agents. Alarmingly, most of t4573/ST22 strains were PVL positive, resistant to ciprofloxacin and related to HA-MRSA infections. Conclusion: Evidence of emerging multi drug resistant S. aureus strains carrying the PVL gene circulating within hospitals, highlights the urgent need for continuous active surveillance and implementation of prevention measures. Not applicable. In total, 3341 caretakers were screened due to MRSA outbreak investigations. Of these, 9 (0,3%) were diagnosed with MRSA. Based on spa typing, 2 out of 9 (22,0%) caretakers were linked to the outbreak strain. In total, 678 patients were screened due to MRSA outbreak investigations. Of these, 10 (1,5%) were diagnosed with MRSA. Based on spa typing, 9 out of 10 (90,0%) were linked to the outbreak strain. Conclusion: The percentage positive findings among caretakers and patients is low. The majority (77,8%) of MRSA positive findings in outbreak investigations among caretakers were considered incidental findings. However, the majority of MRSA positive findings among patients were considered to be linked to the outbreak (90,0%). This research suggests that the practice of outbreak investigations as currently used in Maasstad Hospital might be interpreted as excessive and the size of outbreak investigations could be reduced. Objectives: This study aimed; [1] Investigating the bacterial load of nosocomial infections in dust particles, [2] Identifying type of clinical isolates using different selective media, [3] Comparing the biochemical properties and effects of dust particles from different indoor environments and [4] Improving health quality for those who are exposed to contaminated dust particles. Methods: The project involved dust samples from different living environments for inoculation and enumeration for total viable aerobic bacterial count and drug resistant strains (i.e. MRSA). Testing of toxicity levels of dust particles for micro-organisms as well as human cells with the help of different Bioassays including Acute toxicity, Yeast Estrogenic Screen (YES), Genotoxicity and MTT Assay for cell viability after exposure to dust samples. Results: In results, particles contaminated with pathogens 5x 10 6 cfu/ g of dust showed more acute toxicity. For YES, estrogenic activity was reduced due to breakdown of estrogen. In Gentoxicity and MTT Assay for A-549 the Human Alveolar Epithelial cells, dust treated with pathogens showed higher toxicity. Both treated and untreated dust samples were containing significant load of viable bacteria and MRSA showing the low efficacy of bleach as disinfectant. Conclusion: As a conclusion, there is need to optimize the concentration of household cleaning products to improve safety guidelines, and give us directions to decide which cleaning products need to be abandoned completely for indoor use in order to minimize or eradicate the negative environmental health impacts. In future, the study results will also be helpful for developing new, less harmful disinfectants/cleaning products for indoor settings without any potential risk to human health. were observed in the province. The increased incidence rate of VRE in this region resulted in increased provincial incidence rate compared to the previous year. Conclusion: In the context of a province-wide surveillance, the cessation of VRE screening at admission, in hospitals of one region in the province of Quebec, resulted in the increase of VRE infections. While the number of admissions in this region accounts for a small proportion of provincial admissions, we observed a significant increase in the incidence rate of VRE infections due to changes in colonization screening measures in only one region. Objectives: The European Standard methods for testing the bactericidal efficacy of antiseptics typically employ the related species Enterococcus hirae (ATCC 10541) as a reference test organism. Additionally, and primarily focussing on thermal tolerance, the Enterococcus faecium reference strain ATCC 6057 is tested in the context of the chemicalthermal instrument-or textile disinfection only. In order to evaluate the above-mentioned findings on E. faecium ST 796 in the context of current hygiene and test standard requirements, we therefore compared the in vitro efficacy of commercially available alcoholic preparations against E. hirae, E. faecium ATCC 6057 and E. faecium in accordance with the European Standard EN 13727 (2015) . Simulating surface disinfection with mechanical action (wiping), preparations were additionally analysed in the 4-field-test according to EN 16615 (2015) for their efficacy and its dependency for those three reference strains. Results: Results are presented and discussed with regard to the controversy mentioned above. Conclusion: Results suggest that susceptibility to antimircrobials might primarily be strain-and species dependent quite naturally already and that it rather is thourough compliance to stablished and ever-evaluated hygiene procedures that therfore matters most for infection control. Introduction: Recent studies have questioned the impact of contact precautions (CPs) for Vancomycin Resistant Enterococcus (VRE), demonstrating that through universal preventive measures such as hand hygiene, daily patient bath, environmental hygiene and antimicrobial control program it is possible to discontinue contact precautions without increasing the infection risk. Adverse events associated with CPs such as less contact with healthcare personnel, the psychological impact for the patient, difficulties in patient flow and higher costs question this measure even more. In this study we share the experience of 7 healthcare instituions in Argentina that no longer apply this measure for VRE. Objectives: To evaluate the clinical and economic impact of discontinuing CPs for VRE. Methods: Multicenter study, quasi-experimental pre-post CPs discontinuity, one year pre and year post, in adults with colonization or infection with VRE, in 7 medical surgical hospitals of Argentina with an Infection Control program and without changes in preventive measures suchs as hand hygiene compliance or enviromental hygiene.VRE infection was defined as a positive culture other than surveillance culture and clinical signs compatible for infection <48 hours after cultures for VRE were taken. We compared VRE infection episodes/1000 discharges during the first period and the second period (significant difference p 0.005). An estimate of the costs associated with CPs in the first period was made. Cost savlsing: 11445€ Conclusion: In this experience we were able to discontinue CPs for patients colonized or infected with VRE without an increase in VRE infections, through the implementation of an Infection Control and Surveillance program. Additionally, the discontinuation of CPs resulted in an estimated annual savings of 11445€. Introduction: Although the cost-benefit of universal screening programs for VRE colonization remains controversial, targeted VRE screening of "high risk" patients, and in "high risk" units could be implemented to protect the frailest patients from VRE infections. Objectives: This study reports the evaluation of surveillance and control measures adopted to contrast VRE colonization/infection in a rehabilitation unit of Territorial Socio-Sanitary Authority (ASST) of Lodi. Methods: Since August 2018, in the 40-bed rehabilitation unit of ASST of Lodi all patients are screened for VRE with an active weekly surveillance. Different standard precautions have been implemented. Microbiological surface control was performed using SRK Hygiene monitoring kit system (Copan). Disinfection with hydrogen peroxide and silver cations micronebulization (HyperDRYMist, 99Technologies) after patient discharge was introduced. The trend in colonization was measured using the coefficient of transmission, which expresses the number of transmissions/1000 days for patient at risk. Results: A total of 371 patients (93% bedridden) underwent screening for VRE during the initial 9-month of observation: 278 (75%) of them had a negative rectal swab, while 93 (25%) were colonized by VRE at admission. Colonization by VRE after admission could be identified in 92 (33%) patients, with a median admission-tocolonization time of 12 days (3-80) days. Since December 2018, organizational isolation instead of spatial isolation resulted only in a slight increase of transmission. The coefficient of transmission varied from 1.32 in August raising to 1.86 in January (χ 2 =0.48, p=0.49) and subsequentely decreased to 1.17 in April (χ 2 =1.86, p=0.17). VRE was isolated in urine of 17 patients and in blood coltures of only one patient, without a clear clinical meaning. Conclusion: Our data highlight the strong survival and diffusion capacity of VRE in healthcare settings. The value of VRE screening in a LTCF remains contentious: VRE colonization is of no concern, VRE are "wimpy" pathogens, VRE control is difficult and costly, however in the absence of control measures, VRE colonization rates increase. Introduction: A large outbreak of vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium (VRE) vanB ST796 is affecting several hospitals in the Canton of Bern since December 2017. As patients are regularly transferred from the affected hospitals to a 110-bed rehabilitation clinic in the Canton of Valais, this institution is regularly exposed to this clone. Therefore, the prevention policy was reinforced. Objectives: To assess whether our prevention policy is effective to prevent dissemination of VRE. Methods: Transferred patients were categorized as follows based on information provided by the affected hospitals: A. Known to be colonized or infected; B. Known to have been in contact with a colonized or infected patient (same room); C. Other patients were considered possible contacts. Patients in category A were isolated at admission. Those in category B were isolated preemptively at admission until 3 consecutive negative rectal swabs were obtained. Those in category C underwent 3 screening swabs as well, but preemptive isolation was stopped if the 1 st swab was negative. In September 2018 and January 2019 respectively, 12 and 13 patients staying in the rehabilitation clinic for >30 days on wards that had housed or were housing VRE-patients were screened. Swabs were plated on chromogenic agar plates (CHROMID VRE, bioMérieux) incubated for 48 hours. Colonies were identified as E. faecium using MALDI-TOF (VITEK MS, bioMérieux) and tested for vanA and vanB genes (Xpert vanA/vanB, Cepheid) before phenotypic susceptibility testing on an automated system according to EUCAST (Vitek 2, bioMérieux The TF detected major shortcomings in the system: lack of pro-active screening in hospitals, lack of a consistent national surveillance and lack of communication between healthcare institutions and health authorities. The financial and administrative support provided by the FOPH facilitated a coordinated national VRE outbreak investigation and enabled identification of deficits in epidemiological surveillance and communication. As a result, the FOPH is introducing mandatory reporting of VRE outbreaks. Cantonal Officers of Health, who are in charge of infectious disease control in Switzerland, will receive electronic updates on all outbreaks in order to pro-actively inform hospitals and contain further dissemination of VRE between facilities. In addition, a center of excellence for epidemiological investigations of nosocomial outbreaks will be launched. Moreover, all isolates were grouped within the same cluster with high genetic similarities (0 to 2 loci differences) and were very similar to isolates from Bern (< 7 loci differences), highly suggesting a link between the two outbreaks. The index case remained undetermined so far: none of the 11 patients had an obvious link with Bern, all but one lived in the canton of Vaud. However, one known ST796 patient from Bern attended our ambulatory pain clinic during the same period and we cannot excluded a transmission through healthcare personal. Conclusion: A year after its first identification in Switzerland, the ST796 VREfm clone is circulating between Swiss hospitals. We showed that prompt detection and strong infection control measures, as described in recently published Swiss national guidelines, are efficacious to contain VRE outbreaks. Introduction: The incidence of Vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), although relevant for infection control purposes, is not systematically monitored in Switzerland. However, antibiotic resistance data from hospitals, representing at least 75% of annual inpatient days, are collected on a weekly or monthly basis by the Swiss Centre for Antibiotic Resistance (anresis.ch). Recently, due to a regional outbreak of a VRE Enteroccocus faecium clone ST796, a one-time nationwide survey on VRE epidemiology was conducted on behalf of the National Centre for Infection Control (Swissnoso). Objectives: The aim of the current study was to compare the anresis.ch VRE data with the results from the Swissnoso survey, in order to identify gaps of detection and hereby improve the national surveillance system anresis.ch. Methods: VRE data from 1 January 2015 to 31 March 2018 from 55 healthcare institutions, each represented in the anresis.ch and the Swissnoso database, were compared. Moreover, we performed a subanalysis of VRE bloodstream infections (BSI). Wilcoxon signed rank tests were applied. Results: Among the 55 healthcare institutions included in the analysis, 332 and 567 VRE detections were observed in the anresis.ch and in the Swissnoso database, respectively, resulting in a significantly higher number of VRE detections per hospital in the Swissnoso database (p=0.036). In three hospitals (5.45%) an identical number of samples was found in both databases, in 14 hospitals (25.45%) a difference of one sample was observed, in 18 institutions (32.72%) the difference was >1 sample, and from 20 hospitals (36.36%) no samples were detected in either database. Regarding VRE BSI per hospital the difference between the two databases was not significant (p=0.28). Two hospitals (3.64%) showed consistently positive results, nine (16.36%) showed a discrepancy of one sample, three institutions (5.45%) a discrepancy of >1 sample, and 41 hospitals (74.55%) showed consistently negative results. Conclusion: Discrepancies between the VRE databases of anresis.ch and Swissnoso were mainly due to missing screening samples in anresis.ch. For VRE BSI congruency was high. In order to prepare anresis.ch for a possible future role in VRE outbreak investigation we have since increased anresis.ch coverage and enforced the data transfer of screening samples. Introduction: Antimicrobial resistance is one of the biggest health challenges facing the world today. Estimates suggest that 700,000 lives are lost annually to antimicrobial Resistance, and it is projected to lead to mortality of at least 10 million lives by 2050. ABR leads to increased health care costs, longer hospital stays, and limited drug options for treatment, most especially in developing countries. One of the leading causes of antimicrobial resistance is self-medication with antimicrobials. Objectives: The aim of this study was to assess the knowledge of antimicrobial resistance among undergraduate students of Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria.North-Western Nigeria Methods: A cross-sectional descriptive study was coducted among 416 respondents using a multi-stage sampling method and data was collected using a pre-tested, coded interviewer administered questionnaire deployed on the Open Data Kit (ODK) software version 1.16.1 installed on an android device. The data was analysed using STATA software version 13.0 (Stata Corp., College Station, TX, USA). Results: Majority (76.44%) of the respondents had good knowledge of antimicrobial resistance. The Mean Knowledge score (± S.D.) of antimicrobial resistance was found to be 9.18 ± 2.61 on a scale of 16points. Self-Medication with Antimicrobials was found to be the main factor affecting the knowledge of antimicrobial resistance. Conclusion: Majority of the respondents had good knowledge of antimicrobial resistance. There is still therefore the need for more educational interventions to curb the growing threat posed by antimicrobial resistance Introduction: Many international publications on antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in China addressed molecular characterization rather than incidence and prevalence on a broader scale. Objectives: The objective of this study aimed at summarizing AMR in seven hospitals of Southern China in 2017, and to specifically calculate the incidence density of AMR in clinical context within three tertiary-care hospitals. Methods: All data on antimicrobial susceptibility testing being reported to the Chinese "WHONET" were included for analysis. Resistance data of three tertiary-care hospitals were linked with patient's data, providing specific information on healthcare-associated infections (HAIs) and community-associated infections (CAIs). Results: Two secondary and five tertiary hospitals reported a total of 2,775 and 13,773 bacterial strains to WHONET, respectively. The proportions of 3 rd generation cephalosporin-(3GC) resistant Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae were 43.9%(95%CI: 42.4% -45.5%) and 30.0%(27.9% -32.2%), respectively. The proportions of carbapenem (CAR)-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter baumannii were 20.7%(18.7% -22.9%) and 49.5%(46.0% -52.9%), respectively. The proportion of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecalis were 26.2% and 0.5%, respectively. In the three tertiary hospitals, the incidence density of HAI and CAI due to 3GC-resistant E. coli was 0.14(0.12-0.16) per 1,000 patient-days, and 0.35(0.32-0.38) per 100 admissions, respectively. The incidence density of HAI and CAI due to 3GCresistant K. pneumoniae was 0.047(0.036-0.060) per 1,000 patientdays, and 0.089 (0.073-0.106) per 100 admissions, respectively. The incidence density of HAI and CAI due to CAR-resistant P. aeruginosa and A. baumannii together was 0.03 infections per 1,000 patient-days, and (0.016 VS 0.022) per 100 admissions, respectively. The incidence density of HAI and CAI due to MRSA was 0.023(0.015-0.032) per 1,000 patient-days, and 0.067(0.054-0.082) per 100 admissions, respectively. Conclusion: Antimicrobial resistance in the seven hospitals of this study was lower than that in Chinese report, but higher than in Switzerland and Germany. However, given the findings on HAI due to AMR, transmission in the hospitals should be followed up carefully, particularly for Enterobacteria and non-fermentative bacilli. Background: Treated wastewater effluent has been known to contain high loads of contaminants, including disease-causing bacteria such as Vibrio pathogens. The aim of this study was to evaluate the diversity and antimicrobial signatures of clinically important Vibrio pathogens isolated from treated effluents of two sub-urban wastewater treatment plants over a period of 12 months (December 2016 -November 2017). Methods: Presumptive isolates were recovered by processing the samples with thiosulfate-citrate-bile salts-sucrose agar and later incubated at appropriately. The presumptive isolates were identified using PCR methods with emphasis on four Vibrio species of public health importance. The phenotypic susceptibility patterns of the confirmed isolates to 18 antibiotics were determined using the standardized Kirby Bauer disc diffusion method. Results: Of the total 206 presumptive Vibrio species, 124 were confirmed belonging to the Vibrio genus. Four clinically important of Vibrio pathogens (Vibrio cholerae, V. parahaemolyticus, V. mimicus and V. fluvialis) were detected in 43, 16, 11 and 4% of the confirmed Vibrio species respectively. All the isolates were resistant to Polymixin B and Tetracycline. Multiple antibiotic resistances were observed among the confirmed isolates and genetic profiling of resistance genes identified tetA 36 %, parC 32 %, tetM 28 %, tetC 25 %, gyrA 23 %, gyrB 18 %, tetD 15 %, blaOXA-48 10 %, and blaIMP 8 % genes among the antimicrobial resistance determinants examined. Conclusion: Based on our findings, we conclude that treated wastewater effluents are potential reservoirs of Vibrio species antibiotic resistance determinants. Hence, there is need for regular monitoring of the wastewater treatment plants for compliance in order to safeguard public health. Introduction: Gut colonization with antibiotic-resistant bacteria such as extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) and/or carbapenemaseproducing Enterobacteriaceae (EPE and CPE respectively) jeopardize infections. Objectives: The aim of this study was to determine the EPE and CPE colonization rate and genotype prevalence among healthy individuals in rural Nepal. Methods: A total of 237 rectal swabs were collected by systematic random sampling from healthy adults and children in the Kaski district of Western Nepal. Volunteers without a history of antibiotic consumption or hospitalization three months prior to recruitment were included in the study. Specimens were screened for EPE and CPE by selective plating and confirmed by phenotypic methods. The β-lactamase genes; bla TEM /bla SHV /bla OXA-1 and bla CTX-M (phylogenetic groups 1, 2 and 9) were detected by PCR and sequencing. All ESBL positive E. coli isolates were screened for sequence type 131 clades (A, B, and C) by multiplex PCR. Results: A total of 187 (79.2%, 95% CI 60, 86) EPE isolates were obtained from 237 specimens, which included 95 EPE (74.8%) from 118 adults, 100 EPE (78.74%) from 118 children. No CPE was isolated. Of the 187 ESBL positive strains, 172 (91.9%) were identified as E. coli, eleven as Klebsiella species (5.8%), and four (2.1%) were of Enterobacter and Citrobacter species. More than 50% of the isolates were MDR. Among non-cephalosporin antibiotics, the resistance rates were observed higher in nitrofurantoin, tetracycline, and fluoroquinolones. The bla TEM and bla SHV gene was detected in 13.6% of the isolates each, and bla OXA -1 gene in 6.5% of isolates. Twenty four percent of total strains co-harbored multiple ESBL genes. Among bla CTX-M ESBL types (70.8%), bla CTX-M-15 genes were found in 95.8% isolates. Out of 172 E. coli isolates, 16 (9.3%) were belonging to ST131 and of clade C. Conclusion: This is the first study in Western Nepal, demonstrating the EPC genotypes and clonal prevalence among gut flora of healthy individuals in community settings. Our data indicates that CTX-M-15 was the most prevalent ESBL enzyme mainly associated with E. coli belonging to non-ST131clones. Introduction: Antibiotics saving the lives of millions of people around the world, and have been a critical public health tool since the discovery of penicillin 1928. Today, the development of resistance of antibiotics well recognized around the world which means simple infections that are treatable today may become untreatable tomorrow. Antibiotic resistance starts at the individual level and impacts the population More attention needed where the access to antibiotics could be without prescriptions Objectives: The aim of the study to increase the awareness among the public communities and create effective communication tools Methods: Most active 10 Public cultural forums in Khartoum State were participate in this study, these Public cultural forums used to conduct weekly event concerning about the Sudanese music and songs for two hours The time for music and songs reduced up to one hour and filled the remaining hour as ½ hour power point presentation about the use of antibiotics and the other ½ for questions and discussion. The key points in the presentation definition, type &classification, mode of action, method of uses guidelines and recommendations Results: The idea accepted by the participants and interacts through questions, comments and discussion as well they enjoyed the music and songs Awareness improved among the participants and many invitations from other Public cultural forums received showing they are interested to participate in the program Conclusion: The idea accepted by the participants and interacts through questions, comments and discussion as well they enjoyed the music and songs Awareness improved among the participants and many invitations from other Public cultural forums received showing they are interested to participate in the program Multidrug resistance results into limited therapeutic options urging the clinicians to reconsider the use of old antibiotics as Fosfomycin. Objectives: Objectives: This work aimed at studying the invitro activity of fosfomycin against the ESBL MDR uropathogens Methods: Methods: The ESBL production among the MDR urinary isolates was screened by Chromogenic agar and confirmed using Cephalosporin/ Clavulanate combined disk method (CAZ and CAZ/CAL) as well as by double disk synergy test. The confirmed ESBL MDR producers were selected for invitro susceptibility testing against Fosfomycin using Disk diffusion Kirby Bauer method. Statistical Analysis was done using Microsoft Excel 2010 and Statistical Package for the social Science ,version 23 for Microsoft Windows. Results: Results: The ESBL producing MDR uropathogens were confirmed in 44.4 % of the total collected urinary isolates (472/1063). It was found that 36.9% (174 / 472) of the urinary isolates were resistant to all antibiotics other than Fosfomycin. The susceptibility rate to Fosfomycin among these isolates was 50% (87 / 174) which was significantly lower than that among other isolates that were not resistant to all antibiotics showing a sensitivity of 80.2 % ( 238 /298 ). The E-Coli showed a highest susceptibility incidence (93.1%) to fosfomycin. Conclusion: Conclusion: The fosfomycin showed a high invitro activity against ESBL producing MDR uropathogens. E-Coli showed a significantly higher susceptibility rate to Fosfomycin than other other tested species Introduction: The appearance and spread of carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii (CRAB) pose an important challenge for optimization of antibiotic therapies and outbreak preventions. Ability to produce OXA-type carbapenemases is the most prevalent mechanism for resistance to carbapenem in this opportunistic pathogen. Objectives: We aimed to evaluate the prevalence of OXA-type carbapenemases among clinical isolates of A. baumannii in a one of the referral hospital in Tehran. Methods: In this cross sectional study 90 A. baumannii was collected from different clinical specimens in Milad hospital, Tehran. Collected strains were identified by conventional microbiological methods. Antibiotic susceptibility testing was done according to CLSI. Oxa-23, Oxa-48, Oxa-58, Oxa-40 and Oxa-24 genes as most common Oxa type genes in A. baumannii were detected buy PCR. The sequencing was used to confirm PCR results. Results: 90 collected A. baumannii was confirmed according to phenotypic methods. Colistin remains the most effective antibiotic in MDR A. baumannii and all of strains were susceptible to that. The most of resistance was observed against cefotaxim, ceftazidim and imipenem. 88%, 67%, 38% and 9% Oxa-23, Oxa-24 , Oxa-48 and Oxa-40 were identified by PCR and sequencing, respectively. Conclusion: the results of this study indicated that the presence of high rate of Oxa-23 and Oxa-24 in MDR A. baumannii and they are the most prevalent of OXA type enzyme in this cause of nosocomil infection in Iran. These genes are located on transferable genetic elements and can spread rapidly in hospital. Thus, nosocomial infection committee of hospital should consider this high prevalence of plasmid resistance gene. Introduction: Resistance to antimicrobial agents especially extended spectrum cephalosporins is increasing globally. Plasmids are key vectors of horizontal gene transfer from one bacteria to another and enable a competent bacteria to take up naked DNA which facilitates the rapid dissemination of genes through bacterial population. Objectives: Testing the sensitivity of the isolated bacteria to third and fourth generation cephalosporins. Curing the cephalosporin-resistant isolates in order to destroy any present plasmid. Re-testing the cured isolates to determine the loss of resistance or otherwise. Plasmid analysis to confirm the presence of plasmid. Methods: The Gram negative bacterial (301) isolates were subjected to standard biochemical tests to confirm their identity. The identified isolates were subjected to sensitivity to standard discs of Cefoperazone, Ceftazidime, Ceftriaxone, Cefotaxime and Cefepime using disc diffusion method according to Clinical Laboratory Institute criteria. Resistant isolates were further subjected to curing experiment using acridine orange by modified technique of Winkler et al. (1976) followed by retesting the isolates for loss of antibiotic resistance. Of the 301 bacterial isolates tested for susceptibility, resistance was observed in 143(47.51%), 299(99.34%), 268(89.94%), 301(100.9%) and 247(82.06%) to Cefoperazone, Ceftazidime, Ceftriaxone, Cefotaxime and Cefepime respectively. On curing the resistant isolates and re-testing for sensitivity to the same antibiotics, 31(21.68%), 9(3.01%), 24(8.96%), 21(6.98%) and 23(9.31%) were found to be susceptible which indicated that their initial resistance was plasmid mediated. Conclusion: The overall plasmid mediated resistances of 10.30%, 3.00%, 7.97%, 6.98% and 7.64% to the respective cephalosporins discs used in this study is a major public health concern as these antibiotics are the drugs of choice for most bacterial infections at the healthcare facility patronized by patients from the northern part of Nigeria and many neighbouring West African countries. Objectives: This study aimed to, phenotypically and genotypically, screen for carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative bacteria (GNB) isolated from bloodstream infections in 4 ICUs in Egypt, to examine the genetic relatedness of the common resistance genes. Methods: The study was conducted over two years in four ICUs in tertiary-care hospital in Egypt during 2017-2018. It included 130 (GNB) isolates from blood stream infection. Identification of isolates was performed using MALDI-TOF. Antimicrobial susceptibility was tested by the disk diffusion method following CLSI guidelines. Phenotypic detection of carbapenemases enzymes activity determined by modified Hodge test and Carba-NP method. Isolates were investigated for most common carbapenemases encoding genes bla KPC , bla NDM , and bla OXA-48 using multiplex PCR assay. Molecular typing of carbapenem-resistant isolates occurred by ERIC-PCR followed by sequencing for the common resistant genes. Results: Bloodstream infections were primary in 63.91% and secondary in 36.09%. The most common isolates were Klebsiella pneumoniae. All isolates were ESBL producers, 38.65% of isolates were positive for modified Hodge test and 45.86% for Carba-NP detection. Multiplex PCR assay detected the bla NDM in 44.44% of the isolates and bla KPC in 19.44%, bla NDM and bla KPC were detected together in the same isolate in 5.55% while bla OXA-48 were detected in 8.54% of the isolate. ERIC PCR ruled out genetic relatedness, which excludes horizontal transmission of isolates. Conclusion: High resistance rates were observed for all antibiotics including carbapenems. Though ERIC PCR showed that the resistant isolates were polyclonal, yet strict adherence to aseptic technique is essential during insertion and maintenance of central lines, as well as the implementation of antimicrobial stewardship. Introduction: Infections caused by MDR gram negative bacilli (MDR-GNB) are a therapeutic challenge to clinicians and Combination antimicrobial therapy with empirically selected antibiotics is often used to treat these infections. This approach is poorly guided, as the antibiotics selected may not be optimal because of different killing activity. This study aims to determine in-vitro efficacy of antibiotic combinations devoid of carbapenems to explore potential synergy between antibiotics of different chemical classes. Introduction: Non-typhoidal Salmonella (NTS) remains one of the most important food-borne pathogen worldwide and presents a big challenge to public health and food safety. Globalization and the import of food, especially meat, have increased the risk linked to NTS. Objectives: the infectious risk related to imported meat. Methods: In the context of microbiological surveillance of imported food products, 33 NTS strains were isolated during the period 2013-2015 according to "ISO 6579: 2002" in Pasteur Institute of Algeria. Six strains were chosen belonging to three different countries and five different serotypes to perform genomic investigations, the six strains were isolated from the frozen meats. A paired-end 2x 250bp sequencing run was performed using the MiSeq illumina. The Nextera XT DNA library Preparation kit was used to construct libraries. Raw sequence reads were trimmed by "Trimmomatic v0.36.4". Assembly was carried out using "Spades v1.3.1". AMR gene presence was investigated with "Resfinder v3.1". The presence of plasmid replicons was explored by "PlasmidFinder v2.0". Virulence was investigated using the virulence factors database: http:// www.mgc.ac.cn/VFs. Samtools SNP Phylogeny pipeline was used to calculate SNP number and build the tree of genetic distance. Results: concerning AMR genes, aac (6')-Iaa was found in all the strains, while qnrB19 was found only in the strain 6. Strains contained an average of 161 +/-9 virulence factors and all contained the SPI-1 and SPI-2. Two plasmids with 100% identity were identified using BlastN on the NCBI database. A large genetic distance was detected between strains. Conclusion: This study tried to highlight the infectious risk related to imported meat, and provided the first genomes of Salmonella spp in Algeria which should allow comparison and monitoring in Salmonella infections. Carbapenem resistant Enterobacteriaceae is a major challenge for microbiology laboratory to identify, given the wide variability in the capacity of clinical and public health laboratories to perform testing for the detection of carbapenemases. That's mainly due to multiple mechanisms of resistance, including carbapenemase production ,extended spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBL)orAmpC enzymes together with porin changes,or efflux and permeability mechanisms. In our study we evaluate the commonest gene detected at our institution; King Abdulaziz Medical City in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; A tertiary care center that include two hospitals(Main Hospital & Children Hospital)with total capacity of 1600 beds. A Total of 1769 Carbapenem Resistant Enterobacteriaceae tested using Gene Xpert® Carba-R which is a qualitative,on-demand realtime PCR test for the detection and differentiation of blaKPC,-blaNDM,blaVIM,blaOXA-48,and blaIMP gene sequences since 2014 to up to date. We tested all samples following the manufacture's instruction. All suspected multi-drugs resistant Enterobacteriaceae tested using this method. The Carbapenem resistant Enterobacteriaceae strains were isolated from urine, respiratory tract, blood, cerebrospinal fluid and wound samples. Out of 1769 Carbapenem Resistant Enterobacteriaceae isolates are(46.8% isolates are blaOXA-48, 20.2%isolates are blaNDM ,0.73%isolates are blaKPC,0.39%isolates are blaVIM and 0.05%isolates are blaIMP). The results presented suggest the rapid emergence of blaKPC isolates. Data shows dissemination of multiple carbapenem resistance genes as blaOXA-48+blaNDM in 6.8% of the isolates and there are 0.11%isolates exhibit both blaOXA-48+ blaKPC. Carbapenem resistant Enterobacteriaceae is a global concern. Adherence to Infection Control practice, rising the awareness and rapid identification of patient once admitted to a healthcare setting are very critical tools to eliminates it's spread in health care setting. Antimicrobial stewardship program must be activated in all institutions as carbapenem resistance start to reach to an alarming level globally. Disclosure of Interest: None declared P336 EVALUATING THE LEVEL OF DISINFECTION AND EFFECTIVENESS OF DISINFECTANTS USED AT KABALE REGIONAL REFERRAL HOSPITAL. C. Ngabirano 1 , A. M. NAMUTEBI 2 , on behalf of kabale regional referral hospital /infectious disease institute uganda 1 Internal medicine, ministry of health Uganda(Kabale Regional Referral Hospital; 2 Internal medicine, kabale regional refferal hospital, KAMPALA/ KABALE, Uganda Background: Disinfectants are used to destroy microorganisms that are living on the objects by destroying the cell wall or interfering with the microbe's metabolism. At Kabale Regional Referral Hospital (KRRH), disinfectants such as Alcohol, Sodium Hypochlorite, and Chlorhexidine are used. Limited data is however available on evaluating the level of disinfection and effectiveness of the disinfectants in Hospital settings. The study was to determine the level of disinfection and effectiveness of the disinfectants used at KRRH. Methodology: Working surfaces and Door handles from fifteen (15) units in the hospital were swabbed during the morning after disinfection. The samples were cultured. The isolates were gram stained and identified using biochemical tests. The disinfectants from these wards were collected and qualitative Suspension tests performed. Results were expressed as 'growth' or 'no growth'. Results: Of the 15 units swabbed, 80% (12/15) showed growth for staphylococcus aureus and Escherishia Coli. 66% (10/15) of the working areas exhibited growth, 6% (1/15) of the door handles sampled also showed growth. The suspension test showed 100% clearance of the bacterial cultures with Sodium Hypochlorite and Alcohol. Escherishia coli suspensions with Chlorohexadin showed 99.9% clearance. Conclusion: Disinfectants used at Kabale regional referral Hospital are effective in killing microorganisms with Sodium Hypochlorite and Alcohol being more effective than Chlorohexadin. The Growth of microgranisms in 80% of the hospital units was probably attributed to poor dilution of disinfectants and inadequate cleaning/hand hygiene. Recommendation. To Strengthen training of cleaners and other hospital staff on proper cleaning/hand hygiene techniques including proper dilution of disinfectants and more comprehensive study should be done to determine the relationship between the isolated organisms after disinfection and the common organisms causing hospital acquired infections, hence prevention. Introduction: The increasing issue of Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) has emerged as a major health crisis in almost all countries of the world including Pakistan. Objectives: The objective of current study was to establish a better understanding of physician knowledge and beliefs, and compare distinctions in knowledge, attitude and perception of junior and senior doctors, regarding the rational use of antibiotics in a tertiary care hospital in Karachi, Pakistan. Methods: A 26-question survey, divided in three sections to test knowledge, attitude and perception, was distributed among doctors in a tertiary care hospital in Karachi, Pakistan. IBM Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) was utilized for analyses.. All data was in the form of categorical values and presented as percentages. No imputation techniques were used for missing values. A p value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant. Results: A total of 200 questionnaires were completed. The greatest response was from the department of General Medicine (32.5%). Although majority of physicians (91.0% ) realized that antibiotic resistance is a pressing issue but significant percentage (n=94 ,47.0%) of participants admit that they over prescribe antibiotics . A substantial number (69.1% ) of junior doctors felt that patients' demands influenced their decision of unrequired antibiotic prescription to patients but only 50.0% of seniors agreed (p = 0.01) on it . Physicians were not educating their patient about proper use of antibiotics , not aware of the antibiotics available in the hospital formulary and harmful effect of antibiotics use in agricultural industry . They did not realize the importance of local antibiotic guidelines and antibiotic policy for logical use of antibiotics . Conclusion: There were many gaps in knowledge and perception about AMR .Obtaining information on the knowledge and diffèrent perception of physicians about antibiotics helps in planning future intervention to improve antibiotics prescription practices and hencé decreasing AMR .This study also highlighted the importance of formulation and implementation of antibiotic stewardship program ( ASP ) and infection prevention and control program in healthcare facilities on urgent basis . Introduction: Antibiotic resistance is rising to dangerously high levels in all parts of the world. In 2016, a multi-sectoral international external evaluation team conducted a joint assessment of the International Health Regulation core capacities of Sudan. By the end of the assessment, antimicrobial resistance was found to score low. Antimicrobial Stewardship is an effective program used by healthcare institutions to reduce inappropriate antimicrobial use. Objectives: This study was conducted to assess the knowledge, attitudes, and practices of healthcare professionals towards antimicrobial stewardship and their predictors at a Teaching Hospital in Sudan. Methods: A prospective cross-sectional study was designed based on an endorsed anonymous self-administered questionnaire. The study included a sample of 128. The inclusion criteria for this study are all healthcare professionals who are willing to participate in the study excluding laboratory technicians and radiologists. Data was collected from March 1 to March 31, 2019, compiled, analyzed (using descriptive statistics and binary logistic regression) and presented using frequency table, figures, and charts. Results: There were a total of 128 participants. 73 % of the respondents were females. The majority of participants had good knowledge (87.5%), 31 % had positive attitude towards antimicrobial stewardship and 33 % of Health Care Professionals had good practices related to antimicrobial stewardship. The main source of information used in dealing with infectious diseases was asking a colleague (41%) followed by standard treatment guidelines and smart phones internet (26%) and Wikipedia and medical encyclopedia (7%). Conclusion: Despite the fact that the practice of Antimicrobial Stewardship is not implemented and well developed in the hospitals and healthcare facilities in Sudan, the level of Knowledge Attitude Practice towards the Antimicrobial Stewardship was good. However, in spite of the casual knowledge of our study participant's, attitude and practice with regards to antibiotic use were found to be unsatisfactory. Therefore, we recommended to develop and adopt guidelines and policies to implement and monitor antimicrobial stewardship in all government and private health institutions countrywide. Introduction: Hospital Antimicrobial Stewardship Programs (ASPs) aim to optimize the antimicrobial therapy by reducing inappropriate use of antibiotics, and thereby reducing antimicrobial resistance and improving patient's clinical outcomes and quality of care. An estimated 40-60% of pregnant women worldwide receive antibiotics during pregnancy or prior to delivery to prevent infection in both the mother and fetus that warrants having a formal ASP framework in obstetrics. A scoping review has identified scarcity of literature around ASP among the obstetric population. Objectives: To describe the antimicrobial stewardship programs among different obstetric setting and to determine the impact of ASPs conducted in obstetric setting, specifically around the consumption of antibiotics, prescribing outcome and patients' clinical outcomes. Methods: We systematically searched the following databases, Cochrane, Embase and Medline (PubMed), CINAHL for studies that provided data on ASP from the inception until May 29, 2019. Studies were included for the final review only if they reported at least one if they presented data on any of these three outcomes, antibiotic consumption, prescribing outcome or clinical outcomes of patients (e.g. length of stay). Results: Whilst the initial database search retrieved 392 relevant unique citations, only 11 studies were identified as potentially eligible for review and analysis. Majority of the studies originated from Nigeria (27%). Most of the studies (72%) collected data from multiple centers and involved hospitals over 500 beds. Majority of the studies were prospective in nature (54%) and the data collection period varied from three months to five years. Most of the studies reported data on prescribing outcomes (72%) followed by antibiotic consumption (63%); two studies estimated the economic impact and the compliance rate to the guideline. Owing to the heterogeneity in method and the data collection it was difficult to pool the data for analysis, however 90% of the studies reported significant impact either in terms of prescribing (72%), Conclusion: Based on the findings, it is evident that obstetric settings with ASPs have achieved significant improvement in terms of rational prescribing, consumption and overall costs Introduction: Public knowledge, attitudes and behaviours relating to Urinary Tract Infection -a highly common self-limiting infection (1)remain under-explored, particularly in countries such as Malta. From a Health Psychology perspective, it is important to explore the perceptions and views people hold towards infections as well as the way they behave in the management of their symptoms. Objectives: This study aims to better understand the views and drivers of behaviours in relation to the management of UTI in Maltese women. The secondary aim is to gain a better understanding of their knowledge and understanding of antibiotics and the drivers of antimicrobial resistance. Methods: A qualitative methodology was utilised involving the conduction of semi-structured face-to-face or telephone interviews with Maltese women recruited via the dissemination of hard-and soft-copy adverts online and around the Maltese Islands. The data gathered from these interviews was analysed thematically following Braun & Clarke's (2006) guidelines. Results: 19 participants were included in the analysis, which is currently underway. However, overarching themes have emerged so far with regards to the management of UTI in the Maltese context. The themes examine: understanding and experience of UTI; participant response to UTI; Help-seeking and management strategies; Interactions with and accessibility of health-care professionals; knowledge about antibiotic resistance and its result on antibiotic behaviour; UTI prevention strategies. Conclusion: A general aversion towards antibiotics as well as a relative openness to alternative methods of managing UTI show promising avenues for interventions aimed at educating and empowering Maltese women in Antimicrobial stewardship with regards to their UTI management. The accessibility of Maltese healthcare can be harnessed in order to encourage women to engage in healthier antibiotic behaviours. Introduction: Southeast Asia is a known hotspot for antimicrobial resistance. However, there is limited information on public and patient knowledge on antibiotics in this region. Objectives: To review current information on knowledge, attitudes and practices on antibiotics among the public and outpatients seeking health care in Southeast Asia. Methods: Studies published in Medline until 01/01/2019 were identified using combinations of terms for the concepts "antibiotics", "knowledge" and "awareness". We also screened article reference lists. We included qualitative and quantitative English-language studies conducted in Southeast Asia on the public's and outpatients' knowledge on antibiotics. Southeast Asian countries were defined as Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) member states. Results: 14 studies met the inclusion criteria and were analysed. The search yielded studies from Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines, Laos, and Indonesia. Most were prospective, descriptive studies which used structured questionnaires that were selfadministered or administered by an interviewer. Study recruitment ranged from statistical to convenience sampling in various settings, including residential communities (rural and urban) as well as outpatients seeking healthcare at hospitals, primary healthcare clinics and pharmacies. Statements used to evaluate subjects' knowledge included: whether antibiotics are effective for bacterial and/or viral infections, whether antibiotics can have side effects and whether antibiotic misuse is linked to resistance. Studies reported varying levels of knowledge on antibiotics. Interestingly, several studies highlighted that despite public and patient awareness that antibiotics are ineffective for viral infections, there was the expectation that antibiotics be prescribed for viral infections such as upper respiratory tract infections. Some studies mentioned self-reported antibiotic misuse practices, such as patients switching doctors or buying antibiotics without a prescription to obtain antibiotics. Conclusion: Southeast Asia is a heterogenous region with regard to development and healthcare standards. Despite varying levels of public and patient knowledge on antibiotics, there are worrying antibiotic use practices, which may contribute to antimicrobial resistance. Further research is required in countries with little information on public knowledge on antibiotics. Introduction: 'Antibiotic resistance' (AR) is the ability of bacteria to become resistant to the action of antibiotic agents, threatening the effective prevention and treatment of an ever-growing range of infections and rendering AR an issue of local, national, and international concern (1). An exploration of public and patient perspectives of, attitudes towards, and behaviours around the use of antibiotics in self-limiting infections is necessary for discovering suitable areas for targeted action in alleviating AR through reducing antibiotic misuse. Objectives: To explore existing literature pertaining to public awareness and knowledge of, attitudes towards, and behaviours around antibiotic use and resistance in SLI. Methods: A scoping review was conducted on 7 electronic databases from inception until May 2017. For included studies, quantitative and qualitative data was extracted, charted and synthesized. Results: 143 studies were included. Symptoms and infections of the respiratory tract were most frequently studied, followed by those of the urinary tract, and the eye. A number of key common factors that may lead to the unnecessary use of antibiotics in SLI were uncovered, including a number of misunderstandings and inappropriate attitudes towards antibiotic use in SLI. Furthermore, sociodemographic and experiential factors have also been found to influence these outcomes, including but not limited to gender; level of education; area of residence or nationality; perceived symptom severity; and past antibiotic use. The use of theoretical frameworks to satisfy study aims was observed in a small minority of included studies. Conclusion: Narrowing our research focus unto areas that are relatively under-explored can help us uncover some important infection-, population-, and context-specific factors that influence inappropriate antibiotic use. The use and application of theory must be further explored if we are to give predictive and robust value to behavior change interventions. The increasing issue of Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) has emerged as a major health crisis in almost all countries of the world including Objectives: Aim of this study was to prepare a protocol that includes learning outcomes and content to explore a national consensus on AMS competencies that will improve the knowledge about antibiotics and AMR for pharmacists and pharmacy students in Sri Lanka. Methods: The first draft of the proposed curriculum was developed through a literature review, informed by extensive investigations of pharmacy students' current knowledge and understanding and ensuring suitability in the Sri Lankan context. A process of liaising with academics and stakeholders in Sri Lanka and discussions with academics from developed countries (such as Australia), was used to prepare the final draft. Results: The resulting curriculum covers six domains: infection and surveillance, antibiotics and antimicrobial resistance, infection and prevention control, quality use of antimicrobial agents, patient education and counselling, and inter-professional collaborative practice. This curriculum was prepared to fit the local context, aligning with recently published World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines on antimicrobial resistance (AMR) education for healthcare professionals [1] . The competencies developed will be applicable to pharmacy undergraduate programs in Sri Lankan universities and for practicing Sri Lankan pharmacists as a continuous professional development program. This protocol, once implemented, will help to strengthen AMS education amongst pharmacists in Sri Lanka and will ultimately benefit Sri Lankan consumers and assist other health care professionals addressing AMR. Introduction: Approximately 40-60% of pregnant women worldwide are prescribed with antibioticsduring prenatal, antenatal and postnatal period to prevent infection in both the mother and fetus. Antimicrobial stewardship interventions such as restriction of drugs, pre-authorization of certain antimicrobials, multidisciplinary rounds and implementation of guidelines and education have shown significant outcomes in patients. Objectives: The current study aimed to demonstrate the impact (more specifically in terms of antibiotic consumption and clinical outcome) of recently implemented Antimicrobial stewardship program at a tertiary care obstetric setting in Qatar. Methods: The study took place at a 300 bedded tertiary care obstetric academic center in the state of Qatar. Data was collected for three different pharmacy specific stewardship interventions, daily defined doses (DDDs) (for 11 months) of intravenous use only, quality outcome such as intravenous to oral switch (>72hrs) and patient specific outcome such as de-escalation, escalation or discontinuation of an antibiotic (2 months each). Results: From May 2018 through March 2019, the DDD for all antibiotics used ranged from (253 -293)/1000 patient days. Majority of the antibiotics were used in postnatal wards, anticipated mostly due to the post-surgical or to prevent infection. Ampicillin was used the highest followed by ceftriaxone, gentamycin, clindamycin and cefazolin. Of 188 patient files reviewed 124 patients (66%) were successfully switched to oral medications, while 62 (35%) patients had substantial justification for not switching, the remaining 2 patients (<1%) were transferred and lost follow up. Most common indication for antibiotic use was chorioamnionitis followed by urinary tract infections. In terms of patient specific outcomes, we extracted the data for 2 months specifically for restricted antibiotics (5), of 73 patients reviewed 16 (21%) patients had discontinuation of antibiotic, 14 (19%) were deescalated to a smaller antibiotic. Conclusion: Antimicrobial stewardship program at the obstetric setting has shown a significant improvement in terms of antimicrobial prescribing and patient outcome. Further long-term studies including cost analysis are warranted to understand the actual impact. The multidisciplinary meetings were held in Jan, April and July 2017. Representatives were appointed to each surgical related unit to prepare the first draft according to the procedures listed in the hospital electronic system. Choices and duration of antimicrobials were reviewed by pharmacists with reference to international and local guidelines. In cases where references were not found, consensus was reached during the discussion. Evidence for preoperative timing, intraoperative redosing and postoperative duration were presented at each discussion. Before the last draft was finalized, a meeting was held with hospital therapeutic committee, IT department and hospital OT committee to draft the implementation strategies to ensure compliance to the guideline. Results: Surgical antimicrobial prophylaxis guideline was launched in September 2018. Compared to year 2012, only 10 surgical disciplines and 20 procedures were listed, in which 70% stated third generation cephalosporins as primary choice. In the revised guidelines, the number of surgical disciplines involved increases to 15, including newly added paediatrics and interventional radiology, with 351 procedures being added. Third generation cephalosporins is no longer put as choice of surgical prophylaxis but replaced with either penicillin group or cefazolin or cefuroxime, according to procedures. In year 2019, the format of the electronic postoperative notes was revised so that the information regarding antibiotic choice, timing of administration and post operative antibiotic plan was made mandatory for regular audit and feedback purposes. (1)), we sought to gain an in-depth understanding of the barriers and facilitators to the use of antimicrobial guidelines and adoption of CDSS by in-hospital physicians. Methods: We conducted a qualitative study using semi-structured interviews among in-hospital physicians in three public hospitals in Switzerland and France. We developed an interview guide with open-ended questions using a comprehensive checklist for determinants of healthcare professional practice (2) . Physicians were recruited by convenience sampling and snowballing until data saturation was achieved. We analysed the data using Thematic Content Analysis with a mixed approach, a) identifying themes deductively from a framework and b) generating themes inductively from the data. Results: We interviewed 30 physicians. The following themes emerged (a) CDSSs were seen as essential tools for our future health systems, (b) CDSSs were felt to potentially compromise physicians' thinking, autonomy and make them lose time (c) both CDSSs and guidelines in general were felt not to be able to replace physician's decision making in complex situations (d) CDSSs were felt to help making guidelines more accessible, (e) CDSSs uptake is influenced by software features and physician resistance to change. Introduction: Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) has a major negative impact on global public health, especially in low-and middleincome countries. AMR is projected to cause up to 10 million deaths annually by 2050, with up to 4,730,000 and 4,150,000 annual deaths in Asia and Africa, respectively. South Africa is a middle-income country facing a quadruple burden of disease. With a shortage of trained practitioners able to expand on the Antimicrobial Stewardship programme, approximately 84% of the population relying on resource-limited public sector healthcare facilities, and a low life expectancy, a treatment-based approach alone is insufficient and ineffective. Culture-sensitive and contextspecific educational material can reduce the literacy barrier and facilitate behavioural changes of low-to semi-literates, resulting in increased practice of health interventions, decreased health disparities and enhanced health outcomes. Objectives: To design, test and implement a context-specific, enduser literacy aligned and culture-sensitive health information leaflet (HIL) on AMR for low-to semi-literate community health workers (CHWs) from seven Primary Health Care (PHC) clinics in Grahamstown, South Africa. Methods: A HIL on AMR was developed based on the key areas identified from 15 semi-structured interviews and six focus group discussions with healthcare professionals and CHWs from seven PHC clinics in Grahamstown. The HIL was subjected to readability testing using seven readability formulae. It was tested for content comprehension and culture-sensitivity using the Suitability Assessment Material instrument and Patient Education Materials Assessment Tool and modified based on peer-assessment and feedback from CHWs. The HIL will be implemented through collaborative workshops with CHWs, which will be evaluated using pre-and post-workshop questionnaires. Results: A thematic analysis of the data supported the need for a holistic health promotion initiative on the prevention and control of AMR. The development of the HIL resulted in aligning to the desired readability of the target group. Suitability assessment results showed that the HIL was suitable for the target population. The HIL was suitable for the CHWs and obtained an average readability score which fell within the target range of this study. Introduction: Invasive candidiasis in critically ill patients has continued to challenge, with infection being associated with significant morbidity and mortality. The criteria for initiating empirical therapy for suspected invasive candidiasis in non-neutropenic high-risk patients remains poorly defined. Early initiation and the widespread use of antifungal agents must always be balanced against the risk of toxicity and emergence of resistance. Over the last decade there has been a growing awareness that improvements to stewardship and robust surveillance is needed to ensure the judicious use of antifungal agents. This study supports the importance of our Microbiology led ICU stewardship programme in promoting effective antifungal usage. Objectives: The aim of this study was to evaluate antifungal use in intensive care and assess the impact of our stewardship programme. Methods: A retrospective analysis was performed over a 12 month period (July 2017 to August 2018). Data on antifungal usage was provided by the lead Pharmacist for our intensive care unit at Glasgow Royal Infirmary, a large teaching hospital within Greater Glasgow and Clyde. Only patients who were identified as being initiated on antifungal therapy were included for anaylsis. The indication/criteria, diagnosis, antifungal management and clinical advice was reviewed for each patient. For each case the microbiological culture results were assessed. The 30-day, 90-day and all-cause mortality rate was determined for the study population. Results: A total of 52 patients were identified as receiving antifungal therapy. In 83% (43/52) of cases, empirical antifungal therapy was considered appropriate based on clinical or radiological evidence. Of these, 53% (23/43) of patients received targeted antifungal therapy based on positive culture results (a Candida spp cultured from a sterile site specimen in keeping with invasive candidiasis). For the 7 cases where antifungal therapy been initiated either prior to admission to ICU or review/discussion on our stewardship ward round, following a detailed assessment antifungal therapy was stopped with no adverse outcome (culture negative, no clinical or radiological evidence, all cause mortality was 0%). Conclusion: This study supports the importance of an effective programme of surveillance and audit to promote antifungal stewardship and improve clinical outcome. Introduction: In antimicrobial stewardship, progress on one front is often met by set-backs in others. We investigated whether some pathogens trends are worsening in the US Veterans Affairs (VA) system, as well as whether antibiotic trends portend to problems in the future. Objectives: Estimate trends for several pathogens by prevalent antibiotic phenotypes. Estimate antibiotic phenotype-specific trends in antibiotic pressure. Methods: Data were extracted between 2005 and 2016 from VA medical centers. The top 5 most prevalent antibiotic phenotypes were studied. Nosocomial trends were assessed by counting clinical isolates occurring after hospital day 2 without precedent in the past year, denominated by patient days-at-risk. Antibiotic regimens selecting for a pathogen were those with no predicted activity given the phenotype. Regimens selecting against a phenotype contained at least one active agent. Antibiotic days for and against phenotypes per 1000 days present were measured. Annual trends were estimated using generalized estimating equations, assuming a negative binomial distribution and allowing for clustering at medical centers. In the presence of ½ MIC GR for E. coli, there is an increase in the antimicrobial action of all antibiotics without exceptiondifferent types of action and different structure. The effect of polymyxin, azithromycin and levomycetin is most strongly enhanced (MIC decreases 10-50 times), and at least for cyclosporine, vancomycin, rubomycin (2-3 times). In the presence of ½ MIC GR for S.aureus, an increase in the antimicrobial action of all the tested antibiotics is also observed. The effect of polymyxin, capremabol, ampicillin increases to the greatest extent (5-10 times). Two antibiotics, ciprofloxacin and naftifine hydrochloride, were tested against fungi. Addition of GR reduced the MIC for both antibiotics 4 times Conclusion: The use of antibiotics of different groups and mechanisms of action in conjunction with microbial auto-regulators of growth, in particular hexylresorcin, allows to reduce the concentration of the antibiotic used. Data collection and analysis Two review authors independently selected studies, extracted data, and assessed risk of bias. We used random-effects models for meta-analysis. If meta-analysis was not possible, we summarized the results narratively. Introduction: Effective surgical hand preparation (SHP) is required prior to surgical procedures. World Health Organization (WHO) recommended two formulations for local production of alcoholbased hand rub (ABHR), composed of alcohol, glycerol, and hydrogen peroxide. However, recent evidence suggests that WHO formulations may not comply with the efficacy requirements of international norms (eg. EN 12791). Objectives: The objective of this systematic review was to assess the efficacy of WHO ABHR formulations and/or any modified version of their composition to international norms for SHP. Methods: The following databases were searched: MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, and Google Scholar. Title-abstract screening, full-text screening, and data extraction were conducted by at least two reviewers. The review was registered to PROSPERO (CRD42018112697). Results: The search yielded 2909 studies for title-abstract screening of which 161 studies were reviewed in full-text. Five studies were identified for the final data extraction. The evidence suggests that neither WHO formulations met noninferiority of the norms, and that increased alcohol concentration by using mass rather than volume percent concentrations and reducing glycerol (either halving from 1.45% to 0.725% vol/vol or eliminating completely) improved both immediate and sustained microbiological efficacy. Generally, 5minute rub showed better efficacy than 3-minute. None of the included studies provided data on tolerability and acceptability of the modified formulations. Four of the five studies were performed by the same research group. Conclusion: Available evidence suggests that the microbiological efficacy of the WHO ABHR formulations is not fully compliant with international norms for SHP. However, the clinical implication of these findings is unclear. Some studies indicate that modified formulations could improve compliance with the norms but their tolerability is unclear. Thus, more research is needed to identify more effective and well-tolerated ABHR formulations for local production. Disclosure of Interest: None declared with antimicrobial soap and water are both recommended for surgical hand preparation, as they are considered equally effective for surgical site infection prevention. Objectives: To compare the tolerance and acceptance of surgeons to handrubbing with ABHR and handscrubbing with antimicrobial soap and water. Methods: A matched clinical trial was conducted in a university hospital among cardiac and orthopedics surgical teams, from April 1 to October, 31, 2017. In the first phase, participants performed handscrubbing with either 2% chlorhexidine (CHG) or 10% iodopovidone (PVP-I). In the second phase, participants performed handrubbing with an ABHR (57% ethanol + 22.5% n-propanol). Two trained nurses using WHO-validated scales evaluated surgeons' skin tolerance and acceptance of the study products. Data was dichotomized in "good" or "bad" and analyzed using the MacNemar's test within the STATA program. Tolerance to the ABHR was separately compared to CHG and PVP-I containing products. Results: We enrolled 56 surgeons potentially eligible, but 23 medical residents did not joined any operation during one of the study phases. Therefore, 33 participants constituted the "per protocol" population. Regarding tolerance, there was little variation in redness, scaliness, fissures, and visual rating of the skin when handrubbing was compared to handscrubbing with PVP-I or CHX. Regarding acceptance, participants rated better handrubbing than handscrubbing with PVP-I regarding product smell (66.6% x 0%, p=0.002), color (73.3% vs 0%, p=0.001) product texture (60% vs 0%, p=0.004), skin dryness effect (60% vs 0%, p=0.004), application (66.6% vs 0%, p= 0.002) and general satisfaction (66.6% vs 6.7% p=0.011). Participants rated similarly handrubbing and handscrubbing with CHX, except for product texture, when ABHR was better rated (71,4% vs. 0%, p= 0.002). When asked which method they preferred, 73.3% answered handrubbing. Conclusion: Considering surgeons'skin evaluation, both handrubbing and handscrubbing were well tolerated. Regarding acceptance, handrubbing was preferred by most of the surgeons. Introduction: Alcohol-based preparation (ABP) was implemented in July 2018 for surgical hand antisepsis (SHA) because of its rapid action, time savings, fewer side-effects and cost savings. Objectives: To evaluate the adherence to SHA with ABP, according to World Health Organization and manufacturer recommendations. Methods: Cross-sectional study, performed from September 2018 to March 2019, at 700-bed hospital with 17 operating rooms. Any member of surgical team using ABP for SHA was observed by a trained professional for 1h, 3 times a week using a personal electronical device with checklist in Google Forms divided in two phases: PI -Preantisepsis and PII -Antisepsis with ABP -executed with fricction in 3 steps: S1 fingertips and forearms, S2 other side's fingertips and forearms, S3 both hands, back of the hands, interlaced fingers, back of the fingers, thumbs; duration of technique, ABP volume used and hand drying. Introduction: According to the surgical hand preparation with alcoholbased handrubs in the WHO Guidelines on Hand Hygiene in Health Care (2009), 5 mL of alcohol-based handrubs is taken with one hand and smeared on the other hand up to the elbow. In this procedure, there is a risk that the expected amount of handrubs could not be applied on the entire forearm due to spill of the handrubs. In order to avoid this risk, we have developed a new method that sprays the handrubs directly from the hand to the elbow using a continuous dispensing mode (up to 20ml) of a no-touch dispenser. In addition to the continuous direct application of the handrubs, the new method also focuses on the disinfection of fingertips since this is the most contaminated parts of hands in daily work in healthcare settings. Objectives: To evaluate the effectiveness of a new surgical hand preparation method. Methods: The efficacy test method of surgical hand preparation, EN 12791 was referred to evaluate the efficacy in this study. The volunteers' hands and forearms were prepared by washing with plain soap, and the resident bacteria on the hands and forearms were sampled to determine the baseline. The hands and forearms were disinfected using the new surgical hand preparation method with a test product (contains ethanol, n-propanol, phosphoric acid and other 3 ingredients). The resident bacteria on one hand and forearm were sampled after disinfection and the number of bacteria was measured to evaluate the disinfection effect. Results: The disinfection effect was observed, and the requirements of EN 12791 were fulfilled. Conclusion: The new method which directly and continuously applies handrubs on hands up to elbows and focuses on the disinfection of fingertips is considered to be effective for surgical hand preparation. The prospective cohort study funded by the Federal Ministry of Health (project "HygArzt" ZMVI1-2516FSB111) aims to demonstrate the effectiveness of hygiene measures introduced by an in ICP trained physician of the department. We investigated the introduction of a new dressing change (DC) concept (DCC), and general hand hygiene compliance (HHC) according to WHO in three orthopedic/trauma surgery normal wards. The DC HHC were recorded with a modified checklist based on the recommendations of the German Commission for Hospital Hygiene and Infection Prevention. Four required hand disinfections were defined as indications ("preparation of DC", "immediately before DC", "before clean phase", "after DC"). In the pre-intervention phase (pre) 337 DC were observed to assess the initial situation. Based on the results, a new DCC was introduced in the intervention phase (int). This included the introduction of additional bed dispensers for hand disinfectants at each patient's bed, taking the dressing trolley into the patient's room to ensure a low-germ storage area, introduction of sterile disposable trays for the transport of dressing material into isolation rooms (into which the dressing trolley may not be taken), theoretical and practical DC-training on and off the job. During the intervention phase, 60 observations were performed and the DCC adapted iteratively. In the post-intervention phase (post) 317 DC have been observed so far. A χ²-test was performed for the analysis. The introduction of the DCC has significantly increased the HHC of all indications. The strongest increase in HHC occurred in the indication "preparation of DC" (34% pre, 91% int to 85% post; p<.001). The HHC also increased in the other indications ("directly before DC"; 32% pre, 73% int, 85% post; p<.001); "before clean phase" (42% pre, 81% int, 96% post; p<.001); "after DC" (74% pre, 100% int, 99% post; p<.001); "after DC" (74% pre, 100% int, 99% post; p<.001). The introduction of the new DCC has significantly increased HHC in all indications of the DC. Through continuous observation and an iterative improvement process, the intervention could already be adapted in the int. With so much clinical evidence to support its use, one would imagine that the field of HH is relatively protected from fake news and misinformation. In the contrary, misinformation about the safety and efficacy of ABHR is widespread and can decrease compliance and put patients directly at an increased risk for HAI. Objectives: To identify the instances and trends of misinformation in the field of HH, especially when the safety or efficacy of ABHR was questioned without scientific evidence to support it (as this would be the type of misinformation that would have the greatest effect of patient safety). Methods: Because of our work in the field, we were already aware of numerous instances of misinformation concerning ABHR. We performed a literature search to identify some of the misinformation that could potentially damage healcare worker compliance. Some of the search questions were "dangers of hand sanitizer", "can hand sanitizer give me cancer" and "reasons to avoid hand sanitizer" Results: A precursory search revealed that there are probably thousands of articles (mostly in the lay press) that misinform the public about ABHRs. These include the ideas that certain bacteria are developing resistance to ABHR, and that most ABHRs can put you at risk for bisphenol-A and triclosan absorption, that ABHR can be toxic to use, or carcinogenic, etc. The effect of this misinformation has not yet been quantified. Based on our research, we will propose a framework to assess the risk for the fake news to spread in HH and link our work to the "European fake news initiative". Conclusion: More must be done to combat fake news and misinformation in HH, as the outcomes of a reduced healthcare worker compliance translates directly into an increase in HAIs and jeopardizes patient safety. Introduction: Hand hygiene (HH) is universally recognized as the cornerstone of healthcare-associated infection (HAI) prevention. Although the WHO "My five moments for hand hygiene" has been used for almost a decade to delineate HH indications and promote action, adherence levels among healthcare workers (HCWs) are still notoriously low and disquieting. Objectives: To compensate for the lack of effective HH communication, we aimed to describe a novel educational strategy by evaluating emojis as possible surrogates for the non-verbal aspects of HH behaviour. Methods: Following a thorough review of the Unicode version 12.0, the most applicable emojis to the terms used in the 5 Moments were extracted. Consequently, we developed a questionnaire to determine infection prevention and control (IPC) experts' opinions regarding the proposed emojis. Completed questionnaires were collected and analysed to assess the suitability of the existing emojis to illustrate a unified emoji poster of the 5 Moments. IPC experts were not informed that other experts would be asked to complete the questionnaire. Results: According to our preliminary results, 8 emojis demonstrated a scientific appropriateness of 50% or more. There was a 62.5% agreement on five emojis related to "hand", "hygiene", "touching", "risk", and "surroundings" and 75% agreement on "patient". Further results of this study will be presented at the conference. Conclusion: Emojis have the potential for promoting HH compliance provided that they clarify information through adding dynamicity to verbal cues that may lead to a more accurate perception of the intentions of the HH process. Using these symbols may be one major step forward in conveying HH concepts. Even though the observations of this study revealed that existing emojis are not completely adequate to express HH moments, using meticulously selected emojis to promote the 5 Moments for HH may result in enhanced attention, memory and behaviour change. Further research and implementation testing is needed. Introduction: Acquisition and dissemination of community and hospital acquired multi drug resistant bacteria (MDRB) remained a public health issue in Nigerian health care delivery systems. Floors of toilets in public schools in Nigeria could be heavily contaminated with all sorts of germs, because they are often characterized by lack of constant water for flushing and hand sanitizers. Possession of smart phones by university students is almost 100%. Objectives: A study was therefore undertaken to determine how social media applications could improve hand washing compliance after use of public toilet between pure science (PS) and social science (SS) students of Nigerian University. Methods: A total of 100 male students, 50 each from PS and SS students with each group sharing same toilets. A chat group for each set of student was opened and information regarding importance of hand wash with water, soap and alcohol based hand rubs was passed to each group on daily basis. Pre and post knowledge and practice was asses via online questionnaire. Voice messages, info graphics and short essays on need to employ hand wash after toilet use was transmitted and discussions was monitored. Nature of response which include questions and clarifications and exhaustion of hand washing soaps and sanitizers placed at a distance from the toilet was used to assess the compliance level. Results: Prior knowledge of MDRB was very low (11%) among SS students when compared with PS students (56%). There is no significant different in the practice of hand wash after toilet use with water and soap among the two groups, but use of hand sanitizer was 13% and 28% among SC and PC students respectively prior to the study. Surprisingly, information passed via smartphone improves the knowledge and practice of PS and SS students by 26% and 42% respectively. Only 12% of the SS were aware of MDRB as problem, but 26% agreed that MDRB could be contacted in dirty toilet but not sure of dissemination. Voice messages recorded high impact on SS, followed by info graphics. A shift in practice of hand sanitizer was observed from initial from 13% to 38% among SS and 28% to 66% among PS. Conclusion: Hand wash campaign via smart phone and social media platforms significantly improves hand wash knowledge, practice and overall compliance among social and pure students of a Nigerian University. Introduction: A train-the-trainers (TTT) 3-day course is used for education of infection prevention and control (IPC) experts worldwide on improvement of hand hygiene practices. A pre-and-post course questionnaire was designed to measure the acquisition of knowledge during the course. Objectives: To develop and field-test a questionnaire on knowledge about HH practices among IPC experts worldwide. Methods: The questionnaire was developed in English. It contained 22 multiple choice questions based on general IPC principles, the WHO Multimodal HH Improvement Strategy, and monitoring HH compliance using the "My five moments for HH". It was developed in consultation with HH experts. 27 IPC experts were invited to pretest the TTT questionnaire. For content validity, participants were asked to complete a feedback survey. For reliability testing, participants completed a test-retest with at least one week interval between the tests. Following expert validation, field testing of the questionnaire was performed at TTT courses organized in 2 different countries involving 29 and 85 participants, respectively, mostly nurses and doctors. Results: 20 IPC experts from 13 countries (Netherlands, France, UK, Malta, Turkey, Malaysia, Australia, South Africa, Brazil, Costa Rica, Mexico, Canada and Switzerland) and 18 healthcare facilities participated in both test-retest of the questionnaire and completed the feedback survey. Experts advised on the construct and content that resulted in some modifications, such as removed, reworded, or added questions. Reliability testing showed good internal consistency (Kappa coefficient = 0.81). Field testing with 114 TTT participants was performed. The before and after test mean (CI 95%±) were 43.10% (± 8.83) and 67.87%(±7.74), respectively, for an increase of 24.7%. Conclusion: The tested questionnaire proved reliable and field testing demonstrated a significant increase in the knowledge of the participants about hand hygiene practices and promotion. Introduction: Hand hygiene is considered the single most important procedure for prevention of hospital acquired infection (HAI) in patients and health care providers. Hand hygiene compliance in anesthesia providers has been poorly studied in Palestine. In the absence of standard protocols for hand hygiene in the Palestinian health care system, compliance may be poor. Objectives: To evaluate compliance of anesthesiologists with hand hygiene practice inside the operating room(OR). Methods: A multi-centre, cross-sectional, descriptive study, using a self-administered questionnaire, was conducted in January-March 2015. Participants' compliance regarding IC practices and availability of training material and programs policies were examined using 48 items questionnaire. SPSS was used for data analysis. Results: Fifty-seven anesthesia doctors from nine governmental and private hospitals in West Bank responded to our survey. Most participants were male (93%) of them 66.7% were residents, and 29.8% were specialists. 61.4% had a postgraduate degree (master, diploma, PhD). Only one third of the respondents begin their day at the OR with hand washing while only half of them always wash their hands between cases. 36.4% reported that they rarely wash their hands before inducing general anesthesia, one third of them specialists. 20.4% rarely wash their hands in neuroaxial blocks, 35.1% in peripheral blocks, 41.7% in venous cannulation. Surprisingly, 24% or participants reported the absence of alcohol inside the operating room Conclusion: Anesthesia providers' adherence to hand hygiene practice and guidelines is extremely low. This exposes patients and healthcare providers to serious nosocomial infections. Further research is required to know why they do not comply the infection control (IC) practices. Hand hygiene improvement programs should be prioritized and addressed to help anesthesiologists to employ safe hand hygiene. Introduction: Healthcare associated infections (HAI) are an important problem not only in hospitals, but also in long-term care facilities (LTCFs). Infection control in LTCF facilities operates in a different framework than in hospitals -infection prevention procedures probably are not as comprehensive as in hospitals. Objectives: The aim of this study was to acquire knowledge about LTCF medical staff knowledge on WHO recommendations on hand hygiene (HH) , their self-assessment of compliance of the practice with recommendations in the context of the infection control program operating in these facilities. Methods: The study was conducted using the diagnostic survey method, which included questions about the WHO recommendations on hand hygiene, self-evaluation of its practice and questions about the scope of infection control programs. The survey was conducted among 237 medical or social workers, from May to June 2017 in LTCFs in the Małopolskie voivodship. Results: Most of the respondents were women (96.2%), of which more than half worked in the profession for at least 20 years. The majority (90.3%) of respondents declared knowledge of the WHO recommendations on hand hygiene, but only 66.7% of them correctly mentioned the moment before contact the patient and 66.2% after contact the patient. The declaration of the WHO recommendations on 5 moments of HH correlated with the declaration that the supervisor ever checked whether an employee complied with these recommendations, and whether he was correctly applying the Ayliffe technique. 81.1% of the respondents declared that the infection control program was implemented in their unit, and 88.5% that a person was appointed to perform infection control tasks. Almost 70% of respondents declared that HH is the most important hygiene procedure in the context of infection prevention. At the same time, also 70% of respondents said that employees who have contact with patients often overlook the HH, although only 27% positive answers to the question whether they face difficulties related to the HH procedure (lack of funds, etc.) were noticed. In the self-assessment, only 15% of respondents declared that they often overlook hand hygiene. Conclusion: The obtained results indicate that the degree of compliance of HH recommendations with practice in Polish LTCF can be highly unsatisfactory and requires immediate implementation of corrective actions. Introduction: Inappropriate usage of antimicrobiotics has easily induced antimicrobial resistance. To decrease the rate of MRSA, it is essential not only to practice the proper usage of antimicrobiotics but also to educate hand hygiene performance (HHP). In 2017, enforcement rate of HHP was low (37%) in Japan. Otherwise, it is reported that HHP are 36%~51% in the US, 33%~65% in Europe. Objectives: Applying through IoT, we analyzed big data to visualize the status of HHP. Compared the data obtained using new IoT and AI methodology, with the data by the direct / indirect observation, we evaluated the effectiveness of our method. Methods: In July 2018, 21 doctors and 40 nurses in gastrointestinal surgery ward(GSW), were subjects of this study. At entering into a patient's room / patients zone and exit from there, HHP by using disinfection and /or liquid soap were analyzed from the data collected by IoT system. Installed IoT gates on the ceiling can collect the data from each sensor on the pump of disinfect. Mobile phones and mobile disinfect bottle which belong to medical staff, send the wireless signal to IoT gates and enable to integrate the data to show the location. The data of the individual, time course, location, the kind of disinfect, the amount of disinfect were accumulated for 24 hours in the particular area. Results: The average rate of HHP was very low (7.8 %) in doctors and rather high (27.2 %) in nurses. In 5 Moments presented from WHO, the average rate was 8.3 % (Step 1), 2.9 % (Step 2), 21.6 % (Step 3&4), and 10.8 % (Step 5). In our facility, the disinfect volume ( mL / patients・day) was 83.7 in NICU, 17.5 in ICU, 10.1 in hematological ward, and 7.4 in GSW. HHP rate in ICU was 40.1% in doctors and 96.1% in nurses, at entering ICU room. Conclusion: Using IoT, compliance of HHP can be analyzed accurately for 24 hours continuously. The system could collect the data concerned with HHP in real time and all of the medical staff simultaneously. In GSW, it would be necessary to educate medical staff for recognizing the importance of HHP. Applying feedback system will enable us to proceed with HHP. Introduction: During the evolution of man from our earliest ancestor Ardi (Ardipithecus ramidus) to our own spezies Homo sapiens hand skills have developed and become refined (1.). The hand and brain of the modern man interact in a way that allows handling of fine tools and advanced technical equipment like smart phones. The thumb and index finger have become more important and widely used. By their usage they come into contact with microorganisms (2.). Objectives: The aim of this observational study is to unterstand how kindergarten children wash their hands in a natural way without instruction. Of particular interest is whether the thumb and index fingertip get the attention they deserve. Methods: Parents of kindergarten children were asked to film their children with a smartphone while the children wash their hands at home. The children did not get any special instruction in handwashing techniques beforehand. The children knew, that they were being filmed. The first 20 records received (from 12 March to 3 April 2019) were analyzed for this presentation. Results: 20 children aged between 5 years 2 months and 6 years 9 months participated in the study. Only one child washed the index fingertip in a reasonable way. The other children did not rub the index fingertip against another hand part in order to wash the fingertip. The claw hand, which is necessary for such an action, was not formed naturally when washing hands. The thumb was washed well by 2 children and in a rudimentary manner by another 5 children. 13 out of the 20 children did not wash their thumbs. Conclusion: When handwashing children do not give the attention to the thumb and index fingertip which they deserve in view of the wide usage of those hand parts. These findings may explain, why the thumb and fingertips belong to the often missed hand parts during handwashing (3.) . The reason for this handwashing behavior probably lies in the anatomy of the hand and in the hand/brain interaction.To wash the thumb and index fingertips properly we need more concentration on these parts. It does not work automatically, but requires concentrated brain energy until it becomes habitual. Introduction: A low hand hygiene compliance of physicians was observed in Coronary Intensive Care Unit (CICU) and remained a challenge for four years. Improvement strategies were initiated and implemented to change culture on physicians' perspective and to improve compliance. Objectives: To increase hand hygiene compliance of physicians in CICU from 56.5% in 3rd Quarter 2014 to above 90% target by the end of 4th Quarter 2018 and beyond. Methods: A quality improvement "Hand Hygiene Project" was initiated by multidisciplinary team. A driver diagram was developed to implement strategies and to empower staff to remind doctors for any missed opportunities. Trained secret observers were chosen to monitor physicians' specific compliance based on WHO My 5 Moments of Hand Hygiene and compliance rates were posted monthly by names in CICU Board. Annual recognition was given to physicians with 90% compliance rate. Results: After implementation of initiatives, physicians compliance rate gradually increased but low compliance rates below the 90% target was still observed due to the rotation of new residents. A baseline rate of 56.5% was markedly increased to 86.52% in 4 th Quarter 2016 then dropped to 79.19% in 4 th Quarter 2017. With continuous reinforcement of practices in 2018, a 90.73% compliance was achieved in 4 th Quarter 2018 and a 60.58% increase from baseline rate. A reduction of healthcare associated infections was evident with the significant increase in hand hygiene compliance in CICU. Conclusion: Developing a behavioral culture change from physicians' perspective was a real challenge and could happen gradually over a period of time. The implementation of interventions and reinforcement of practices will enhance physicians hand hygiene compliance to achieve 90% target. With strong leadership support, cooperation, teamwork, commitment and recognition of physician champions for hand hygiene can make a difference in improving physicians' hand hygiene compliance. Introduction: Hand hygiene is considered the most important measure to reduce the healthcare associated infections. Objectives: The main aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of an educational program among medical students' knowledge and attitude toward hand hygiene (HH) at Mashhad University of Medical Sciences. Methods: Two groups of medical students of Mashhad university of medical sciences (the first group consisted of the medical students who just passed the physiopathology course and the second group was the students at the beginning of the residency period) were selected to participate in the study during 2017. The Persian version of WHO questionnaire on HH knowledge and attitude was completed by each participant. Then they attended a teaching workshop about the importance and the method of hand hygiene. The same questionnaire was filled by the participants on finishing and 3 months after the workshop. The paired t test was used for analysis of the data. Results: A total of 277 medical students entered in to the study. About 71% completed the study. The knowledge level of the residents was significantly higher than the externs at the beginning of the study (p<0.001). There was a significant difference between the pre-test and the immediate post-test scores on HH knowledge and attitude of the attendants (P<0.001). However, the late post-test scores reduced compare to the immediate post-test scores, but they were still higher than the pre-test scores (P<0.001). Conclusion: Training program can improve the knowledge and attitude toward hand hygiene. Regular course is recommended to maintain the knowledge and attitude levels.  Hand hygiene (HH) is the best way to prevent healthcare-associated infections. The most effective strategies for promoting HH use behavioral changes. Guided by the Precede-Proceed model, the present study aimed to describe the predisposing factors and facilitators of HH among nurses in two hospitals in Kinshasa and to examine associations between these factors and various characteristics of participants. The quote was of a descriptive correlational type. The convenience sample included 89 nurses who had previously participated in HH training (response rate: 83%). The data were collected by selfadministered questionnaire. In addition to participants' characteristics, the questions focused on knowledge, perceptions of HH, and social norms, as well as access to infrastructure that facilitates the adoption of this behavior. Bivariate and multivariate analyzes were performed. The results show lower scores on the scales measuring knowledge and access to infrastructure, compared to the other constructs studied. Significant multivariate associations are obtained in the regression model of perceptions of social norms in hand hygiene. Being in the older age group (50+) and the practice location (hospital and unit) are significant predictors. The findings reveal gaps in HDM knowledge and confirm the importance of the workplace and perceptions of social norms, an important determinant of health behaviors. Introduction: The WHO's "My 5 moments for hand hygiene" is designed to prevent the spread of infectious organisms in healthcare settings which occurs mostly via health-care workers' (HCWs) contaminated hands, items/equipment and the environment. Information on its implementation in Tanzania is needed. Objectives: The main objective of the study was to assess knowledge, access to facilities for hand hygiene and the adherence to the WHO's five moments of hand hygiene by healthcare workers at Dodoma Regional Referral Hospital. It included an assessment of source of microbial contamination through an examination of bacterial content of cell phones of healthcare workers. Methods: This was a descriptive cross-sectional study. Three sets of data were collected through i) questionnaires to assess knowledge and attitudes and barriers to effective hand hygiene, ii) observation to assess adherence of five moments of hand hygiene, and iii) laboratory examination of samples from cell phones for bacterial contamination. Analysis was performed by using Statistical Package for Social Science (SPSS). Results: Over 75% HCWs had had formal training on hand hygiene and had access to hand washing facilities, but only 63% were aware of the 'WHO 5 moments'. Doctors, nurses and health care students were observed and of the 270 hand hygiene moments, only 7 (2.6%) complied with expected action. No group was better and no hand hygiene was observed after touching cell phones. Thirty four percent of sampled cell phones were contaminated with Staphylococci species which were resistant to penicillin and had varying resistance to Erythromycin, Clindamycin and Gentamycin. Conclusion: Hand hygiene is the most effective way to reduce the risk of health care associated infections. However, this case study has shown that many healthcare workers do not adhere to the five moments of hand hygiene despite having training and availability of hand washing facilities. The low practice of hand hygiene means that cell phones of health care workers can easily act as reservoir of transmissable organisms. This study has highlighted the need to identify factors that prevent the implementation of a known "best practice". More studies need to be done to confirm if this is a general behavior in Tanzanian hospitals and to identify necessary interventions. Objectives: To evaluate the perception and beliefs of ward staff towards their choice of HH practices; hand wash (HW) versus locally developed hand rub (HR). Methods: The project was conducted on two acute medical wards in Sarawak, Malaysia. Staff on both wards were educated on correct HH practices by a staff identified as a change agent (CA) who received training by Geneva University Hospital, the WHO collaborating centre for Patient Safety, Geneva. 111 staff received education sessions by CAs during a 56-days intervention period. 12 groups of Question & Answer sessions using a structured questionnaire were then conducted by a local infection prevention and control expert to evaluate staff choice of HH practices. Staff oral responses were clarified whenever necessary. All sessions were recorded, transcribed verbatim and translated to by an expert court interpreter. The average duration of a session was 45 minutes to 1 hour totalling ≈608 minutes. Results: After education on correct HH practices, more than half the staff, from all professions, preferred to HW and were more confident that HW would mechanically remove germs. Preferences for HW including dislike of the smell of ABHR, poor environmental cleaning and that transmission of sporulating microorganism onto surfaces will occur unless HW is performed. Conclusion: Staff prefer and tolerability of locally made ABHR can not be overcome with intensive education. However, staff practice for HW will still provide successful implementation the WHO Multimodal HH Improvement Strategy if staff can commit to the required number of HW per shift. Otherwise industrial ABHR may circumvent the current preference for HW. Introduction: Acquisition of community-associated infectious agents from dirty environments is widely reported in Nigeria. For two consecutive years, restroom floors of congested student hostels and other high-touch surfaces such as corridor floors, toilet and hostel room door handles are frequently contaminated with multidrug resistant (MDR) bacteria before and 1 hour of cleaning and disinfection. More recent isolation of strains of MDR present in contaminated surfaces from the hands of restroom users necessitates this study. Objectives: The objective is to determine how scaring students on the dangers of MDR via face-to-face and through whataspp voice message can impact on their hand hygiene compliance after use of contaminated restrooms. Methods: Two sets of 50 students (A and B) sharing 5 restrooms at different hostel blocks were selected. Practice of hand hygiene with water, ordinary and medicated soaps and alcohol hand rubs after restroom use was assessed before and after scaring voice messages on dangers of MDR and high chance of the acquiring MDR in their restrooms was passed verbally and through whatsapp. Improvement in hand hygiene was determined by the number of participants that used alcohol hand rub placed at about 3 m away from the restroom for 4 weeks. Results: Prior knowledge of danger of MDR was low; it is 16% and 12% in set A and B respectively. The overall practice of hand hygiene with water, ordinary and medicated soap by all the participants were 63, 57 and 23% respectively. Prior use of hand sanitizer was very low (6%). Scaring the participants face-to-face significantly resulted in improving compliance by 56% as against use of whatsapp voice message which only resulted in 11%. There is relative improvement in hand hygiene for up to 4 weeks in set A scared via physical voice, unlike set B which lasted for only 1 week. Follow-up questions on MDR were received from 44 and 18% of participants from set A and B respectively. Conclusion: Incorporation of scaring strategy into teaching of hand hygiene to non-health care workers can encourage participation and compliance. Dissemination of information via face-to-face engagement impact positively in improving hand hygiene practice than using whatsapp. Introduction: In most healthcare facilities in Benin, the indicator of availability of equipment and consumables needed for hand hygiene compliance according to WHO guidelines is less than 20 %. Objectives: Allow healthcare workers to have continuous access to sufficient amounts of hydroalcoholic solution for better Hand Hygiene compliance during care. Methods: --Training workshop for 32 hospital lab technicians on the guidelines for local production of hydroalcoholic solutions; -Logistical support from WHO and Belgian Development Agency for supplying the essential material needed for production of hydroalcoholic solutions in 6 hospitals as an experiment; -Awareness of IPC Commitee members and of staff in general, respectively on the rational management of hydroalcoolique solutions and their efficient use according to WHO guidelines; -Administration of WHO standardized questionnaires to of stakeholder on knowledge and perceptions related to hand hygiene and healthcare associated infection risk; -Organization of the World Hand Hygiene Day with showing to the press of locally produced hydroalcoholic solutions samples. Results: --Hydroalcoholic friction is viewed by 75% of IPC commitee managers as an effective, fast-track and less constraining alternative than hand-washing for preventing healthcare associated infections; -An average monthly requirement of 100 L of hydroalcoholic solution was estimated by Hospital. This quantity would be about 8 times cheaper than the same amount purchased from importers according to hospital managers, of whom 83% didn't know that effective local production of hydroalcoholic solution was possible; -All of them have committed to allocate a specific budget for maintaining this local production. A mapping of prioritization of the place of care with a high level of risk of manupired transmission of microorganisms was carried out within each facility. Conclusion: The initiative to produce the hydro-alcoholic solution locally is wise, especially in a resource-limited country like Benin. However, a regulatory framework must be established to ensure and maintain quality assurance in each production unit. Introduction: Alcohol-based hand rub(ABHR) is the gold standard of care for hand hygiene practice in healthcare settings [i]and proper use can reduce health care associated infections (HCAIs) by as much as 40%. [ii] However, the cost of ABHR ($8-10 per litre for commercial supplies) is considered to be the main impediment for supply. Objectives: 1.To promote local manufacture of ABHR in order to promote hand hygiene in public facilties in Uganda. 2.To establish the cost of local manufacture of ABHR versus commercial ABHR 2.To monitor hand hygiene compliance in public facilities in Uganda Methods: Infection Prevention and Control committees were trained to manufacture ABHR as part of a broader package of interventions including general IPC principles. To initiate the program, facilities were provided with 100 litres of purchased commercially-prepared ABHR. Requisitions for constituents of ABHR were made through the National Medical Stores (NMS) system. Facilities were also provided with tools to distribute ABHR supply and monitor monthly ABHR consumption. Cost inputs were obtained from NMS price lists and IDI procurement invoices Finally, IPC committees were trained to assess hand hygiene compliance based on the WHO 5 moments of hand hygiene framework. Results: Three regional referral hospitals (Mubende, Jinja and Mbale), manufactured 160,80 and 90 litres of ABHR respectively. Mean production cost was $3.70 (13,700/=) per liter versus $6.80 (25,000/=) per liter of commercial ABHR (45% saving). Over time, hand hygiene compliance in Mubende and Jinja increased from a baseline of 22.0%, and 10.9% in 2017, to peaks of 54% and 50% in 2018, respectively. Conclusion: Facilities that benefited from comprehensive IPC support program including local manufacture of ABHR registered improved hand hygiene compliance. Feasibility of scaling up local ABHR production is being explored. Introduction: Hand hygiene process is an essential and cost-effective way to minimize healthcare associated infections in hospitals. Given the lack of infrastructure in most hospitals in Sierra Leone (lack of sinks with clean running water, soap and disposable towels), alcoholbased hand rub (ABHR) is the best solution to providing the means to hand hygiene when indicated at the point of care. Objectives: Training of healthcare in ABHR production was in line with the strategy to strengthen infrastructures relating to hand hygiene in hospitals. The main objectives were to demonstrate the ABHR production process from primary materials to finished product, the ABHR quality control process from primary materials to finished product and assess each participant's ability to perform ABHR production Methods: Fourteen participants were identified from the pharmacy and nursing departments of Sierra Leone. The participants underwent a theoretical and practical training on alcohol based hand rub production. The theoretical training was conducted over 3-days. A demonstration of production process was conducted followed by supervised production. Each participant managed to work as an operator and as a double check. The recommended World Health Organization Alcohol Based Hand-rub Formulation 1 was used during the process of production. University of Geneva Teaching hospitals record keeping forms were adopted during the manufacturing and quality control. Alcohol content determination quality control was done using a Gay Lussac alcoholmeter, and semi-quantitative determination of hydrogen peroxide using quantofix test strips. Results: Seven groups of two participants (operator and checker) where trained in Sierra Leone. Each group managed to produce 3 batches of 10 litres and 3 batches of 20 litres Alcohol Based Handrub solution 80% v/v. The average concentration of first group was 80.4% v/v after adjusting for recorded temperature. Ninety eight percent (41/42) of the batches had hydrogen concentration of 150mg and 2.4% (1/42) had a concentration of 300mg/ml. All produced batches were compliant and released for use after 72 hours of quarantine. Conclusion: Sierra Leone successfully managed to have 14 pharmacy and nursing staff trained in local production of alcohol based hand rub. Sustainability of the program is essential to allow the continuous supply of hand rub to all facilities. Introduction: Hand hygiene (HH) remains the most effective action to prevent healthcare-associated infections. According to the WHO multimodal strategy for HH improvement, the first essential element is 'system change', i.e. the replacement of soap and water handwashing by alcohol-based handrub (ABHR) at the point of patient care. Unfortunately, commercially-available ABHR agents are seldom available and affordable in low-and middle-income countries (LMIC). To overcome this problem, WHO proposed two ABHR formulations, with specific components and a methodology adapted for their local production. Objectives: We assessed the feasibility of the local production of ABHR in LMIC. Methods: A literature search was conducted (March 2019). Index and free terms text for ABHR, hand hygiene and local production were searched on Medline, Pubmed and Google scholar. All articles in English and French languages are reviewed. Results: The last systematic review was conducted more than 10y ago. Over the past decade, there have been several examples of local production of ABHR as part of multimodal approaches to improve HH, from single hospital pharmacy to national level. The feasibility testing, quality control, and costs of local ABHR production have led to very encouraging results, particularly in terms of cost reduction compared to commercial products available in LMIC. There are, however, barriers to the accessibility of ABHR in LMIC, including difficulties in the procurement of basic ingredients, distribution constraints, and discontinuation of regular budget allocation. One emerging solution for the development of country-based capacity in ABHR production has been promoted through South-North partnership mechanisms. In 2006, such partnership was developed and organized practical ABHR production workshops with quality control. Tools are available online for wide replication in LMIC all over the world. Summaries of tools for change and main implementation barriers as well as reasons for successful models will be presented. Conclusion: Our findings demonstrate that ABHR local production occurs in hospital pharmacies or at national level worldwide. Demonstration of successful models based on local ABHR production would be highly beneficial since the literature remains scarce. Introduction: The World Health Organization recommends patients involvement to increase hand hygiene (HH) compliance by healthcare workers (HCW) to prevent healthcare associated infections (HAI). Objectives: To develop, validate and apply an instrument to identify patients' preferences on their involvement in active or passive, in the HH performed by HCW and by themselves, and preferences about HH education strategies. Methods: Cross-sectional, mixed and sequential research performed in 4 phases (PI to PIV). PI -focus group (FG) performed with inpatients to develop the instrument in PII. PIII -instrument validation: a) content validation by a panel of 2 groups of judges (expert and general public), using Delphi technique with 0.80 of the content validity index (CVI) and the Gwet AC2 coefficient of agreement (CA) and b) apparent content validation pre-test, using cognitive interview (CE) with inpatients. Hospitalized patients answered the questionnaire in PIV. Results: After two FG sessions with 24 patients (PI), the instrument (46 questions) were developed (PII) and this was considered validated (PIII) after a) two rounds of validation (CVI and CA >0.80): 25 and 16 participants in the first and second-round respectively and b) CE with 20 patients. The instrument applied to 100 inpatients (PIV) showed the preferences in HH participation: active/passive (49%), passive (33%) and active (16%), p <0.001. If there is a HCW's invitation for the patient participation, they would feel comfortable to remind them to perform HH: physician (55%), nurse (60%) and nursing technician (58%), p >0.99. If there's no invitation, the willingness to remember the HCWs reduces significantly: physician (26%) nurse / nursing technician (34% / 35%), p<0.035. The preferences of the educational strategy about the importance of HH were: posters (41%) and verbal orientation (24%). Conclusion: Patients tend to participate actively in the practice of HH if there is an invitation from the HCW to remind them; the preferences for information about HH were mainly through posters and verbal guidance by HCWs. The instrument identified patient preferences regarding their participation in the HH program. Results: 65% of respondents were aware of the risks of HAIs prior to our survey. 41% were satisfied with the information they received on HAI risk during their last hospitalization, 7% dissatisfied, 36% did not receive information, 11% didn't remember. Only 28% believed HAIs were preventable. 40% would have $1-$30 per day added to their hospital bill to fund programs that educate patients on HAI risk; 4% more than $30/day. 29% used a medical professional as a source for HAI information, 29% website/web search, 22% friend/family, 15% TV/radio, 14% social media such as YouTube, 13% government health website, 11% newspaper/magazine. 39% had not used any source. Conclusion: Awareness of HAI risk has not changed in three decades (62% vs. 65%). The percentage of respondents having an HAI remained at 12%. In 1989, 62% were dissatisfied with the information received from their hospital about HAIs compared to 7% in 2019. In 1989, 83% believed HAIs were preventable; now only 28% believe so. Willingness to pay for better HAI patient education decreased (57% vs. 44%). Despite 30 years of education and empowerment, consumers are not more aware of HAIs, less willing to pay more for HAI reduction programs, and more accepting of HAIs as a risk of healthcare. However, the quality of information is better for those who report receiving it. We now have a baseline of HAI information sources: medical professionals and websites emerge as top sources in this study. nursing team provides their patients, undertaking this practice can be challenging for a range of reasons. Objectives: To assess the intensive care nursing team' knowledge, attitudes and practices regarding oral care of critically ill patients. Methods: Cross sectional study design was used to achieve the aim of the study. The study was conducted in four Intensive Care Units (ICU) at a public hospital in São Paulo, Brazil. A convenience sample of nursing professionals was invited to participate in this study in December 2018. The survey instrument was designed by the investigators and it was previously validated by specialists. The instrument included questions about demographic characteristics; knowledge towards oral hygiene (13 items); attitudes and practices regarding oral care (15 items). The data was analyzed using descriptive statistics methods. This study was reviewed and approved by the Research Ethics Committee (No 3033243) of the medical center where the study took place. Results: Eight-one nursing professionals (nursing technician=60% and auxiliary=7% and nurses=19%) agreed to participate in this study. The majority of the sample was female (n=64, 79%) with an average age of 37 years old. Thirty-nine (48%) participants related that ICU work experience was less than five years and sixty-three (78%) related have no more than one job. Most responded (n=44, 54%) answered no to have received training toward oral hygiene in critically ill patients. The majority of nursing professionals demonstrated positive knowledge, however the majority of them had fair attitude and practice toward oral care in critically ill patients in ICU. Lack of time and materials were pointed out as a barrier to perform OH. Conclusion: These findings suggest the requirement for permanent education for reinforcing the importance of proper OH in ICU and working with hospital managers to allow sufficient time and materials to attend to oral care as a recommended by the literature. Introduction: IPC training and education is one of the eight core components for effective IPC programmes as defined by the World Health Organization (WHO). However, IPC expertise and opportunities for IPC training are limited, especially in low and middle-income countries. Objectives: We aimed to evaluate a newly developed WHO advanced IPC training package. Methods: An IPC expert consultation identified ten priority training topics which were subsequently developed by global IPC experts in English and French. The training package was first evaluated at ICPIC 2017, then in two field pilots with IPC focal persons in Liberia and Senegal. The evaluation targeted participants, facilitators and observers and included a knowledge test and structured questions on teaching methods, content, time allocation, and general effectiveness using a Likert scale of 1 (strongly agree) to 5 (strongly disagree). Data collection included written evaluations, focus group discussions, pre/post-tests, facilitator briefings, and observer notes. All data collected were analysed descriptively. Results: Participants were 30, 37 and 26 from 35 countries during the initial testing, Liberia and Senegal pilots, respectively. In all three testing occasions, the average scores ranged between 4.1 and 4.7 for all questions, apart from "adequate time allocation for the training" which scored 3.5 at the ICPIC testing. The average pre/post-test scores went from 12.3 to 19.6 (41% to 65%) in Liberia and 17.5 to 21.8 (58% to 73%) in Senegal. Participants considered the IPC content as appropriate although specific aspects missing or unclear were noted. They highlighted the value of practical hospital sessions, videos and demonstrations although some modules were noted as needing additional examples, particularly from lowresource settings. It was suggested that the course length ideally could be increased. We used a robust evidence-based approach to evaluate the WHO IPC advanced training package and improve its quality to support countries in bridging the gap in IPC expertise. Introduction: To teach prevention and control of healthcareassociated infections (HAIs), it is recommended the use of novel methods that stimulate critical thinking, such as simulation. The simulation clinical scenarios to be used should be developed based on scientific evidence, have fidelity, be tested and replicable. Objectives: To develop and validate simulation clinical scenarios to teach methods for the prevention and control of HAIs to nursing students. Methods: Two-stage methodological study conducted at a public university in Brazil: 1) development and content validation of two simulation scenarios; and 2) test of the scenarios and evaluation of their design using the Simulation Design Scale (SDS). Results: The simulation scenarios were developed according to the National League for Nursing Jeffries Simulation Theory. The themes standard precautions, specific precautions, and bloodstream and urinary tract infections were used. Ten experts participated in the content validation and achieved an agreement of at least 80%. In the second stage, 44 students participated. Twenty-eight (63.4%) were mid-course students; 28 (63.6%) actively participated in the scenarios, and 23 (52.3%) had previous experience with simulations. The mean score for the design elements was 4.7/5.0 with the internal consistency of 0.86. The mean score for the item importance was 4.8/5.0, with the internal consistency of 0.93. The SDS items with the smallest means were those that assessed fidelity (4.5 and 4.6). Being a senior (p= .021) and having previous experience with simulation (p=.001) were significantly associated with higher rating scores for the simulation. There were no differences between students that participated or were observers in the simulation. The results of this study demonstrated that the lack of environmental fidelity did not compromise the evaluation of the simulation design. The simulation clinical scenarios developed were shown to be appropriate for the population under study, and feasible as a method to teach prevention and control of HAIs. Introduction: A core component of the WHO IPC recommends that staffing levels be adequate for the patient workload. The lack of healthcare workers in low-and middle-income countries, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa is well documented; one way to alleviate the burden of surgical infections without a large commitment of resources is to better train and educate existing facility staff. Objectives: To understand the current allocation of the surgical workload in district level hospitals in Kenya in order to create targeted task-shifting and education programs. Methods: We developed a cross-sectional survey on IPC practices, adapted from the World Health Organization (WHO) Guideline on Core Components for IPC and the WHO Emergency and Essential Surgical Care Situational Analysis Tool, for use in district level facilities in low-and middle-income countries. Survey components included IPC guidelines, surveillance, workload and environment, hospital characteristics, clinical workforce, obstetrical outcomes, and perioperative care practices. In a pilot feasibility trial of the survey tool, data was collected from 27 district level hospitals in Kenya from March to May 2019. These facilities were selected in part based on their capacity to provide comprehensive maternal and obstetric care, including cesarean operations, as cesareans make up the majority of surgeries in the regions and are associated with high SSI rates. Introduction: Uganda has low numbers of health workers, to bridge this gap task shifting has been done with mid-level practitioners providing clinical care even for patients who should ideally be handled by specialists. Objectives: Training opportunities to equip the mid-level practitioners and health workers in general are costly and limited. Through e-learning, affordable and convenient learning opportunities are being provided by the Infectious Diseases Institute (IDI) to equip these health workers with the necessary knowledge and skills to build their technical capacity in clinical management including promotion of Antimicrobial Stewardship(AMS) and handling Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR). Methods: IDI's open access Virtual Learning Environment(VLE) hosts peer-reviewed case studies on AMS, AMR surveillance reports and guidelines that are freely accessible to health workers, utilization of these resources is evaluated through an online post-test and online certification is subsequently provided. A toll-free phone line is made available to participants in case they have queries related to the cases or other clinical issues. Results: AMS resources were launched in March 2018, so far 5 case studies, 2 surveillance reports and 1 AMS success story were uploaded and accessed by over 160 health workers with 52 certificates downloaded after completion of learning. Low numbers of certificate downloads are attributed to among other reasons, a pass mark which muct be obtained. However, health workers cite internet challenges, ward burn out as some of the barriers to accessing these resources. Conclusion: E-Learning can be an effective capacity building avenue for health workers in AMS and has potential for scale up if barriers are addressed. Introduction: Staff development refers to the process whereby employees of an organization enhance their knowledge and skills in directions that are advantageous to their role in the organization. Infection control department conduct different on job training to enhance staff knowledge and skills which helps to prevent and decrease hospital acquired infections (HAIs). Their training started from general orientation programme, ongoing in-service education and simulated workshop. Methods: The PDSA Plan-Do-Study-Act model, a continuous quality improvement (CQI) tool, was used to enhance staff knowledge and competencies related to infection control. Plan: In Q4 2017 it was identified that the number of sessions conducted by ICNs were drastically decreased from 55 to 35, simultaneously staff engagement decreased from 1326 to 1200. Do: The problem identification was done through annual risk assessment at begin of the year and educational planner was developed. This planner includes session for general orientations, in-service sessions, infection control linked nurses session. The modules were revised as per guidelines, different strategies were used.Study: It was identified that staff will required to refresh their knowledge thus all the educational material kept on website for easy access. Pocket guide was developed in both versions. Simulated workshops were conducted. Act: It was identified that all the staff were not covered through session thatswhy worked with IT and launched mandatory on line certification for all the direct care staff. Results: After the implementation of all the strategies drastic improvement was seen and we were able to achieve our targets. It was observed that our no of session increased more than 50% i.e. from 35 to 71 and staff engagement increased from 1200 to 1844. Conclusion: Health care workers sessions are very essential to decrease hospital acquired infections and mandatory on line course is essential to enhance staff knowledge related to infection control. Introduction: Infection control link nurses (ICLN) are deployed to support implementation of infection prevention and control (IPC) guidelines Objectives: The aim of this study was to explore the occurrence and variation of infection control link nurse (ICLN) programs in Dutch hospitals and to assess determinants that may influence effectiveness of these programs. Methods: In this cross-sectional study one infection prevention expert per hospital was surveyed during a National Congress for Dutch infection prevention experts in 2018. Survey questions were based on literature that reports on ICLN programs, and The Template for Intervention Description and Replication checklist. This checklist is applicable in the reporting of complex interventions in a non-trial setting. Data was analyzed using descriptive statistics. Associations were calculated for variables that represent current best practices. Results: In total, 72 of 86 questionnaires, representing 82 Dutch hospitals, were returned. A ICLN program is in place in 66.7% of the hospitals. The top 3 goals for these programs were to increase awareness for infection prevention, to create a liaison between the wards and the infection prevention and control team, and for ICLN to be a source of information for their peers. In 87.5% programs ICLN receive education, with a mode of ≤ 4 sessions per year. Respondents perceived that they were able to accomplish their IPC goals due to the help of ICLN, when expressed on a 10 point Likert scale, as 7 (IQR 6.0-7.0). Programs that included education on infection prevention topics as well as training in implementation skills were associated with higher perceived effects (median 7.0, IQR 7.0-8.0) than programs without such education (median 5.0, IQR 2.5-6.8) or programs where this education included only infection prevention topics (median 6.0, IQR 6.0-7.5). Conclusion: ICLN programs have been implemented in two thirds of Dutch hospitals. The training of link nurses in implementation skills besides education on infection prevention topics is associated with higher perceived accomplishment of IPC goals by infection prevention experts. Objectives: To advance healthcare workers' IPC skills and knowledge and create a pool of IPC experts committed to reducing healthcareassociated infections in Sierra Leone. Methods: A six-month course was designed for clinical practitioners with previous training in basic infection prevention and control. The program structure consists of three contact sessions, each incorporating classroom didactics, and handson clinical sessions, field assignments, and a preposttest. Face to face and virtual mentorship will be provided between in-person sessions. Competencies will be assessed during contact sessions and mentorship visits Results: Twenty-five HCWs from across Sierra Leone participated in the first cohort of the Competency Based IPC Certificate Course in May 2019. Participants trained in microbiology, standard precautions, and transmission based precautions in the classroom, laboratory and clinical setting. Participants will return to Freetown for the second contact session in July 2019. Conclusion: Competency based training is an effective way of building national capacity, increase access to IPC expertise at the central, district, and hospital levels of the health care system. Participants will Improve implementation and coordination of IPC in healthcare facilities and promote creative thinking and problemsolving skills around IPC issues to improve healthcare delivery. Objectives: To educate the ICLN in four interactive workshops which will be used to investigate the perception of the ICLN on their role and identify barriers for ICLN that may withhold them to fulfil their role. Methods: A training program was developed to interfuse knowledge on IPC measures with executive and implementation skills. In 4 interactive workshops, situations common to the daily care practice of ICLN were simulated in role-plays. ICLN took part in the play as a patient, as a coworker or as themselves. All others observed the compliance with IPC protocols or the role of the ICLN. Role-plays were evaluated directly afterwards. During the last workshop the ICLN role and the impact of this role on various IPC topics was discussed. ICLN where asked to share experiences and their ideas on how to improve the 8 IPC topics that the role-plays were based upon, in daily practice. Results: A total of 42 ICLN participated in the workshops and 62% of the ICLN attained more than one workshop. Evaluation of the roleplays and the discussion on the role revealed that ICLN interpretation of their role varied, despite the existence of a written role profile. Furthermore ICLN struggled to blend this role into their role as a nurse in daily practice.Ideas to overcome these barriers could be divided into 4 categories: knowledge, skills to fulfill the ICLN role, ideas for short term projects, and ideas for long term projects. To address the barriers identified in the workshops in a playful way, an IPC quartet was developed using experiences and ideas of the ICLN. It contains one instruction card and 32 play cards based on 8 IPC topics. Conclusion: Barriers to fulfill the role of ICLN uncovered during this training program emphasize the need for collaboration between IPC experts and ICLN to translate the ICLN role into their day-to-day work. An IPC quartet could be a suitable tool to fulfill this need. Introduction: Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) is a crucial indicator of quality and safety in healthcare settings, monitored to reduce patient infection and improve his outcome. Hand hygiene monthly audits in Recovery has fallen below 75% in three consecutive months, prompting urgent individual and team education to improve staff engagement and compliance with local and national IPC guidelines. In situ simulation is an effective educational method, allowing teams to review and reflect about their own practice in their actual working environment, identify system weaknesses and develop solutions to overcome those, improving safety and the quality of care provided. Objectives: In association with the IPC team, the aim of this project is to facilitate personalised education through in situ simulation and ultimately improve IPC and patient safety in Recovery. Methods: Two in situ, high fidelity simulations were delivered to the Recovery team in the months of March and April. Those sessions were recorded and posteriorly analysed in relation to hand hygiene and protective equipment with the collaboration of the IPC team. A teaching session was then planned and delivered, including the visualization of the simulation records and facilitation of team reflection and discussion about IPC practices requiring improvement and the review of IPC guidelines and the five World Health Organization (WHO) moments of hand hygiene. Added to the teaching session, a structural change was also made in the Recovery setting, with the reallocation of alcohol-based handrub foam into each bed space, to reinforce its usage. Results: The results from the project will be ready for poster publication at the ICPIC Conference. Those will include the trend in Hand Hygiene Audit in the months of June to August and feedback forms from the Recovery team. Conclusion: In situ simulation improves individual, team and organizational learning, promotes engagement and increases the opportunity to practice knowledge, skills and attitude. Through in situ simulation and consequent reflection over own practice and change of behaviours, this project endeavours to improve IPC practices and the quality of care provided in Recovery. Introduction: Healthcare-associated infection (HAI) is a major challenge in modern medicine. Objectives: We attempted to provide knowledge on infection prevention and control (IPC) to different audiences, focusing on education as an essential part of multimodal approaches towards IPC. Methods: We sent a nation-wide invitation and gathered medical, nursing and dentistry students from all over Iran to present projects on "How to reduce HAI?" in a predefined structured format. After excluding non-conforming projects, two reviewers assessed all projects using a standardized protocol; the top twelve were selected. The contest was designed in three rounds. In first round, 12 teams were matched one by one and debated in a knockout manner, while the jury reviewed the scientific content and presentation skills to select the top five. In second round, the reviewers selected the top three projects for final presentation in front of a panel including renowned international experts to determine 1st to 3rd ranks. Results: We received 49 projects, of which 11 (22%) were excluded due to non-adherence to the predefined criteria (10) and to plagiarism (1). The overall score of the retained 38 projects averaged 69.38± 18.25 (SD; maximum score, 115). The average score of the 12 selected projects was significantly (p <0.001) higher than that of the 25 others. In first round, the top 5 projects scored significantly (p < 0.001) higher than the 7 others, 147.6±9.22 vs. 116.97±9.13, respectively (maximum, 188). The average score of the three projects selected in the second round was 157.06 ± 5.40. Conclusion: Building a powerful motivation combined with interactive educational methods might play an important role in adherence to guidelines to help implementing multimodal approaches and promote innovation in IPC. Introduction: Emoticons are ubiquitous symbols that enable us to convey emotional and non-verbal cues. In particular circumstances, emoticons may improve communication by increasing attention and effecting positively on behaviour and health. Objectives: The aim of this review was to identify examples of using emoticons in medical literature, highlighting infection prevention and control (IPC) as a field that is significantly influenced by human behaviour. Methods: We conducted PubMed and Cochrane database search for the keyword "emoticon" with no time limit. All identified original research studies using emoticons in IPC were summarized. Results: Our search yielded only one eligible study published in 2018. By performing a field experiment research, Gaube et al. revealed the significant impact of injunctive norms on hand hygiene behaviour by using an emoticon-based feedback system. Conclusion: Emoticons facilitate effective communication by giving personality to the written text. However, despite the prevalent use of these global symbols, there are currently limited data available concerning the role of emoticons in health behaviours particularly related to IPC as a major component of health systems. According to the satisfactory results of the only evidence existing, further research is necessary in the health system. Conclusion: In LMICs, WASH infrastructure investments are often ill maintained and needs outpace funding. Low cost and scale-able interventions are required to increase and maintain WASH services to enable infection prevention practices. Results from Clean Clinic Approach implementation demonstrate that substantial progress can be made to improve infection prevention readiness in HCFs without waiting for expensive, large-scale infrastructure investments. Lowcost system changes can empower managers within wards, HCFs and local governments, to make and sustain improvements independently of external investments. Introduction: In 2013 UZ Brussels launched the idea for the patients to see and to hug their pet during their hospital stay. But lack of legal regulation around animals visit to patients was an obstacle. Therefore it was decided to build a House (Villa Samson) next to the hospital, a ' meet and greet ' place where pets and therapy animals can come for a visit. Objectives: The aim is to describe the implementation of infection prevention rules in zootherapy. Methods: As the plans progressed, the need to create an infection prevention framework together with the initiators and the expertise of a vet, became clearer. In addition to exclusion criteria for patients and animals, visit rules and regulations about cleaning and disinfection were drafted and implemented. Results: The staff consists of a coordinator with a nursing background and volunteers. The latter accompanies the patients to and from Villa Samson and guides the patients and animals in the house. Before entering the service and annually, they participate in a training day with instructions on hand hygiene and cleaning/ disinfection. Meanwhile, Villa Samson is open for more than 1 year. To date, no incidents have been reported. On average, there are 60 visits per month, especially from psychiatric, pediatric, geriatric and rehabilitation wards. Because of an increasingly shorter hospitalization, the practical organization of a visit to Villa Samson remains difficult. Everyone tries as much as possible to adhere to the rules but hand hygiene compliance is sometimes difficult, just as it is in the hospital. Conclusion: This experiment proves that the risk remains manageable as long as the setting adheres to a procedure, such as the High Health council (HGR) in Belgium prescribes. Introduction: Low hand hygiene compliance (HHC) at hospitals remains a problem and good monitoring methods are needed. Objectives: We aimed to asses HHC and describe our experiences using a real-time automated hand hygiene monitoring system. Methods: An automated HHC monitoring system (Sani nudge™) 1 was installed at two Danish hospital wards between Feb 2018 and Sep 2018. The system constantly monitored staff hygiene behaviour using sensors located on staff name tags, patient beds and sanitizers. Specially designed algorithms based on the WHO's '5 Moments for Hand Hygiene' and local hospital guidelines were used to calculate the HHC levels. The system has been validated and compared with direct observations. Results: With 79 staff members (nurses, n=73; doctors, n=6) included, the system registered 2.2 million data points equating to 127,601 direct observations and a mean HHC of 46%. There was a disparity in HHC rates across room types with the lowest HHC in patient bedrooms (mean 36%) and the highest HHC in staff toilets (mean 80%). In the patient bedrooms, the staff more often sanitized hands after (mean 35%) than before (mean 26%) patient contact. Fluctuations in HHC between days became smaller as the HCWs worked with the data from the fully integrated system and a general upward trend could be seen achieving HHC levels as high as 93% in staff toilets. Conclusion: The automated hand hygiene monitoring system proved to be a successful alternative to current observation methods in supplying detailed information about HHC. The data-driven approach provided hospitals with unbiased and real-time compliance data while giving important insights into hygiene behaviour. Importantly, the system helped identifying critical areas with low HHC that was improved. Introduction: According to bacteriological tests (BTs), the level of colonization by nosocomial microorganisms of hospital facilities is from 5 to 36%, however, these tests do not always help to determine the pathways of infection. Additional information can be obtained from RT-PCR tests, but its place in the system of epidemiological survey has not yet been determined. Objectives: To conduct a comparative study of BTs and RT-PCR tests results in assessing the colonization of hospital environment objects. Methods: 215 samples of washout specimens from various sources of hospital environment were processed by BTs and RT-PCR tests. Results: Positive results of BTs were found in 54% of samples, RT-PCR at the same objects in 80.0%, with strong correlation (r=0.92) in content. The coincidence of the results in most cases was noted at high values of DNA copies (800-10000), and mismatch of the results at low values of DNA copies or in the presence of microbial associations. BTs revealed 129 microorganisms with a predominance of coagulase-negative staphylococci (CoNS) -70.5%. RT-PCR discovered the DNA of 288 pathogens: CoNS -55.6%t, Streptococcus spp. -19.8% and Enterococcus spp. -16.7%. The frequency of pathogens from ESCAPE group was 22.7% in the BTs and 41.3% in RT-PCR(p< 0.05). The RT-PCR tests revealed genes of methicillin-resistant St.aureus 1.9 times more often (p <0,05) and found the genes of metal-βlactamase (MBL) in 26.0% of washout samples, where the BTs did not find the MBL producers at all (p<0,05). Conclusion: Although the PCR method doesn't answer the question whether pathogens that are found on the objects of the hospital environment remain alive, but the detection of their DNA indicates that they have contaminated the surfaces for some time and could be a source of nosocomial infection of patients. Introduction: According to WHO, defective infection prevention and control (IPC) practices during every day health care delivery cause harm to hundreds of millions of patients worldwide every year. To achieve successful implementation of the core components (CC) of infection prevention and control (IPC) programmes, WHO is committed to assisting countries with the development and implementation of evidence-based IPC guidelines, as one key component. Objectives: To determine the baseline of one country in the European Region with regards to the current level of implementation of the IPC CC at national level. To test the draft content of a planned, easy to read five-step roadmap for national development, adaption, adoption, implementation and monitoring of evidence-based IPC guidelines in this country. Methods: A desk exercise was undertaken to critique the available information on the WHO five step cycle for implementation and a mapping exercise performed to highlight examples that could form the basis of a roadmap for guideline development. A baseline assessment, using the WHO National IPC Assessment Tool 2 (IPCAT2) was performed. Finally, in-country interviews were conducted and pilot testing of the draft content of the roadmap was performed. Results: The desk exercise resulted in an enhanced outline of the WHO five step cycle, focused on the actions required at the outset of guideline development, to inform the draft roadmap. The pilot test country exercise identified gaps in the content but importantly the need for such a roadmap to allow for a systematic and robust decision making process that is time efficient and has an impact on practice. Conclusion: Further testing of the roadmap content is planned with an additional eight countries in the European Region. A final report including recommendations for the use of the roadmap is expected early 2020, alongside the final visual roadmap. As technical guidelines should provide clear directions on IPC priorities, evidencebased standards and a framework for local adaptation, including training and monitoring of adherence, this roadmap, if adequately developed, can lead to quality improvement and enhanced outcomes. This work will build upon the WHO core components for IPC, supporting prevention of healthcare associated infections and antimicrobial resistance. Introduction: Medical devices may be heavily contaminated with mircoorganisms during daily use and challenge the staff in reprocessing (cleaning and disinfection) them appropriate. Antimicrobial surface technologies could provide great advantages to reduce microbiological contamination. The principal effectiveness of these surface technologies can be demonstrated by standard methods such as the Japanese Industrial Standard (JIS Z 2801). However, there are only a few studies to date on the activity of antimicrobial technologies after reprocessing and permanent use under regular clinical conditions. Objectives: In this work, various manufacturing strategies of common antimicrobial surface technologies were considered and examined regarding their potential impact on their effectiveness. A special focus has been on the possible impact of reprocessing in routine clinical setups on the functionality of the coatings. Methods: Therefore, in laboratory tests, various samples of different materials (glass, plastic, metal, tiles) were antimicrobially coated and the durability of the coatings was evaluated after abrasion tests simulating routine clinical reprocessing. The assessment was done by light and electron microscopic examination of the surface structures as well as by microbiological test methods (JIS Z 2801). Results: Our studies showed strong differences in the durability of the antimicrobial coating depending on the surface texture and the antimicrobially active coating substance used. While some of the coatings were still able to show an antimicrobial activity even after 500-fold wet abrasion, the coating on other test samples was already damaged after the first wiping step with distilled water. Conclusion: Our results suggest that both the antimicrobial active substance itself and the underlying surface material have a strong impact on the durability of the antimicrobial surface technology. Therefore, the assessment of the interplay of these factors is a critical issue and should play an important role in the development of new products with permanent antimicrobial activity in clinical settings. Results: A total of 7871 articles were screened by title and abstract, of which 164 were reviewed in full and 47 were finally included. Overall, included studies showed low quality (reviews, systematic reviews and before-after studies) evidence. Most studies were performed in high-income countries (40/47) and were facility-based (40/ 47). Horizontal IPC measures mentioned as minimum were: hand hygiene (91%), transmission-based precautions (including triage) (87%), surveillance (85%), education/training (81%), built environment/infrastructure (77%), guidelines (70%) and decontamination (70%) and monitoring/audits/feedback (66%). The most frequent vertical interventions were those to prevent catheter-related bloodstream infections (36%), ventilator-associated pneumonia (26%), and surgical site infections (21%), while among pathogen-specific ones, those related to the prevention of the spread of MRSA (32%) and Clostridium difficile (19%) were the most frequent. Conclusion: Horizontal interventions were more frequently mentioned as minimum standards compared to vertical interventions. The use of multimodal and stepwise approaches is critical for their integration. This work will guide the identification of minimum requirements for IPC as the starting point to implement the WHO core components, in particular to help prioritization in low-resource settings. Introduction: Studies suggest that continuously killing antimicrobial surfaces based on copper can reduce bioburden and lower the risk of infection [1] . Copper-containing glass ceramic particles in materials such as architectural wall paint stabilize and release Cu(I) by a slowrelease mechanism imparting microbicidal properties to the coated surface [2] . Objectives: Evaluation of the bactericidal efficacy of coated surfaces containing copper-glass ceramic particles against ESKAPE pathogens leading cause of nosocomial infections, and non-enveloped viruses (Adenovirus 5 and Feline Calicivirus). Comparison with currently available antimicrobial paints containing silver ions and quaternary ammonium compounds (QACs). Methods: Bactericidal efficacy tests including study controls were performed as described in the US EPA's test for efficacy of copper alloy surfaces as a sanitizer. A 20μL inoculum of test microbes was exposed to coated coupons containing copper-glass ceramic particles for 2 hours at ambient temperature and humidity (23°C; 42% RH). Following the exposure period, coupons were neutralized and assayed for survivors/infectivity. Differences in CFU/PFU counts between control and test coupons were calculated to evaluate efficacy. Results: A 3 log (≥99.9%) reduction in colony counts and or reduction of bacteria down to limit of detection was observed against all six ESKAPE pathogens, Adenovirus 5, and Feline Calicivirus when exposed to coatings containing copper-glass ceramic particles. In contrast, commercially available paints with silver ions did not demonstrate ≥3 log kill when screened against S. aureus under realuse contamination conditions. Conclusion: Copper-containing glass particles in decorative coatings and other high-touch environmental surfaces offer a pragmatic and broadly deployable solution for hospital infection control. Introduction: Among other factors, the successful control of nosocomial infections includes the proper planning and observance of cleaning, disinfection and sterilization measures. To which extent constructional and constructive measures of medical devices should be improved by an additional antimicrobial coating is currently the focus of various research projects. Objectives: This study aimed to assess the impact of "hygienic design" and antimicrobial coating for hygienically relevant surfaces. Methods: In this work an evaluation of the "hygienic design" for hygienically relevant surfaces was done with two exemplary surfaces. On the one hand with the Fresenius 4008S hemodialysis machine and on the other with different surfaces of cabinets and drawers in the preparation room of the research OR of OTH Amberg-Weiden. In a first step we evaluated the "hygienic design" of the surfaces, by applying fluorescent markers as well as artificial microbiological contamination in order to evaluate the effectiveness of cleaning and disinfection measures. In a second step we examined the impact of antimicrobial TiTANO® technology after artificial microbiological contamination. Results: In our setup, nearly all surfaces could be fully decontaminated with standard C&D procedures. In general, it turned out that most of the examined objects essentially fulfill the requirements of an easy to clean "hygienic design". Only a few constructive elements (covers, edges), have been detected which are difficult to clean and disinfect. Additional antimicrobial coating leads to an overall reduction of the microbiological contamination. Conclusion: "Hygienic design" is an important factor for effective cleaning and disinfection of hygienically relevant surfaces. An antimicrobial coating may contribute to a reduction of the hazard potential. Based on the results, antimicrobial functionality may be considered as a supporting measure in connection to intraprocedural hygiene cleaning and disinfection protocols. Introduction: Liver transplant unit hosts patients at high risk of infection due to their comorbidities and immunocompromised status. Recurrence of extensively resistant bacteria and Clostridium difficile outbreaks in a liver transplant unit in a university hospital urged for an infectious risk assessment visit. Objectives: This was the opportunity to experiment an a priori assessment risk method with the aim to highlight critical points in infection prevention and control in order to implement corrective measures accordingly. Methods: Data were collected via three pre-tested questionnaires, in which professional practices, maintenance of the premises and knowledge of standard and complementary infection control precautions among health care workers through face to face interviews were explored. The risk assessment visit took place during one full day where medical, surgical and nurse wards rounds were observed, in addition to maintenance of the premises. A qualitative data analysis was performed. Results: A total of 48 questionnaires were collected, highlighting a lack of hand hygiene, a non-compliant glove use (either lack or excess) and an improper chronology when removing personal protective equipments. Among the 14 questionnaires gathered on the maintenance of the premises, none of them reported an expiry date on hand hygiene solutions or the use of an airless solution. In addition, insufficient time was dedicated to the maintenance of premises. In addition, 13 face-to-face interviews were administered to four medical personnel and nine nurses and care-givers, showing a lack of hands-on training in infection prevention and control, a limited professional experience among paramedical staff, a lack of knowledge in complementary precautions and some issues in sharing the patient's infectious status during transfer. Conclusion: Various critical points were described, encouraging the implementation of corrective and sustainable actions and a meticulous assessment of professional practices to adapt infection control measures and prevent the reemergence of future multidrug resistant organisms' outbreaks in liver transplant units. The support to the healthcare settings consist of gathering and validation of the data, analysis of hospital's indicators (MDRO surveillances, hand hygiene, antibiotic use, infection control infrastructure, work load), scientific advice, prioritization and evaluation of measures, mediation between actors, visits and sampling on the field, and if needed, specific control measures (cohorting, closing of wards). Results: Between December 2014 and November 2018, the OST received 33 requests for support. As the assistance for OST support is not compulsory in Belgium, the number of reported outbreaks is not representative for the countrywide situation related to MDRO and nosocomial infections. The incriminated bacteria (n) were as follows: vancomycin resistant Enterococcus (10); community acquired methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (4); carbapenemase producing enterobacteriacae (11); Pseudomonas aeruginosa (2); Streptococcus pyogenes (1); Extended spectrum betalactamases (3); Staphylococcus capitis (1). The OST intervention helped to manage and control these outbreaks. The vast majority of healthcare settings mentioned a clear added value during the outbreak management. Most of them are now considered resolved. Conclusion: Thirty-three healthcare settings in Belgium (> 30%) have experienced benefit of the OST support between December 2014 and November 2018, with resolution in the majority of the cases. Introduction: Serious (deep, organ/space) surgical site infections (SSI) are rare events, and such results should be easy to understand for leaders who continually expect improved display of surveillance results. In accordance, we continually optimize our diagrams, and our latest hit is to include "number of surgeries between events" (g chart) in our varied menu of charts. Objectives: Our work shows the usefulness of g chart. Methods: In Norwegian hospitals SSI surveillance is mandatory and based upon criteria from European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (chosen surgeries only); post discharge patients are also included. Infections control departments are responsible for data collection and for reporting results to National Institute of Health. Our work was based on data from Vestre Viken, a Norwegian trust of four hospitals with 250.000 annual bed days. Results: In order to be able to reveal clustering of rare events, we have decided to introduce use of g chart. This tool gives leaders vital support to trace development vs time and is essential for their engagement in improvement work and patient safety. In our g charts we have chosen to use a delayed moving window estimate of the mean based on 30 observations and a delay of 10. Previously, our menu for displaying surveillance results (standardized national and locally developed graphs) included tabular data, monthly moving average, monthly incidence rate or benchmark data only. Conclusion: G chart is useful for displaying surveillance results for rare events like SSIs as this method can reveal process out of control at an early stage. This tool is powerful for hospital leaders who are engaged in improving patient care. Infection control staff should implement g chart in their display of surveillance results of rare events. Introduction: Cleaning and disinfection (C&D) of high touch and therefore hygienically relevant surfaces is an important element in infection control. For many hygienically relevant areas in the clinical environment there are no normative or standardized procedures for reprocessing defined. A risk management based classification may help to optimize product design and reprocessing procedures and therefore could contribute to reduce infection risks. Objectives: The aim is to create a VDI guideline that standardizes the risk management of hygienically relevant surfaces and the "hygienic design" of non-critical medical devices and other patient near objects. Methods: Search results of international literature and regulations on classification, risk management and the design of hygienically relevant surfaces and objects in patient care and other industries (e.g. food industry) was performed, reviewed and assessed by a panel of experts from manufacturers, scientists and infection control professionals (including VAH and RKI). Classification methods and guidelines for hygienic design were derived or adapted for medical devices and clinically relevant surfaces. Results: The following key criteria for the risk assessment were identified: location of the area, conditions and frequency of surface contact, endangered vs. endangering persons, surface composition and type of contamination. Other criteria are described as potentially influencing factors. Based on these criteria, a risk management process similar to DIN EN ISO 14971 is defined. Taking into account functional aspects, recommendations for design of hygienically relevant surfaces of nonmedical products as well as non-critical medical devices is derived. Conclusion: This guideline shall lead to hygienically optimized, robust and efficient products and solutions. Introduction: For four decades the hand-hygiene compliance level is below 50%. This historically stable non-compliance levels tell us that things won´t get any better on their own. Objectives: Better system is needed to create the missing habit There are five systemic issues that may make compliance difficult for employees: When employees want to sanitize, they may not always find the sanitizer flask around. Even when a sanitizer flask is found when needed, it may be empty. The sanitizer gel quality could be another issue. The amount of gel dispensed is insufficient for correct disinfection. There is no consequence for non-compliance for employees but there is for patients. In the presence of unresolved systemic issues and in the absence of a control system, employees cannot be blamed. Methods: Govisystem™ is an innovation that puts the burden on the system, not on its users. Through this system, supervisors can observe from their desk and know in real time which employee obtained gel, which of the five hygiene moments was practiced, at which dispenser location (which patient room), at what time, how many times and at what intervals, given the clinical task assigned to that person. Results: Govisystem™ with its LAVAGE formula facilitates complainace. ▫▫ Location: Non-portable gel dispensers are placed at the point of use. ▫▫ Availability: Gel availability in all dispensers is monitored in realtime on the computer screen. ▫▫ Validity: The validity of the gel is guaranteed through quality controls. ▫▫ Amount: Gel dispensation amount is personalized for each user´s hand size. ▫▫ Guidance: Individual performance targets are set to comply with the WHO protocol. ▫▫ Evaluations: Individual evaluations and follow up are done. Conclusion: With this improved system design, hand hygiene compliance can be achieved and Hospital Acquiered Infections (HAI) can be reduced, because we are able to identify each of the 5 handhygiene moments and each HCW so a follow-up can be done to help create the missing habit. Introduction: World Health Organization (WHO) Guidelines on drawing blood: best practices in phlebotomy (1) was developed in 2010 incorporated two hand hygiene moments, 1 and 4, from the WHO My Five Moments for Hand Hygiene (2) . A revision of the Guidelines (1) can be revised to reduce glove use with increased hand hygiene. Objectives: To contemporises the Guidelines (1) by incorporating My Five Moments for Hand Hygiene for glove use by phlebotomists. Methods: The WHO Guidelines on drawing blood: Best Practices in Phlebotomy (1) 16 steps for inpatients and outpatients was revised to reduce glove use and include additional hand hygiene moments. Results: Hand hygiene was included in the steps prior to preparing phlebotomy related items to maintain the cleanliness of collection trolley and other phlebotomy accessories. Further changes include hand hygiene immediately before glove donning in accordance with moment 2. Immediately after phlebotomy revision provided a new step, removal of potentially contaminated gloves followed by hand hygiene, moment 3, to avoid contamination of the collection trolley and patient zone. These revised steps allow the phlebotomists to clean reusable items such as tourniquet and collection tray to prevent transmission of blood borne viruses and other microorganisms from patient to patient zone. Conclusion: This revision includes My Five Moments for hand Hygiene (2) practices that explicitly incorporates hand hygiene for glove use. The revised steps have reduced the number of glove changes, the potential for glove contamination and contamination of the patient zone from used gloves for inpatients and outpatients. s. The revised steps would benefit from further validation among different phlebotomy settings. Methods: A software-based environmental monitoring system was tested in a pilot trial to assess the suitability of the system. It was also used to expand the program for internal quality control purposes. The monitoring methods used were: -Settle plates -Water testing -Sterility testing -Surface and hand swabs -Dip slides -UV Fluorescence Results: Use of a software-based tool allowed the hospital to -map the facility, define all sampling points and allocate risk classes -plan sampling activities in a structured way with respect to sites, samples to take, methods, sampling intervals -capture all data in one place, allowing immediate alerts upon exceeding any limits as well as trending and reporting The system resulted in a time saving of 25% compared to manual sampling, as well as gaining full commitment of the team involved. 173 samples were investigated between December 2018 and March 2019. 7 sterility samples exceeded the limits, resulting in a repetition of tests and additional controls of the sterilization process (equipment and personnel) and re-training of staff. A few dip slide samples were above limit triggering a new instruction of medical and cleaning staff. Conclusion: Introduction of a software-based system helped to manage mandatory monitoring activities in a more structured way, saved time and allowed additional testing in specific critical areas. All air and water samples, surface and hand swabs were within their limits. For sterility and dip slides samples corrective actions were taken. Thus a very good hygiene status was confirmed. Introduction: Infection Control Standard Precautions (ICSP) should be applied by all healthcare professionals to all patients. "Patient placement" is part of the ICSP according infectious risk to prevent cross-transmission. The Portuguese Health Directorate recommends"at patient admission the infectious risk should be evaluated, guiding the decision on patient placement and/or isolation." The CDC recommends to implement systems for early detection/management of infectious persons, at admission". Objectives: (1) infectious risk assessment (IRA) strategy implementation at admission to an acute care hospital; (2) execution of specific infection control measures(isolation and/or active screening) in a selected population. Methods: (1) risk factors definition based on bibliography and institutional guidelines for specific microorganisms control, (2) IRA grid construction/pilot testing; (3) IRA guideline; (4) grid digital integration in Electronic Patient Record (EPR); (5) clinicians training to use the grid, (6) grid definitive implementation applied to all patients. Results: We considered the following risk factors: patients from other health institutions/nursing homes; from countries with high prevalence of Carbapenemase-Producing Enterobacteriaceae (CPE); last 6 months history of admission and/or exposure to antibiotics; presence of invasive devices/chronic wounds; patient on haemodialysis program; presence of diarrhoea/cough;pulmonary tuberculosis suggestive symptoms; multidrug-resistant microorganisms in the last 12 months; patient in "comfort measures". Grid available in EPR, with "yes-no" response. When validating the grid, the clinician receives an automated response regarding the measures to be implemented (ICSP or isolation and/or active screening for EPC or MRSA). Conclusion: The implementation of an IRA at patient admission allows, if necessary, specific infection control measures in order to minimize cross-transmission at hospital. Its inclusion in the network, with automated clinical decision responses, facilitates the process and minimizes errors. In the future, the recorded information will allow to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of this strategy. Introduction: Hospital discharge paradigm has changed: today its approach integrates the different levels of care in the health system. In a well-developed and competent structure (primary and long term-care), hospital discharges occur earlier. Nowadays, epidemiological and demographic variations increase the risk of disseminating multidrug resistant organisms among health care levels. Objectives: To describe a local surveillance system directed to patients CRE colonized/infected in our facility (374 bed acute care hospital and primary health care centre). Methods: Laboratory-based surveillance system, from the microbiology laboratory results and automatic email alert messages to Infection Control and Antimicrobial Resistance Unit (ICARU). At ICARU the CRE case is investigated and verified infection control measures and information management: hospitalized patient, isolation precautions and direct contacts active screening; outpatient, the family doctor and nurse are informed by email; nursing home patient, information by phone; patient transfer to other healthcare facility, its ICARU is informed by phone/email. Inform to National Reference Laboratory by facility microbiology laboratory and local ICARU informs regional ICARU. Results: From 1 st January 2018 to 22 nd May 2019: 144 patients CRE infected/colonized were discharged from hospital; mean age 76 years; 107 enrolled in our primary care and 37 to other facility. 39 patients (27%) were readmitted more than two times. Conclusion: A laboratory-based surveillance system and automatic alert messages, directed to CRE patients, allows to implement adequate infection control measures and monitor patient flow. This patients have high admission rate, so sharing real time information with other local, regional and national institutions, can reduce the spread of microbial resistance. In the future, we expected that full automatic surveillance system help ICARU give fast response using less human resources. Background: Control and prevention of Hospital Acquired Infections is a major challenge to modern medicine. These infections are usually caused by Multi-Drug resistant bacteria and are mostly transmitted by hands of Health Care Workers. Hand hygiene adherence among health care workers is less practiced especially in developing countries. In this study, we investigated the bacterial hand carriage by different health care cadres, commonest pathogenic species and there antimicrobial susceptibility patterns at Naguru hospital in Kampala, Uganda. Methods: All health care workers at Naguru Hospital who met the inclusion criteria were included in the study. Hand swabs were done following standard procedures and samples transported within 2 hours to the laboratory for processing. Positive cultures were followed up, identified and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns done using standard operating procedures. Results: Out of 108 health care workers who participated in the study, 68(63%) were females. Proportion microbial carriage per professional category were highest among nurses 16 (34.8%), Clinical officers 6 (13%), Medical officers 11(23.9%), cleaners 4(8.7%) and others 9(19.6%). Among the wards, surgical and emergency wards had the highest prevalence of pathogenic microbial carriage, 36% and 35.6% respectively. Among the isolated pathogenic bacteria, 25(36.2%) were gram positive whereas 44(63.8%) were gram negatives. Staphylococcus aureus was the most predominant organism isolated, 29% followed by E.coli, 21.7%. 50% of Staphylococcus aureus were methicillin resistant and one isolate was vancomycin resistant. 66.7% of the E.coli isolates were ESBL positive. Conclusion: This study demonstrated that hands of all health care workers, with varying prevalence in Naguru Hospital were colonized with different pathogenic bacteria, some with multidrug resistant forms including MRSA and ESBL. We recommend stringent infection prevention and control measures in this setting. Introduction: The transmission of microorganisms from contaminated surfaces to fingers is known to contribute to hospital acquired infections, but the transfer of microorganisms to fingers after multiple sequential surface contacts with and without hospital nitrile gloves remains unexplored. Objectives: To assess the effect of nitrile gloves on the viable concentration of Escherichia coli on fingertips after repeated contacts with inoculated plastic surfaces experimentally and mathematically. Methods: Coupons of laminate plastic, were inoculated with E. coli, allowed to dry and 35 participants touched these sequentially 8 times using either a bare or nitrile gloved finger. Fingers were swabbed, and colonies cultured for enumeration. A linear mixed effects model was used to examine the effect of gloves as well parameters involved in sampling. An Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) method is used to estimate transfer efficiency for a single contact from the data to compare against distributions from literature. Results: Transfer was dependent on finger microbial loading and showed an oscillatory effect becoming negative after 5 contacts. Transfer efficiency for a single contact estimated using ABC, was higher with bare skin (69%, 95% CI=43-94%) than gloved hands (37%, CI=23-51%). Microbial load became statistically stable after four contacts for gloved hands and after six contacts with bare skin. Analysis through Oldham's method suggests that the initial amount transferred during the first contact only has a significant effect on finger loadings up to the fourth contact, after which there is no discernible effect. Use of gloves has a dominant effect over an individual's finger-to-fomite pressure and finger surface area (p<0.01). Conclusion: On average, gloves reduced loading by 4.7% (CI=-12%>21%) over un-gloved contacts. Highest stochasticity of loading is observed from the first to the second contact, leading to the conclusion that contact with a single contaminated surface may be more important than repeated contacts with equally contaminated surfaces. Introduction: In previous studies, we have shown that a simplified method for hand hygiene (HH; 15 sec rubbing with a hand sizeadjusted volume of alcohol and fingertips first followed by the rest of the hands) can lead to a reduction of approximately 2 log 10 on hands artificially contaminated with either Escherichia coli or Staphylococcus aureus. Objectives: We evaluated the efficacy of this simplified HH method in a laboratory experiment simulating WHO HH moment 4 (after touching patient). Methods: Ten pairs of physicians were enrolled in the study. Each one played the role of the physician or the "patient". The test was performed on 2 separate days. On day 1, after handwashing with soft soap, each physician rubbed all fingertips of both hands in tryptone soy broth in order to estimate their resident flora. They then performed a standardized medical examination of the patient for 4 minutes, after which their fingertips were sampled to measure the quantity of transient flora collected after touching the "patient's" skin. On day 2, the experiment was repeated but HH with isopropanol 60% (v/v) according to our simplified method was performed prior to the second sampling. Three dilutions of each sample were inoculated on agar for 48 hours. A linear mixed model with treatment as covariate and subject-specific random effect was used. A log-transformation was applied to meet normality of the residuals. Estimated treatment effect was interpreted as a ratio of geometric means. The same approach was used for estimating the ratio in the group without HH. Results: Without HH, geometric means of the amount of bacteria collected from the fingertips of the 20 doctors before and after touching the patient were respectively 5,527 cfu and 46,501 cfu (ratio = 8.4; 95% CI 3.96-17.84). When hands were rubbed with alcohol after touching the patient, the estimated number of bacteria on fingertips after medical examination was 93% lower than without HH action (p < 0.001). Conclusion: When hands were rubbed with alcohol using the abovedescribed simplified method after touching the patient, the number of bacteria on the physicians' fingertips was quite similar to the number before medical examination, suggesting efficacy in reducing the transient flora. Introduction: Effectiveness of an act of hand hygiene is regularly evaluated by the fluorescent method. This contains performing hand hygiene with a handrub containing a fluorescent marker, then usually human experts evaluating the hands under UV light, and deciding whether the applied handrub covered the whole hand surface, based on the intensity of UV-dye. Objectives: As the UV-dye generates a color-gradient on the hand after application, there is no direct mapping between the color intensity and the effective handrub amount. The aim of this study was to investigate how differently experts judge the same coverage, and compare that to microbiology for validation. Methods: Hands of volunteers were contaminated with high concentration of apathogenetic Staphylococcus epidermidis suspension, than incompletely disinfected with UV-labeled handrub. Four different devices (Schülke Optics UV, Dermalite Check-Box UV, Stery-Hand and Semmelweis Scanner) were used to take pictures of the given hands under UV light. Next, hands were pressed to a special, hand-size agar plate. Plates were incubated for 24 hours at 37°C. Size of inadequately disinfected areas on the hands were determined in two different ways. First, based on microbiology; an expert evaluated the areas, where colonies were grown. Second, four independent senior infection control specialists were asked to mark the "missed" areas on UV pictures. Results: 8 hands of volunteers were examined. From each hand, images were recorded with all the four devices. Each expert evaluated every image; thus 128 results were compared. Expert evaluations were highly inconsistent. The biggest difference between the human assessments was found in the case of hand #6, where properly covered hand surface spanned between 21.6% and 61.1%. Microbiology results were weakly correlated with the mean values of expert evaluations; in half of the cases, there were more than 10% difference. Conclusion: Considering the result of the expert evaluations, variability was disconcertingly high. Software based assessment, microbiology cultivation and other objective methods should be employed, since evaluating the fluorescent method is challenging, even for highly experienced professionals. Introduction: Proper hand hygiene remains the most important factor for the reduction of nosocomial infections and therefore, besides absolute consumption of disinfectants and direct compliance observations, several automated monitoring systems for more detailed consumption of disinfectants have been invented. Objectives: In this study, we aimed to explore the personnel's selfperception and to investigate the implementation of such a system in two different wards of a hospital. Methods: Two wards were equipped with an automated monitoring system detecting each disinfection process in detail with the possibility to distinguish between occupational groups. A transponder worn by every participant transmits any information to a database for analysis. Prior to the implementation, the personnel's self-evaluation of disinfection performance was surveyed with a questionnaire. Results: Before starting the project, consultations with the works council, the installation company, in-house IT and hygiene department were indispensable. We aimed to address and apprise the majority off all affected employees before the installation. Therefore, we informed all leading positions in personal communication within small groups. Furthermore, all employees were invited to introductory events on each ward. Within this context, the survey dealing with the behaviour of hand hygiene was introduced. After activating the monitoring system, the wards were reminded repeatedly and performance summaries were communicated regularly. The survey showed that employees feel well informed about hygiene in the respective hospital and that the amount of disinfectants dispensers is mostly sufficient. However, due to time and personnel shortage, hand hygiene compliance is negatively impacted. Conclusion: Although the systematic and organized implementation of an automated disinfection monitoring system is mandatory and time consuming, such a system offers more detailed information about the actual disinfectant consumption concerning dispensers, during outbreaks and distribution among the days and occupational groups. Disclosure of Interest: A. Witte Other conflict with: HTK is an independent company collaborating with both GWA and Sozialstiftung Bamberg without any financial interest or support. , M. Grohmann Other conflict with: HTK is an independent company collaborating with both GWA and Sozialstiftung Bamberg without any financial interest or support. Introduction: Hand hygiene (HH) is the single most important factor in preventing hospital-associated infections. Evidence is in growing that video monitoring with real-time feedback increases hand hygiene compliance rates. Introduction: Hand hygiene (HH) campaign fatigue obliges stakeholders in healthcare to look for new ideas and tools to promote and improve behavior change. To address this challenge, we developed a device designed to improve the quality of the HH action, and needed to identify the most appropriate name for it. Objectives: To identify the most appropriate name for the device designed to improve the quality of the HH action. Methods: The company Catalyx ® was mandated to conduct research to finding a name for the device. Two meetings were held to explain the device's background, development, and function. A half-a-day workshop (WS) was organized with Catalyx ® , and 12 experts in HH, innovation and technology transfer to brainstorm about the potential uses of the device and to find fitting names. The 12 preferred names, picked by more than one WS participant, were kept. A survey questionnaire was built and reviewed by experts. It was composed of 3 sections: mental association with the device, a proposed ranking of names, and analysis of drivers for name preferences. To avoid bias in the survey participant's choices, all names proposed by the WS participants were listed, including those chosen only once. The questionnaire, together with an explanatory video, was sent to 172 infection prevention and control (IPC) experts worldwide. The survey ran from Nov 6 th -Dec 23 rd 2017. Results: A total of 85 experts responded, resulting in a participation rate of 49%. There were 220 completed activities with 21 ratings and comments, and 27 discussion posts. The HH device was seen as an innovative, practical and positive idea; some concerns about its use in the context of existing guidelines and policies were raised. A good name should reflect both the positive outlook and the device's function. Concerning name preference drivers, emotional drivers scored higher than rational ones. Two of the 17 proposed names were preferred -both used the term "rub"and the most frequently first-ranked name was SmartRub. Conclusion: Two names fulfilled all pre-determined criteria, and SmartRub ® powered by iQati TM (SmartRub ® ) has been chosen to designate the current device in use for testing. Disclosure of Interest: None declared specificity was 98.3%. Four different devices were tested; no significant difference in terms of sensitivity (range 93.2% to 100%) and specificity (range 97.6% to 100%) was observed between the 4 devices. Conclusion: The performance of SmartRub® in the currently tested clinical environment was outstanding. Objective measures of sensitivity and specificity indicate the promise of SmartRub® to capture behaviors associated with individual ABHR use among HCWs in clinical conditions. Introduction: SmartRub ® powered by iQati TM is an innovative wristband that provides automatic and individual feedback on the correct duration of hand friction and volume of alcohol-based handrub (ABHR) used. Objectives: To address the views and experiences of healthcare workers (HCWs) regarding SmartRub ® . Methods: In March 2018 we emailed a questionnaire to 97 participants of a 6-month clinical trial aimed at testing the effect of SmartRub ® on hand hygiene (HH) compliance. The 1 st part of the survey was based on the Theoretical Domains Framework and the Technology Acceptance Models and included the constructs perceived usefulness, perceived easy of use, attitude, subjective norm, facilitating conditions, anxiety, voluntariness and behaviour intention. The 2 nd part inquired about HH: knowledge and beliefs on selfeffectiveness, work motivation, and professional role. Results: A total of 70 HCWs (72%) returned the questionnaire: 41 nurses, 22 auxiliary nurses and 7 others. The majority agreed that SmartRub ® was helpful as a reminder of the correct performance of HH action (55). Most perceived the tool comprehensible (49) and easy to use (47). Only 19 HCWs were concerned about confidentiality issues and 16 found that using the wristband bothered the performance of clinical activities. 40 HCWs would continue to use it after the trial once technical issues were resolved. SmartRub ® is perceived as a great tool to train students (62) and new HCWs (59), but ultimately, it is regarded as potentially useful to improve HH among all HCWs (53). Volume of ABHR, duration, and technique of HH are seen as important to prevent healthcare-acquired infections by 63, 64 and 63 HCWs, respectively. After participating in the trial, HCWs affirm to use more ABHR (36), and rub hands longer (43). Conclusion: SmartRub ® is perceived by the majority of HCWs as an easy and useful tool for HH training. Up to a half of HCWs affirm to have changed their behaviour towards HH regarding the volume of ABHR and duration of hand friction after the use of SmartRub ® . Introduction: Effective ABHRs and healthcare worker (HCW) compliance to hand hygiene guidelines are important in the prevention of infection transmission in healthcare settings. Compliance to hand hygiene guidelines is affected by many factors including education, ABHR availability, time pressure, skin health and user acceptance of the dose size. Objectives: To assess different ABHR foam dose sizes that are within the WHO recommended drying time of between 20-30 secs (1.3, 1.5, 1.6 and 1.7mL) with a variety of healthcare workers and consider how repeated use, hand size and years in the jobs might affect acceptability. Methods: A total of 197 HCWs evaluated a random combination of 3 out of the 4 dose sizes, in a random order, during a central location test at Mount Sinai Hospital, CA. the acceptability of each dose was assessed and rated on a 7-point agreement scale based on their level of agreement with the following statement: 'this product is ideal for me and my patients'. The number of 'acceptability' responses, and the number of top box responses (5-7) for each dose size were analysed using the Chi-Squared test statistical method. Results: -80% of assessments scored 1.3ml and 1.5ml as acceptable opposed to 70% for 1.6ml and 1.7ml. 1.3ml was rated significantly higher than 1.6ml and 1.7ml on ideality. -Considering the first product tested only, there were no significant differences in dose size rating. When multiple doses were tested, 1.3ml scored higher than the other doses. -Dose size acceptability was influenced by hand size -larger hand sizes were more accepting of the doses -HCWs employed by Mount Sinai for less than 3 years were less accepting of the dose sizes than those working at the hospital for 6-20 years. -47% of HCWs felt all 3 of their assessed dose sizes were acceptable. Conclusion: When defining the right dose, testing in isolation does not reflect the effect of repeated use. There is a decline in acceptability after 1.5ml, with 1.3ml being the more favoured dose. Smaller doses may therefore increase hand hygiene compliance. Hand size was also an important factor affecting dose size acceptability. Introduction: The virucidal efficacy of alcohol-based hand rubs (ABHR) is essential ensuring infection prevention. While in Europe virucidal claims are accepted, the FDA does not allow such claims. Efficacy can be tested with in-vivo methods including the whole hand method ASTM E2011-13 and EN 1500. Objectives: We studied the activity of a commercial ABHR and 70 % ethanol as reference against the clinical relevant norovirus using the murine norovirus (MNV) as surrogate. The question was, how to get scientific and regulatory acceptance evaluating virucidal efficacy of ABHR. Methods: The reference "70% (w/w) ethanol" and a commercial "preparation" with 80% (w/w) ethanol as active agent have been included in our study. The test virus was MNV strain S99. Activity tests have been performed in-vivo according to ASTM E2011-13 with five subjects in each group and in a cross-over design based on EN 1500 with 19 subjects. Results: Based on EN 1500 70% (w/w) ethanol and the "preparation" showed comparable mean log reductions (RF) of 2.74 and 2.88, respectively. According to ASTM E2011-13 the RF were 4.05 for 70% (w/w) ethanol and 4.25 for the "preparation". No statistical difference was measured between the test preparations (p > 0.05). However, the difference between the two methods is significant (p < 0.05). Conclusion: Methodological factors like contamination, way of application and recovery might result in different RFs of both methods. However, the methods are able to yield similar results when comparing with the ethanol reference. The EN 1500 suggests a cross-over design with a mandatory control group. This results in an activity evaluation, which is independent from contributing factors including differences between subjects, application etc. The ASTM E2011-13 additionally allows comparing disinfecting with mechanical effect. A combination of both methods might be considered to get an internationally accepted method for virucidal efficacy evaluation of ABHRs. Introduction: Proper hand hygiene requires the complete coverage of hand surfaces with alcohol-based handrub (ABHR). The volume of ABHR used plays a critical role, using insufficient amount of ABHR would result in untreated areas on hands, and thus risk of crosstransmission. Objectives: To assess the occurrence of inaccurate dosing in the case of typical wall-mounted ABHR dispensers in hospitals, and to identify key contributing factors to this phenomenon. Methods: A multicenter study was conducted, divided into 3 parts. First, 22 manual and automatic wall-mounted ABHR dispensers were investigated, both gravitational and regular pumped ones. In the second part, 7 different commercially available ABHR of different compositions were tested with the same dispenser, that previously proved to lose significant amount of ABHR within a short period of time. Last, different formulationsgel and liquidwere tested on a leaking dispenser type. In each part, samples were taken from the dispensers after 0, 1, 2, 4, 8 and 12 hours of resting idle. Each measurement was repeated 5 times. Results: 10 of the 22 investigated dispensers suffered at least 20% loss of dispensed volume after 8 hours without use. Liquid level in their container proved to have significant effect on the dispensed volume. In the second part, ABHR composition was shown to have no effect on the dispensed volume. Third, the percentage of the original amount aliquoted was 1.4% after only 4 hours versus 93.6% after 12 hours when the dispenser was filled with a liquid rinse versus a gel, respectively. Conclusion: Some types of dispensers loose significant volume in a relatively short period of time, leading to frequent sub-optimal volume distribution. According to our results, type of dispensers, ABHR formulation (gel or liquid) and volume level in the container are the main contributing factors. Our study draws the attention to the criticality of infrastructure suggesting in hospitals, suggesting that ABHR dispensers should be regularly audited even before purchasing, and periodically thereafter. Introduction: There are many barriers to effective hand hygiene, including the positioning and availability of the hand hygiene products. The design of the hand hygiene product dispenser is key in minimizing this one such barrier. Objectives: Understand the key hand hygiene product dispenser design parameters and their effect on product availability and usage. Methods: A series of qualitative interviews were held with Healthcare workers to understand the key hand hygiene product dispenser design attributes that act as barriers to hand hygiene compliance. The key attributes to be optimized were identified as: Ease of dispenser refilling to ensure product is always available Intuitive dispenser activation to ensure that product is easy to obtain Dispenser aesthetics that that support ease of installation and clarity of hand hygiene product type. Additional a series of insights were gathered leading to the best combination of features to deliver each of the key attributes. Conclusion: By utilizing a healthcare user centric approach to optimize hand hygiene product dispenser design, it will be possible to improve product positioning and availability in support of hand hygiene compliance. Introduction: Hand hygiene is the first step in preventing and control ofhealth-care associated infections. Nurses' satisfaction with hand hygiene products plays an important role in increasing hand hygiene compliance. Objectives: The aim of this study was to evaluatenurses' level of satisfaction about facilities needed for hand hygiene in Shariati university hospital in Mashhad (a city in north-eastern of Iran). Methods: This cross-sectional study was carried out on 144 employed nurses in Shariati hospital during year 2016.A questionnaire designed to assess product acceptability for hand rub, hand wash and hand scrub according to WHO guideline on hand hygiene in health care facilities. Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS Version 14.0. Results: Seventy nurses (49.3%)were satisfied with the quality of hand rub product. Only 58 (40.2%)accepted liquid hand soap. The quality of hand scrub productwas poor in majority of nurses; 113(78.4%). The availability of hand rub products was also low in wards, only 65(45.1%) of nurses were satisfied. Conclusion: According to the results of this study it is necessary for hospitals toknow about the employees' satisfaction about thequality and the quantity of hand hygiene products. Introduction: Hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) therapy can be used for a diverse range of medical conditions. In the last decade, with the demonstration of its efficacy for patients with specific diseases, its use in medical institutions has increased. With more patients accessing this therapy in multiplace chambers where risks of cross-transmission are higher, best practices in infection prevention and control (IPC) must be addressed and revised. Hand hygiene (HH) is challenging in HBO therapy settings because alcohol-based hand rubs (ABHRs), the preferred products for HH, are flammable in oxygen-enriched environments. The purpose of this narrative review is to assess fire risks associated with use of HH agents in HBO chambers and to evaluate alternatives. Objectives: To assess risk of fire associated with use of HH agents in HBO chambers and to evaluate alternatives. Methods: We conducted a non-systematic literature search using Pubmed, Embase and Google Scholar, and the following key words: hyperbaric oxygen therapy; hand hygiene; hand rubbing; fire; alcohol-based hand rub; hand sanitizer; hand disinfection; infection prevention and control. Products such as alcohol-based hand rub and soap and alternative non-flammable hand hygiene products were considered. The search included articles written in French or English and published up to October 2018. Results: Scientific evidence regarding HH best practices in HBO chambers is scarce. We found no guidelines issuing specific recommendations regarding flammable agents used for HH nor on alternative products. Even though alcohol is prohibited in HBO chambers according to international guidance, ABHR is frequently used in this setting. Soaps containing combustible substances such as glycerin may also represent a risk of fire in HBO chambers. However, safer alternatives to these HH agents could be employed during HBO therapy such as aqueous chlorhexidine 2% or povidoneiodine. Conclusion: Hand antisepsis with formulations containing either aqueous chlorhexidine 2% or povidone-iodine are the best alternatives to ABHR and glycerin-containing soap in HBO chambers. Additional scientific data are needed to assess the compatibility of other HH agents currently prohibited in HBO chambers because of their combustible content. Introduction: Tuberculosis (TB) is yet a significant health problem in Liberia as the country is among the ten countries with estimated incidence rate of 308/100,000 populations and with a minimum number of 10,000 cases per year. The high TB prevalence in Liberia is further complicated by inadequate funding, increase in prevalence of drug resistance, TB and other socioeconomic determinants such as inadequate housing and poor-quality health care services; hence, the need to increase control efforts and support for TB in Liberia. Objectives: To find out the nationwide trends in tuberculosis and incidence of antibiotic sensitivity that would inform antimicrobial stewardship programming in health care settings in order to mitigate risk of antimicrobial resistance in the country. Methods: Retrospective data were analyzed from multiple tuberculosis treatment centers, collected by the National Leprosy and Tuberculosis Program (NLTCP) in collaboration with partners. Data was analyzed using Microsoft Excel Version 2013. Results: The estimated incidence and notification of TB cases were 12,987 and 6,667 in 2010, as compared to 15,584 and 8,335 in 2018 respectively. Ninety four (94) Acid Fast Bacillus (AFB) microscopy centers in 6 counties are activated for conducting AFB microscopy test, with a TB case detection rate of 35.1%; a total of 2,928 new TB cases were detected (1,233 cases by AFB microscopy method (Ziehl Neesen Stain) and 1,695 cases by GeneXpert method. A total of 1,614 Drug Sensitivity Testing (DST) was conducted at 17 GeneXpert testing sites of which 462 were found to be rifampicin resistant TB. The country is estimated to notify 15,584 all forms of TB cases and 390 MDR/RR-TB cases in 2018, only 8,335 (53%) and 65 (17%) were notified in 2018. Conclusion: The response to tuberculosis is one of the major priorities of the Ministry of Health and key MOH partners including WHO, UNAIDS, UNICEF, etc. Findings from the study had underscored the need to intensify control efforts and support for TB as well AMR stewardship programs in Liberia. Introduction: The estimated TB incidence rate in Liberia is 308/ 100000 population, up from 282/100 000 population in 2009 (WHO, 2016). The high TB prevalence is complicated by increase drug resistance and other socioeconomic determinants, including inadequate housing, poor-quality health care services. Objectives: To evaluate the implementation of community-based intensive-phase of MDR-TB treatment pilot that would inform decentralizing MDR-TB treatment centers to mitigate the disease burden. Methods: A prospective cohort study with real-time data collection was adopted, where all six patients spent about six months in the National TB Hospital before transition in the community-based treatment pilot. The Hospital Management held engagement meeting, involving health workers, patients and their family caregivers to explain the aims of the pilot. Patients signed consent forms before discharge from the TB Hospital. Each patient had at least 3 consecutive negative sputum smears using Acid-Fast Bacillus before enrolling the community-based treatment. Laboratory monitoring, including audiometric exams were conducted, health education on infection control, drugs adverse effects were provided to patients and their families by Nurses. Results: Fifty (50%) of the patients were males and 50% females. The overall recovery rate was 100%; no defaulter nor death. The patients' age ranged from 20-35 years, with mean age 26, while 50% were between 25-29 years old. The average length of stay during the intensive treatment phase was 224 days (8 months). The average days spent in the community-based treatment were 53, minimum and maximum days of 33 and 51. Improved patients' satisfaction, reduced caseload on clinicians and rigorous promotion of IPC practices, cough etiquette were observed amongst patients. Conclusion: Addressing TB is a key priority in Liberia, but human resource and facility capacity constraints remain in managing MDR-TB. Once patients are stabilized with at least 3 consecutive negative AFB smears, they can be safely transitioned to home-based treatment, with routine follow by trained health professionals; which reduces crowdedness in facility and improve recovery. Introduction: A case with active pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) can infect up to 10 to 15 new people on average each year. This is of concern, particularly in high HIV prevalence areas such as South Africa. Objectives: The study aimed at determining HIV status and multidrugresistance (MDR) on TB infectiousness following the initiation of an appropriate TB therapy. Methods: Newly diagnosed patients with pulmonary TB were prospectively enrolled from 6/2017 to 2018 in a MDR-TB clinic in South Africa. Sputum was tested using Xpert® MTB/RIF assay and line probe assays. Microscopy tests using Ziehl-Neelsen and fluorescence staining were performed at baseline, 4, 8 and 12 weeks after TB therapy-start, and graded using the WHO/IUATLD TB management classification. Microscopical conversion was modelled using Kaplan-Meier plots and Cox regression analyses. Results: Of 200 patients, 100 were MDR-TB (50.0%), 103 (51.5%) were male, 55 (27.5%) were ≥35 years, and 114 (57%) were HIV positive. After 12 weeks, there was significant microscopy conversion among non-MDR-TB patients [43/45 (95.6%)] compared to MDR-TB patients [54/69 (78.3%)] (P=0.009), all co-infected with HIV. A significant conversion rate was also identified among non-MDR-TB patients [48/55 (69.6%)] compared to MDR-TB patients [21/31(30.4%)] (P=0.03). Time to microscopy conversion in HIV positive patients ≥35 and below 35 years was 4.58 ± 2.97 and 5.69 ± 3.25 weeks, respectively. Conversion in HIV negative patients ≥35 and below 35 years was 5.00 ± 2.83 and 6.86 ± 3.59 weeks, respectively (P=0.003). Correlation between CD4 cell count at baseline and conversion after 12 weeks was significant (P=0.010). At 8 weeks, all MDR-TB patients with a baseline smear count from scanty to 1+ converted negative while 25% of patients with a baseline count of 2+/3+ remained positive at the end of 12 weeks (P=0.014). Only the baseline microscopy count was independently associated with infectiousness of MDR-TB patients after 12 weeks (P=0.014). Conclusion: Isolation precaution measures for TB patients should remain in place beyond 12 weeks of effective anti-TB therapy when managing MDR-TB patients, irrespective of their HIV status. Introduction: The prevalence of tuberculosis (TB) in healthcare workers (HCWs) is generally about twice that of regular people the same age. In Japan, in recent years, we have a serious problem with Doctor's Delay of elderly people's diagnosis of TB because the symptoms of elderly TB were not typical and not always accompanied by fever and prolonged cough symptoms. However, the actual status of tuberculosis infections and countermeasures at community hospitals, which are mainly responsible for elderly medical care, has not yet been known. Objectives: In recent years,we would like to clarify whether there is an outbreak of TB in elderly patients or HCWs within the regional hospitals in urban areas in Japan, and what factors are involved. Methods: In October 2018, we surveyed whether the hospitals experienced TB onset of patients or staff in the hospitals in recent years, on regional hospitals in urban areas of central Japan. We also investigated whether they had diagnosed for Latent Tuberculosis Infection (LTBI) caused by TB in-hospital occurrence were carried out. And we examined the facility background concerning TB infection control measures. We used Pearson's correlation coefficient for statistical analysis. Results: The subjects were 98 regional hospitals with the average bed of 102.0 beds and the average patient age of 75.5 years old. 61 (64%) hospitals had experienced TB onset of patients in 3 years, and 7 (7%) hospitals had experienced TB in their HCWs. 65 (68%) hospitals had conducted diagnostic tests for Latent Tuberculosis Infection (LTBI) caused by TB outbreak in 5 years. Patients' ages (r= 0.327, p = 0.002), the number of beds (r= 0.342, p = 0.001), and the number of airborne precaution rooms (r= -0.342, p = 0.022) were associated with TB outbreak in the hospitals. And HCWs' TB onset was associated with patient TB onset (r = -0.240, p = 0.023). Conclusion: In Japan, even in regional hospitals, the onset of TB in the HCWs associated with the outbreak of TB in elderly patients. As a countermeasure to this, it should consider reducing the number of hospital beds and increasing the airborne precaution room. Results: In Nepal, IC program focuses on Drug Resistant (DR) TB. DR TB centres were provided with exhaust fan, Ultraviolet Germicidal Irradiation (UVGI), N95 masks and simple surgical masks. All TB trainings incorporated sessions related to infection control. Another activity was implementation of FAST (Finding Actively, Separate temporarily and Treat effectively) approach in 15 major hospitals of Nepal that aimed to actively find people with cough, testing through rapid molecular diagnostics and enabling prompt treatment decreasing TB transmission. The National Strategic Plan (NSP) 2016-2021 foresees improvements of infection control measures in all DR TB centers and subcentres based on proposed infection control guidelines. It also states the ppointment of focal person for IC and gradual increase in the budget for infection control. National infection control policy is still not in place and no focal person has been appointed. Different evidences show lack of awareness about IC measures. In the fiscal year 2017/18, there were no provision of budget for IC through domestic funds. Conclusion: Significant efforts are required to address the issue. The national policy and guidelines on Infection control should be prepared to facilitate implementation of IC measures in all health facilities focusing on integrated implementation of administrative control, environmental control and respiratory protection. Current IC measures should be strengthened with gradual expansion to all centers. A designated focal person should be assigned for overseeing the programs related to IC. Domestic funding for IC should be considered. In addition, there is a need to raise awareness on TB IC among all types of health workers, patients and community members. In the project "HygArzt" (ZMVI1-2516FSB111), funded by the Federal Ministry of Health (BMG), the effects of Infection prevention measures (IPM) (e.g. decolonisation of patients before surgery and introduction of a new dressing change concept, introduced by physicians responsible for hygiene in trauma surgery/orthopedics) were investigated. Objectives: Therefore, in this prospective cohort study, all NI (patient outcomes) on three orthopedic trauma surgery normal wards are for the first time completely recorded. In order to identify and document NI, clinical signs of infection were recorded according to KISS and CDC definitions. Data from preexisting conditions and from current and past infections from the hospital management system, admission forms, discharge letters and care documentation were aggregated with current patient data and laboratory findings. In addition, early visits were made three times a week in order to record signs of infection that had not yet been documented. In order to check the effects of the implemented IPM on the infection rates (NI, SSI), the pre-and post-intervention phases were compared. In the first five months of the pre-phase (1100 surgeriespartly multiple surgeries on the same patient) the rates were NI (n= 42) 3.8% (CI 95% 2.7; 4.9) and SSI (n=34) 3.1% (CI 95% 2.1; 4.1). In the first five months of the post phase (1127 surgeries -partly multiple surgeries on the same patient) total infection rates of NI (n=22) of 1.9% (CI 95% 1.1; 2.7) or SSI (n=17) of 1.5% (CI 95% 0.8; 2.2) were found. For NI (RR = 0.51 (CI 95% 0.31; 0.85), p = .009) as well as for SSI (RR = 0.48 (CI 95% 0.27; 0.87), p = .015) significant differences were found between pre and post-phase. Conclusion: By introducing IPM, the relative risk of getting an infection (SSI and NI) in the post phase could be reduced by almost half compared to the pre phase. While only infection rates from indicator operations have been determined in previous research, and none at departmental level specifically for orthopedic/trauma surgery, study data suggested to better tailor infection prevention measures for a specified medical discipline. Introduction: Tumor orthopedic surgery has higher incidences of surgical site infections (SSI) than non-oncologic surgery. Objectives: However, their epidemiologic microbiology is rarely published. The knowledge of this epidemiology is necessary to tailor specific perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis regimens. Methods: In our large tertiary composite database of adult orthopedic infections, we compare SSIs in adult oncologic patients to adult non-oncologic orthopedic patients. Results: Among 2752 different first episodes of orthopedic infections in adults, only 14 (0.5%) concerned SSI at the site of prior oncologic surgery. Oncologic patients had no more prior antibiotic therapy (before intraoperative samplings) than non-oncologic patients, but they witnessed significantly more SSIs due to enterococci, Gramnegative pathogens, or infections due to multi-resistant skin commensals. In contrast, the proportion of classic orthopedic pathogens such as Staphylococcus aureus or streptococci was not different from the control group. We couldn't link the germs to prior oncologic treatment, nor to the length of perioperative surgical antibiotic prophylaxis. Conclusion: The microbiology of orthopedic SSI in adult oncologic patients is significantly different than in non-oncologic patients. Retrospectively, the standard antibiotic prophylaxis is inadequate for the involved pathogens. More studies are needed to tailor a specific perioperative prophylaxis in terms of choice of the agents, rather than of duration of the standard prophylaxis. Introduction: Surgical site infections (SSIs) following cardiac surgeries in pediatric patients are associated with prolonged hospitalization, increased costs and higher mortality. Known risk factors include low birth-weight, non-compliance with antibiotic prophylaxis, and prolonged duration of surgery. Objectives: This study was conducted to determine the SSI risk factors associated with pediatric cardiac surgeries. Methods: A prospective SSI surveillance following pediatrics cardiac procedures was conducted by the infection control (IC) team between 2015 and 2018 at the American University of Beirut Medical Center. The surveillance was based on the CDC/NHSN (Centers Disease Control and Prevention/National Health Care Safety Network) definitions. Results: 17 SSIs were identified following 669 procedures at a rate of 2.5%. SSIs were classified into superficial (53%), deep (18%), and organspace infections (29%). The NHSN risk index score was 1 in 82% and 2 in 18% of the cases. 76% of the patients were < 1 year old with 69% < 15 days old. 59% of the patients weighed < 3.6 Kg. The intra-operative temperature was < 34.9°C in 71% of the patients (range 30-34.8°C). The duration of the surgery lasted >5 hours in 24% of the cases. Compliance with antibiotic prophylaxis was 100% in the drug choice, 82% in the time of administration, and 56% in the intraoperative re-dosing when indicated. 11 (65%) of the patients were ventilated for >6 days and 14 (82%) had a central venous catheter for >5 days post-surgery. 14 (82%) were hospitalized for >10 days after surgery. Staphylococcus spp. were the most common causative organisms in 59% of the cases (80% S. aureus, mostly methicillin-sensitive, and 20% coagulase negative Staphylococcus). 2 of the patients underwent surgical debridement and all the patients recovered. Conclusion: Key strategies were envisioned to minimize the modifiable risk factors related to the surgeries such as improving compliance with antimicrobial prophylaxis and pre-operative bathing with antiseptic soap. Ongoing surveillance and sustaining adequate IC practices are fundamental in preventing SSIs in this population. Introduction: SSI is the most frequent type of HAI in low-and middle-income countries (LMICs). Approximately one in 10 people who have surgery in LMIC's acquire a SSI. In India, there is a paucity of data regarding SSI. Objective of the study was thus to describe the epidemiology of Surgical Site Infections in a Quaternary care Hospital in India. Objectives: To describe the epidemiology of SSI in our hospital, a quaternary care hospital in India and to study some of the risk factors related to SSI in the patients who developed SSI. The pathogens isolated from cases of SSI will also be studied. Methods: Retrospective analysis of case files of surgical patients that were identified with a surgical site infection by the SSI surveillance team using the protocol of the US Centre for Disease and Control and Prevention(CDC) National healthcare and Safety Network(NHSN), in the months of January to December 2018 was done.The cumulative prevalence rate and rate across departments were calculated for the 12 months. Prevalence of risk factors for SSIs and the causative organism with the antibiogram were also looked at in each case. Results: A total of 167 SSI for the 8253 Surgeries done in this period were reported with an annual rate of 2.02%. 22% were reported from surgical Gastroenterology, 16% were reported from Neurosurgery and 13% were reported from Cardiothoracic unit. The most common organism isolated was Klebisella pneumoniae followed by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. 23.31% of the patients had hypothermia during the perioperative period, 35.83% patients had documented poor glycemic control while antibiotic prophylaxis was non compliant in 7.18% of the cases studied. Conclusion: The prevalence of SSI is quite high in our centre compared to the global benchmarks. Overall SSI rates are reported least in the USA (0.9%) to maximum in SE Asian countries (7.8%). Our rates are around 2% -which is less that for most SE Asia countries. Most of the SSI were contributed by the Surgical Gastroenterology, Neurosurgery and Cardiac surgery departments. In spite of good adherence to antibiotic prophylaxis -poor compliance to preventing hypothermia and hyperglycemia were identified -these are to be focused now Introduction: Monitoring of surgical site infections (SSI) is a priority in our facility. In the Obstetrics Gynecology department, the incidence of SSIs has significantly decreased since it joined the active surveillance network since 2006. Objectives: -Calculate the SSI's incidence -Identify risk factors related to the occurrence of SSI Methods: Descriptive longitudinal study for analytical purposes. Data collection was carried out between 1st February and 30th May 2016 with a follow-up up to + day 30. The SSI diagnosis was established according to the criteria of the CDC Atlanta. Data entry and analysis was done on the Epi Data Entry 3.02 and Epi Data Analysis software. Results: A total of 193 interventions were included. The average age is 38 +/-11 years old. 60.1% had an ASA score = 1, the average length of stay was 5.6 +/-3.3 days. The percentage of patients reviewed on D + 30 was 100%. More than two thirds of the interventions were clean contaminated (69%), over half of operated had a score of NNIS = 0 (64.8%) and almost a third of the interventions carried out in emergency (28.5%). The SSI's incidence is 4.7% (09 patients), the average age of infected patients was 50.44 +/-12.76 years and mean time to onset of infection is 6.3 +/-4.5 days. The SSI's incidence was significantly greater when the patients had performed a depilation using a razor, 9% versus 1.7% for the other types of depilation: cream and mowing, p <0.01. Infected patients had an average duration of surgery significantly greater than uninfected patients (102 minutes versus 76 minutes, p <0.02). The SSI rate was significantly higher when the class Altemeier was contaminated (10.3% versus 2.3% clean contaminated, p <0.05). Conclusion: The surveillance of SSI in Gynecological Obstetrics has highlighted risk factors that should be taken into account to improve the management and prevention of risks associated with surgical care. The aim is to reduce the average duration of surgery, to be cautious in patients with multitares, to avoid mechanical shaving and to promote other types of hair removal: cream and hair trimmers. Introduction: The Balgrist University Hospital in Zurich is a tertiary referral center for orthopaedic surgery and acute paraplegic care; with an estimated 20% of direct transfers from other institutions all over Switzerland and abroad. Objectives: To verify our isolation and screening policy regarding multiresistant pathogens (partially representative for the Greater Zurich area). Methods: During March 2019, we screened adult patients, hospitalized for more than 48 hours, at entry (+/-1 day) and at discharge (-3 days) for nasal, pharyngeal, inguinal and rectal carriage of MRSA, multi-resistant Gram-negative rods and VRE. To reduce sampling bias, the Infection Control nurse and the Infectious Diseases physician sampled all specimens by themselves. In case of doubt, identical species underwent typisation. Results: Of a total of 115 patients hospitalized within the three wards, we sampled 115 at admission (median age 57 years; 42% women), and 100 at discharge. Only 15 patients (13%) were lost at discharge. Another 9 (8%) refused rectal screenings, but accepted groin swabs. The median length of hospital stay was 5 days (range, 2-21 d). Among the study population, 3.4% were known for multiresistant carriage due to previous targeted screenings. The MRSA and VRE incidences were both 0% at entry and 0% at discharge; without any acquisition during the stay. This was 6% and 4% for Gram-negatives, respectively, which were all various ESBL. The intra-hospital new acquisition risk was 0.0% an. One possible ESBL transmission revealed different typisation results. The preceding observed global hand hygiene compliance was 68% (418 correct actions out of 615 indications; 83% among the nursing staff). Conclusion: In our institution, we detected no new intra-hospital acquisition of multi-resistant germs. We keep our screening and isolation policies unchanged; with new evaluations in distant future or in case of eventual outbreaks. Introduction: Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) threatens to send us back to a time when we were unable to easily treat infections and it is listed as one of the top 10 threats to global health in 2019 by the WHO. Resistance in one microorganism against one particular drug may drive treatment decisions of clinicians, thereby fostering selection pressure to resistance development against another antibiotic, often rising complex and difficult scenarios. Objectives: We conducted an investigation on AMR in our 1300 beds tertiary care structure, Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genova, Italy. We evaluated the AMR epidemiology in our hospital in comparison with national and european data, to provide an useful tool for the management of resistant bacteria. Methods: AMR was tested following the guidelines of the 2017 Annual report of the European Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Network (EARS-Net). Blood and cerebrospinal fluid were the only source specimen considered. We evaluated every positive isolate from 1/1/2014 to 31/12/2018. We excluded same patient cases within 30 days one from another and cases where the AMR was not tested. Results: From 2014 we observed a consistent rise in vancomicyn resistant E. faecium from 20% to 36% of the isolates while the percentage of high dose gentamicyn resistant E. faecalis decreased from 55% to 46 %. We observed that the proportion of meticillin resistant S. aureus is decreasing (from 58% in 2014 to 45% in 2018). K. pneumoniae resistance levels are on a remarkably decreasing trend: through the years we observed a reduction in resistance to fluoroquinolones (from 79% to 54%) , third-generation cephalosporins (from 79% to 55%), aminoglycosides (from 66% to 37%) and carbapenems (from 63% to 39%). We observed a reduction also in the percentage of K. pneumoniae isolates with combined resistance to fluoroquinolones, thirdgeneration cephalosporins and aminoglycosides, from 63% in 2014 to 36% in 2018. Conclusion: AMR is a real issue in public health and needs to be approached with multidisciplinary efforts. each year and the percentiles distribution were calculated for each procedure. Results: The number of participating HF increased over the years: 555 in 2012 to 569 in 2017, representing respectively 83% and 89% of eligible HF. The most frequent procedure in the period was cesarean section (n=1,961,504) and the less frequent was colectomy by laparoscopic (LP) (n=16,434) . The rates of laparoscopic appendectomy, colectomy, hysterectomy and of mastectomy were zero up to percentile 75; their percentile 90 rates varied along the years ranging, respectively, from 1.1 to 3.6%; 0 to 7.8%; 1.0 to 2.0% and 3 to 5.5%. Craniotomy had 0% SSI rate up to the p50 and varied along the years ranging from 5 to 6.8% at the p75 and from 10 to 14.3% at the p90. The p50 ranged within the years from 0.2 to 0.23% for cesarean section and from 2.5 to 5.2% for coronary artery bypass graft. The p90 for laparoscopic cholecystectomy varied along the years ranging from 0.8 to 1.2%. Conclusion: The results showed high adherence of HF to the statewide surveillance system. The high number of hospitals with rate of zero pointed out flaws in the surveillance performed by the HF. The high rates demand strategies by both the health authorities and HF aiming to reduce the SSI. Introduction: Carbapenemase producing organism (CPO) pose major challenges for prevention, control and treatment of the infections. We aimed to determine the prevalence and risk factors of CPO detected in Neonates in NICU in Maternity hospital, in Vietnam Objectives: are to determine the prevalence and risk factors of CPO detected in Neonates in NICU in Maternity hospital, in Vietnam. Methods: a prospective cross-sectional study included 83 neonates chosen randomly. A rectal swab was used to collect samples. To screen for CPOs we used MELAB Chromogenic CARBA disks. We then identified the CPO and the relevant antibiogram using the BD Phoenix automated direct identification system. SPSS software version 18.0 was used to analyze the demography characteristics and prevalence of CPO, risk factors associated with CPO and the adjusted odds ratio with a 95% confidence interval was considered significant. Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05. Results: The prevalence of CPO was 48.2% (n= 83) screened with MELAB Chromogenic CARBA disks and 42.2 % (n=83) with BD Phoenix automated system. The majority of CPOs were E Coli of which 27 had an identical antibiogram profile. Risk factors for CPO colonization included neonatal age (days) (OR: 26 (7.891 -85.664), prior exposure to antibiotics (OR: 18.764 (5.829 -60.405), the length of hospital stay (OR: 19.5 (4.197 -90.602). Other risk factors were associated with procedures performed on neonates. We identified nosocomial cross infection was significant. Conclusion: Nosocomial cross-infection associated with CPO was detected in this study. Preventing & controlling CPO should be an urgent priority at the Neonatal department in HV hospital. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. interventions to address neonatal infection, including multimodal strategies and hand hygiene compliance. The modified Delphi process identified 13 priority IPC gaps: patient safety culture; hand hygiene; nurse-to-neonate ratio; alcohol-based hand rub at point of care; neonate co-bedding; sterilization and reprocessing of multi-use items; reuse of single-use items; inadequate cleaning of non-critical items; facility exceeding capacity; lack of running water, sinks, soap and paper towels; sterile compounding of medications; aseptic technique for device insertion and device maintenance and care. Conclusion: This literature review and modified Delphi process identified important IPC gaps leading to healthcare-associated neonatal sepsis. Prioritizing IPC interventions and strategies for these areas may reduce neonatal sepsis in RLS. Introduction: Since 2011, EU patients have a right to seek healthcare anywhere in the EU. Little is known on the influence of differences in acute healthcare structures on infection prevention. Moreover, guidelines and realization of those for infection prevention and control (IPC) staff differ and might impact the quality of healthcare. Objectives: We performed an analysis of those parameters in the Dutch-German border region in order to indicate differences and similarities. Methods: For the German border region hospitals (GBH) we extracted annual quality records of hospitals from the Federal Joint Committee. For the Dutch border region hospitals (DBH) the data was requested at press offices of hospitals. We used population statistics and survey data in fulltime equivalents on staff in GBH in 2015. Results: There are more than 4 times more hospitals, hospital beds and inpatient cases per inhabitants in the German than in the Dutch region. Both guidelines recommend similar number of IPC staff. Twenty out of 29 DHB (76.9%) fulfill the Dutch IPC staff guideline for infection control doctors (ICD), 23 (88.5%) for infection control nurse (ICN). Nine out of 35 GBH (25.7%) adhere to the German IPC staff guideline for ICD. All GBH have at least one ICD as an external consultant; 21 (60.0%) have enough ICN. Estimating the actual numbers of IPC staff in DBH with the German guideline, 21 DBH (80.8%) fulfil them for ICD and 19 (73.1%) for ICN. If the Dutch IPC staff guideline would be valid in GBH, 14.5% for ICD and 40.0% for ICN would fulfil it. Conclusion: The observed large differences in acute healthcare structures in the Dutch-German border region cannot be explained by the different population density. There are more and smaller hospitals in Germany hampering the employment of sufficient IPC staff. The fourfold more inpatient cases per inhabitants in the German region enhance the exposure to healthcare, antibiotics and MDRO. Co-operation in education of IPC staff and recognition of degrees could facilitate closing the gap of supply and demand in IPC staff at both sides. Introduction: Implementation science is helpful to overcome the challenge of translating scientific evidence into clinical practice. This study presents preliminary data from a Webquest (WQ) implementation project aiming to enhance knowledge on infection prevention in primary health care (PHC). WQ is an innovative, inquiry-oriented lesson format in which most information comes from the web, but we have adapted it for use offline since in PHC internet access is frequently poor. Objectives: To evaluate the feasibility of the WQ strategy and analyze the local health managers opinion about viability of this strategy in PHC. Methods: Settings: PHC units in a countryside city of Brazil. Design: Mixed method. A quantitative approach assessed the feasibility of the WQ strategy with 50 members of PHC nursing teams. A qualitative approach assessed the perception of three local health managers through interviews and content analysis. Results: The mean time spent to perform the WQ was 32.5min. Most of participants (96%; 48/50) considered the activity easy and pleasant. Managers thought infection prevention was an important issue, but it was not a priority for them. They pointed out potentially positive influential stakeholders, such as the nursing supervisor and the municipal continuing education staff. The enablers of the implementation process were the feasibility of performing WQ during journeys to work and the low technology requirement. The barriers were the lack of effective continuing education on infection prevention; a perception of devaluation and demotivation of personnel; understaffing; previous experience with research that had not changed clinical practice. Conclusion: The WQ has potential as an effective and innovative tool for infection prevention in PHC. There is a need for strategies to raise the priority of infection prevention on the PHC agenda. The identification of potential positive influential stakeholders, enablers and facilitators will support the next step of the implementation process, increasing the chance of success in the transfers of scientific evidence to clinical practice. Introduction: Surfaces may be contaminated by patients colonized or infected with multi-resistant germs. In order to avoid nosocomial infections, the rooms are undergoing a terminal disinfection (TD) when these patients are discharged. If the TD is inadequate, there is a risk of germ transmission to the next patient. Objectives: Does UV-C disinfection of rooms occupied by patients colonized or infected with Vancomycin-resistant Enterococci (VRE) lead to a measurable decrease in pathogens compared to standard TD procedures? Methods: Between October 2018 and April 2019, 20 rooms were examined at the University Hospital of Basel after discharge of patients with VRE. Eight sample sites have been checked: Toilet seat, toilet button flush, toilet paper cover, tap, floor, patient bed bell, bedside drawer and folding table. Standard TD was performed by a mix of quaternary ammonium compound with aldehyde (Deconex ® 50 FF, 0.5%). The microbiological samples were taken using RODAC contact plates (Merck) and eSwab™ (COPAN) at three times: a) before TD, b) after TD and before UV-C disinfection, c) after UV-C disinfection. 0.2 ml of liquid were taken from eSwab™ and spread on CNA plates. Contact and CNA plates were incubated for 48 hours at 35°C. When growth was detected, isolates were subcultured on Columbia blood agar and CNA plates, and identified by MALDI-TOF. Susceptibility pattern was evaluated by VITEK. VRE was phenotyped followed by typing by Next-Generation Sequencing. Results: Overall, 352 samples were analyzed. In one patient room, 8 samples could not be taken after TD and before UV-C. At time point a) 32 of 160, b) 4 of 152 and c) 0 of 160 samples were positive for VRE. Significant reductions were achieved before TD and after UV-C disinfection (p<0.0001) However, the addition of UV-C after TD did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.055). The number of VRE positive rooms was 55% (11/20) of all investigated rooms before TD among positive rooms, 36% (4/11) remained positive after TD. The addition of UV-C to TD lead to 0/11 positive rooms (p<0.01). Conclusion: The applied TD failed to completely eliminate VRE. The additional exposure with UV-C succeeded to eliminate VRE from the environment. Introduction: This study specifies a test method and the minimum requirements for basic bactericidal activity of Disept as a chemical disinfectant that form a homogeneous, physically stable preparation when diluted with water. Products can only be tested at a concentration of %80 or less as some dilution is always produced by adding the test organisms and water. Objectives: This study only could apply to active substances (antibacterial biocides) and to formulations under development that are planned to be used in food, industrial, domestic and institutional, medical and veterinary areas. This study was done based on Iranian national standard (10504). Methods: A sample of Disept as delivered (highest test concentration = 80%) is added to a test suspension of bacteria. The mixture is maintained at (20 ± 1)°C for 5 min ± 10 s (obligatory test conditions). At the end of this contact time, an aliquot is taken; the bactericidal and/or the bacteriostatic activity in this portion is immediately neutralized or suppressed by a validated method. The method of choice is dilution-neutralization. The numbers of surviving bacteria in each sample are determined and the reduction is calculated. The test is performed using Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus as test organisms (obligatory test conditions). Results: In both the bacteria pseudomonas aeruginosa and staphylococcus aureous, the number of colony forming units per ml of test mixture was < 1.5 ×10 2 and the number of living organism decreased to >10 5 Conclusion: For the Disept E-1 as ready to use possesses bactericidal activity in the conditions of the test. The basic bactericidal concentration determined according to this study is ready to use for both test organism Pseudomononas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus and showed a 5 log reduction or more at a this concentration. Introduction: Steam sterilization is the most commonly used method for sterilizing reusable medical devices in healthcare facilities. Biological indicators (BIs) are considered 'gold standard' for monitoring effectiveness of steam sterilization processes. However, because of associated costs and level of skills required, BIs are rarely used in low-income countries like Nepal. Class-5 chemical indicators could be an reasonable alternative to BIs, but their sensitivity and specificity to detect sterilization failures in a public hospital setting in Nepal are not known. Objectives: To determine sensitivity and specificity of class-5 chemical indicator to detect steam sterilization failures in public hospitals in Nepal. Methods: Of the 88 primary and secondary care public hospitals in Nepal, 13 hospitals were sampled randomly using stratified clustered design. In total, 189 steam sterilization cycles were tested for effectiveness using BIs (containing 10 6 spores of Geobacillus stearothermophilus) and class-5 chemical indicators following manufacturers' instructions. Test results of both the indicators were cross-tabulated and sensitivity and specificity of class-5 chemical indicators against BIs were determined. Effect of clustering and stratification of study units on outcome measures were considered when analyzing the data. Results: The sensitivity and specificity of class-5 chemical indicator to detect steam sterilization failures were 95.3% (95% CI 81.0% -99.0%) and 92.6% (95% CI 84.3% -96.7%) respectively. The proportions of steam sterilization failures with the biological and class-5 chemical indicators were 71.0% (95% CI 46.8% -87.2%) and 69.8% (95% CI 44.4% -87.0%) respectively. Conclusion: This study demonstrated a high sensitivity and a high specificity of class 5 chemical indicators to detect steam sterilization failures in public hospitals in Nepal. These indicators, which are generally cheaper than BIs, can be used routinely to monitor effectiveness of sterilization in these hospitals. The hospitals had a high proportion of stem sterilization failures and therefore, there is an urgent need for improving steam sterilization practices in these hospitals to minimize the risk of infections associated with inadequately sterilized medical devices. Introduction: Nurses are at high risk of acquiring and transmitting the blood borne infections. They need to be aware regarding the prevention and spread HBV infection. Objectives: To assess the knowledge and attitude regarding care of Hepatitis B Virus positive patients and hepatitis B vaccination status amongst the nurses. Methods: A total of 400 bedside nurses working in various areas viz Emergency Unit, Surgical Unit, Operation Theatre, ICUs, Obstetrics Unit, Medicine Unit and Dialysis unit were studied. Around 50% nurses working in each said area were taken up for the study. A self administered questionnaire with questions on knowledge, attitudes, and practices regarding HBV was used to collect the data. Results: The overall mean knowledge score regarding hepatitis B was 25.7±1.64 (56%). As per the various categories of the disease, mean percentage score was maximum (80%) regarding diagnosis of hepatitis B followed by Management of Hepatitis B and mode of transmission with almost equal percentage score (71.7% and 70%) respectively. The minimum score was regarding knowledge regarding vaccination of hepatitis B and clinical symptoms. Regarding the attitude of the nurses regarding care of HBV positive patients, 43% strongly agreed and 38% agreed that their job puts them at risk for Hepatitis B. Around one fourth each strongly agreed and agreed that these patients should be isolated from other patients Regarding opinion about Hepatitis B vaccination, 67.2% strongly agreed that Hepatitis B vaccine should be compulsory for all the health workers. Regarding vaccination, only half had taken all the three doses of hepatitis B. Conclusion: The nurses need to be sensitized periodically to update their awareness regarding care of the HBV positive patients. 
