9b35c39b9560e47a0786cfbf97c735392aea6054
American Red Cross, 11 San Francisco Veterans Affairs HCS, 12 Statens Serum Institut, 13 National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute
Gustaf  Edgren Edward  Murphy Donald  Brambilla Henrik  Ullum Catherine  Lee Matt  Westlake Steve  Kleinman Darrell  Triulzi Ritchard G Cable Elizabeth  St   Lezin Roberta  Bruhn Henrik  Hjalgrim Simone  Glynn Nareg  Roubinian 

Karolinska Institutet University of California University of British Columbia University of California University of California 
Background/Case Studies: A recent publication reported that red cell transfusions from previously pregnant female donors markedly increased the mortality of transfused male patients. The findings would-if true-have far-reaching clinical and administrative implications in the management of the blood supply. However, these results may have been influenced by biases introduced in the statistical analysis. Study Design/Method: We separately analyzed data from three linked blood donor and recipient cohorts including data from the US and Scandinavia, over long time periods. Patients were followed from the time of first red cell transfusion for the occurrence of both in-hospital and long-term mortality. We used separate Cox regression models to estimate the associations between number of red cell transfusions from a female donor, a previously pregnant donor, and a donor sex-discordant with the recipient-all treated as timedependent-and risk of death while controlling for total number of red cell transfusions received using a stratified Cox model. Analyses were performed for overall effect and stratified by recipient sex and age. Results/Finding: We included a total of 53,890 patients (5,654 deaths), 93,724 patients (8,519 deaths) and 918,996 patients (198,537 deaths with longer follow up) in cohorts I, II and III, respectively. There was no association between any of the donor characteristics and in-hospital mortality in any of the three cohorts (Table) . Hazard ratios per transfused unit from a parous female donor were all non-significant, ranging from 0.99 to 1.02. Results were similar for the effect of donor sex and sex-discordance on in-hospital mortality (Table) , as well as with long-term mortality in two of the cohorts (data not shown). Effect estimates did not differ with recipient sex, and/or age. Categorical analyses did not show negative effects in heavily exposed patients. Conclusion: In this joint analysis of data from three large cohorts of transfused patients, we found no evidence of an association between donor sex, or parity and either in-hospital or long-term patient survival. These null findings using a similar statistical approach across more than a million patients from heterogeneous clinical settings in different countries indicate that prior findings seem unlikely to reflect true biological effects. Background/Case Studies: Platelets are essential for optimal haemostasis and to preserve the endothelial glycocalyx in resuscitation from shock. However, the 5-7 day shelf-life of conventional room-temperature stored platelets means they are usually not available outside large hospitals. Cryopreservation at -80C in dimethylsuphoxide extends shelf-life to 2-4 years, with reconstitution in plasma requiring minimal time, specialised equipment or training. However, despite encouraging preclinical and phase I data, only one phase II trial, in which only 24 patients received cryopreserved platelets, has been published. The CLIP trial program is seeking to provide sufficient phase III trial data for regulatory approval. Study Design/Method: Between July 2015 and December 2017 in 4 hospitals, we enrolled cardiac surgical patients at particularly high risk of perioperative bleeding (identified using the TRUST criteria (Alghamdi et al., Transfusion, 2006) ) in the CLIP-I pilot trial (ACTRN12612001261808). Patients were randomised 1:1 to receive either cryopreserved or liquidstored platelets if their treating clinicians decided a platelet transfusion was indicated. Cryopreserved platelets were prepared by the Australian Red Cross Blood Service using a method based on that of the Netherlands Military Blood Bank, a modification of the original protocol described by the US Navy. Results/Finding: In total, 121 patients were randomised, of whom 42 (35%) received a platelet transfusion. Study groups were well-matched at baseline. There were no significant differences in any effectiveness outcome, but there was a trend for the cryopreserved group to require fewer red blood cell units transfused (median [IQR] 2.5 [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] vs. 4 [3] [4] [5] units, p=0.18). There was a trend towards the cryopreserved group having less blood in their chest drains at 24hr (median [IQR] 712 vs. 805 [591-1080]ml, p=0.27). For the composite outcome defined by the Bleeding Academic Research Consortium (BARC), there was a trend to superiority in the cryopreserved platelet group (27.3% vs. 55.6%, p=0.07). There were no clinically important differences in any measured adverse events. Conclusion: In this pilot trial, cryopreserved platelets were associated with no evidence of harm and small non-significant trends to reduced requirement for red cell transfusion and reduced postoperative blood loss. In the light of this data and the clear logistic advantages of cryopreservation, a definitive study with a non-inferiority design testing volume of postoperative bleeding as the primary outcome is warranted. Improved identification of patients at high risk for a platelet transfusion using a platelet-specific transfusion risk prediction score will increase the efficiency of the phase III trial. was communicated, assuming all criteria remained acceptable including absence of MSM in the prior year, following telephone calls to a toll-free number; reinstated donors were also recruited for donation based on current eligibility. All reinstated donors were required to meet the same donor requirements as any other donor. Rates of ID markers in reinstated donors were compared by chi-square testing to the general donor population, both donating during 2017. Results/Finding: 520/22, 482 (2.3% ) donors returned to donate after their indefinite MSM deferral was removed; 7 donors had ID deferrals following reinstatement (2 confirmed syphilis, 5 anti-HBc-reactive on 2 occasions of which 3 had a 1x history prior to reinstatement and 2 had both anti-HBc reactives post reinstatement; of note, 1 anti-HBc reactive donor was also an incident HIV NAT converter). An additional 72 donors returned to donate after a subsequent 12-month MSM deferral of which 2/72 had ID deferrals following reinstatement; both had confirmed syphilis and one donor was also HIV (antibody+NAT) positive with acknowledged ongoing MSM. The overall rate for all ID markers for routine donors in 2017 was 0.4% (21,676/4,829,679 ) as compared to 1.3% (7/520) in reinstated indefinitely deferred MSM donors (p<0.01; Odds Ratio, OR 3.0; 95% Confidence Interval, CI 1.44-6.38), or 2.8% (2/72) in reinstated 12-mo deferred MSM donors (p<0.05; OR 6.3; 95% CI 1.55-25.84). Conclusion: Federally funded programs investigating variation in HBV, HCV and HIV prevalence and incidence have not yet detected significant changes, indicating comparable safety pre-and post-MSM policy change. However, review of MSM reinstated donors for all ID-markers versus general donors shows trends that require careful monitoring. P4-MN1-6 Incidence of Red Blood Cell Alloimmunization and the Impact of Prophylactic Antigen Matching in Patients with Warm Autoantibodies Meghan Delaney *1 , Torunn Oveland Apelseth 2 , Carolina Bonet Bub 3 , Claudia S. Cohn 4 , Nancy M. Dunbar 5 , Jose M. Kutner 6 , Michael Murphy 7 , Kathleen Selleng 8 , Julie Staves 9 , Silvano Wendel 10 and Alyssa Ziman 11 . Background/Case Studies: Recent assessments of massive transfusion protocol outcomes have identified early transfusion of plasma results in improved hemostasis, shorter ventilator times and increased survival. Infusion using a $1:1 of plasma to red blood cells has also demonstrated a significant decrease in morbidity and mortality. Freeze-dried plasma (FDP) products have been successfully used as an alternative to fresh-frozen plasma (FFP), however, current FDP products prepared in glass bottles have limited widespread adoption of FDP in environments such as the battlefield. A new FDP product (RePlas®) that is contained and reconstituted in a plastic blood bag, using $ 250 mL USP sterile water for injection within less than two minutes, has been recently developed. Study Design/Method: This was a prospective, paired, open label, singlecenter, dose-escalation phase 1 study to determine the safety of autologous infusions of whole blood (CPD) derived FDP or plasmapheresis (ACD) derived FDP into normal healthy subjects. Each FDP product was manufactured from a minimum volume of 270 mL of FFP. Three cohorts of 8 subjects per cohort were included (n=24), resulting in infusions of 270 mL (Cohort 1, n=4 for each CPD or n=4 for ACD FDP infusions), 540 mL (Cohort 2, n=4 for each CPD or n=4 for ACD FDP infusions) and 810 mL (Cohort 3, n=8 for ACD FDP and ACD FFP infusions). Cohort 3 was a randomized, double-blind, crossover study that compared the clinical and laboratory levels of thrombogenesis biomarkers after FDP vs FFP infusions. Clinical and laboratory follow-up was performed after 30 minutes, 4 hours, 24 hours, 7 and 28 days post-infusion. in vitro biochemical and coagulation parameters including pH, osmolality, aPTT, NaPTT, INR, Factors V, VIII, VIIa, protein S, antithrombin III, and total protein levels were also analyzed. A data safety monitoring board reviewed the subjects' data after the completion of infusions in each cohort. Results/Finding: To date, a total of 41 subjects have been screened and 28 subjects have been enrolled and assigned to treatment. For cohorts 1 and 2, all 16 subjects have been infused with FDP products. All FDP units were reconstituted in less than two minutes. For all subjects, no serious adverse events (SAEs) related to product infusion and no occurrence of predetermined, treatment emergent adverse events (TEAEs) including thromboembolic events, infections, evidence of unusual bleeding/bruising or elevated D-dimer levels have been observed. Physical examinations showed no significant changes in vital signs or Wells' scores. Four AEs not related to the FDP product infusion were observed in cohort 1 (rhinitis, transient weakly positive DAT, hyperglycaemia and transient mild increase of liver transaminases). No AEs were identified in cohort 2. No signs of either local or systemic allergic reactions were observed after infusions. Cohort 3 infusions are ongoing and the results of this cohort will be presented. Conclusion: Preliminary data suggest that RePlas® FDP is well tolerated in normal healthy volunteers with no SAEs or safety concerns. Background/Case Studies: There is substantial donor-to-donor variability in how well stored human RBCs circulate post-transfusion. However, the basis of such variability is poorly understood. It has been reported, that like humans, RBCs from genetically distinct strains of mice store differently. The genetic element responsible for differences in storage between B6 mice (store well) and FVB mice (store poorly) was mapped. Study Design/Method: 156 individual mice in the F2 generation of a B6 × FVB cross were analyzed with regards to: 1) 24-hour post-transfusion RBC recoveries (PTR), 2) high resolution metabolomics, and 3) SNP based genotyping. A phenotype driven backcross was also carried out; poorly storing progeny were crossed to B6 mice for 8 generations (B6.FVB congenic strain). New transgenic mice were engineered that overexpress Steap3 on their RBCs. Known human variants of human Steap3 were cloned and expressed in CHO cells and activity measured. Results/Finding: Quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis of F2 mice identified a 149 Mb region on Chr 1 associated with PTR (p=2.09x10 -31 ). B6.FVB narrowed this to 2.8 Mb containing 20 coding genes. mRNA levels were quantified for all 20 genes by RT-PCR in erythroid precursors. Only one gene, Steap3, showed significantly different expression in FVB and B6.FVB mice compared to B6 (p<.005 by 2-way ANOVA, Bonferroni correction). Steap3 has two mRNA transcript variants in mice. Comparing FVB and B6. FVB mice to wild type B6, transcript var1 was 8-10 fold higher while transcript var2 was 3 fold lower (p<.0001 and p<.05 respectively by 2-way ANOVA, Bonferroni correction). RBCs from both FVB and B6.FVB mice had twice the Steap3 activity and 7 fold higher protein levels than B6 RBCs. Overexpressing Steap3 in B6 transgenic mice resulted in a significant decrease in PTR of stored RBCs compared to wild-type B6 (p<0.001). Lipid oxidation correlated with poor PTR in the F2 cohort and refined clusters of oxylipins carried over into the B6.FVB strain and into Steap3 transgenic mice. Known natural variants of human Steap3 had a wide variety of activities. Conclusion: Multiple lines of evidence using different approaches identified Steap3 as a genetic element regulating PTR. Steap3 is a ferrireductase converting Fe3 + to Fe2 + suggesting a mechanism of promoting a Fenton reaction with ensuing oxidation of lipids. Humans and mice share a Steap3 orthologue that is 84.97% identical at the amino acid level. Both null mice and deficient humans have a similar anemia. To our knowledge, this report is the first indication of a role of Steap3 in the biology of mature RBCs. Human Steap3 variants differ in activity but have not been tested for RBC storage. Testing this hypothesis in humans would require studies of PTR of RBCs from donors with genetic variation of Steap3, or other genes involved in Steap3 based pathways. Red Blood Cell Alloimmunization Responses to Transfused Blood Do Not Require Splenic Marginal Zone Macrophages Abhinav Arneja *1 , Juan Salazar 1 , Manjula Santhanakrishnan 2 , Jeanne Hendrickson 2 and Chance J. Luckey 3 . 1 University of Virginia, 2 Yale University, 3  Background/Case Studies: Alloimmunization to non-ABO red blood cell (RBC) antigens remains a significant clinical problem in transfusion medicine. Presence of RBC alloantibodies can lead to delayed transfusion reactions resulting in significant morbidity and occasional mortality. Transfused RBCs represent a unique immune stimulus as they lack traditional pathogenic signals that stimulate innate immune responses. The molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in the stimulation of immune responses to transfused RBCs remain unclear. Recent work in mouse models has shown that storage of RBCs prior to transfusion leads to a significant enhancement of alloimmunization. Further studies have independently implicated macrophages and the spleen as being critical for immune response to stored RBCs. Splenic marginal zone macrophages (MZMs) have been reported to not only stimulate innate immunity but also to promote adaptive immune responses to certain blood-borne pathogens. Additionally, Splenic MZMs specifically phagocytose intravenously injected apoptotic cells resulting in immune suppression towards apoptotic cell antigens. Uptake of apoptotic cells by MZMs critically depends on the exposure of phosphatidylserine (PS) on their cell surface. Exposure of PS on the surface of RBCs increases with RBC age but is significantly enhanced by storage. We hypothesized that splenic MZMs phagocytose transfused stored RBCs and, unlike apoptotic cells, stimulate innate and adaptive immune responses to RBC antigens. Study Design/Method: To investigate the role of MZMs in RBC alloantibody generation, we utilized the HOD mouse model to compare alloimmunization in Wild-Type (WT) and Liver X Receptor α (LXRα) knock-out (KO) mice. LXRα is a transcription factor essential for the generation of Background/Case Studies: Prophylactic administration of polyclonal anti-RhD in women prevents maternal alloimmunization. However, under certain conditions, some preparations of anti-RhD have a paradoxical enhancement of alloimmunization. The underlying mechanisms behind modulation of humoral alloimmunization by anti-RhD are unknown. However, recently it has become appreciated that different IgG subtypes of antibodies may differentially regulate alloimmunity. Herein, we take a reductionist approach and passively immunize mice with monoclonal alloantibodies, whereby the antibodies have the same specificity but are different IgG subtypes, to test how IgG subtype regulates RBC alloimmunization. Study Design/Method: A new monoclonal anti-Duffy was isolated, sequenced, and class-switched into different mouse IgG subtypes (IgG1, IgG2a, IgG2b, IgG2c, IgG3). Individual subtypes were passively infused into C57BL/6 (B6) mice followed by a transfusion of 100uL of packed, leukoreduced RBCs consisting of 50uL HOD and 50uL B6, each labeled with lipophilic dyes to allow tracking. HOD RBCs express an RBC-specific triple fusion protein consisting of hen egg lysozyme, ovalbumin (OVA), and human Duffy. Some recipients received an adoptive transfer of 10 5 OTII CD4 T cells, which recognize OVA contained within HOD, presented by recipient MHCII. Alloantibodies were assessed over 21 days and measured by flow crossmatch against HOD and control B6 RBC targets. Results/Finding: Passive immunization with 1ug of IgG2a or IgG2c enhanced anti-HOD alloantibody production (3/3 experiments, p<0.01), IgG2b led to a 3-fold increase, but neither IgG1 nor IgG3 modulated alloimmunization, compared to controls. Additional mechanistic studies focused on IgG2c. Passive immunization with IgG2c accelerated HOD RBC clearance from circulation at every time point analyzed, compared to syngeneic B6 RBCs. Additionally, IgG2c treatment led to a significant increase of HOD RBC consumption (p<0.05, 3/3 experiments), with increases observed in CD8 + dendritic cells (DCs), CD8-DCs, red pulp macrophages, and to a lesser extent plasmacytoid DCs and neutrophils. The cumulative effect of altered RBC consumption patterns in IgG2c-treated mice resulted in a significant increase in OTII proliferation (p<0.0001, 2/2 experiments). Conclusion: The current findings indicate that pre-existing anti-RBC alloantibodies can modulate future RBC alloantibody production. In particular, IgG2c enhances alloantibody production through accelerated RBC clearance and shifting the pattern of consumption to individual immunostimulatory antigen presenting cell subsets. The cumulative effect of these changes is enhanced CD4 T cell activation and proliferation which leads to increased RBC alloantibodies. As polyclonal anti-RhD contains multiple antibody subtypes at varying ratios, these finding may provide insight into why some preparations of RhD, under certain conditions, enhanced alloimmunization. Paurvi Shinde 1 , Krystalyn E. Hudson 1 , Ariel M. Hay 1 , Jenna Lebedev 1 , Heather L. Howie 1 , Ellen Van Der Schoot 2 , Gestur Vidarsson 3 , Xiaohong Wang 1 and James C. Zimring *1 . 1 BloodworksNW Research Institute, 2 Sanquin Blood Supply Research, 3 Sanquin Research Background/Case Studies: In addition to the better known effector function(s), antibodies are also known to regulate primary immune responses; e.g. administration of polyclonal anti-RhD to prevent maternal alloimmunization. Attempts to generate monoclonal anti-RhD have been complicated; ironically, some preparations enhanced rather than suppressed in human trials. Likewise, administration of plasma derived anti-RhD has caused enhancement in some settings. The underlying factors and/or mechanisms that regulate enhancement or suppression are poorly understood. To investigate these processes, we used a tractable mouse model that expresses the K1 variant of Kell on RBCs, and allows transfusion of RBCs into antigen-negative recipients as an allotransfusion. Study Design/Method: A monoclonal anti-K1 was isolated and sequenced. Recombinant DNA technology was used to express the same anti-K1 variable domain as each of the different mouse IgG subtypes (IgG1, IgG2a, IgG2b, IgG2c, IgG3). Isolated subtypes were infused into C57BL/6 (B6) mice followed by transfusion of one unit of K1 RBCs (50 microliters). Alloimmunization was measured by testing serum for anti-K1 IgM (at day 6) and IgG (at day 21) via flow crossmatch with K1 RBCs. Recipient mice included targeted deletions of the common gamma chain of FcgRs, FcgRI or FcgRIII. Both traditional and cellular surface plasmon resonance (SPR) assays were performed to assess affinity for IgG2a with the different FcgRs. Results/Finding: IgG2a, IgG2b and IgG2c (but not IgG1 or IgG3) significantly enhanced alloimmunization. For example, in combined data from 3 experiments, IgG2a treated vs. control mice had IgM (1693 vs 357, p = 0.02) and IgG (5926 vs. 6.9, p = 0.002). No enhancement was observed using antibodies against a third-party antigen. Likewise, no signal was detected in mice that received anti-K1 antibody but no transfusion. Additional mechanistic studies focused on the IgG2a subtype. Enhancement by IgG2a was lost in mice with a deletion of the common Fc gamma chain (FcgR -/-), suggesting that FcgRI, FcgRIII or FcgRIV (or some combination) was required for enhancement. Enhancement by IgG2a was eliminated in FcgRI -/mice but was unaltered in FcgRIII -/mice. Additionally, SPR analysis revealed affinity of IgG2a was highest for FcgRI (1x9x10 -8 ). These findings demonstrate that FcgRI, but not FcgRIII is required for IgG2a mediated enhancement of alloantibody response to K1 RBCs. Conclusion: The current findings indicate anti-RBC antibodies can influence humoral alloimmunity and this process is dependent upon IgG subtype. IgG2a, IgG2b and IgG2c each enhanced alloimmunity. Mechanistically, IgG2a enhancement requires FcgRI. Because enhancement is lost in FcgRI null mice, then none of the other FcgRs is sufficient for enhancement; but we cannot rule out that they may be involved. Background/Case Studies: Transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO) is one of the leading causes of transfusion-related major morbidity and mortality. Hydrostatic pulmonary edema is key and major risk factors include speed and volume of transfusion. To date no preclinical studies have investigated infusion speed and volume on pulmonary capillary pressure. Our aim of this study was to develop a rat model for TACO and investigate the influence of these risk factors. Study Design/Method: A 'two-hit' rat model was developed using Lewis rats. Blood harvested from donor rats was used to make red blood cell units (RBC) following national blood banking practices. Under general anesthesia, a cardiac left-ventricular pressure transducer was placed. Isovolemic anemia was induced by replacing 25% of circulating volume with colloid solution. A large myocardial infarction was induced through ligation of the left-anterior descending coronary artery (first-hit). Animals were randomized (n=3 per group) to receive 1, 2 or 4 units of RBCs in 30 or 60 minutes (second-hit). Animals were followed-up to 1-hour post-transfusion. Primary outcome was difference in left-ventricular end-diastolic pressure (dLVEDP)gold standard for measuring increased pulmonary pressure (hallmark of TACO). Secondary outcomes include lung wet-dry ratio (WDR) and hemodynamic parameters. Results/Finding: Pre-transfusion LVEDP was 9.64 mmHg (IQR: 8.1 -11.1); following transfusion a significant increase in dLVEDP was seen between 1 vs. 2 and 1 vs. 4 units (resp.: p = 0.013, p = 0.013). While higher transfusion speeds trend towards higher pressures, this was not significantly different. Elevation of LVEDP above baseline persisted up to 1 hour after transfusion in the 2 and 4 unit group (ns.). WDR showed no differences between units or transfusion speed. Conclusion: This is the first animal transfusion model investigating the effect transfusion speed on pulmonary hydrostatic pressure, the key feature of TACO. A strong dose-dependent effect of transfusion volume on pulmonary hydrostatic pressure was found. While higher transfusion speed showed a trend towards higher pressures, it was not significant in this model. Future experiments in this model will allow testing of interventions and therapeutic strategies to prevent TACO. Background/Case Studies: Culture of residual components can detect septic transfusion reactions (STR). According to AABB criteria, signs/symptoms suggestive of STR include 1) fever (>/=38C with a rise >/ = to 1C) PLUS any of the following: rigors, hypotension, shock, tachycardia, dyspnea and/or nausea/vomiting -OR-2) isolated hypotension. Limitations of these criteria include that hypotension and tachycardia are undefined, fever may occur in the absence of other signs/symptoms, and fever may not occur in patients pre-medicated with antipyretics. The goal of this project was to develop improved criteria for detection of STR by culture of residual product in adult patients. Study Design/Method: We collected retrospective data for all transfusion reactions in adults ( > 15 years) that resulted in culture of the residual product during calendar year 2016. We also collected the same data for any reactions with positive residual product culture results from 2012-2015, to enrich the dataset for positive results. We modified AABB criteria to define hypotension as systolic blood pressure </ = 90 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure </ = 60 mmHg -ANDdecrease of 15% from baseline; and tachycardia as > / = 100bpm -AND-15% increase from baseline. We also modified recommendations to culture when the fever was >/=39C in the absence of any other signs/symptoms or in the absence of fever when the patient was pre-medicated with an anti-pyretic and other signs/symptoms were present. We retrospectively determined the sensitivity and specificity of these Background/Case Studies: When a septic transfusion reaction (STR) is suspected, AABB Bulletin 14-04 recommends testing the returned product for bacterial contamination as well as drawing blood samples from the patient for culturing. Growing the same bacterial species from these two sources supports a diagnosis of STR. However, patient blood cultures can be negative in the setting of a true STR if the patient is on antibiotic therapy at the time of transfusion. This multicenter, retrospective, international study describes 1) the rate of patient culturing in the setting of product culturing and 2) organisms detected from these cultures. Study Design/Method: We collected data for all transfusion reactions with residual product culture during the calendar year 2016, including recipient demographic data, type of product implicated, and patient and/or product culture results. The data set was additionally enriched with all cases from 2012-2015 where product culture was positive. Imputability of the clinical significance of a positive product culture was defined as "definite STR" if the patient culture grew the same organism and "possible STR" if patient was not cultured or if the culture 1) was negative or 2) grew a different organism from the product. Results/Finding: Out of 1,174 transfusion reactions with product culture at 22 institutions, only 449 (38%) patients were concurrently cultured. Eighty-eight (7%) product cultures grew a bacterial organism. Of those positive product cultures, 13/88 (15%) had concordant patient cultures ("definite" imputability). The organisms implicated were either members of the skin microbiota (8/13) such as Staphylococcus spp. or of the gastrointestinal tract (5/13) such as Escherichia coli. In 6/88 (7%) cases, patient blood culture grew a non-concordant organism (Table) and in 46/88 (52%) cases patient cultures were negative ("possible" imputability). In the remaining 23/88 (26%) cases, the patient was not cultured (unable to assess imputability). Conclusion: A minority of patients had concurrent blood cultures obtained when a residual product was cultured during the workup for STR. Imputability therefore could not be assigned in 26% of positive product cultures. Isolation of the same bacterial species from the patient and the product allowed for assignment of "definite" imputability in 15% of cases with positive product culture. If transfusion reaction signs and symptoms warrant culture of the residual product, a patient blood culture should be collected concurrently to aid in interpreting product culture results. reporting rates were lower for plasma when compared to PLTs and RBCs (p<0.0001) , no difference in reaction culture rates by component type were observed (Table) . Survey results demonstrated marked variation in institutional culturing policies. The majority (13/20; 65%) of centers do not use published criteria for culturing STRs. Some centers allow culturing of residual units without medical director approval (7/20; 35%) and have no formal review process to trigger STR investigation (5/20; 25%). Centers that reported a historically clinically relevant STR had overall higher reaction culture rates (55.1% vs 18.3%; p<0.0001), suggesting recall bias may be a driver for increased culturing. Conclusion: There is marked variation in institutional practices surrounding culturing residual components to detect STRs. Historically reported clinically relevant STR appears to result in higher culture rates. There is opportunity for practice standardization. Transfusion-Associated Circulatory Overload -Understanding the Pathogenesis Robert Klanderman *1,2 , Joachim Bosboom 3 , Marije Wijnberge 1,3 , Adrie Maas 2 , Margreeth Vroom 1 , Nicole Juffermans 1,2 , Markus Hollmann 2,3 , Bart Geerts 3 and Alexander Vlaar 1,2 . 1 Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Academic Medical Center, 2 Laboratory for Experimental Intensive Care and Anesthesiology, Academic Medical Center, 3 Department of Anesthesiology, Academic Medical Center Background/Case Studies: Transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO) is one of the leading causes of transfusion-related morbidity and mortality. By definition, TACO is caused by hydrostatic pulmonary edema due to circulatory overload. The exact pathophysiology however is unclear, as up to 50% of cases occur after only 1 transfused unit. To date no animal models have been able to induce TACO, since healthy hearts are able to deal with large infused volumes. We hypothesized underlying volume incompliance, e.g. cardiac dysfunction, and subsequent transfusion causes TACO. Our aim was to induce TACO in an animal model and investigate the pathophysiology. Study Design/Method: A 'two-hit' TACO model was developed using Lewis rats. Under general anesthesia, the left-ventricle was catheterized. Using colloids, 25% of circulating volume was replaced to induce isovolemic anemia. A large myocardial infarction was induced through ligation of the left-anterior descending coronary artery ('first-hit'). Rats were randomized (n=3 per group) to receive 2 or 4 units of RBCs prepared from donor rats or similar volume of lactated ringers (LR) over 30 minutes ('second-hit'). Animals were followed for 1-hour post-transfusion. Primary outcome was leftventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP)gold standard for measuring increased pulmonary capillary pressure (hallmark of TACO). Secondary outcome was lung water-content. Results/Finding: Baseline hemodynamics were similar between groups and LVEDP was 9.2 mmHg (IQR: 8.0 -12.2). A large increase in LVEDP (Table 1. ) was seen directly after infusion of 4 RBCs but not with LR (p<0.05). Post-transfusion LVEDP dissipated more rapidly in the fluid infusion group at 30 and 60 minutes (p<0.05) but was not significant anymore after 1-hour. Lung water-content did not differ between groups. Conclusion: In this 'two-hit' model of anemic rats with underlying cardiac dysfunction, blood but not fluid infusion increased pulmonary capillary pressure. This TACO model is the first to compare fluids to blood products and measure both direct pulmonary capillary pressure and pulmonary edema. Blood transfusion has a profoundly different effect on capillary pressure in the lungs, the study is currently underpowered to detect differences in pulmonary edema however inclusion is ongoing. This data suggests TACO pathophysiology is more than solely fluid overload. Blood Centers of the Pacific-Irwin Center Background/Case Studies: Transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO) is a common and often severe adverse reaction of blood transfusion associated with increased morbidity and mortality. We sought to develop a predictive algorithm which would use pre-transfusion patient characteristics to identify patients at high risk for developing TACO before they are transfused. Study Design/Method: A case control study at four academic hospitals utilized active surveillance to enroll cases of TACO as well as matched transfused controls without pulmonary edema. A measure of cardiac stress, N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), was measured in cases of TACO and controls prior to and following transfusion. Case detection algorithms to identify patients at the highest risk of TACO were developed using classification and regression tree (CART) analyses. We evaluated approximately 50 pre-transfusion risk factors and produced a ranking of 7 most important predictors in order of their relative importance for predicting TACO. Algorithm performance was evaluated using 10-fold cross-validation with misclassification error rates, average square error (ASE), sensitivity and specificity. Receiver operating characteristics curve analyses were used to determine the accuracy of pre-transfusion clinical predictors in differentiating TACO from controls. Results/Finding: The most informative determinants for cases of TACO (n=200) versus control status (n=405) were: pre-transfusion SpO2/FiO2 (SF) ratio, NT-proBNP level, hospital setting, history of hypertension, elevated systolic blood pressure, respiratory rate, and pre-transfusion hemoglobin level > than 7 g/dL. Patients with pre-transfusion SF ratios less than 450, NT-proBNP levels greater than 1060, and OR/PACU, emergency department, or procedural suite settings had the highest probability of developing TACO (86%). Patients with pre-transfusion SF ratio greater than 450 and respiratory rate less than 16 had the lowest probability of developing TACO (5%). Algorithm performance had excellent discrimination for TACO (n=200) vs. control (n=405) with the area under the curve = 0.83. CART analysis achieved a misclassification rate of 21%, an ASE of 15%, a sensitivity of 63%, and a specificity of 85%. Conclusion: A CART-based screening algorithm differentiated cases of TACO from transfused controls using only pre-transfusion clinical data in a case-control setting. Classification tree algorithms may improve identification of patients at risk for developing TACO. Prospective studies are needed to assess the utility of real-time predictive algorithms plus clinical interventions in preventing TACO in a large-scale hospitalized patient cohort. Background/Case Studies: Massachusetts blood banks have been required by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health (MDPH) to submit monthly transfusion activity and adverse reaction data to the National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN) Hemovigilance Module since June, 2014. Such standardized statewide data collection allows for more comprehensive analyses, including the potential to generate local benchmarks. Transfusion-Associated Circulatory Overload (TACO) is currently of interest due to international discussions of proposed modifications to the current surveillance case definition. As a result of perceived local increase in TACO incidence, we examined data submitted involving TACO and report the findings here. Study Design/Method: TACO reactions (2015) (2016) (2017) meeting the NHSN case definition and imputability criteria of possible, probable, or definite from 70 facilities, were included. We analyzed by age, gender, product received, transfusion indication, hospital bed size, and selected clinical criteria using SAS 9.3. Rates were calculated per 10,000 units transfused. Results/Finding: 205 TACO reactions were reported with a mean of 68.3/ year. Of these, 107(52%) were in females, 45(22%) were aged 50-59, and 51(25%) were aged 70-79 years. Notably, two were aged ≤ 18. Facilities with ≥ 300 beds reported 160(78%) TACO reactions, 23(11%) occurred in those with 100-299 beds, and 22(11%) in those with < 100 beds. The rate of TACO per 10,000 units transfused was 5.14 in facilities with < 100 beds, 0.88 in those with 100-299 beds and 2.01 in those with ≥ 300 beds. Indication for transfusion was documented for 124/205(60%), with "medical" 44% (n=54) being most frequent followed by malignancy 17% (n=21), internal bleeding 13% (n=16), hematologic disorder 10% (n=12), and surgery 8% (n=10). Seasonal variation was observed with the lowest incidence of TACO occurring in June and July. The rate of TACO increased from 1.64 to 2.08/10,000 units transfused over the study period. The three-year TACO rates per 10,000 units transfused by product type were 1.09 for plasma, 1.54 for platelets and the highest was 2.00 for RBCs. Conclusion: A modest increase in TACO was observed over the three-year period, as well as a bi-modal age distribution among cases. The seasonal variation and higher rate among smaller facilities provides guidance to target awareness and potential interventions. Limitations include a lack of external data validation and the possibility of inconsistent case definition interpretation and application. This study demonstrates the utility of NHSN for trend identification and selected reaction analysis and targeting of transfusion safety efforts. Transfusion of Incorrect Blood Components (IBCT) Reported to the Norwegian Hemovigilance System Aurora Espinosa * , Øystein Flesland and Christine Torsvik Steinsvåg. The Norwegian Directorate of Health Background/Case Studies: The Norwegian hemovigilance system was implemented in 2004 as a voluntary reporting system, becoming mandatory for serious adverse events in 2007. In the Norwegian hemovigilance system, IBCT has been reported as a transfusion complication, even when the patient did not experience any symptoms. Study Design/Method: IBCT is defined as the transfusion of a blood component intended for another patient or the transfusion of a blood component which does not comply with the specified requirements. Clinical reactions and severity, as well as the cause of the errors were registered, including errors in ordering of the blood component, selection and issuing, labeling, testing and bedside patient identification. Results/Finding: In the period 2004-15 the Norwegian hemovigilance system received 240 cases of IBCT, including 104 cases of blood component transfused to the wrong patient and 132 cases of blood component not meeting the specified requirements. In four additional cases, the blood component both failed to meet the expected requirements and was transfused to the wrong patient. Examples of non-conformities regarding lack of specified requirements of the blood component are lack of irradiation when required and transfusion of incompatible red cells in the presence of previously identified red cell antibodies. Thirty-five of the reported IBCT occurred in patients under the age of twenty. In 28 of these cases the transfused blood component did not meet specified requirements. In more than 50 % of the total number of cases there were multiple errors. There were 26 reports on hemolytic transfusion reactions caused by IBCT, twenty of them ABO incompatibility cases and six cases caused by incompatibility in other blood group systems than ABO, even if the antibody was known prior to the transfusion. Nine of the ABO-incompatible blood transfusions were less severe reactions, ten were serious or life-threatening and three were fatal. Two patients with known anti-IgA had an anaphylactic reaction after the transfusion of a red blood cell concentrate. Most of the patients receiving an incorrect blood component had no adverse reaction. Errors were most frequently related to ordering of blood components by the clinical departments, selection and issuing of blood components by the blood bank and to inadequate bedside patient identification prior to the transfusion. One can assume that in all cases where the patient received a blood component intended for another patient, the bedside patient identity control was not performed according to the local guidelines. Conclusion: Errors occur in all areas of the transfusion chain and in a high number of cases multiple errors are made. Most cases of blood components transfused to the wrong patient could have been prevented if adequate bedside patient identification had been performed. The main cause leading to IBCT are errors regarding ordering of blood products and inadequate bedside patient identification. In patients under the age of twenty the main cause for IBCT is transfusion of a blood component not meeting the specified requirements especially irradiation. The Norwegian hemovigilance system has strongly recommended the use of electronic patient identification before transfusion to reduce the number of transfusions of a blood component intended for another patient, but only a few hospitals in Norway have implemented such a system. Background/Case Studies: Each transfusion entails the risk of an acute disturbance, be it febrile (F), allergic (A), and/or cardiorespiratory (C) at presentation. Although the overall odds of transfusion reactions (TR) are low and most are minor, respiratory transfusion reactions (RTRs) are likelier to be severe, and are the leading cause of transfusion-related morbidity and mortality. RTRs may be cardiogenic (transfusion-associated circulatory overload [TACO] ) and/or non-cardiogenic. The latter range from direct insults (transfusion-related acute lung injury [TRALI] , or allergic bronchopulmonary transfusion reaction [ABTR]), to indirect manifestations of other injuries (bacterial contamination, or acute hemolytic incompatibility). If criteria are not met for these harms, and underlying disease progression is not playing a role, then the diagnosis of exclusion is transfusion associated dyspnea (TAD). TRs, and RTRs in particular, can be challenging to investigate in patients with complex comorbidities, and in the working environment with its information gaps. The extent to which TR patients present with multiple disturbances, and the extent to which reviewers can reach conclusions more certain than merely "possible," is of interest to measure in TR investigations, and especially in RTRs. Study Design/Method: In the hemovigilance database of an academic adult healthcare institution (comprising 3 sites transfusing 55,000-65,000 components/year), consecutive TR were retrospectively analyzed for mode of presentation (F/A/C), with multiple modes of presentation counted as a measure of complexity. Final conclusion(s) and respective conclusion-specific certainty/imputability underwent review to gauge diagnostic confidence. RTRs were also analyzed for the number of conclusions reached per case, and for the frequency of TACO, TRALI, ABTR, and TAD as a conclusion (and their respective certainties). Results/Finding: Over 5 years (01/01/2013 -31/12/2017), 1691 TR were investigated by the transfusion laboratory team. Fever occurred in 764 cases, while RTR was noted in 346 (20.5%). Referrals with more than one disturbance (eg. F+C) occurred in 265 cases (15.7% of referrals). The provisional diagnosis in the TR referrals was ultimately no more certain than "possible" in 188 cases (11.1%). In RTRs, there were 451 conclusions reached, a value 30% greater than the number of referrals. When conclusions were stratified between those of low confidence [possible/cannot rule out] versus high confidence [probable or definite], the weight was low confidence-skewed in most RTR categories (95/80 in TACO, 24/0 in TRALI, and 113/22 in TAD, versus 52/65 in ABTR, respectively). Overall, the ratio of low confidence to high confidence RTR conclusions was 1.7:1. TAD was coded 135 times, and was the commonest conclusion after TACO. Conclusion: Overall, TRs present with more than one disturbance in >15% of referrals, while > 10% of TRs reach conclusions no better than "possible" for the likeliest (provisional) diagnosis. RTRs are comparatively more problematic, with more conclusions reached than there are cases, and the (TS20-MN3-23) Background/Case Studies: Babesia, a protozoan parasite that infects red blood cells, is a leading infectious cause of mortality in transfusion recipients, as reported to FDA. Babesia is usually transmitted via ticks but may be transfusion transmitted (TTB) or from mother to child during pregnancy or delivery. Prospective testing of blood donations in endemic areas of the US revealed 0.32% of donors were positive for Babesia DNA or antibodies. The US FDA does not currently require donor screening for Babesia but plans to issue draft guidance in 2018 with recommendations to reduce TTB risk, including requirements for screening blood donations. Study Design/Method: cobas ® Babesia for use on the cobas ® 6800/8800 Systems, is a highly-sensitive qualitative polymerase chain reaction nucleic acid amplification test (PCR-NAT), developed to detect in whole blood (WB) each year of screening under ID-NAT, MP-NAT, and with no screening in the context of the fifty United States and District of Columbia. Individual recipients' blood component exposures were sampled from data. Zikarelated adverse health events experienced by transfusion recipients, sexual partners, and infants born to recipients or sexual partners were captured. The model was run while varying the ZIKV rate from 1 confirmed-positive unit for every 1,000 blood units collected to 1 every 10 million. Estimate uncertainty was calculated using probabilistic sensitivity analysis. We assumed a willingness-to-pay threshold of $1 million per quality-adjusted life year gained (QALY). Results/Finding: We estimate that MP-NAT is only cost-effective in donor populations for which the ZIKV rate exceeds 1.3 positive units per thousand. Trigger strategies to ID-NAT are cost-effective in populations for which the ZIKV rate exceeds 7.7 per thousand. At a ZIKV rate of 1 per million, we estimate that transfusion-transmission of ZIKV would result in one case of mild febrile illness every 5.8 months (95% CI 3.9 -9.8 months), one case of Guillain-Barre every 336 years (95% CI 250 -476 years), and one case of congenital Zika syndrome every 694 years (95% CI 395 -4642 years) with no screening. Estimates of these outcomes at various ZIKV rates are reported (Table) . Conclusion: At the peak of the Zika epidemic in the Americas, the ZIKV rate among donors in the fifty United States did not approach the threshold at which universal MP-NAT or ID-NAT would be considered cost-effective at a threshold of $50K or even $1 million per QALY. Exclusively screening donor groups with higher expected ZIKV rates, such as donors with recent travel to or residence in an area experiencing autochthonous Zika transmission, may be cost-effective. Evidence from this analysis should be considered alongside other risks and benefits. Genetic Variability of Zika Virus Isolated from U.S. Blood Donors, 2016 Andriyan Grinev*, Felipe Assis, Evgeniya Volkova, Emilia Sippert, Rafaelle Fares-Gusmao, Suzan Ok, Bruno Rocha, Caren Chancey and Maria Rios. Background/Case Studies: Zika virus (ZIKV) is a Flavivirus related to Spondweni and Dengue viruses, spread by Aedes mosquitoes that can also be transmitted from human to human by sexual contact, from mother to fetus during pregnancy, and by blood transfusion. Most ZIKV infections are asymptomatic, but serious disease manifestations including neurological disorders and birth defects such as microcephaly, may occur. Zika disease became a threat to public health in the U.S. in 2016 when, in addition to travel-related cases, local transmission was reported in the continental U.S. The U.S. blood supply has been screened for ZIKV RNA since 2016 using investigational and later, FDA-licensed, nucleic acid tests (NAT) . Mutations in the viral genome may potentially negatively affect ZIKV blood screening by causing mismatches between the viral sequence and primers/ probes in detection by NAT. Therefore, this study aimed to analyze the genetic diversity of human ZIKV isolates from the U.S. in 2016 and Panama 2015. Study Design/Method: Anonymized plasma samples were obtained from various blood collection facilities, and isolates were expanded by culture in Vero cells. Viral RNAs were purified from cell supernatants and sequenced using Sanger method. The complete ZIKV genome of 10 isolates collected during the 2016 epidemic in Puerto Rico and Florida were sequenced. In addition, we analyzed 3 clinical isolates from Panama, 2015. ZIKV sequences were aligned using Mega 7 software. The ZIKV genomes were also subjected to Bayesian and Maximum Likelihood phylogenetic analysis. Results/Finding: Viral isolates from 10 blood donors collected in 2016 showed an average of 2.07% nucleotide divergence when compared with the ancestor Micronesia strain, 2007 (GenBank# EU545988). As usual among all flaviviruses, most nucleotide changes (>86%) were silent transitions (T$C, A$G). The number of nucleotide mutations ranged from 193 to 209 and resulted in 19 to 29 amino acid substitutions. Isolates from the same geographic location were genetically similar. Phylogenetically, ZIKV isolates from Florida clustered together with isolates from Honduras and Nicaragua, 2016. Isolates from Puerto Rico and Panama clustered with the Caribbean clade together with other isolates from Puerto Rico, Panama and Colombia, 2015-2016. Conclusion: The level of ZIKV genetic diversity observed in our study warrants further monitoring of ZIKV among the human population both to ensure suitability of the current licensed and investigational blood donor screening assays, and to determine whether ZIKV diversity may be associated with functional changes in the viral genes. Background/Case Studies: CD4 + CXCR5 + Foxp3 + follicular regulatory T (Tfr) cells have been recently identified as a specialized subset of Foxp3 + regulatory T (Treg) cells, which locate in the germinal center (GC) and suppress follicular helper T (Tfh) cells, B cells and antibodies production. And Tfr cells play an important regulatory role in the pathogenesis of autoimmunity diseases like SLE. Additionally, Baicalin, which is a natural compound isolated from Chinese herb, has been reported to promote Foxp3 expression during the differentiation of Treg cells and ameliorate kidney inflammation in lupus-prone MRL/lpr mice. Thus, it is speculated that Tfr cells plus Baicalin might be a promising cellular therapeutic approach for the treatment of antibody-mediated autoimmune diseases. In this study, it was determined that Baicalin could effectively induced CXCR5 + Tfr cells from Foxp3 + Treg cells, and these Baicalin-induced Tfr cells also could relieve lupus nephritis in mouse model. Study Design/Method: In vitro, naive CD4 + T cells were first purified from spleen of B6 mice, and stimulated by TGF-β and Baicalin plus anti-CD3/28 Abs and IL-2, termed Baicalin-induced Tfr cells. And the phenotype, proliferation, serious cytokines productions and suppression of Tfr cells were assessed. Meanwhile, 1 × 10 6 Baicalin-induced Tfr cells or vehicle-induced Tfr cells were transferred i.v. into the MRl/lpr mice (12-week) once a week, which were lasting 4 weeks, and control mice were treated with PBS. The 24-hour urine protein were measured every week, and histopathologic test of kidney, anti-ds-DNA antibody titers and cytokines in serum and CD4 + Th subsets in spleen were analyzed after mice were treated with Tfr cells for 4 weeks. Results/Finding: After Baicalin induction 5 days in vitro, the percent of CXCR5 + Foxp3 + Tfr cells in CD4 + T cells increased significantly from 0.74 ± 0.14% to 14.08 ± 0.54%, and up to 48.57 ± 2.93% of Treg cells showed CXCR5 positive and expressed high level of Bcl6, the key marker of Tfr cells. Baicalin could promote Tfr cell differentiation accompanied by inducing TGF-β and IL-10 production. Further, Baicalininduced Tfr cells could effectively inhibit Tfh cell proliferation, suppress IL-21 secretion and induce Tfh cell apoptosis in vitro. To determine the suppressive function of Baicalin-induced Tfr cells in vivo, the SLE mouse model were used. After 4-week treatment, a more remarkable anti-inflammatory activity, improved clinical renal scores and histological end-points in kidney were found in the Baicalin-induced-Tfr-treated group than those in the Tfr-treated group. The treatment of Baicalininduced Tfr cells could significantly decrease anti-ds-DNA antibody titers in serum and reduce 24-hour urine protein than Tfr cells treatment. Moreover, the transfusion of Baicalin-induced Tfr cells resulted in a more obvious decrease in the percentage of CD4 + CXCR5 + PD-1 + Tfh cells and the lower level of IL-21. Conclusion: These results indicated that Tfr cells induced by Baicalin showed more effective suppression in vitro, and reduced more markedly the severity and progression of lupus nephritis than Tfr cells in SLE mouse model, which was associated with modulation of Tfh/Thr polarization and IL-21 secretion in vivo. This study highlights that Baicalin might be an assistant stimulator for Tfr cells expansion, and Baicalin-induced Tfr cells showed the potential therapeutic utility for lupus. Background/Case Studies: Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) show promise for the treatment of trauma. Although their mechanism of action is not fully understood, MSCs possess properties which may limit post-injury damage and promote healing (such as anti-inflammatory/immune modulatory activity). MSCs can interact with and affect function of several immune cell types. In this study, we investigate interactions between MSCs and innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) . ILCs are important rapid responders in infection and are likely to also be important in the response to trauma. Beyond the previously identified cytotoxic natural killer (NK) cells, several non-cytotoxic subtypes have been described (ILC1, ILC2, ILC3). Different inflammatory/anti-inflammatory functions are proposed for the subtypes; thus the subtype ratio is important and may change with injury and treatment. In light of interactions between MSCs and other immune cells, we propose that they interact with ILCs, and that interactions will alter the function of both cell types. Study Design/Method: MSCs from commercial sources were used at early passage. Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from de-identified human whole blood collected by the ISR Research Blood Bank under an approved standard operating procedure. ILC subtype identification was performed by flow cytometry. ILCs were enriched from whole blood using EasySep Human Pan-ILC magnetic enrichment kit (StemCell Technologies). Co-culture was performed in RPMI medium supplemented with 10% FBS for 2-4 days. Non-adherent cells were subjected to flow cytometry for identification of ILC subtypes. Results/Finding: ILC subtype characterization in whole blood was performed on 8 individual donors. A high degree of variation between donors was observed. Magnetic enrichment of PBMCs increased the number of ILCs (11% of total events compared to 0.01% in unenriched PBMCs), allowing for more accurate ILC subtype characterization. When human PBMCs were cultured in the presence and absence of human adipose-derived MSCs, differences in subtype distribution were observed at 4 days (25.5% ILC1, 42% ILC2 and 32.5% ILC3 for PBMCs alone compared with 53.5% ILC1, 23.8% ILC2 and 22.8% ILC3 for PBMCs co-cultured with MSCs). Conclusion: Based on the current study, we conclude that ILC1, ILC2 and ILC3 can be identified in whole human blood or PBMCs by flow cytometry. There is variability in the subset distribution between different donors. Enrichment of ILCs by magnetic separation allows greater accuracy for subtype identification by flow cytometry. MSCs influence ILC subtype distribution in co-culture. Since different ILC subsets have different functions, the interplay between these two cell types could have meaningful effects on immunomodulation. CBIB9-MN4-32 Molecular Characterizations of Anti-ABO Blood Group Antibodies Khoa Nguyen* 1 , Tho Pham 1 and Scott Boyd 2 . 1 Stanford University School of Medicine, Department of Pathology, 2 Stanford University Background/Case Studies: Antibody response against carbohydrate antigens, specifically against the ABO blood group system, is an important foundational aspect in transfusion and transplantation medicine. We seek to molecularly define antibodies involved in ABO carbohydrate blood group recognition. We investigated antibody somatic hypermutation levels, isotype makeup, and clonality of anti-ABO antibodies in healthy humans. We also assessed for the presence of stereotyped (convergent) antibodies expressed by different individuals. Study Design/Method: Using fluorescently labeled ABO antigens, we performed FACS to identify B-cells from healthy human peripheral blood with surface immunoglobulins specific for each blood group antigen. Once bulksorted, we performed high-throughput DNA sequencing of the rearranged immunoglobulin heavy chain VDJ locus to characterize the ABO-specific antibody sequences. The sequences were then parsed and analyzed for specific antibody characteristics such as IGHV usage, CDR3 sequence, and IGHV mutation rate. Results/Finding: We discovered ABO-specific B-cells to comprise hundreds of clones, express all isotypes, and do not show evidence of IGHV gene restriction. The isotype make-up for anti-ABO antibodies comprise approximately 30% IgM, 30% IgD, 16% IgG, 14% IgA, and 10% IgE among the general population. The anti-ABO antibody response also appears to be polyclonal within individuals; for example, there is an average of 6177 anti-A antibody clones per group O person. Interestingly, as reported in prior literature, we have also found the existence of anti-self ABO antibodies (e.g. anti-A antibodies in group A individuals). We have found no evidence of IGHV gene restriction; there are no significant differences in IGHV usage among the ABO blood group antibodies and among different individuals. Furthermore, we have found that B-cells reactive to blood group A exhibit higher mutation rates than unsorted B-cells, for both IgM (2.1% vs 1.8% p < 2.22e-12) and IgG2 (9.8% vs. 8.1%, p < 1.7e-12) antibodies. Finally, we identified over a hundred convergent anti-A antibody clusters that appear in multiple blood group O individuals, exhibiting significantly higher mutation rates (5.75%) when compared to convergent anti-A antibodies found in individuals of blood group A (3.2%, p < 9.4e-04) and blood group AB (1.8%, p < 4.4e-06), but not in individuals of blood group B (4.4%, p < 0.21). Conclusion: Our data provides new molecular insights into anti-carbohydrate antibodies and may provide new avenues of studying these antibodies across diverse biomedical fields. These findings can potentially impact transfusion and transplantation medicine, and have direct relevance to clinically significant events such hemolytic disease of the newborn and organ transplantation rejection. Cooperative Immunogenicity between MHC Alloantigens in a Murine Model Krystalyn E. Hudson, Andrea S.L. Wong, Amanda L. Richards, Linda Kapp and James C. Zimring*. BloodworksNW Research Institute Background/Case Studies: Humoral alloimmunization to HLA can lead to a refractory state in patients requiring platelet transfusion, problems for patients who subsequently require transplantation, and can also lead to TRALI caused by donated products containing anti-HLA. While alloimmunization to HLA requires exposure to alloantigen, how overall degree of MHC mismatch affects immunogenicity of individual alloantigens is unclear. Study Design/Method: C57BL/6 (B6) mice (H2 b MHC haplotype) were exposed to the K d alloantigen by infusion of leukocytes, but in different contexts: 1) K d in isolation on cells from a novel mouse that expresses K d as a single MHC alloantigen on a B6 background (B6-K d ), and 2) in the context of multiple other mismatched alloantigens (e.g. the whole H2 d haplotype) from BALB/c mice or congenic B6.H2 d animals. Alloimmunization was assessed by incubating serum with B6-K d or BALB/c targets, followed by florescent anti-mouse Igs and analysis by flow cytometry. Alloimmunization was calculated as mean florescent intensities (MFI). In some mice, the precursor frequency of CD4 +T cells specific for K d alloantigen was modified through 1) adoptive transfer of CD4 +T cells from T cell receptor transgenic mice (TCR75) specific for the immunodominant K d peptide presented by MHCII to CD4 +T cells or 2) immunization with the immunodominant peptide from K d . Results/Finding: Compared to control mice that had no detectable anti-K d alloantibodies (MFI = 0), a strong anti-K d response was observed after a single exposure to leukocytes from mice expressing the whole H2 d haplotype (MFI = 6267, n=10 mice over 3 experiments, p<0.001). In contrast, no significant alloimmunization was observed in response to K d as an isolated alloantigen, despite repeat exposure. Both adoptive transfer of naïve TCR75 T cells and pre-immunization with K d peptide resulted in strong alloimmunization in response to subsequent infusion with leukocytes expressing K d as an isolated alloantigen, equivalent to leukocytes expressing the whole H2 d locus (MFI 13012, p < 0.0001). This was not an artifact of induction of anti-K d by maneuvers to increase CD4 + T cell numbers, as neither TCR75 nor peptide immunization induced detectable anti-K d on their own. Conclusion: These findings indicate that the immunogenicity of a single alloantigen is affected by the context in which it is encountered. In isolation, K d induced no significant alloantibody response; however, a strong anti-K d response is observed when multiple mismatches are present. The mechanism of this effect involved the magnitude of CD4 + T cell help. This challenges the notion that MHCI alloantigen is intrinsically a strong immunogen on its own, indicating rather that there is a cooperative effect between different mismatched MHC alloantigens when encountered together. Background/Case Studies: Despite the prevalence and clinical significance of red blood cell (RBC) alloantibodies, there are no known laboratory tests to predict which patients may form antibodies after transfusion. CD64 (also known as Fc gamma R1) expression on monocytes is a marker of a type 1 interferon signature in some autoimmune diseases. Given that autoimmunity is associated with RBC alloimmunization and that type 1 interferon has been shown to play a role in RBC alloimmunization in an animal model, we hypothesized that CD64 expression on monocytes may correlate with RBC alloimmunization. Study Design/Method: Forty-two adults with sickle cell disease were recruited, and demographic information and red blood cell alloantibody history were extracted from the electronic medical record. Flow cytometry was completed on peripheral blood and CD14 high/CD16 low cells were classified as classical monocytes, CD14 high/CD16 high cells were classified as intermediate monocytes, and CD14 intermediate/CD16 high cells were classified as non-classical or inflammatory monocytes. The mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of CD64 for each monocyte subset was calculated. Results/Finding: Of 22 non-alloimmunized patients, 13 were documented to have received RBC transfusion(s) at the study institution and will be referred to as "non-responders." Forty-six percent of these non-responders were female, with a mean age of 31 years (range 19-56 years). The nonresponders were compared to 20 alloimmunized "responder" patients; 65% of the alloimmunized patients were female with a mean age of 36 years (range 19-81 years). These patients had a total of 44 antibodies identified, primarily against the E or K antigens. There were no statistically significant differences in the percentages of total, classical, intermediate, or non-classical monocytes between non-responders and responders. The nonresponders showed a trend of having higher CD64 expression on their total monocytes ( Conclusion: Contrary to our hypothesis, we observed lower CD64 expression on classical and intermediate monocytes of alloimmunized patients with sickle cell disease compared to non-responders. It is possible that type 1 interferon signaling, which impacts alloimmunization in animal models, is in some way responsible for this altered CD64 expression. One potential mechanism, previously shown in vitro, may involve type 1 interferon mitigating the ability of interferon gamma to upregulate CD64. Oral Abstract Session: Product Manufacturing, Contamination, and Pathogen Reduction Background/Case Studies: Screening of platelet concentrates (PCs) for bacterial contamination is performed using an automated culture system. Since August 2017, the PC shelf-life was extended to 7 days with an improved bacterial testing algorithm: delayed testing at ≥ 36 hours post collection; inoculation of aerobic and anaerobic culture bottles; screening of double apheresis PCs with three aerobic bottles and one anaerobic bottle; and post-sampling quarantine at ≥ 6 hours. Contaminated PCs with negative screen results can be found through Quality Control (QC) testing of outdated PCs or reporting of transfusion reactions. Study Design/Method: From August 2017 to February 2018, 50,678 buffy coat (BC) pools and 9,434 apheresis units were screened during routine testing. In addition, 1210 outdated PCs were QC-tested. Positive results were classified as: "confirmed positives" if the same bacterium was isolated in initial and confirmatory cultures (implicated or associated components); "false positive" if no bacteria were isolated from positive screen cultures; "unconfirmed positive" if initial positive culture results could not be confirmed. "False negatives" if units had negative screening results but were positive during QC testing or were involved in septic transfusion reactions. Since March 2018, co-components associated to false positive results for BC pools have been released to inventory. Results/Finding: Thirty-three (0.07%) and three (0.03%) culture results were categorized as confirmed positives during routine screening of BC pools and apheresis units, respectively. Most bacteria (61%) isolated from BC pools were Propionibacterium acnes. Nine of the 33 confirmed positives (27%) involved an initial culture of a PC pool and confirmatory testing of associated RBCs, all contaminated with P. acnes. One of three confirmed positives for apheresis PCs was also identified as P. Background/Case Studies: Chikungunya (CHIKV), Dengue (DENV), and Zika (ZIKV) are arboviruses transmitted by Aedes and Albopictus species mosquito vectors. As a result, their geographic distributions can overlap, resulting in areas where all three viruses are circulating at the same time. This co-circulation can increase the likelihood of patients becoming coinfected with 2-3 of these co-circulating viruses, as recently reported in several endemic countries. The large number of asymptomatic arbovirus infections raises the possibility of transfusion-transmitted infections (TTIs). The risk of CHIKV, DENV, and ZIKV TTI, whether alone or in combination, can be reduced by use of the photochemical INTERCEPT â Blood System pathogen reduction (PR) technology, which has previously been demonstrated to be effective against multiple arboviruses including CHIKV, DENV, and ZIKV. Here we report that treatment with amotosalen/UVA inactivates the combination of CHIKV, DENV, and ZIKV in platelet concentrates (PC) and plasma. Study Design/Method: Plasma or PC in 35% plasma/65% platelet additive solution (PAS) units co-contaminated with CHIKV, DENV-2, and ZIKV were treated with amotosalen and UVA light. Infectious viral titers were determined by plaque assay. Inactivation was determined by comparing log titers before and after treatment. Results/Finding: Following amotosalen/UVA treatment, all three viruses were simultaneously inactivated to the limit of detection in both PC and plasma (see Table below ). This resulted in > 5.8 log (CHIKV), > 4.1 log (DENV-2), and >4.1 log (ZIKV) inactivation in PC and >5.0 log (CHIKV), >4.2 log (DENV-2), and >4.6 log (ZIKV) inactivation in plasma. These AMR in renal transplant pts, in general, carries an excellent prognosis, AMR in cardiac transplant pts denotes a poor prognosis and treatment options are less well understood and standardized. Study Design/Method: We reviewed the records of 63 heart transplant pts who were referred for immunotherapy, from 1/08-1/18, to treat AMR. The median age of pts (at time of rejection) was 55 years (19-71 years old), and 65% (41/63) pts were male. Pts presented with symptoms of congestive heart failure, diastolic and/or systolic dysfunction, and decreased ejection fraction (EF). 87% (55/63) pts had endomyocardial biopsy results consistent with AMR, and 92% (58/63) pts had evidence of circulating DSAs at time of rejection (including A23, A32, B35, B44, Cw7, DQ2-9, . 83% (52/63) pts had evidence of concurrent acute cellular rejection at time of AMR. All pts were DSA and T-cell crossmatch negative at time of cardiac transplant. Median time from transplantation to AMR was bimodal: 2.2 yrs (0.4-5.3 yrs) for 62% (39/63) pts, and 9.7 yrs (6.1-15.9 yrs) for 38% (24/63) pts. All pts received the following immunotherapy (IT) protocol: plasma exchange (TPE) every other day (or 3X/week) for 4-6 treatments (txs), followed by intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) (1 gram/kg/day X 2 days). 83% (52/63) pts received high dose CS. Serial DSA measurements were obtained after each pharmacologic intervention. For refractory or recurrent AMR, 46% (29/63) pts received weekly rituximab (2-4 doses), and 27% (17/63) pts received twice-weekly bortezomib (4 doses). Results/Finding: 63 pts underwent 119 courses of TPE (1-5 courses/pt), each followed by post-TPE IVIG. 78% (49/63) pts had moderate improvement in allograft function, and 67% (42/63) pts showed substantial improvement in systolic and/or diastolic dysfunction and EF. 54% (34/63) pts had significant reduction or elimination of class I and II DSAs, and resolution of AMR with 1 course of IT tx. 46% (29/63) pts required a minimum of 2 course of IT tx for AMR, of which 27% (17/63) pts had refractory AMR requiring 3-5 courses of IT tx. The most common DSAs present in refractory AMR included class II DQ2-9, DR4-8, and DR52-53. Pts with refractory AMR received monthly IVIG, with intermittent courses of TPE and bortezomib. Over a mean follow-up of 4.3 yrs (0.3-7.4 yrs) from time of AMR, 25% (16/63) cardiac transplant AMR pts lost their allografts to rejection, whereas over a mean follow-up of 5.9 yrs (0.4-12.3 yrs), only 9% (6/68) renal transplant AMR pts lost their allografts (p<0.04); both groups were treated with relatively similar protocols for AMR. Conclusion: Plasma exchange, IVIG, rituximab, and bortezomib are useful treatment modalities for cardiac transplant pts with AMR. Suppressing refractory class II DQ and DR DSAs may be critical to providing durable allograft rescue. The development of more effective protocols for treating refractory and recurrent AMR in cardiac transplant pts is needed. Background/Case Studies: Automated red cell exchange (RCE) is a wellestablished therapy in sickle cell disease (SCD) as a maintenance therapy and as an emergent intervention. Quantification of hemoglobin species is used to determine if goals of RCE have been achieved. However, a recent publication included a formula to estimate post-RCE hemoglobin S (HbS) using pre-and post-RCE platelet counts and a correction factor (Xm) to create a derived fraction of platelets remaining (dFPR) that closely approximates the fraction of cells remaining (FCR) (Keiser AM et al, 2018) : Est:post-Hbs% ¼ dFPR*pre-Hbs% dFPR ¼ post-RCE platelet count=ðpre-RCE platelet count + XmÞ In certain situations, this could be used in lieu of traditional, laborious, and time-consuming HbS determinations. We performed an external validation of this formula with our SCD patients to determine the generalizability of this formula. Study Design/Method: In this IRB-approved retrospective study, we queried our institutional apheresis database to identify all RCE procedures performed in SCD patients from 1/1/2017 to 1/1/2018 with a pre-procedure HbS of ≥ 40%. Using pre-RCE HbS and pre-and post-RCE platelet counts, we applied the formula to our SCD population to derive an estimated post-HbS for each procedure. Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed rank test was (260) performed to compare derived and actual post-RCE HbS values, and statistical significance was defined as p<0.05. Results/Finding: We applied the formula to 163 RCE procedures performed on 42 patients. For 145 procedures (89%), derived post-RCE HbS was within 5% of actual post-RCE HbS as measured by high performance liquid chromatography quantification of hemoglobin species. There was no statistical difference between dFPR and FCR (p=0.87 pre-HbS=40-70%, p=0.53 pre-HbS>70%), or between derived post-RCE HbS and actual post-RCE HbS (p=0.73 pre-HbS=40-70%, p=0.53 pre-HbS>70%). Some inter-patient variation was noted, with 4 patients' RCE procedures accounting for over half (10/18) of all derived post-RCE HbS values with discrepancies >5% from actual post-HbS values. RCE performed emergently versus electively for maintenance therapy had no bearing on formula accuracy. Conclusion: The formula accurately approximated post-RCE HbS using pre-and post-RCE platelet counts for patients with pre-RCE HbS of ≥ 40% in our SCD patient population. In instances where traditional post-RCE HbS determinations may take considerable time, this formula may be used instead to expedite removal of temporary vascular access or time to discharge. Additional investigations are necessary to better characterize why this formula performs less well for a small proportion of SCD patients. Five-Fold Increase in the Frequency of MTP Activation at a Large Academic Medical Center: Lean Analysis, and Implementation of Mitigation Strategies James D. Gorham* 1 , Gay Wehrli 1 , Thomas Brady 2 , Theresa A. Libby 2 , Eric P. Shields 2 , Joseph Schoeny 2 , Jahan Chowdhury 2 , Matthew P. Robertson 2 , Stephanie M. Corbett 2 , Kathy Butler 2 , Stuart Lowson 1 and J.F. Calland 1 . 1 University of Virginia School of Medicine, 2 University of Virginia Health System Background/Case Studies: The MTP rapidly provides recurrently issued blood products in specific ratios to patients at risk of exsanguination. Following an initial rollout in mid-2008 at our institution (large AMC with Level I Trauma Center designation), MTP usage patterns changed dramatically. The MTP Activation Frequency (MAF) rose steadily (1.3/mo 2008/9; 7.4/mo 2015) , with no concomitant increase in frequency of trauma patients. Since the MTP demands significant effort, this large increase in MAF potentially indicates a serious misallocation of resources. We sought both to understand the reasons for the MAF increase, and to identify effective solutions. Study Design/Method: In 2016, an extensive Lean A3 process was undertaken. A problem statement was developed, followed by process mapping, fishbone diagramming, and prioritization gridding. Solutions were proposed and discussed, then deployed toward end of 2017. To assess efficacy, data were collected pre-vs. post-A3/deployment. 1 º outcome was MAF across equivalent (pre vs. post) time periods. 2 º outcomes included RBC U Transfused per Activation (RTA) as an indicator of bleeding severity, and MTPspecific product wastage (USD). Results/Finding: Between 2008/9 & 2015, MAF rose from 1.3/mo to 7.4/ mo, and RTA fell (20.3 ± 17.8 vs. 4.8 ± 4.0 (mean ± SD); p < 0.0001; Stdnt's t-test), indicating that the MTP was being increasingly activated for patients of lesser bleeding severity. A3-generated storm clouds revealed probable causes for the dramatic changes in MAF / RTA: (1) no sustainable education component; (2) no decision support tool; (3) low clinician confidence in standard blood ordering; (4) no feedback on appropriateness of each MTP activation. Solutions were developed/deployed: (1) a comprehensive educational campaign using orthogonal approaches; (2) a literature-backed decision support tool incorporating patient vital signs (ABC score); (3) creation of an EMR-independent alternative pathway to rapidly issue small numbers of RBC+plasma; (4) a timely MTP review mechanism providing feedback. Comparing the 1 st 110 days of 2015 and 2018, respectively, MAF dropped >50% (7.4/mo vs 3.3/mo), RTA trended upward (4.8 ± 4.0 vs 8.4 ± 12.9; p = 0.19), and MTP-specific product wastage fell ($3285 to $864 USD). Conclusion: A comprehensive A3 root cause analysis involving multiple stakeholders identified the underlying bases for the increasing misuse of the MTP. The A3 allowed us to develop and test solutions to address each likely cause for the change in MTP usage pattern. The result is an alteration in usage more aligned with the MTP's primary purpose: provide blood rapidly to exsanguinating patients. Transfusion-Associated HLA Sensitization in Patients Bridged to Heart Transplantation Using Ventricular Assist Device Jae Elkind 1 , Juliana Sobczyk* 1 , Oscar Ostberg-Braun 2 , Jorge Enciso 2 , Eric Adler 2 and Gerald P. Morris 1 . 1 Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, 2 Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego Background/Case Studies: Heart transplantation is a curative therapy for end-stage heart failure. Limited organ availability often requires use of ventricular assist devices (VADs) to bridge patients to transplant. VADs allow recipients to benefit from otherwise unattainable transplants, but are associated with complications such as increased HLA sensitization rates. HLA sensitization is associated with negative clinical outcomes post-transplantation, including increased rejection and increased mortality. VAD-associated HLA sensitization is a consequence of blood product transfusion associated with thoracic surgery, though factors that determine the incidence and extent of alloantibody formation remain undefined. To examine this, we examined VAD-associated transfusion effects on HLA-sensitization and subsequent transplantation. Study Design/Method: We performed a retrospective cohort study of 107 patients receiving VAD at an academic-based hospital from January 2014 to September 2017. Medical record data including transfused blood products, anti-HLA antibody testing, crossmatch testing, and time to transplant were evaluated. Categorical data were analyzed by Fisher's exact test and quantitative data were analyzed using Mann-Whitney test. Multivariable analyses were performed using STATA software. Results/Finding: Patients received an average of 13.8 (range 0 -44) RBC and 1.9 (range 0 -8) single donor platelet transfusions associated with VAD surgery. There was a 28.7% increase in the incidence of HLA antibodies after VAD surgery (p=0.001), approximately a 2-fold higher rate than described in the literature among potential organ transplant recipients receiving transfusion. Multivariate analyses indicated development of new anti-HLA antibodies did not directly correlate with volume or type of blood product exposure, but was related to a patient's pre-VAD HLA sensitization status; the relative risk of new anti-HLA antibodies in VAD recipients with pre-VAD alloantibodies was 3.5-fold higher than in patients without prior alloantibodies (p=0.008). Development of new anti-HLA antibodies post-VAD were associated with an increased time to transplant (169 d versus 330 d, p=0.013). Conclusion: Our findings concur with the literature describing VADs as associated with increased rates of HLA sensitization. Uniquely, our study indicates that the presence of anti-HLA antibodies pre-VAD was the most significant risk factor for developing additional antibodies post-VAD. This suggests that a subset of patients may be predisposed to alloantibody formation and at increased risk for development of anti-HLA antibodies. Identification of at-risk patients is important to develop strategies to minimize HLA sensitization and prevent a potentially avoidable barrier to subsequent transplantation. Background/Case Studies: During their training, the majority of medical trainees will obtain informed consent for blood transfusion. Literature has demonstrated that informed consent for transfusion is at times incomplete, poorly understood, hurried and/or inaccurate in part due to lack of educational resources. A gold standard narrative would help ensure true patient informed consent and have utility in teaching trainees the risks and benefits of transfusion. Study Design/Method: A modified Delphi approach was used to survey a purposively selected international group of Transfusion Medicine (TM) experts with experience consenting patients for transfusion and critical knowledge regarding the risks and benefits of transfusion. A case scenario (a woman with gastrointestinal bleeding) was presented and participants were asked to draft a narrative (or script) for obtaining informed consent from the patient. Using the techniques of qualitative descriptive content analysis, a smaller steering committee of TM experts analyzed the scripts for core themes and topics. Common themes or categories were identified, (e.g. risks of transfusion, benefits of transfusion, etc.) as were specific topics/items (e.g. possibility of allergic reactions, possibility of HIV infection, etc.). Affective and structural content was also captured (eg. manner of engagement). A second survey was developing based on the collated topics and themes from the first survey. It was redistributed to the 24 participants from the first survey and 2 pilot participants. Participants were asked to rate each topics on a 6 point scale (1=very low importance; 6 = very high importance/essential). Content validity index (CVI) for each item was calculated. A narrative was developed using topics that scored a CVI of 0.80 or higher. Results/Finding: The survey was completed by 28 TM experts spanning 8 countries (4 as pilots and 24 participants). The majority of participants (>90%) have more than 5 years of experience practicing TM, of those, half have more than 15 years. Content analysis identified 10 high level themes and 97 specific topics from narratives that were included in the second round of the Delphi. The second survey was completed by 21/24 participants who completed the first survey, and 2 of the original pilot participants (88.5% response rate). Forty out of 97 topics with a CVI of 0.80 or greater were incorporated into a narrative that was developed to meet a Flesch Kincaid Grade level 8.7. There were 4 topics with a CVI of 1.00: Ask if patient has questions, Ask directly, "do you consent to a blood transfusion", Discuss that there are risks to transfusion and Discuss that the risk of transfusion transmitted disease is low. Given the high incidence of transfusion associated circulatory overload (TACO) and high mortality associated with Transfusion Related Acute Lung Injury (TRALI), it was surprising to see the low CVI scores related to these topics: State possibility of "lung injury" (0.56), State possibility of fluid overload (0.64) and State general possibility of shortness of breath with transfusion (0.56). Mean CCI ± 95% CI 3.1 ± 0.9 4.5 ± 0.6 11.2 ± 0.7 Success Rate (%) 26% 31% 78% Mean CCI per Patient ± 95% CI 3.0 ± 1.4 4.6 ± 1.1 13.4 ± 1.9 Conclusion: Using a Delphi approach, a gold standard narrative for obtaining informed consent for blood transfusion was developed. Plans are to further validate the narrative with other healthcare providers and patients using both surveys and focus groups to elucidate feedback and further refine the narrative. Background/Case Studies: Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD) is a rare human prion disease caused by infection with a bovine prion. Although all clinical cases of vCJD evaluated for the prion protein gene, PRNP, have been methionine homozygotes at codon 129 for 20 years, the first definite heterozygous vCJD patient, with Methionine/ valine (MV) genotype, was recently described in the United Kingdom. This patient met the diagnostic criteria for probable sporadic CJD (sCJD) but neuropathology and molecular analysis of prion strain type at autopsy confirmed vCJD. This recent publication underlined previous concern about a possible second wave of vCJD cases attributed to alternative genotype at codon 129 and secondary transmission. Iatrogenic transmission of vCJD by blood transfusion has already been documented in three recipients of non-leucodepleted red blood cell concentrates from donors in incubation of the disease. One additional probable case of vCJD transmission by blood transfusion was revealed at autopsy in a MV patient who died from a non-neurological disorder when vCJD prion protein was detected in his spleen. A highly sensitive and specific pre-mortem test to discriminate MV vCJD from sCJD is urgently needed to rapidly and accurately diagnose any future MV vCJD patients. Study Design/Method: Protein Misfolding Cyclic Amplification (PMCA) has already demonstrated high performances in the detection of vCJD prions in the blood of clinical patients and allowed the detection of silent carriage of prions before the clinical onset in two blood donors who later developed vCJD. This ultrasensitive technology was adapted for the specific detection of vCJD in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF-PMCA) to identify vCJD infected individuals including the recent MV patient. Results/Finding: Among the 98 CSF samples analysed blinded to the diagnosis, CSF-PMCA identified specifically 40 of the 41 vCJD samples thus achieving a diagnostic sensitivity of 97.6% (95% confidence interval [CI] , 87. 1 -99.9 ). Importantly, this assay allows the discrimination of the heterozygous MV vCJD case from the 12 MV neuropathologically confirmed sCJD patients tested. CSF-PMCA also showed 100% analytical specificity (95% CI, 93.7 -100), with none of the 57 potentially cross-reacting CSF specimens from patients with sCJD, genetic CJD, Alzheimer's disease, and other non-neurodegenerative diseases giving a positive result. Conclusion: These results indicate that CSF-PMCA may allow the identification of MV vCJD in life and, in combination with other tests such as CSF real-time quaking-induced conversion, accurate discrimination from sCJD. The presence of infectivity in the blood of the first definite MV vCJD patient involved in this study is uncertain and requires further investigation. Cryopreserved Platelets Possess the Classical Phenotypic Characteristics of "Procoagulant Platelets" Lacey Johnson* 1 , Lauren Waters 1 , Ben Wood 1 and Denese C. Marks 1,2 . 1 Research and Development, Australian Red Cross Blood Service, 2 Sydney Medical School Background/Case Studies: Platelets can be cryopreserved at −80°C with DMSO, which increases their shelf-life from days to years. Cryopreservation of platelets results in a significant increase in exposed phosphatidylserine and the release of phosphatidylserine-expressing microparticles, which mediate their procoagulant function. Understanding the procoagulant nature of platelets, and defining the discrete phenotype of this population is an area of continuing interest, and contention, in platelet biology, where procoagulant platelets have been referred to as being activated, coated, apoptotic and necrotic. Thus, the aim of this study was to determine whether the phenotypic attributes of cryopreserved platelets align with the current definition of what constitutes a procoagulant platelet. Study Design/Method: Buffy coat-derived platelets were frozen at -80°C with DMSO (5% final concentration). Cryopreserved platelets (n=8) were thawed at 37°C and reconstituted with a unit of thawed plasma. In vitro testing of paired units was carried out prior to freezing (fresh) and after thawing (post-thaw), using flow cytometry and western blotting. Data were analysed using paired, two-sided t-tests, with p<0.05 considered statistically significant (*). Results/Finding: Phosphatidylserine externalisation was significantly increased in cryopreserved platelets, as measured by lactadherin and annexin-V binding. Mitochondrial damage was evident in the cryopreserved platelets, as evidenced by a reduction in tetramethylrhodamine (TMRE) sequestration. Cryopreserved platelets displayed higher intracellular calcium (Fluo-3AM) and superoxide anion formation (dihydroethidium [DHE] staining) than fresh platelets. Using western blotting, members of the intrinsic (Bak, Bax, Bcl-2 and Bcl-x L ) and extrinsic (FADD, Fas, DR5) apoptotic pathways were differentially altered by cryopreservation, but the changes were not clearly indicative of a pro-apoptotic state. Activation of caspase-9 (FITC-LEHD-FMK) and cleavage of caspase-8 was greater in cryopreserved platelets. However, activation of the executioner molecule caspase-3 (Red-DEVD-FMK) was similar in cryopreserved and fresh platelets. Interestingly, cleavage of calpain-1, which is characteristic of procoagulant platelets, was observed in cryopreserved platelets. Conclusion: Cryopreserved platelets acquire many of the classic features that are used to define the 'procoagulant platelet', many of which overlap with the apoptotic and necrotic pathways. Further work is required to fully dissect the molecular events occurring in cryopreserved platelets and understand how these changes may influence clinical utility. (S-303) and glutathione (GSH) to inactivate a broad spectrum of viruses, bacteria, protozoa and T-cells. Transfusion dependent thalassemia (TDT) patients require chronic RBC transfusion combined with iron chelation, but lifetime exposure increases the risk of transfusion-transmitted infections. Study Design/Method: Aims: A randomized, controlled, double-blind, noninferiority study to evaluate leukocyte-reduced (LR) S-303/GSH RBC in comparison to Control LR-RBC. Methods: TDT patients ≥ 10-years-old were enrolled. Baseline exclusion criteria included natural antibodies against S-303 RBC; DAT > 2+; hypersplenism; anticipated splenectomy; pregnancy and breast feeding. Each patient underwent 6 transfusion episodes with S-303/GSH RBC and Control RBC in a two-treatment period, crossover design, maintaining the same pretransfusion Hb threshold (hemoglobin (Hb) 9-10 g/dL). The primary efficacy endpoint was RBC Hb consumption during transfusion episodes 3-6 in each treatment period (total Hb mass transfused adjusted for body weight Parameter Fresh Post-thaw Annexin-V (% positive) 1 ± 0 67 ± 4* TMRE (MFI) 1293 ± 120 166 ± 34* DHE (MFI) 105 ± 8 227 ± 26* FITC-LEHD-FMK (MFI) 113 ± 52 177 ± 47* (kg) and duration of support (Hb g/kg /day)). Non inferiority was defined by a predetermined margin of 15% of the Control-period mean Hb consumption. The primary safety endpoint was treatment-emergent antibodies to S-303/GSH RBC. Results/Finding: 86 subjects enrolled and 81 were transfused at two sites in Italy (n=14) and one in Turkey (n=67). Mean age was 26.1 ± 8.1 years (range: 10-44), 45.7% male, and 18.5% age ≤ 18 years. Eleven percent of patients had pre-existing RBC alloantibodies. In the intention to treat (ITT) population, mean exposure was 12.5 S-303/GSH RBC (range 3-18) and 12.5 (range 6 -18) Control RBC, with a mean transfusion interval of 19.4 (Test) and 19.5 (Control) days. Total transfused Hb (on-study + off-study RBC) in the Test period was 687 ± 97 grams (g) versus 700 ± 116 g Hb (p = 0.127) in the Control period. Total mean Hb consumption in the efficacy evaluation period was 0.113 ± 0.04 g/kg/day for S-303/GSH RBC, and 0.111 ± 0.04 g/kg/day for Control RBC. Non inferiority was robustly achieved with a treatment difference of 0.002 g/kg/day (non-inferiority margin < 0.017g/kg/day). No treatment-emergent RBC alloantibodies or S-303/GSH RBC-specific antibodies were detected. Adverse events were balanced between Test and Control periods. There were no deaths, grade 4 adverse events, or events certain or likely related to S-303/GSH RBC transfusion. Conclusion: S-303/GSH-RBC were non-inferior to Control RBC in transfusion-dependent patients with thalassemia, based on Hb consumption. The safety profile was not different from Control RBC and no antibodies were detected to S-303/GSH RBC. Resuscitation from Hemorrhagic Shock with High Molecular Weight Polymerized Hemoglobin Alexander T. Williams* 1 , Andre Palmer 2 and Pedro Cabrales 1 . 1 University of California San Diego, 2 The Ohio State University Background/Case Studies: Hemoglobin (Hb) based oxygen carriers (HBOCs) have been proposed as an alternative to red blood cells (RBCs) for transfusion medicine for decades. Lack of mechanistic analysis of the side effects of early HBOC formulations lead to the clinical evaluation of low molecular weight (MW) products, which failed due to a myriad of Hb associated toxicities not seen in pre-clinical trials. Increasing the MW of HBOCs can decrease these side effects by confining HBOCs to the vascular space and increasing nitric oxide (NO) generation via vascular mechanotransduction. HBOCs' advantages over blood include their nonimmunogenic properties and potential to use non-human Hb sources, among others. In this study we compare the efficacy of fresh blood or stored blood, with freshly synthesized polymerized bovine Hb (PolybHb) or PolybHb stored for 2 years in restoring cardiac function after hemorrhagic shock. Study Design/Method: PolybHb was synthesized in the low oxygen affinity (T) state with a 35:1 ratio of glutaraldehyde to bovine Hb, and then subjected to 8-9 cycles of diafiltration. This resulted in a PolybHb solution containing only polymerized Hb molecules < 0.2 uM and >500kDa. PolybHb was then frozen at -80°C and stored until used. Fresh red blood cells were prepared from the blood removed during hemorrhage by centrifugation at 1000g for 7 minutes, removal of the buffy coat, and removal of plasma until a hematocrit of 50%. Stored red blood cells were stored in AS-3 for 3 weeks after leukodepletion. were hemorrhaged for 50% of their blood volume, held in hypovolemia for 30 minutes, and resuscitated to recover blood pressure to 90% pre-hemorrhage with fresh autologous blood (fresh blood), 3-week-old blood, PolybHb generated within 3 months of the study (PolybHb 2017), or PolybHb generated two years prior to the study (PolybHb 2015) . Results/Finding: Shock resulted in impaired oxygen delivery and cardiac function. Resuscitation with fresh blood, stored blood, PolybHb 2017, and PolybHb 2015 restored cardiac function and systemic vascular resistance, but stored blood required significantly larger volumes to achieve this. Slightly higher volumes of PolybHb was infused compared to fresh blood before restoring 90% pre-hemorrhage MAP. Fresh blood and PolybHb fresh or stored did not impair cardiac contractility nor cause excessive vasoconstriction, relative to stored blood. Conclusion: Studies indicate that PolybHb is as efficacious as fresh blood in restoring cardiac function in rats after hemorrhagic shock. Additionally, PolybHb can be safely stored at -80°C for two years and retain efficacy, unlike red blood cells, which lose efficacy during storage. Impact of Pre-Printed Order Implementation for Prothrombin Complex Concentrates at an Academic Tertiary Care Hospital: A Quality Assurance Audit Krista Marcon* 1,2 , Ko Ta K. Chen 2,3 , Xin-Yue Zhang 4 , Andrew W.Y. Shih 1,2 , Kristine Roland 1,2 and Tyler Smith 1,2 . 1 Vancouver Coastal Health, 2 University of British Columbia, 3 Centre for Blood Research, 4 British Columbia Institute of Technology Background/Case Studies: Since their approval by Health Canada in 2008, all orders for Prothrombin Complex Concentrates (PCCs) at an academic tertiary care hospital required approval by a hematopathologist (HP), except during intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) due to its high acuity. In March 2014, after 6 years of experience, a pre-printed order (PPO) was implemented to streamline the HP approval process in other urgent warfarin reversal scenarios to simplify and expedite PCC administration. The goals of the PPO were to standardize PCC and vitamin K dosing, decrease turn-aroundtime (TAT), and reduce non-value-added calls to HPs. The purpose of this quality assurance study was to review PCC usage pre-and post-PPO implementation to determine the impact of the PPO in achieving its goals. Study Design/Method: A retrospective chart review of PCC usage was performed for two years pre-and post-PPO implementation (March 2012 -2014 and March 2014 . Relevant medical information, including PCC indication and dose, use of vitamin K, thrombosis events, and mortality were recorded. Appropriateness of PCC dosage was adjudicated using the Canadian National Advisory Committee (NAC) PCC guidelines. Appropriateness of PCC indication was adjudicated based on chart review. Bleeding episodes were verified by review of clinical notes, endoscopy reports, and imaging reports. Surgical start times were documented from the anesthetic record, with urgent surgery defined as less than 6 hours from PCC order. Results/Finding: Baseline characteristics of patients receiving PCCs preimplementation (n=207) and post-implementation (n=202) were similar, including sex, age, warfarin use, and INR levels. The proportion of patients receiving PCC doses within 500 IU of NAC guidelines was significantly higher in the post-PPO period (67.2% vs. 79.0%, p=0.015). The administration of at least 5mg of intravenous vitamin K was more frequent following PPO introduction (70.5% vs. 75.2%, p=0.015). No significant differences were observed in TAT, additional doses of PCC, red cell transfusion, INR correction, thrombosis, or mortality. After the introduction of the PPO, call volume to HPs for PCC approval was significantly lower (67.1% vs. 16.3%, p < 0.001). The PPO was used to release PCCs for inappropriate indications 23.2% of the time: 15 cases for patients on warfarin for "urgent surgery" when surgery was > 6 hours from the PCC order; and 27 cases for patients not on warfarin without a HP consultation. Conclusion: Many of the goals of the PPO were achieved, with an increase in appropriate PCC dosing and vitamin K usage. The PCC ordering process was streamlined with a reduction in the call volume to HPs, preventing unnecessary delays in PCC administration. Although the PPO was used inappropriately in about one quarter of cases, these can guide refinements to the PPO to improve appropriate PCC utilization. Background/Case Studies: Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) show tremendous promise for the treatment of military and civilian trauma, based on their ability to regulate inflammation and promote wound healing. In this study we implement an assay designed to compare the angiogenic potential of MSCs and other cellular therapy products and investigate the relationship to cellular metabolism. Study Design/Method: Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and human MSCs (BM-MSCs, AD-MSCs and UC-MSCs) were obtained from commercial sources. mRNA isolated from early passage HUVECs from transwell co-cultures was used to generate cDNA. HUVEC expression of genes related to angiogenesis (VEGF, FLT4), tissue factor (TF), signaling and metabolism (TSG-6, OSGIN1, BBC3, JMJD8) were evaluated by qRT-PCR. Tube formation assays were performed on HUVECS plated onto Geltrex LDEV at sub-confluent densities in the presence of conditioned media or in co-culture with MSCs plated in transwell inserts. Angiogenesis was determined by quantitation of tube formation using Image J. Expression of HUVEC cellular proteins from transwell co-culture were visualized by Western blot and quantitation with an Odyssey scanner. Bioenergetic analysis via extracellular flux measurements were carried out on confluent cells in a Sea horse XFe 24 bio-analyzer. Results/Finding: HUVECs respond to MSCs with increased TF protein expression as well as increased expression of angiogenic mRNAs. Co-culture with BM-MSCs or AD-MSCs for 24 hr. altered the bio-energetic profile, increasing both the oxygen consumption ratio (OCR) and the spare respiratory capacity of the HUVEC cells. Co-culture with either BM-MSCs or AD-MSCs increased tube formation by HUVECs (22% and 40% increase, respectively). Conditioned medium from umbilical cord-derived MSCs was less potent in this assay. Conclusion: We have used the tube formation assay, qRT-PCR, Western blot and bioenergetics analysis to evaluate the angiogenic potential of MSCs and other cell therapy products. Preliminary results suggest that potency differences exist between MSCs derived from different tissue sources. Direct contact between HUVECs and MSCs is not required for stimulation of angiogenesis by MSCs, suggesting that a paracrine mechanism is primarily responsible. Evaluation of the bio-energetic profile in the co-cultured samples allows investigation of the relationships between angiogenesis and cellular metabolism. Increased angiogenic activity is accompanied by increased TF expression, potentially increasing thrombotic risk of MSC therapy. Further study is warranted to explore the inter-relationship of metabolic activity with pro-coagulant and pro-angiogenic gene expression. Thejaswi Bikkani* 1 , Nasha Elavia 1 , Matthew Hsieh 1 , Courtney Fitzhugh 1 , John Tisdale 2 , David F. Stroncek 1 and Sandhya R. Panch 1 . 1 National Institutes of Health, 2 NHLBI Background/Case Studies: Allogeneic transplant is the only curative treatment for patients with sickle cell disease (SCD). However, related donors for SCD patients have at least a 50% probability of having sickle cell trait (SCT). Mobilized peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMNC) SCT donor grafts are often cryopreserved after collection. To ensure successful posttransplant outcomes, thawed PBMNCs must contain an adequate quantity of hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs). Study Design/Method: Data on 102 mobilized PBMNC grafts, thawed for transplantation of SCD patients, were reviewed. Grafts from donors with SCT (SCTD) (n=78) were compared with normal healthy donor (NHD) grafts (n=24). Data was further stratified by products immediately cryopreserved (IC) post apheresis or those held overnight at 4°C for delayed cryopreservation (DC) (3 vs. 20 hours; p=1.4x10 -42 ). Results/Finding: Mean post-thaw (PT) total nucleated cell (TNC) viability (79% vs. 83%; p=0.06), TNC viable recovery (VR) (73% vs. 81%; p=0.01) and PT CD3 + (T-cell) VR (73% vs. 84%; p=0.09) showed trends towards being lower in SCTD compared to NHD. However, no difference was noted in PT CFU-GM (60 vs. 75; p=0.2) and PT CD34 VR (86% vs. 88%; p=0.7). Stratified data (Table) showed significantly lower PT TNC viability and T-cell VR with DC compared to IC in SCTDs. PT CD34 VR and PT CFU-GM were similar in the 2 groups. In NHD, only PT T-cell VR was lower with DC. Post-transplant, no differences were seen between SCTD and NHD grafts or between IC and DC grafts based on time to platelet and neutrophil engraftment. The duration of cryopreservation did not impact PT CD34 VR in either the SCTD or the NHD grafts (r 2 = 0.03). Conclusion: PT TNC viability and PT T-cell VR of SCTD grafts were lower than NHD grafts, especially for grafts which underwent DC. PT HPC recovery, in-vitro colony forming capability and post-transplant platelet and neutrophil engraftment were unaffected. This is likely due to the inherent durability of HPCs compared to T-cells. To ease logistics, DC of SCTD grafts may be feasible. However, caution must be exercised regarding product holdovers, given the definite decrease in overall viability. Further if donor lymphocyte infusions are planned from cryopreserved-thawed PBMNCs, dosing by PT viable CD3 + counts may be useful. Background/Case Studies: Umbilical cord (UC) blood can be cryopreserved for long term storage and functional hematopoietic progenitor cells, recovered after more than 20 years, are suitable for use as source material for induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) generation (Broxmeyer et al, 2011) . Advances in iPSC technology include development of a variety of cGMP compatible, transgene-free approaches for reprogramming that can be used to generate iPSCs from small amounts of peripheral or UC blood (Zhou et al, 2015) and translated to automated platforms (Paull et al, 2015) . The UC tissue is rich in MSCs which are easily expanded ex vivo without compromising attributes considered important for future clinical applications. We explored the utility of UC tissue, cryopreserved as a composite material in a newborn stem cell bank, for iPSC reprogramming using integration-free reprogramming methods with translation to a semi-automated platform for iPSC colony isolation and subsequent culture. Study Design/Method: UC tissue was collected from consenting mothers and cryopreserved as a composite material. MSCs were isolated from thawed tissue by explant outgrowth as described (Skiles et al, 2018) . Cell lines were expanded and reprogrammed into iPSCs using the NYSCF Global Stem Cell Array™ (Paull et al, 2015) with footprint free modified mRNA encoding transcription factors and nuclear GFP (nGFP). Reprogramming was also performed in parallel using CytoTune-iPS 2.0 Sendai reprogramming kit. iPSCs were expanded under automation and quality controlled for sterility, mycoplasma, pluripotency, karyotype, identity, and differentiation potential. Results/Finding: UC cell lines were expanded on an automated platform and passed quality control tests in preparation for reprogramming. Two methods of iPSC reprogramming, mRNA and Sendai Virus, were validated leading to the generation of successfully reprogrammed iPSCs. UC cells displayed a strong ability to be transfected with mRNA encoding nGFP however the success of mRNA reprogramming was limited and high toxicity observed. Tra-1-60 expression confirmed the presence of colonies prior to enrichment and cells displayed normal markers of pluripotency, differentiation capacity, and karyotype as expected. Conclusion: UC cells, isolated from thawed UC tissue, can be utilized to generate iPSCs and are amenable to semi or fully automated reprogramming methods. Donor variability and method dependent reprogramming efficiency highlight the importance of method optimization that may be cell population specific. Such efforts will be important in consideration of greater utilization of automated, high-throughput technologies for reprogramming and iPSC line propagation as well as increasing interest in alternative, noninvasive starting material from neonatal tissues. Results/Finding: From 2014 to 2017, 54 CART products were studied on 2 clinical protocols (Anti-BCMA: n=26, Anti-CD19: n=28). Mean CART dose was 4.7x10 6 (±3.4) cells/kg. DGS resulted in significant depletion of RBC (75.3%, p<0.001), platelets (85.4%, p<0.001) and neutrophils (59.8%, p=0.002) and a significant enrichment of monocytes (55.8%, p<0.001) relative to lymphocytes (27.3%, p=0.48) prior to CART culture initiation. Results were similar in both protocols. In univariate analyses, neutrophil depletion efficiency following DGS, was positively correlated with the final CART transduction efficiency (TE) (r=0.6, p=0.002). The lymphocyte fraction (%) in the post-DGS sample was correlated with higher CD8% (r=0.6, p<0.001). Conversely, a greater monocyte proportion (%) in the post-DGS sample correlated with a higher CD4:CD8 ratio (r=0.7, p<0.001). In a Box-Cox transformed mixed effects model comprising of post-DGS RBC, platelet, and neutrophil, monocyte and lymphocyte counts, RBC counts and platelet counts were strong negative and positive predictors of TE in the final product, respectively (pseudo-r 2 =0.5; p<0.001). Neutrophils and monocytes had a minimal negative impact on TE. The cell composition post-DGS did not affect CD3 + cell FE. Conclusion: DGS depletes RBC, platelets and neutrophils, while enriching monocytes significantly more than lymphocytes in the starting material for CART culture. TE is significantly improved with neutrophil depletion efficiency. Interestingly, a higher RBC count in post-DGS samples worsened TE, whereas platelets had the opposite effect. In this regard, RBC depletion methods may be studied further. Monocytes increased the CD4:CD8 ratio with possible impact on final CART product characteristics. Further analysis of the overall combined effect of DGS on final CART critical characteristics is underway. of the unit to be used in the setting of single unit transplant becomes of paramount importance. UCB units are typically selected based on the HLA match and nucleated cell dose. Additional testing is performed upon thaw prior to infusion and includes: total nucleated cell (TNC) count, viability, CD34 + cell enumeration, sterility, and CFU assay. While the CFU assay is the only in vitro assay that assesses the biological function of HPCs, few studies have documented the influence of the post-thaw CFU dose on engraftment after UCB transplantation. Study Design/Method: In an attempt to investigate the potential impact of post-thaw CFU-GM counts on the quality and efficacy of UCB, we retrospectively studied the transplant outcome in 269 patients with malignant and non-malignant disease, receiving single UCB transplant. To evaluate the independent effect of cell counts, we used Fine and Gray regression to model the endpoints of platelet and neutrophil engraftment. We also correlated the post-thaw CFU-GM counts of 1912 units with the pre-freeze and post-thaw graft characteristics, hoping to optimize selection criteria of UCB. Data analysis included: total nucleated cells, viability, CD34 + cell content, nucleated red blood cells, post-thaw hematocrit, frozen storage time, and UCB bank. Results/Finding: Infused CFU-GM dose was high at 6 x10 4 / kg. The cumulative incidence of neutrophil and platelet engraftment for the patients undergoing single UCB unit transplant was 96.2% and 89.3%, respectively. We demonstrated an association between post-thaw CFU-GM dose and the speed of neutrophil and platelet engraftment in both myeloablative malignant and non-malignant patients. Post-thaw CD34 + cell dose and CFU-GM dose were highly correlated with each other (r=0.78). However, we observed an interaction in which CFU-GM showed additional benefit on top of patients receiving the lowest quartile of CD34 + cell dose (2.4% increased risk of platelet engraftment for every one unit increase in CFU-GM, P < 0.01 and a 2.0% increase risk of neutrophil engraftment for every one unit increase in CFU-GM, P=0.01). CD34 + cell dose and CFU-GM dose were included in models after controlling for HLA disparity, type of disease and conditioning intensity. HLA disparity did not adversely impact either platelet or neutrophil engraftment (P>0.45). Evaluation of 1912 UCB units showed that despite potential CD34 + standardization issues (i.e., prefreeze testing at bank, then post-thaw testing at transplant center), postthaw CFU-GM/million showed moderate correlation with CD34 + measured both pre-freeze (r=0.35) and post-thaw (r=0.46). Other parameters showed weak correlation with the post thaw CFU-GM/million. Post-thaw CFU-GM was not influenced by storage time (r=-0.04) but was impacted by the UCB bank (P<0.01). Conclusion: CFU-GM measured at our facility at the time of unit thaw seems to provide an effective measure of the quality and efficacy of UCB when the CD34 + cell counts are low. Our analysis suggests that both prefreeze and post-thaw CD 34 + cell enumeration are reflective of unit potency. Thus, CD34 + cell enumeration provided by banks could be considered as an additional selection criterion, particularly when HLA match and nucleated cell dose are equivalent among available options. Background/Case Studies: Thrombocytopenia or qualitative platelet disorder require life-saving platelet transfusions. However, platelet transfusions are limited by alloimmunization, donor-dependent supply, and cost. Increasing efforts focusing on stem cell derived in vitro platelet production have failed to generate platelets in scales required for platelet transfusion. Hence, our aim was to understand the basic molecular aspects of megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis that will enable greater yields of megakaryocytes (MKs) and platelets in vitro. Study Design/Method: CD34 + hematopoietic stem cells were isolated from human umbilical cord blood and grown in serum free stem cell media supplemented with stem cell factor and thrombopoietin for 13 days that favors MK growth. Sub-populations of these cultures were studied for MK markers, apoptosis, signaling and proplatelet formation. RNA sequencing analysis of cultured MKs identified BCL2L2 (encoding Bcl-w) as a candidate apoptosis regulator, and BCL2L2 was significantly correlated with platelet count in 154 healthy individuals (R=0.27, FDR-adjusted P=0.04). Overexpression of BCL2L2 in cultured MKs was achieved by lentiviral transduction and in vitro platelet production was studied. Results/Finding: During MK cultures, three distinct cell populations, namely P1, P2 and P3, were observed by flow cytometry, defined by forward and side scatter. On day 13, only P1 cells showed increased CD41a/ CD42b MK markers (P=6.54E-07 for P1 vs. P2; P=5.17E-05 for P1 vs. P3; n=6), αIIbβ3 activation in response to platelet agonists (P=0.03 for PAR4-AP; P=0.04 for thrombin; P=0.03 for collagen related peptide; n=4), and morphologic characteristics similar to mature MKs. P2 cells showed features of apoptosis (P=0.002 for Annexin V + ; n=4) and P3 cells showed similarities to normal human platelets. Over-expression of anti-apoptotic BCL2L2 in cultured MKs increased functional P1 MKs by 22.8% (P=0.049; n=5). Most importantly, MK proplatelet formation was increased by 58% (P=0.006; n=5), ultimately resulting in an increased CD41 + platelets (P=0.017; n=6). These in vitro platelets were functional, as demonstrated by thrombin-induced αIIbβ3 activation (P=0.028; n=5) and α-granule release (P=0.05; n=5). Overall, results showed that BCL2L2 restrains apoptosis in cultured MKs, promotes proplatelet formation and cultured platelet activation, and is associated with human platelet number. Conclusion: BCL2L2 is a novel target for improving MK and platelet yields in culture systems and enforced expression of BCL2L2 may facilitate in vitro MK and platelet production. Background/Case Studies: Very low birth weight (VLBW) infants are a highly transfused population. Estimated transfusion rates remain poorly characterized in this population. Rates of blood product utilization may inform the design of transfusion studies and provide data for individualized discussions with parents on the probability of their VLBW infant receiving a blood transfusion. Study Design/Method: Secondary analysis of a prospective, multicenter observational cohort study from 2010-2014. Infants with a birth weight ≤1500 g who were not transfused before admission were included and followed until 90 days, discharge, or death. All blood products transfused, including timing, were prospectively recorded. Blood product utilization rates, along with 95% confidence intervals, were estimated for transfusions of red blood cells (RBC), fresh frozen plasma (FFP), platelets (PLT) and cryoprecipitate (CRYO) per 100 hospital days. Birth weight and GA specific estimates were calculated and relative transfusion rates compared using incidence rate ratios. Results/Finding: Among a study cohort of 598 VLBW infants, 2223 blood product transfusions were recorded during 37,369 infant days of follow-up. Any blood transfusion occurred in 58% of infants, with RBC in 55% (rate: 4.4; 95% CI 4.2-4.6), PLT in 18% (rate 1.1; 1.0-1.2), FFP in 9% (0.4; 0.3-0.5), and CRYO in 1% (0.02; 0.01-0.04). Among birth weight strata, any blood transfusion occurred in 98% of infants < 750 g (rate 13.5; 12.7-14. 3), 73% between 750 to < 1000 g (rate 5.9; 5.5-6.3) and 34% for infants 1000-1500 g (rate 1.8; 1.6-2.1). RBC transfusion rates decreased with increasing GA (Table) . Rates at 23 wk GA were 13 fold higher (95% CI 9. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] than for infants at >30 wk GA. We observed similar trends for PLT, but not FFP or CRYO. Conclusion: Among VLBW infants, blood product utilization of RBC and PLT, but not FFP and CRYO, decrease with increasing GA. GA-specific transfusion rates may inform discussions with families and guide the need for early and proactive consent. These data may also help inform the design of future studies examining blood product transfusion in VLBW infants. Background/Case Studies: Septic transfusion reactions (STR) are a significant risk of blood product transfusions. Pediatric patients are heavily transfused and suffer a higher rate of acute transfusion reactions (ATR) compared to adult patients (6.2 versus 2.1 per 1000 transfusions, respectively). There is not a uniform approach to detect contaminated blood products using product culture following an ATR in pediatric and neonatal patients. The goal of this project was to develop improved criteria for detection of STR by culture of residual product in neonatal and pediatric patients. Study Design/Method: We collected retrospective data for all transfusion reactions that occurred in neonatal and pediatric patients (</ = 15 years of age) which resulted in culture of the residual product during calendar year 2016. We also collected the same data for any reactions with positive residual product culture results from 2012-2015, to enrich the dataset for positive results. Using current AABB criteria for culturing a blood component following an ATR as a reference point, clinical parameters and culture results were compared to determine if modified criteria, including the use of agespecific objective definitions for hypotension and tachycardia, would increase sensitivity for detection of positive residual product cultures (Table) . Results/Finding: 15 institutions submitted complete reaction data for 201 cultured residual components in pediatric and neonatal patients. Of these, 13 had positive culture results (7 platelet and 6 RBC products). Two were considered definite STR (patient cultures grew the same organism); 11 were considered possible STR (patient culture was negative, discordant, or the patient was not cultured).The sensitivity of the AABB criteria to detect any positive culture (definite + possible) was 23% (95% CI 6 -54%); specificity was 66% (95% CI 59 -73% Background/Case Studies: Non-infectious adverse events to transfusion are well reported in adult recipients. However, the literature is scarce for pediatric recipients. The primary objective was to compare the rates of various adverse transfusion reactions (ATRs) reported to the Quebec Hemovigilance System (QHS) among < 18 and ≥ 18 years age recipients (children versus adults). Study Design/Method: ATRs were investigated and reported by transfusion safety officers located in designated hospitals in Quebec. Standard definitions for ATRs were used. Data were validated by the hospital blood bank hematologist, a provincial TSO, a medical epidemiologist and a consultant hematologist. Rate comparisons were made using data from four pediatric hospitals that reported 91% of ATRs among children. Actual number of units transfused by hospitals was used for rate calculations. Results/Finding: From 2005 to 2015, 3 629 868 blood components were transfused in all Quebec hospitals including 4.7% transfused to children. A total of 18 912 ATRs deemed possibly, probably or definitely associated with transfusion were reported. Of those, 1580 (8.4%) occurred among children. ATRs in infants < 1 year old represented 11% of all ATRs among children. Rates of ATRs for all labile product units transfused are described in table 1. Pediatric recipients were more likely to have experienced febrile, allergic and acute hemolytic reactions whereas adult recipients were more likely to have presented circulatory overload. Incidence of fatal ATRS was similar in both groups (0.1 and 0.2%). Rates of ATRs in children were higher with apheresis platelets (1:86) followed by red blood cells (1:109) . Conclusion: ATRs rates were twice as common in children compared to adults, mostly due to the higher occurrence of allergic and febrile reactions. Whether this is due to physiologic differences or better reporting remains to be determined. Background/Case Studies: Despite the introduction of leukodepleted blood components, it has been shown that donor leukocyte engraftment (microchimerism) remains a long-term consequence of red blood cell (RBC) transfusion in some patient groups. The incidence of transfusion-associated microchimerism (TAM) may be affected by international differences in blood processing methods, transfusion practices or patient types. In Australia, it was found that there was a 10% incidence of transfusion-associated microchimerism (TAM) in trauma patients. However, the incidence of TAM has not been extensively studied outside of the trauma setting. This study was conducted to determine the incidence of TAM in Australian pediatric recipients of RBC units. Study Design/Method: Pediatric patients in this study were defined as patients up to 16 years of age at the time of admission. Patients (n = 232) transfused with at least one red blood cell (RBC) unit between 2001 and 2012, were approached for participation in this study. The incidence of TAM was determined using PCR analysis with a panel of insertion/deletion (InDel) biallelic polymorphisms. Results/Finding: Samples were returned from 32 of the potential participants. These were mostly hematology/oncology patients diagnosed with bone marrow failure usually as a result of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Seventeen were female and fifteen male with an median age at the time of transfusion of 6 years old. 6.52 ± 0.05 6.63 ± 0.04* 6.36 ± 0.03* 6.41 ± 0.04* Day 56 6.26 ± 0.05 6.34 ± 0.03* 6.12 ± 0.03* 6.15 ± 0.04* Chloride shift, mM, Day 1 3.0 ± 1.7 9.7 ± 0.6* 8.0 ± 2.6* 7.3 ± 1.2* ATP, mmol/g Hb # Day 1 5.0 ± 0.9 5.4 ± 0.9* 5.3 ± 0.7* 5.2 ± 0.7* Day 35 4.3 ± 0.6 5.0 ± 0.6* 6.1 ± 1.1* 5.4 ± 1.5* Day 56 3.4 ± 0.6 3.9 ± 0.7* 4.7 ± 1.0* 4.1 ± 0.9* 2,3-DPG, mmol/g Hb Day 1 10.2 ± 0.6 10.6 ± 0.5* 11.9 ± 0.3* 11.9 ± 0.4* Day 35 1.0 ± 0.5 1.5 ± 0.7* 20.  Background/Case Studies: Biological and manufacturing variability have been recognized as key factors impacting red blood cell storage and, potentially, transfusion outcomes. Metabolomics approaches can be used to assess the impact of these factors on the phenotypes of stored packed red blood cells (pRBC). Study Design/Method: The multi center RBC-Omics Study enrolled 13,603 whole blood donors from four different US blood centers. Based on 3 endof-storage (42 day) RBC hemolysis measures (spontaneous, osmotic stress, oxidative stress), selected donors at each end of the hemolysis spectrum for each measure were recalled to donate a second unit of leukocyte-filtered pRBCs. Study samples drawn from the pRBC units at 10, 23 and 42 days were snap frozen and later processed for Ultra-High Pressure Liquid Chromatography coupled to Mass Spectrometry (Vanquish -Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher). Feature to compound assignments were performed via Compound Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher) on the basis of high-resolution accurate intact mass, isotopic patterns, retention times against an in house standard library of >1,000 pure chemical compounds, stable isotope-labeled internal standards (including previously established markers of the metabolic age of pRBC) and MS/MS validation of transition fingerprints. Results/Finding: Untargeted metabolomics analyses included 599 samples from 250 donors. There were strong impacts of pRBC storage duration (14.2% of variance) and blood center of collection (12.2% of variance) on metabolic phenotypes. The latter difference was attributable to the additive solutions (AS) used at the different sites (AS-1 vs AS-3; area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve = 1.0). Of note, minimum variance was observed across the 3 blood centers using AS-3, suggesting an overall consistency in standardization of blood processing protocols. The metabolic phenotypes of samples stored in different AS differed beyond the components of the additive formulations; e.g., samples stored in mannitol-free/citrate loaded AS-3 were characterized by higher levels of high-energy compounds, increased glycolytic rates (higher ATP and DPG) and total glutathione levelsall factors significantly correlating with RBC propensity to hemolyze when challenged with pro-oxidant agents such as 2,2-azobis-2methyl-propanimidamide dihydrochloride. Increased methionine metabolism and activation of the trans-sulfuration pathway was noted in samples processed at the site that used AS-1. Conclusion: This study highlights the impact of storage additives on the metabolic heterogeneity and hemolytic phenotypes of samples processed in the largest multi-center RBC metabolomics study conducted to date, an observation that may contribute to explaining the difference in results between small-scale single-center laboratory studies and clinical trials on the age of blood. Metrics Associated with Expansion of 7-Day Platelets from a Pediatric Transfusion Service to a Hospital System Alex Ryder* and Dawn Moreau. Le Bonheur Children's Hospital Background/Case Studies: Due to their short 5-day shelf-life and required bacterial culture release testing, platelets present a significant inventory management challenge. With the recent FDA clearance of a rapid testing platform for bacterial contamination as a "safety measure," hospital transfusion services now may extend platelet shelf-life to 7-days under many circumstances. Our Pediatric Transfusion Service recently implemented this testing platform, and soon thereafter extended our testing to include day-6 and day-7 platelet units from two Adult Hospital Transfusion Services within our hospital network. Here, we describe metrics associated with these implementations. Study Design/Method: Pre-implementation data was gathered over a 9month period, for platelets received into inventory at our Pediatric Transfusion Service, as well as two affiliated Adult Transfusion Services, from January 1, 2017 through September 30, 2017. Descriptive statistics regarding platelet transfusions and expiration were compared to the 6-month postimplementation period, from October 1, 2017 through March 31, 2018 for our Pediatric Transfusion Service, and a 3-month post-implementation period of January 1, 2018 through March 31, 2018 for our affiliated Adult Transfusion Services. Platelets products consist entirely of single-donor apheresis units. Units are considered expired if they reach outdate prior to being transfused or used for aliquot preparation. Results/Finding: During the 9-month pre-implementation period, our Pediatric Transfusion Service received 344 apheresis platelet units, of which 101 expired prior to use (29.4%). During the 9-month pre-implementation period, the two combined Adult Transfusion Services received 4358 apheresis platelet units, of which 285 expired prior to use (6.5%). During the 6-month post-implementation period, our Pediatric Transfusion Service received 258 apheresis platelet units, of which 23 units expired prior to use (8.9%). During the post-implementation period, 51 platelet units were PGD tested; 21 units tested once, and 30 units tested twice, for a total of 81 tests. We estimate having spent $2430 on testing ($30/test). Of the 51 tested units, 30 were used for transfusion, representing approximately $15,000 in savings ($500/unit). Additionally, the 21 outdated PGD-tested units provided an additional 41 days of platelet stock. We estimate that this amounts to an additional $7590 in cost avoidance, as replacement units were not purchased. During the 3-month period during which testing was extended to platelets for the affiliated Adult Transfusion Services, 1162 units were transfused. Of these, 81 were day-6 or day-7. The total number of expired units was 47 (3.9%), which represents a significant decrease from the pre-implementation period. Savings from transfusion of day-6 and day-7 extended platelets during this short period of time is estimated to be $40,500 ($500/unit). Conclusion: We describe the recent implementation of an FDA-cleared rapid bacterial test for platelets as a "safety measure" to achieve a 7-day outdate at a Pediatric Transfusion Service, and the subsequent extension of this practice to positively impact inventory management at two associated Adult Transfusion Services. As we continue to improve the logistics of the process, we believe this testing will continue to decrease platelet wastage, while increasing platelet availability and patient safety. Storage of Platelets in PAS-5 with 10% Plasma as a Function of Apheresis Instrument and Storage Container Stephen Wagner* 1 , Cheryl Hapip 1 , Annette Turgeon 1 , Lenora A. Abel 1 and Nadine Kaelber 2 . 1 American Red Cross Holland Laboratory, 2 FDA Background/Case Studies: The storage properties of apheresis platelets suspended in the experimental additive solution, PAS-5, and 10% plasma may be affected by collection instrument or storage container. This study evaluated the impact of Amicus (A) or Trima (T) collection platforms on platelets collected from the same donors that were stored in either of the two manufacturer's containers. Study Design/Method: The same consenting 12 donors provided A or T platelets with concurrent plasma with a targeted yield of 4 × 10 11 platelets on 4 occasions in 100% plasma. Following collection, platelets were rested 1-4 hours and then centrifuged at 22˚C and 3800 rpm (5.5 × 10 7 ACE), plasma expressed, and resuspended in PAS-5 to yield units with 10% plasma. Following 1-2 hours rest, platelets were placed on the agitator and either maintained in the original storage container or transferred to the other manufacturer's storage container and placed on the agitator. On days 1, 5 and 7, units were assayed for in vitro testing including platelet count, pH, blood gases, mitochondrial membrane potential, reactive oxygen species, extent of shape change (ESC), hypotonic shock response, aggregation to ADP + collagen, glucose, lactate, bicarbonate, morphology, CD42b, CD62P, and annexin V binding. Data were analyzed by repeated measures ANOVA and Bonferroni post-test; a ANOVA p value of 0.001 was considered significant due to repeated measures. Results/Finding: Average unit volume, yield and percent plasma was 291 ± 11 mL, 3.7 ± 0.4 × 10 11 , and 10.3 ± 0.7%, respectively, and were comparable between collections with either apheresis instrument and stored with either manufacturer's container. Day 1 platelet activation was 40 ± 22% and was similar in either collection instrument or container. Except for pH (days 1, 5), CO 2 (days 1, 5, 7) and ESC (day 5), every other in-vitro parameter was similar between apheresis platforms or manufacturer's container. Day 5 values for pH, CO 2 and ESC are given in the table below. pH values of all units on all days of storage were ≥6.8 except 1 unit that was collected on T and stored in an A container, which had a pH of 5.7 on Day 7 and a pH of 6.8 on Day 5. Conclusion: Based on in vitro measures, storage of platelets suspended in PAS-5 with 10% plasma is feasible in the original manufacturer's container for 7 days. Based on CO 2 levels, T containers have greater gas exchange than A containers. Utilizing Thromboelastography (TEG) as a Bleeding Risk Assessment Tool Prior to Interventional Radiology Procedures Christine Cahill* 1 , Ashwani Sharma 1 , Neil Blumberg 1 , Amy E. Schmidt 1 and Majed A. Refaai 2 . 1 University of Rochester, 2 Transfusion Medicine, University of Rochester Background/Case Studies: The international normalized ratio (INR) is commonly used as a bleeding risk assessment prior to invasive procedures. This practice may be sub optimal as INR was developed to monitor warfarin therapy and is primarily affected by factor VII activity. Several society guidelines recommend correcting INR to ≤1.5 prior to procedures to mitigate bleeding risks,which is not evidence based. Plasma transfusion or prothrombin complex concentrates (PCC) with and without vitamin K administration are usually used for this purpose. TEG is a whole blood assay which measures the full spectrum of primary and secondary hemostasis and may be a superior tool for risk assessment. Study Design/Method: Records of 14 patients undergoing interventional radiology procedures were collected over a 5-month period and retrospectively reviewed. All patients had TEG in addition to the traditional laboratory screening assays run prior to their procedures. Patient characteristics, medical conditions, laboratory results, and adverse events were collected and analyzed (Table) . Results/Finding: Average age of our cohort was 70 ± 12.2 years with the most common diagnosis being pulmonary disorders (7/14), coronary artery disease (5/14), and/or renal failure (5/14). The interventional radiology procedures performed were biopsies (5/14), central line and catheter placement (5/14), thoracentesis (3/14) and drain placement (1/14) . Pre-procedure renal and liver chemistry profiles showed 4/14 had mild to moderate liver abnormalities and 3/14 had renal failure. Nine patients were on warfarin, 1 patient was on a direct oral anticoagulant (apixiban), and 2 patients were on aspirin. Although the pre-procedure INRs were > 1.5, with an average of 2.3 ± 0.9, TEG results were largely normal suggesting a low risk of bleeding (Table) . No bleeding complications, blood product transfusions, or vitamin K administration were given. Conclusion: In this pilot study TEG appears to be a superior assay to assess bleeding risks in patients undergoing invasive interventional radiology procedures, particularly for patients receiving oral anti-coagulation. Although the INRs were higher than suggested guidelines no patients had significant bleeding or complications. Further studies using a larger cohort are warranted to evaluate for consistent trends. Background/Case Studies: Very few data exist to guide the dosing platelets PLTs for oncology outpatients. At our center, specialized coordinators assign PLTs to oncology patients, and recommend either one or two single donor apheresis PLTs for transfusion based on each pts medical and transfusion history (e.g., ABO type, HLA antibody status, splenomegaly, body mass, response to previous transfusions), as well as PLT attributes (ABO type, PLT yield, volume). In this study, we sought to determine whether the transfusion of one versus two units of apheresis PLTs t had an effect on post-transfusion PLT count, time to next transfusion, or the PLT count prior to the next PLT transfusion. Study Design/Method: After obtaining IRB approval, we retrospectively studied all adult oncology pts who received an outpatient transfusion from 7/1/2016 through 11/7/2017. We collected the date and time of transfusion, unit number, and date and time of pre-and post-transfusion PLT counts. Results/Finding: A total of 605 pts received 8,491 PLT transfusions cumulatively during the study period. The majority of pts (n=363, 60%) were variably transfused with 1 or 2 PLTs per outpatient visit while a minority were transfused exclusively with a 1 PLT-only (17.2%) or 2 PLTonly (22.6%) strategy throughout the study period. The vast majority (n=7809, 92%) of PLTs were given to patients who received a mixture of 1-PLT and 2-PLT transfusions during the study period. As summarized in Table 1 , the pre-and post-transfusion PLT counts and interval between outpatient visits were medically similar (although statistically different) regardless of transfusion strategy. Additionally, pts who received 2 PLTs probes for 90 blood group antigens  across 19 blood group genes (ABO, GYPA, GYPB, GYPE, RHD, RHCE,  KEL, DARC, SLC14A1, SLC4A1, ACHE, ERMAP, ART4, AQP1, ICAM4,  CD55, CR1, CD44, BSG) . After capture, samples were sequenced using an Illumina NextSeq. Ninety five samples from blood donors previously test by licensed SNP assay were used for comparison testing and selected to represent a diverse set of antigen phenotypes. We used bloodTyper, an automated blood group typing software platform for interpretation of NGS data (Lane WJ, et al, Lancet Haematology, 2018 -In Press) . bloodTyper was enhanced to analyze the MIP based NGS data. The MIP based NGS results were compared to serologic and SNP typing for 36 antigens (A, B ERMAP and CR1 failed quality filters repeatedly; careful review revealed that they were not captured in the ES library. Serologic validation for K, Fy a , Fy b , Jk a , and Jk b was performed on RBC samples from 103 participants and resulted in 3 discrepancies: 1 due to clerical error, and 2 attributed to failure of the antibody to detect expression of a weak Kidd allele. Ten novel frameshift or nonsense variants were identified in the A4GALT, BCAM, SLC14A1, SLC4A1, ICAM4, CR1, GCNT2, and ABCB6 genes and predicted to be deleterious for enzymatic function or antigen expression. We describe an open-source informatics tool to translate NGS data into a predicted extended RBC phenotype and demonstrate its application through the analysis of 1018 ClinSeq® ES files. Our results corroborate the relative high frequency of weak Kidd alleles in the Caucasian population. CLIA-certified serology of 5 antigens in 103 samples correlated with NGS predictions, but the latter was more precise for detection of weak Kidd expression. One percent of participants carried novel blood group variants predicted to be deleterious through a nonsense or frameshift mechanism, which are currently under investigation. Background/Case Studies: Unravelling the genetic bases of blood groups has facilitated implementation of novel diagnostic tools in transfusion medicine and related fields. By now, all systems except one have been resolved to allow genotypic antigen prediction. The Xg a antigen was reported in 1962 and PBDX (now XG) was identified as the underlying gene in 1994. However, the reason why 33% of men and 10% of women lack Xg a has remained undefined. A hypothetical regulatory locus, XGR, was proposed already in 1987 to govern expression of both antigens in the XG system, Xg a (encoded by XG) and high-frequency antigen CD99 (encoded by neighbour gene MIC2/CD99). XG is located in the pseudo-autosomal region 1 on both sex chromosomes but is disrupted on Y and only produces a protein (of unknown function!) from X. We hypothesized that Xg a /CD99 expression is transcriptionally controlled by a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) within the XG region. Study Design/Method: Calculated Xg a allele frequencies in different populations were compiled from the literature. Comparisons were made with multiple XG variants in the 1000 Genomes Project. Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) in the same region were analyzed at https://gtexportal.org. Transcription factor binding was analyzed at http://jaspar.genereg.net. Blood samples from 158 blood donors anonymized other than for gender were phenotyped for Xg a and genotyped. Flow cytometric typing of Xg a and CD99 was performed on a subset of donors and mRNA levels were quantified by RT-qPCR. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and a luciferase reporter assay assessed the functional importance of the identified SNP. Results/Finding: Among > 2,600 investigated XG variants, rs311103 showed the best fit to Xg a frequencies in historical datasets. Strikingly, the same SNP, located 3.7 kb upstream of the XG transcription start site, was also the eQTL with the most significant impact on XG-mRNA levels in whole blood (p=2.0 × 10 -22 ). Also, rs311103C abolishes a GATA1-binding site, which was corroborated by clear ChIP seq peaks in datasets from erythropoietic cells. Genotyping showed that all 120 Xg(a+) donors, regardless of gender, carried at least one rs311103G allele. One female sample was positive by flow cytometry only. All 13 Xg(a−) women and 13 Xg(a−) men were homozygous for rs311103C. In 11 Xg(a−) men, C was accompanied by a G, presumably Y-derived. As opposed to Xg(a+) donors, Xg(a−) showed low-to-undetectable XG-mRNA levels. GATA1 binding to oligonucleotide probes with rs311103G but not C was shown by EMSA and confirmed by mass spectrometry following protein-oligonucleotide pulldown experiments. The intact GATA1 motif enhanced transcription in the luciferase reporter assay. Finally, CD99 expression on RBCs also correlated to rs311103 status (GG>GC>CC). The Xg(a+) phenotype depends on an intact GATA1-binding site upstream of XG. Xg(a−) is due to impaired transcription, which follows Background/Case Studies: A 45-year-old Caucasian woman with metastatic ovarian carcinoma, and no history of pregnancy or transfusion, typed as serologic weak D (weakly positive by gel and non-reactive by tube), so her sample was reflexed for RHD genotyping which revealed the patient was RHD*weak D type 1. Thereafter, she was managed as D + as recommended by AABB/CAP workgroup guidelines, as individuals with weak D type 1 are not considered at risk for production of clinically significant anti-D. She received 7 D + RBCs over 21 days for chemotherapy induced anemia and unexplained hemolysis while undergoing carboplatin and paclitaxel therapy. Four weeks after her last D + transfusion, she presented with worsening anemia and anti-D in her plasma. Study Design/Method: The plasma anti-D was investigated to determine if allo-or auto-anti-D. Serologic testing was by standard methods. RHAG, RHD, and RHCE -cDNA amplification and sequencing were performed to determine if mutations in other Rh proteins part of the Rh membrane complex, in combination with the c.809T>G (p. Val270Gly) associated with weak D type 1, could potentially explain alloimmunization. Results/Finding: The pre-transfusion RBC phenotype was C+c+E−e+; antibody screen and DAT were negative. Four weeks after transfusion of D + units, she presented with worsening anemia (Hgb=6.8 g/dL), slight increase in bilirubin and clinical concern for hemolysis. The DAT was negative but anti-D was present in plasma (2 + to 3 + by PEG IAT) and in an eluate. No antibodies to carboplatin or paclitaxel were detected. Reference laboratory testing suggested allo-anti-D: plasma adsorbed with rr RBCs contained anti-D. Anti-LW was ruled out. The anti-D reacted with D variant RBCs (DIII, DIV, DV, DVI, DVII, R Har 0 ), but did not react with weak D type 1 RBCs (n=3). Testing of the patient's RBCs with the ALBA Advanced Partial D Typing Kit gave a pattern of reactivity consistent with a weak D type 1 sample tested in parallel. Sequencing of RHD, RHCE, and RHAG found no additional changes. Samples obtained 2 and 8 months later showed anti-D and anti-D + anti-K, respectively. Lookback indicated at least 2 of 7 D + units were also K+. Samples tested 9.5 months after the last transfusion of D + units continued to show anti-D, although reacting weaker than prior (1 + in contrast to 2 + to 3+). The reactivity was equivalent, as shown by titration, in her plasma adsorbed with autologous RBCs. Conclusion: We report robust production of allo-anti-D in a patient with weak D type 1. Weak D type 1 individuals are not considered to be at risk for allo-anti-D based on observational studies primarily from Europe. There are rare exceptions known, but to date these anti-D have not been associated with clinically significant RBC destruction. This patient's anti-D may have contributed to exacerbation of her anemia, however confounding clinical history and abnormal pre-transfusion lab values makes a definitive assessment challenging. Transfusion of at least 2 D+K + units and sensitization to both antigens suggests they may have acted synergistically to complement alloimmunization. Background/Case Studies: Human immunoglobulin G (hIgG) includes IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4. Each IgG subtype contains different isoallotypes due to genetic variation, with IgG3 containing the most isoallotypes (N=15) described. It was previously shown that an FDA-approved monoclonal anti-IgG failed to recognize 2 of 15 hIgG3 anti-Kell (K) isoallotypes (hIgG3-03 and hIgG3-13) by indirect antiglobulin test (IAT). The failure to detect these two anti-K antibodies was due to amino acid changes in the isotype heavy chain. Anti-K is the second most common cause of hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn, and the observation raised concerns of the potential clinical impact of these two isoallotypes. We wanted to examine whether any of these hIgG3 isoallotypes had a differential effect on human monocyte/macrophage Fcγ receptor-mediated phagocytosis. We compared the phagocytic activity of 15 purified recombinant hIgG3 anti-K isoallotypes using an opsonized-erythrocyte monocyte monolayer assay (MMA). Study Design/Method: A novel monoclonal recombinant anti-K antibody was isolated and used to create a panel of the 15 hIgG3 isoallotypes. Thus, all monoclonal antibodies had the identical variable region genes and recognized the same K antigen epitope, differing only in their Fcγ heavy chain region. The hIgG3 anti-K antibodies were pre-incubated with K-positive (KK, Kk) red blood cells (RBCs). Opsonized RBCs were examined using IAT (tube and gel), flow cytometry (using anti-lambda chain antibody to avoid any variations in Fc heavy chain region), and MMA. Results/Finding: A dosage effect was seen for many of the hIgG3 isoallotypes where the Kk IAT result (2 + to 3+) was lower than KK (3 + to 4+), particularly for hIgG3-03 and hIgG3-13. Opsonisation of KK RBCs was optimal at 2.5 μg/mL hIgG3, as determined by flow cytometry analysis. There was a differential effect of the 15 hIgG3 isoallotypes on the induction of phagocytosis. Compared to hIgG3-01 (Phagocytic index, PI=16), hIgG3-03, hIgG3-08, and hIgG3-13 showed a reduced capacity to induce phagocytosis with PI of 9.5, 8.0, and 8.5 respectively. However, hIgG3-17 (PI=27), hIgG3-18 (PI=31), and hIgG3-19 (PI=34) showed significantly enhanced ability to induce phagocytosis (p≤0.1). Both hIgG3-18 and hIgG3-19 induced clinically significant phagocytosis at 500ng/mL, while hIgG3-03, 08, and 13 required a 10-fold increase in concentration to achieve a PI suggesting clinical significance. Conclusion: Certain amino acid variations in the Fc region of hIgG3 antibodies may lead to an enhanced or reduced capacity for their ability to induce phagocytosis. Results indicate that all anti-K hIgG3 isoallotypes can be clinically significant as measured by MMA. Thus, antiglobulin reagents that fail to detect hIgG3-03 or hIgG3-13 could present a problem. Oral Abstract Session: Blood Groups -New Antigens, New Alleles Characterization of a Novel High-Prevalence Antigen in the Lutheran Blood Group System Cédric Vrignaud 1,2,3 , Stéphanie Ramelet 3 , Denise Amiranoff 4 , Laure Bourguignat 4 , Guy Mpoy 5 , Sylvie Poupel 3 , Joelle Nataf 3 and Thierry Peyrard* 1,2,3 . 1 Laboratoire d'Excellence GR-Ex, 2 INSERM UMR_S1134, 3 Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, 4 EFS Ile de France, 5 Hôpital Simone Veil Background/Case Studies: The Lutheran blood group system consists of 24 antigens located on the basal-cell adhesion glycoprotein called B-CAM, with 19 high-prevalence, 4 equilibrated and one low-prevalence antigen reported to date. This protein is strongly involved in the interaction of the red blood cells (RBCs) with the extracellular matrix. The aim of the present work was to describe a novel high-prevalence antigen of the Lutheran system, through the investigation of two sisters who both produced the corresponding anti-LU antibody. Study Design/Method: Blood samples of a pregnant woman were firstly referred to our laboratory for investigation of a pan-agglutinating antibody. Antibody identification (gel-test IAT, Bio-Rad) was performed on native, papain-treated (Diagast) and trypsin-treated (Sigma) RBCs. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood cells by a fully automated method and amplified by LU exon-specific primers and sequenced. Results/Finding: The proband was a group A, R 2 r, K-, 47 yo female patient, of Turkish origin. During her first pregnancy, in 2003, her serum was reactive on all native RBCs but nonreactive on trypsin-treated RBCs and LU null samples. Autologous controls were negative and her LU phenotype was unambiguously LU:-1,2. Underlying alloantibodies of common specificities were ruled out. The antibody was finally concluded as a so-called "para-LU antibody", i.e. an antibody to a probable high-prevalence LU antigen of unknown specificity. The proband had another child two years later without any complication despite a stronger reactivity of the antibody. In 2003, blood samples from siblings were required for compatibility testing and RBC antibody screening; her elder sister turned out to be compatible. However, no further investigation was performed at that time. In 2008, a "para-LU antibody" was also detected in the proband's elder sister during pregnancy. Genomic DNA sequencing revealed the presence, in both sisters, of two nucleotide changes at homozygous state in the LU-BCAM gene, on a LU*02 allele basis. The first one is a synonymous change in exon 3, c.324G>A (p.Gly108Gly, rs3745159) known to be present in about 3-4% of the general population. The second one was found in exon 9, c.1184G>A (rs200421757), and is responsible for the amino acid change p.Arg395His. This mutation has been reported with a frequency of less than 0,03% in the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) database. Conclusion: Serological and molecular studies allowed us to provide evidence for a novel high-prevalence antigen in the Lutheran blood group system, and most importantly, to identify the specificity of a patient's antibody and recommend optimal transfusion policy. We suggest to provisionally assign the names LU27 and LUYA (after the proband's name) for this antigen. According to the structural model of Parsons et al (Blood, 1997) , the LUYA expression is predicted to be on the fourth IgSF domain of BCAM, as is the LU7 antigen. Sumi: A Novel Low Incidence Antigen of Mns Blood Group Antigen Shoichi Ito 1 , Sayaka Kaito 2 , Toru Miyazaki 3 , Naoko Watanabe-Okochi* 2 , Yumi Suzuki 2 , Hatsue Tsuneyama 2 , Ryuichi Yabe 2 , Kazumi Isa 4 , Kenichi Ogasawara 4 , Makoto Uchikawa 2 , Nelson-Hirokazu Tsuno 2 and Kazunori Nakajima 2 . 1 Tohoku Block Blood Center, Japanese Red Cross, 2 Kanto Koshinetsu Block Blood Center, Japanese Red Cross, 3 Hokkaido Block Blood Center, Japanese Red Cross, 4 Central Blood Institute, Japanese Red Cross Background/Case Studies: In 1990, a case of positive reaction in a major crossmatch was consulted to our blood center. Antibody screening of the patient plasma was negative. We applied various antibodies to the crossmatch-positive relevant blood product but could not identify the antigen. It was named "SUMI", after the first proband whose RBCs carried the antigen, SUMI antigen was recognized as an unidentified low-incidence antigen. Here, we report that the SUMI antigen is present on the Glycophorin A (GPA). Study Design/Method: Serological tests were performed by the standard tube method or with automated blood grouping machine (PK7300). Standard methods were also applied for the RBC treatment with proteolytic enzymes. Anti-SUMI monoclonal antibody-producing cell line (HIRO-305) was obtained from lymphocytes of anti-SUMI positive individuals by the hybridoma method. Immune-complex capture fluorescence analysis (ICFA) using Luminex was used to analyze the SUMI antigen. Genomic DNAs were extracted from peripheral white blood cells of SUMI-positive individuals and the nucleotide sequence of GYPA was examined by direct sequencing and TA cloning. Results/Finding: Nine SUMI positives were found by screening 324,000 Japanese blood donors with human monoclonal IgM antibody (HIRO-305). SUMI is sensitive to red cell treatment with trypsin, ficin, pronase, or sialidase, but not α-chymotrypsin or DTT. Anti-SUMI (1 + or higher) was found 1,351 among 10,392 normal sera by saline tube method at room temperature. The strongest antibody titer was 1:64. On the other hand, 100 cases of umbilical cord blood plasma showed negative reactions with the SUMIpositive RBCs. ICFA assay with murine monoclonal antibodies to intracellular potion of GPA (CBC-450) showed that SUMI antigen is located on the GPA. GYPA gene analysis showed a mutation of c.91 A > C (p. Thr 31 Pro). The same mutation was recognized in all SUMI+. All of SUMI + showed that M antigen are positive. Conclusion: The SUMI antigen is a novel low frequency antigen of the MNS blood group system that represent Thr31Pro substitution in GPA. The frequency of SUMI antigen was 0.0028% among the Japanese donors. From family analysis, it was confirmed that SUMI antigen is dominantly inherited. Anti-SUMI was detected in 13.0% of healthy donors, and it was considered to be a naturally occurring antibodies of IgM class. New York Blood Center Background/Case Studies: Algorithms for donor antigen typing and DNA analysis and in-house policies for serologic confirmation when only DNA testing is ordered lead to the discovery of multiple RHCE discordances. We investigated six samples with conflicting results: E in 3 donors; C in 2 donors and 1 OB patient. Study Design/Method: Automated PK7300 and manual tube methods were used for RBC typing. Genomic DNA was isolated from WBCs and RNA from RBCs. HEA PreciseType, RHCE BeadChip, RHCE gene sequencing, and in-house assays were done. RhCE-specific cDNA analysis was performed for two samples. Results/Finding: Three Caucasian donors typed E− by PK7300 (clones P3x25513G8+MS24) but reflexed HEA testing for extended RBC profiling predicted the RBCs were E+. By tube testing, the RBCs were 1+ w -3 + with Immucor and 3 + -4 + with Bio-Rad anti-E. RHCE BeadChip indicated E + phenotype but review of the genotype results showed the samples were heterozygous for c.697C>G (p.Gln233Glu). Gene sequencing with SNP-specific primers confirmed the presence of c.697G on RHCE*cE. A Caucasian and a Hispanic donor were C + by PK7300 (clone 906) but predicted C− by HEA. By tube testing, the samples were 3+ s with Immucor Gamma-Clone, Ortho BioClone, and Bio-Rad Seraclone anti-C. By multiplex PCR and RHCE BeadChip, the samples lacked the 109bp insert in intron 2 characteristic of RH*C. RHCE exon 2 sequencing however was consistent with RH*C. Rh-cDNA analysis found a conventional RhCe transcript, indicating this is a novel allele encoding a C + phenotype that lacks the 109bp insert. A Hispanic OB patient with anti-e and the paternal sample were referred for RHCE genotyping to evaluate risk for HDFN. The paternal sample was genotyped as C+E−c+e + (consistent with serology) and all children predicted to be e+. The patient's RBCs were predicted C−E+c+e− by HEA. Serology confirmed E+c+e−, but her RBCs were C+ w with Immucor Gamma-Clone, Ortho BioClone and 2 single donor source anti-C, and 2 + to 3 + with ALBAclone, Bio-Rad Seraclone, and 1 single donor source anti-C. RHCE BeadChip indicated C− phenotype, but the genotype indicated heterozygosity for c.48G/C and c.307C/T. Rh-cDNA analysis showed the changes were on RHCE*cE, indicating expression of C antigen from a novel allele, RHCE*cE48C, 307T. Conclusion: We report three new RHCE alleles; RHCE*cE697G associated with variable E antigen typing (n=3), RHCE*Ce lacking the classic intron insertion associated with C antigen (n=2), and RHCE*cE48C 307T encoding variable C antigen expression (n=1). The c.697G has been reported on two RHCE alleles but with additional changes (RHCE*cE697G, 712G; RHCE*cE697G, 712G, 733G, 744C); both with variable E expression. Interestingly, the RHCE*cE697G was found in three Midwest Caucasian donors. Continuous discovery of RH variants, knowledge of the serology, prevalence of the alleles and their potential clinical impact are important for designing future genotyping assays. A Novel RHCE Allele Expressing RHD Epitopes Responsible for a False-Positive D Typing and Post-Transfusion Anti-D Alloimmunization in a Patient of Western European Descent Cédric Vrignaud 1,2,3 , Stéphanie Ramelet 3 , Dominique Gien 3 , Ines Molinier 3 , Séverine Creppy 4 and Thierry Peyrard* 1,2,3 . 1 Laboratoire d'Excellence GR-Ex, 2 INSERM UMR_S1134, 3 Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, 4 EFS Rhône Alpes Background/Case Studies: Rh currently comprises 55 antigens encoded by two highly homologous genes, RHD and RHCE. The RhD protein expresses the D antigen whereas the RhCE protein carries the C/c and E/e antigens. However, some RHD variants may paradoxically code for a RhCE reactivity, such as RHD*DIIIa-CE(4-7)-D and RHD*DIVa-2 responsible for a C reactivity with the MS-24 clone. Conversely, some RHCE alleles, such as RHCE*ceHAR, RHCE*ceCF, RHCE*ceRT and RHCE*ceSL, may express RhD epitopes more or less detectable by anti-D reagents depending on the clone being used. We describe here the serological and molecular investigation of a D-positive patient of Western European descent with anti-D alloimmunization. Study Design/Method: RhD typing was carried out by standard hemagglutination techniques with polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies. Adsorptionelution testing was performed with a polyclonal anti-D and acid elution method. Genomic DNA was amplified by RHD and RHCE-specific primers and sequenced. RHD gene was also investigated with the wRHD DNAbeadchip device (Immucor/BioArray). Results/Finding: Blood samples from a group A, D+ w C-E-c+e+, K-, 76 yo male patient of Spanish origin were referred in March 2012 to our reference laboratory to explore an anti-D with negative DAT and autocontrols. The patient was concluded to carry a weak D phenotype by the referring laboratory and likely considered D + as he was of European ancestry. Anti-D was observed 5 months after the first transfusion of D + RBC units in June 2010. The patient was then regularly transfused with D + platelets and D-RBC units for about 2 years. A weak or no D expression was found by our routine techniques: 3 + with Ortho BioVue System/D7B8 clone, no reactivity with Bio-Rad ID-System/ polyclonal. The use of a panel of monoclonal anti-D showed positive reactions with 4 clones, MS-26 (4+), HM10 (4+), ESD1 (3+), HM16 (2+) and SAL1A6 (<1+), but no reactivity with 9 other clones. RHD analysis showed no exon amplification. New blood samples were sent after another transfusion episode in 2014. As no RHD gene was found in the patient, we speculated that the D reactivity could originate from a RHCE variant allele. This was confirmed by the presence of a heterozygous c.508A>G non-templated mutation in exon 4 (p.Arg170Gly). Besides, an adsorption-elution study with a polyclonal anti-D was found to be negative. Conclusion: We described a novel RHCE allele, RHCE*ce508G (Genbank number KX236061), that expresses D epitopes detectable by several commonly used monoclonal anti-D reagents. This may cause a false-positive D typing, especially with D7B8, MS-26, HM10 and ESD1 clones (3 to 4 + reactivity), and a risk of anti-D alloimmunization in a seemingly D + patient. This is especially a matter of concern for D typing in women of childbearing age. According to the Rh protein structural model from Flegel WA (Curr Opin Hematol, 2006) , p.Arg170Gly is located in the extracellular domain of the RhCE protein, within the so-called "Rh protein vestibule". Our data for this new allele seem to confirm the importance of this vestibule area in terms of RhD epitope expression. We propose to call this new variant RHCE*ceRG (RG for Arg to Gly), similarly to the naming procedure followed for RHCE*ceSL and RHCE*ceRT. Serological and Molecular Characterization of Three New RHD Alleles Judith Aeschlimann* 1 , Sunitha Vege 1 , Christine Lomas-Francis 2 , Amanda Kinsinger-Stickel 3 , Jay P. Hudgins 4 , Ira Shulman 5 and Connie M. Westhoff 1 . 1 Immunohematology and Genomics Laboratory, New York Blood Center, 2 New York Blood Center, 3 University of Virginia Health System, 4 Keck School of Medicine at USC, 5 LAC/USC Medical Center Background/Case Studies: The serological and molecular diversity of the RhD antigen is without question and the list of RHD variant alleles continues to grow. We investigated samples from 3 females referred for weaker than expected D typing and RH genotyping. Study Design/Method: Genomic DNA was isolated from WBCs. RHD BeadChip assay and RHD sequencing was performed. RhD-specific cDNA analysis was done for two samples. Serologic testing was by standard methods with multiple anti-D and by ALBAclone Advanced Partial RhD typing kit for two samples. Results/Finding: Sample 1 was from a pregnant woman, ethnicity unknown, whose RBCS typed +w at IS. Her RBCs also reacted 1+ s to 2 + at immediate spin (IS) and 2 + to 3 + at IAT with anti-D Ortho BioClone, Immucor Gamma-clone and Series 4 and Series 5, Quotient anti-D blend, alpha and delta. RBCs also typed C−E−c+e+, V/VS + and G−/G + with monoclonal/polyclonal anti-G. Three clones of the ALBA Partial D kit (LHM174/102, LHM70/45, LHM57/17) were non-reactive with her RBCs but the pattern did not match any indicated partial D. RHD BeadChip showed low signal for exon 2 markers, suggesting a hybrid allele. RHD exon 2 sequencing and RhD-cDNA analysis confirmed a hemizygous RHD-ce(2)-D hybrid with c.254C>G and c.307C>T (associated with C antigen) and a c.744C>T silent change in exon 5. RHCE BeadChip detected RHCE*ce/ce733G. Sample 2 RBCs from a woman of unknown ethnicity sent for RHD genotyping, reacted 1 + to 3 + IS and 3 + IAT with Bio-Rad Seraclone, Immucor Gamma-clone and Ortho-BioClone. RHD BeadChip did not detect any changes, but exon 2 sequencing identified a heterozygous change c.329T>C, associated with partial RHD*DVII. RHD-cDNA analysis confirmed RHD*DVII and identified a RHD-CE(3-9)-D hybrid with an additional change c.733C>G in exon 5. Sample 3 was from an African-American pregnant woman referred for variable D typing. Her RBCs reacted 1 + to 3 + at IS and 3 + to 4 + at IAT with Ortho BioClone, Immucor Gamma-clone and Series 4 and Series 5, Bio-Rad Seraclone and Seraclone blend and typed Go(a+). Her RBCs typed C−E−c+e + and reacted with five clones of the ALBA Partial D kit with a DIV pattern. RHD Bead-Chip detected c.712G>A and c.1048G>C; RHD gene sequencing confirmed a new allele. Conclusion: We report 3 new RHD alleles, two with variable D typing with evidence to encode partial D phenotypes and one silent RH hybrid in trans to DVII. Sample 1 was found to be a new RHD-ce(2)-D hybrid with c.254C>G and c.307C>T in exon 2. These changes are characteristic for RHCE*ceAG.05, suggesting this allele arose by a gene conversion event. The RHD-CE(3-9)-D hybrid has been reported without the c.733C>G change found here in sample 2. Lastly we describe a new allele RHD*712A, 1048C, with RBC reactivity pattern of DIV by ALBA partial D kit and Go(a+). Lack of Alloimmunization to the D Antigen in D Negative Orthotopic Liver Transplant Recipients Receiving D Positive RBCs Perioperatively Lindsey Wlosinski*, Jaber El-Bashir and Zaher K. Otrock. Henry Ford Hospital Background/Case Studies: D negative (D-) patients (pts) are routinely transfused with D-RBCs due to the increased immunogenicity of the D antigen. The rate of alloimmunization to the D antigen following transfusion can be as high as 80%; however, immunosuppressed pts may be less likely to become alloimmunized. Some D-pts undergoing liver transplant may require a large number of RBC units which can risk the inventory of D-RBCs which are considered relatively rare (10-15% of donor units) as compared to D positive (D+) RBCs. So the blood bank may be forced to supply such pts with D + RBCs due to inventory constraints. Though the process of providing D + RBCs to D-transplant recipients is accepted in blood bank practice, the incidence of alloimmunization to the D-antigen in D-liver transplant pts has not been well defined. With a very active liver transplant program at our institution, studying the prevalence of anti-D formation in Dliver transplant pts receiving D + RBCs perioperatively will assist in successful patient blood management. Study Design/Method: This was a retrospective study performed at a single large academic medical center. The study was approved by our Institutional Review Board. Electronic medical records and blood bank files for all 505 pts who underwent orthotopic liver transplantation at Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit, Michigan, from August 2012 through December 2017 were reviewed. Results/Finding: Twelve D-pts received D + blood perioperatively. Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of these pts. The median age was 60 years (range 48-67 years); 8 (66.7%) were male. Median number of D + RBC units transfused was 13.5 units (range 3-72 units). There was no evidence of D alloimmunization in any patient after a median follow up of 30.9 months (range 20.2-59.6 months). Only one patient died after surgery. We had 8 Dpts (8/76 = 10.5% of all D-liver transplant recipients) who presented with D alloimmunization before transplant; none of these pts was transfused with D + blood at our institution. Conclusion: Our study showed that there was no risk of alloimmunization to the D antigen in D-orthotopic liver transplant recipients receiving D + RBCs perioperatively. Complement Stability in Thawed Plasma: Inventory and Plasmapheresis Implications Laura Stephens*, LinaCel G. Cadden and Samuel Pepkowitz. Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Background/Case Studies: Donor plasma is selected over albumin for therapeutic plasmapheresis replacement fluid when non-oncotic functional components such as clotting factors and ADAMTS-13 need repletion. Because plasma also contains complement proteins C3 and C4, which have beneficial functions in immunity and inflammation but may have disease-accentuating roles in conditions such as transplant rejection and complement-mediated glomerular disease, post-procedure complement levels should be of concern for select patients. While coagulation proteins, fibrinogen, and ADAMTS-13 are known to be preserved in Thawed Plasma (TP), the stability of C3 and C4 has not been reported, and multiple reference laboratory stability comments suggest serum complement levels drop after three days of storage. Accordingly, this study assayed C3 and C4 in refrigerated TP and patient serum during 5 days of storage. Study Design/Method: C3 and C4 were measured by an FDA-approved nephelometric method on four units of FP24 donor plasma at the time of thaw and on each of 5 days of storage at 1 to 6°C C3 and C4 were also measured on three random patient samples stored under the same conditions. Results/Finding: Donor TP unit C3 and C4 levels had an average change in value of -0.3% (range: -13.0% to + 5.9%) over 5 days after thaw (Table 1) . Patient serum samples had initial C3 levels of 69.2, 108.0, and 141.0 mg/dL (reference range: 79-152 mg/dL) and C4 levels of 29.5, 26.6, and 30.4 mg/dL (reference range: 16-38 mg/dL). Serum C3 and C4 levels changed by an average of +3.0% and -0.1%, respectively, over 5 days of refrigeration. Conclusion: C3 and C4 levels are maintained for the shelf-life of TP. For plasmapheresis cases in which maintenance of complement levels postprocedure is indicated, there would be no advantage to use immediately thawed plasma preparations over stored TP. For patients for whom a lowered complement concentration is desired, albumin replacement is preferred when clinically acceptable, and stored TP would provide no benefit over immediately thawed plasma preparations. Serum C3 and C4 levels also appear stable when refrigerated for up to 5 days. This investigation has allowed our tertiary care/trauma center to confidently maintain a rolling inventory of TP, supporting immediate availability for emergency/massive transfusion needs. Additionally, routine use of TP for plasmapheresis fluid replacement has curtailed expiration of our TP product inventory. disorders (e.g. hemophilia A), but today is primarily used to replace Fg in trauma and acquired coagulopathy. Cryo guidelines require use within 6 hrs of thawing, but may be overly restrictive when cryo is used for Fg replacement. We assessed the hemostatic quality of thawed pooled cryo stored at refrigerated (4C) and room temperatures (RT) for 35 days. Study Design/Method: Cryo (6-donor pools, Type O or A, n=4 each) was thawed and distributed into 6 ml aliquots for storage at cold (4˚C) or RT (21-24˚C). Cryo was diluted 1:10 with PBS and analyzed for Fg and FVIII in a hematology analyzer. vWF activity was quantified by ristocetin cofactor assay. Coagulation of cryo diluted in cryo-poor plasma (CPP) at original ratios (1:10) was measured by ROTEM. Thrombin generation of the cryo-CPP mixture was quantified by thrombogram. Packed red cells, platelet concentrates, frozen plasma, and cryo were combined (1:1:1:1) to simulate massive transfusion and analyzed by ROTEM. vWF function was also measured by shear-induced adhesion of platelets to a collagen-coated surface flow. the recent year (therefore not complying with the current 12 months deferral policy). Only 8.5% self-deferred themselves through the DHQ. Of those who did not donate blood in the last year, 202 (19%) declared they plan to do so under the current 12 months deferral policy, although they had sexual intercourse with another man in the last year, raising the rate of blood donors among the MSM population that participated in the study from 13% to 22%. About 64.5% of the respondents are supportive/ very supportive of the suggested new FPQP, and if introduced, 64% would consider donating blood, which will raise the rate of blood donors among the respondents from 13% to 65%. In addition, 85% of MSM who donated blood in the last year stated they will agree to reveal their sexual orientation in the DHQ, in order to be included in the program, compared to 8.5% under the current 12 months deferral policy. Conclusion: Introduction of new approaches is needed, to increase compliance of the LGBT community, enabling them to take part in life saving by blood donations, without compromising the blood recipients' safety. The suggested Plasma Quarantine Policy will bring probably more MSM to donate blood, who will truly state their sexual practice. This and the retesting the donors in the future donation will significantly increase blood safety, when compared to the current practice. If accepted, the suggested change in policy should be accompanied by an adequate educational campaign for both blood donors and recipients. We hypothesized that, unlike modified human RBCs with multiple background human gene products, mouse RBCs would serve as a "blank canvas" without human RBC alloantigens, that could be engineered to express individual human alloantigens. Study Design/Method: Transgenic mice in which RBCs express either K, k, or Jk b alloantigens were subjected to an extended phenotype with antibodies against common human RBC alloantigens. Transgenic or wild-type mouse RBCs were also tested with plasma from two human patients with known identified alloantibodies. Human plasma was incubated with wild-type mouse RBCs, and bound antibodies were eluted and tested for carbohydrate binding with a glycan array containing 600 different carbohydrates of known chemistry. Results/Finding: Mouse RBCs typed negative for RhD, RhC, Rhc, RhE, Rhe, Fy a , Fy b , K, k, S, s, or Jk b antigens but were reactive with anti-Jk a . "Naturally occurring" alloantibodies to mouse RBCs, both IgM and IgG, were detected in multiple samples of human plasma. Eluates from mouse wild-type RBCs incubated with human plasma were observed to have a strong IgG signal against only a single carbohydrate of the structure Gal-NAca1-3(Fuca1-2)Galb1-4GlcNAcb1-3Galb1-4GlcNAcb1-3Galb1-4GlcNAcb-; no reactivity was seen with other carbohydrates of a similar structure (e.g. other poly-N-acetyl-lactosamines). Human anti-mouse antibodies were easily absorbed using wild-type RBCs, resulting in plasma free of activity against wild-type RBCs. Testing absorbed plasma on transgenic mouse RBCs (wild-type, K, k or Jk b ) correctly identified an anti-k and anti-Jk b in two separate patient specimens, by flow cytometry and wet-tube testing in the immunohematology lab. Conclusion: These studies report a novel approach to isolate individual human blood group antigens, one at a time, on mouse RBCs. The use of RBCs of a non-human origin provides several advantages, including: 1) a "blank canvas" without most human alloantigens, 2) RBCs that can be used in existing immunohematology platforms, and 3) a stable source of RBCs from well-characterized animals. Problems include assessing the basis for reactivity of anti-Jk a with mouse RBCs and eliminating human anti-mouse RBC antibodies. Although absorption works well, identifying the target and eliminating it would be preferable, by genetic modification and/or enzymatic treatment. Ongoing work includes expanding the panel of transgenic lines and understanding background reactivity. . This raises the concern that 16H8 may miss clinically significant alloantibodies in patients whose genome encodes the IgG3-03 and/or IgG3-13 variants. Study Design/Method: Sequence analysis of 29 known human variants of IgG subtypes was carried out. A monoclonal anti-K1 antibody was expressed recombinantly, as each of the different 29 variants, and this panel was used as targets to assess the ability of 16H8 to bind. K+/k + targets were incubated with each expressed anti-K1 variant, followed by 16H8, and then analyzed by flow cytometry. In addition, mice were immunized with human IgG, splenocytes were fused with myeloma partners, and novel monoclonal anti-AHG antibodies were cloned and characterized using the same assay. Results/Finding: 7 amino acid residues were identified within the variants analyzed, which were common to canonical IgG1-IgG3 but missing in variants of IgG4. Of these, only a single amino acid (E) at position 419 was also found in the IgG3 variants that 16H8 does not recognize (IgG3-03 and IgG3-13) but was Q for all other expressed IgG1-IgG3 variants. Mutation of the natural E at position 419 to Q in IgG4-01 caused a gain of 16H8 reactivity. Moreover, Q instead of E at position 419 is the only amino acid difference between IgG3-03 (16H8 nonreactive) and IgG3-06 (16H8 reactive). In addition, a new monoclonal antibody was isolated that recognized all expressed variants of IgG1-IgG3, but not variants of IgG4. This new monoclonal AHG mapped to position 355, which is R in all expressed non-IgG4 variants but is a Q in IgG4 variants analyzed. The reported findings identify that the epitope recognized by 16H8 contains amino acid 419, and that the E419Q polymorphism is responsible for unintended lack of recognition of IgG3-03 and IgG3-13 as well as the useful non-reactivity with IgG4. We report a new monoclonal that maintains the virtues of 16H8 but remedies its defects. Combination of the new monoclonal with 16H8 would generate an AHG mixture non-reactive with IgG4, but unlikely to lose reactivity with IgG1-IgG3 due to as of yet undescribed polymorphism.  Background/Case Studies: A number of blood programs have recognized the opportunity that blood donation provides to identify ostensibly healthy individuals who might be unaware of risks to their health. These programs have included, along with mandated serological testing, such assays as non-fasting total cholesterol (TC) and hemoglobin A1c. They have also taken steps to notify individuals whose results suggest risk for cardiovascular disease or diabetes. Since our program has a long history of providing donors information about their TC, we decided to find out if some individuals with elevated TC met the criteria for familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). FH, which has a prevalence of 1 in 300 to 1 in 500 in the general population is a common, but frequently underdiagnosed, genetic disease. The disease is marked by severe elevation in cholesterol, evidence of coronary arterial disease at an early age and, when untreated, early death due to myocardial infarction. Results/Finding: Over storage time, platelet recoveries declined significantly compared with fresh (all p<0.006) and from 5 to 10 days (p=0.02) and 5 to 15 days (p=0.002). Platelet survivals decreased significantly from fresh to 5 days, 10 days, and 15 days (all p<0.0001). Intrinsic apoptotic events, measured by mitochondrial membrane integrity, decreased only non-significantly over storage time. Similarly, apoptosis measured by activation of the effector caspases 3,7 increased non-significantly from fresh to 15 days. Phosphatidyl serine exposure (measured by Annexin V binding) increased significantly from 5 to 10 days (p=0.03) and from 5 to 15 days (p=0.002). All other markers of platelet activation, specifically microparticles and P-selectin increased significantly from 5 to 15 days (p=0.001, p=0.002 respectively). Of note, platelet response to collagen stimulation revealed functional inside-out signaling with integrin activation comparable to (and non-significantly different to) fresh platelets up to 15 days of storage. The best predictor for 10 day platelet recovery and survival was collagen-stimulated integrin activation (r=0.88, p=0.048 and r=0.89, p=0.043 respectively). Conclusion: We performed the first studies with extended storage cold (4 ºC)-plasma-stored apheresis platelets up to 15 days and a fresh comparator. We show that there is continuous loss of recovery up to 15 days of storage. Overall, continuous platelet activation is a hallmark of coldstored platelets, while markers for caspase activation and mitochondrial membrane integrity show a delay of apoptosis during cold-storage. Platelet function tests show preserved integrin activation comparable to fresh up to 15 days of storage. The best predictor for 10 day platelet recovery and survival was collagen-stimulated integrin activation. Taken together, storage up to 15 days in the cold appears to yield acceptable in vitro and in vivo results. Pathogen Reduction of Platelet Rich Plasma Abrogates T Cell Alloresponse in Mice Johnson Q. Tran* and Rachael P. Jackman. Blood Systems Research Institute Background/Case Studies: Alloimmunization following platelet transfusion can lead to rejection of subsequent transfusions and transplants. Recipient T cells are key mediators of the alloimmune response, and can recognize allogeneic MHC via either direct binding on donor cells or indirectly when donor antigens are presented by recipient antigen presenting cells. Prior work has shown pathogen reduction with riboflavin and UV light (UV+R) of allogeneic platelet rich plasma (PRP) prevents alloimmunization in mice, and provide partial antigen-specific tolerance to subsequent transfusions. in vitro work demonstrated the mechanism of UV+R treatment in preventing alloimmunization is associated with down-regulation of donor cell surface adhesion molecules that prevents direct recognition by allogeneic T cells. However, the role of T cells may be more complex in vivo involving either indirect recognition, or weak direct signals. To better understand how UV+R treatment regulates alloimunization, this study provides a comprehensive evaluation of the T cell response to allogeneic PRP transfusion in mice. Study Design/Method: White blood cell (WBC)-rich PRP was isolated from donor BALB/c or C57Bl/6 mice, left untreated, or treated with UV+R and transfused into C57Bl/6 mice. To evaluate the impact on secondary exposure, some were given a second transfusion of untreated WBC-rich PRP two weeks later. CD4 + and CD8 + T cell responses were measured in the spleen and blood of recipient mice over time by flow cytometry. T cell activation, deletion and anergy were examined. Results/Finding: As expected, there was a significant upregulation of activation markers on T cells in the blood and spleen following transfusion with untreated allogeneic PRP. This included CD28, ICOS, and CD44, and peaked on day 7 (p < 0.0001). In contrast, mice that received a single UV +R transfusion showed no T cell response in blood or spleen although a small but significant enrichment of CD8 + CD28 + ICOS + T cells was observed in the blood on the seventh day after challenge (p < 0.002). Mice given UV+R PRP followed by untreated PRP displayed an early, but weaker and more transient response peaking around day 2 or 4 (p < 0.01). No evidence of deletion or anergy was observed in the CD4 + and CD8 + T cell compartment. Conclusion: Allogeneic CD4 + and CD8 + T cell responses were significantly diminished after pathogen reduction with UV+R treatment. However, T cell allorecognition in vivo was not completely absent as a small but significant induction of activated CD8 + T cells was observed in the blood. The failure of a T cell alloresponse after UV+R treatment is not likely due to T cell deletion or anergy but possibly associated with active T cell tolerance or immune avoidance. Anupam Prakash* 1 , Jelena Medved 1 , Juan Salazar 1 , Andria Li 1 and Chance J. Luckey 2 . 1 University of Virginia, 2 University of Virginia Medical Center Background/Case Studies: Antibodies generated against non-ABO red blood cell (RBC) antigens in response to transfusion are a major cause of morbidity and mortality in chronically transfused patients. Despite their clinical significance, the molecular mechanisms regulating the immune response to transfused RBCs remain poorly understood. Previous work in our lab (Arneja et al., 2016) demonstrated IL-6 deficient mice mount a significantly lower antibody response to RBC antigens. However, alloantibody production still occurred in the absence of IL-6, suggesting alternative pathways are capable of driving RBC alloimmunization. Since we observed an increase in Th2 skewing cytokines in response to transfusion in IL-6 deficient mice, we hypothesized that the key Th2 cytokine IL-4 and its downstream transcription factor STAT6 also drive RBC alloimmunization. Study Design/Method: We used a previously established RBC alloimmunization mouse model containing a fusion protein of hen egg lysozyme (HEL), Ovalbumin and the human Duffy antigen (HOD) on all RBCs as a model for RBC alloimmunization. Wild type, IL-4 deficient and STAT6 deficient mice were transfused with 12-day stored HOD blood. Sera were collected from these mice at various time points (2, 3, 5 and 7 weeks post transfusion) and total anti-HEL IgG titers were measured using ELISA. Results/Finding: While wild type mice elicited a robust IgG response against HEL, the response of IL-4 deficient mice was 5-fold lower (p=0.0015) at 2 weeks post transfusion. Similarly, antibody responses in STAT6 deficient mice were 10-fold lower (p=0.002) at 2 weeks post transfusion. Interestingly, at 7 weeks post transfusion IgG titers of STAT6 deficient mice was 40-fold lower (P = 0.025) compared to that of the wild type, demonstrating it also plays a role in antibody evanescence. All statistics were done using Student's t test using Holm-Sidak correction Conclusion: Ours is the first data to suggest a role of IL-4 and STAT6 in RBC alloimmunization. Ongoing studies in the lab are focused on uncovering the specific cell types on which IL-4 and STAT6 are active in response to transfused RBCs, and further how these pathways interact with the IL-6R pathway in controlling RBC alloimmunization. Background/Case Studies: The omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), are important for membrane fluidity and cellular signaling. Dietary supplementation with EPA and DHA is associated with improved red blood cell (RBC) deformability, hydration, and membrane fluidity, along with reduced irreversible sickling and pain episodes in patients with sickle cell disease. However, PUFAs are not completely benign. They are highly susceptible to peroxidation in oxidative environments, potentially damaging RBC structure during aging or cold storage. Therefore, it is important to evaluate whether diets enriched in PUFAs affect RBC lifespan and post-transfusion recovery (PTR). Study Design/Method: Mice from strains known to have good (C57BL/6) and poor (FVB) refrigerated RBC storage were fed a diet enriched in safflower or fish oil (n=15 mice/group) for 8 weeks. RBCs were biotinylated in vivo and lifespan measured by tracking biotinylated RBCs for 14 days. Leukoreduced blood was also prepared, and RBC deformability (LORCA and microsphiltration) and PTR were evaluated before and after 8 days of refrigerator storage. Metabolomics studies on fresh and stored blood were performed. Results/Finding: The RBC lifespan in C57BL/6 and FVB mice on a safflower diet was significantly greater than in the same strain on a fish oil diet (C57BL/6: 48.7d to 34.1d; FVB: 39.2d to 25.6d; both P<0.001). On the safflower oil diet, baseline RBC deformability was significantly higher in C57BL/6 as compared to FVB mice. Furthermore, RBC deformability was significantly decreased for both strains on the fish oil diet. When RBCs were transfused after 8-days of storage, PTR was significantly lower in the fish oil group for both strains (C57BL/6: 119% to 76%; FVB: 60% to 46%; P<0.0001 and P<0.05, respectively). There was also a strong correlation between PTR and deformability by LORCA (R 2 =0.9979) and microsphiltration (R 2 =0.9637). Metabolomics studies of plasma and RBCs revealed markedly lower levels of free and esterified carnitine in the fish oil group both before and after storage. Conclusion: These data suggest that diets containing very high levels of DHA and EPA from fish oil (30% kcal) are associated with decreased membrane deformability, in vivo lifespan, and PTR after cold storage. Carnitine modulates RBC fluidity due to its role in phospholipid repair, stabilization of spectrin-actin complexes, and sodium/potassium ATPase activity. The strong correlation between decreased carnitine levels, deformability, RBC lifespan, and PTR suggests potential mechanisms underlying these effects and identifies possible interventions for improving RBC quality. Background/Case Studies: Understanding megakaryocyte (MK) biology is critical to understanding and treating diseases that affect platelet production and function. However, procuring adequate numbers of this rare myeloid population remains rate-limiting. Most in vitro studies rely on MKs differentiated from hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), but there remains a lack of consensus on the optimal methods. Here, we present an optimized protocol for generating mature MKs from peripheral blood (PB) CD34 + cells with increased platelet production. Study Design/Method: We assessed the features and function of our MKs differentiated through our two-phase culture system using a set of "gold standard" metrics including morphology/ultrastructure (bright field and electron microscopy [EM]); cell surface marker expression, ploidy, and cell size (flow cytometry); cytoskeletal organization and granule content (confocal microscopy); and protein content (Luminex assay). We also quantified their release in static culture and bioreactor settings and characterized the resulting platelets at rest and upon activation. Results/Finding: Consistent with megakaryopoiesis, CD34-expression decreased and CD41/CD61-expressing cells increased over the course of differentiation. Size (14.2 ± 3.4 μm) and ploidy (58.5 ± 23% ≤ 4N) of differentiated cells were consistent with values for MKs from cord blood-derived MKs. MKs contained F-actin and β1-tubulin cytoskeletal elements characteristic of mature MKs, as well as markers of alpha-granules (VWF, PF4) and dense granules (thrombospondin, serotonin). Differentiated cells expressed growth factors (including EGF, VEGF, and PDGF) at levels similar to those found in human platelet lysate. Additionally, differentiated MKs produced proplatelets and functional platelets by day 7 in static culture, with a 3.5-fold increase in adult-like platelets produced using a novel bioreactor. Conclusion: Our differentiation protocol rapidly and consistently generates mature MKs from PB CD34 + HSCs. Despite resembling cord blood MKs in size and ploidy, these cells produce larger numbers of proplatelets than have been previously reported by as early as day 7 of differentiation. Background/Case Studies: The pathomechanisms of complications due to blood transfusion are not fully understood. Elevated levels of heme derived from stored RBCs are thought to be associated with transfusion reactions, especially inflammatory responses. Recently, the proinflammatory effect of heme has been widely studied. However, it is still unknown whether heme can influence the resolution of inflammation, a key step of inflammatory response, resulting in aggravation of inflammation. Study Design/Method: A murine model of self-limited peritonitis initiated by zymosan A was used. The effect of hemin on resolution was assessed by resolution indices. Western blot, qRT-PCR, flow cytometry, chemotaxis assay, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, luciferase reporter assay, and lentivirus infections were used to investigate possible mediating mechanisms in neutrophils and differentiated HL-60 cells. Results/Finding: The administration of hemin significantly increased the leukocyte infiltration at the entire time course (4 -48 h), enhanced the expression of TNF-α and IL-6 in peritoneal lavages and murine serum, and prolonged the resolution interval by $ 7 h in mouse peritonitis. In vitro, hemin significantly downregulated formyl peptide receptor 2 (FPR2) protein levels (P < 0.05), a key resolution receptor, leading to the suppression of proresolution responses triggered by the proresolution ligand resolvin D1. Subsequently, four predicted miRNAs (miR-543, miR-144-3p, miR-181b-3p, and miR-410-3p), most likely binding to FPR2 3'-UTR, were identified by two prediction databases. Among these, miR-144-3p was significantly upregulated by hemin (P < 0.05). The inhibition of miR-144-3p attenuated the inhibitory effect of hemin on FPR2 protein expression (P < 0.05). Luciferase reporter assay confirmed that miR-144-3p directly bound FPR2 3'-UTR. MiR-144-3p overexpression significantly downregulated FPR2 protein levels, whereas miR-144-3p inhibition led to a significant increase in FPR2 (P < 0.05). Conclusion: Our results suggest that hemin prolongs resolution in self-limited inflammation, and this action is associated with downregulation of FPR2 mediated by hemin-induced miR-144-3p. These findings demonstrate a novel mechanism of hemin derived from stored RBCs for inflammatory response. Cold Background/Case Studies: Sodium Citrate has become the preferred anticoagulant used with apheresis collection platforms and has been included in platelet additive solutions since PAS-II. It was suggested that sodium citrate be included in PAS to prevent spontaneous aggregation. Research in cancer cell lines has demonstrate that concentrations of sodium citrate present in current PAS formulations (10mM) causes apoptosis. In light of these data we evaluated whether the removal of sodium citrate from PAS-III could have a positive impact on platelet storage. Study Design/Method: Hyper concentrated apheresis platelet units $4.0 × 10 11 were collected on the Amicus from a normal, consenting donor. PAS-III without sodium citrate was added to $100 mL of hyper concentrated platelets to achieve a 35% platelet/plasma to 65% PAS ratio and rested for 1hr. The unit was then split into 4 polyolefin bags which were sealed in half. 60mL was added to each bag and increasing concentrations of sodium citrate were added to obtain a final concentration of 0, 2, 5, and 10mM. Platelet quality and function were assessed on Days 1, 5, and 7. Platelet count, pH, glucose, lactate, and blood gases were measured and quantitated. Surface markers were evaluated by flow cytometry which included CD62P, CD42b, Annexin V binding, and reactive oxygen species were measured using CM-H2DCFDA (n=4). Platelet function was assessed with aggregometry to collagen and TRAP6. Results/Finding: Platelet count and pH were acceptable and comparable throughout 7 days of storage regardless of PAS-III condition. Platelets stored for 5 days in PAS-III without sodium citrate(Cit) had significantly increased glucose levels (0mM Cit 2.75 ± 0.38 mM, 10mM Cit 0.48 ± 0.33 mM), and significantly decreased lactate levels (0mM Cit 9 ± 0.8 mM, 10mM Cit 12.35 ± 1.4 mM), ROS levels (0mM Cit 29 ± 5 mM, 10mM Cit 127 ± 53 mM), Annexin V positivity (0mM Cit 8.8 ± 2%, 10mM Cit 20 ± 4%), and P-selectin expression (0mM Cit 50 ± 4%, 10mM Cit 66 ± 3%) compared to those stored in 10mM citrate (p≤0.05) (n=4). There was a trend toward better preservation of GPIb on the surface of platelets stored without sodium citrate. Platelets stored without citrate also showed a trend towards a greater extent of aggregation compared to those containing 10mM citrate (Collagen % aggregation 0mM Cit 89 ± 2, 10mM Cit 54 ± 18; TRAP % aggregation 0mM Cit 90 ± 8, 10mM Cit 64 ± 18). Conclusion: Removal of sodium citrate from PAS-III did not result in spontaneous platelet aggregation or clotting which could lead to decreased platelet counts during 7 days of storage. The absence of sodium citrate improved nearly all measured parameters. We demonstrate that sodium citrate has a contribution to the platelet storage lesion and its removal results in improved cell quality and function. The Background/Case Studies: Alloimmunization is common following transfusion with platelet rich plasma (PRP) and can cause complications such as platelet refractoriness or transplant rejection. It has previously been shown that pathogen reduction of PRP with riboflavin and UV light (UV+R) can protect against alloimmunization in mice and induce partial tolerance to subsequent transfusions. This study evaluated the relative contributions of major histocompatibility antigens (MHC) and minor antigens to both the alloresponse to PRP transfusion and the tolerance induced by UV+R treatment. Study Design/Method: C57Bl/6 mice were transfused with PRP from C57Bl/6 (syngeneic), BALB/c (allogeneic MHC and minor antigens), B6 H2d (allogeneic MHC only), UV+R B6 H2d, or UV+R B6 H2d followed by untreated B6 H2d 2 weeks later. BALB/c mice were transfused with PRP from C57Bl/6 (allogeneic MHC and minor antigens), B6 H2d (allogeneic minor antigens only), UV+R B6 H2d, or UV+R B6 H2d followed by untreated B6 H2d 2 weeks later. Two weeks after final transfusion, blood was screened for antibodies against the different donor type cells, and splenocytes were challenged ex vivo with the different donor type cells, and culture cytokines were measured to evaluate priming in vivo. Groups were compared using ANOVA with Tukey's post-test. Results/Finding: Both total and MHC specific antibody responses were highest when both MHC and minor antigens were mismatched, with lower antibody responses observed with MHC mismatch alone (p<0.05). There was a weak, but significant (p<0.01) alloantibody response to minor antigens only. UV+R treatment protected against both major and minor antigen alloimmunization. Both allogeneic MHC and minor antigens primed an enhanced cytokine response ex vivo, though this was weaker with minor antigens, and responses were blocked with UV+R treatment. Reduced cytokine responses were observed in the C57Bl/6 mice given UV+R treated B6 H2d PRP followed by untreated B6 H2d PRP (allogeneic MHC only), but not in the BALB/c mice given UV+R treated B6 H2d PRP followed by untreated B6 H2d PRP (allogeneic minor antigens only). Conclusion: Allogeneic MHC is sufficient to drive alloantibody production in our model and is responsible for the bulk of the alloantibody response. Minor alloantigens induce a small antibody response against themselves, and also enhance the anti-MHC response. While minor alloantigens can induce a weak cytokine response, allogeneic MHC is necessary and sufficient to induce tolerance using pathogen reduction technology. Transfused Mice Efficiently Generate Germinal Centers, but Produce Poor Plasma Cells Jelena Medved* 1 and Chance J. Luckey 2 . 1 University of Virginia, 2 University of Virginia Medical Center Background/Case Studies: A well-described complication of transfusion is non-ABO red blood cell (RBC) alloimmunization. Despite the universal prescreening for alloantibodies in patients, transfusion complications are still a relatively common occurrence with delayed hemolytic transfusion reactions remaining the third leading cause of all transfusion-related fatalities in the USA. A major cause of morbidity and mortality is the remarkably high rate of evanescence in patients, with over 50% of all alloantibodies dropping below the level of detection within a year of their initial production. Molecular and cellular controllers of the high rate of anti-RBC evanescence are completely unknown. Herein we study anti-RBC alloantibody evanescence in an experimentally tractable mouse model of alloimmunization, contrasting the antibody response to transfused RBCs with those generated in response to standard vaccination. Study Design/Method: Wild type mice were transfused with 14-day stored mouse RBCs expressing the HOD (hen egg lysozyme, ovalbumin, and human Duffy b ) antigen or vaccinated with NP-OVA precipitated with aluminum hydroxide. Antigen-specific total IgG was measured on sera collected 2, 7, and 13 weeks post-immunization by ELISA. The presence of antigenspecific short-and long-lived plasma cells (SLPCs and LLPCs) was examined by ELISPOT 10 days and 13 weeks after immunization. Germinal center (GC) differentiation, assessed by the percentage of CD19 + CD4 -CD8 -IgD lo PNA hi GL7 hi GC B and CD4 + CD8 -CD19 -CD44 hi Cxcr5 hi PD1 hi T follicular helper (Tfh) cells, was examined by flow cytometry 10 days after immunization. Results/Finding: Antigen-specific antibodies were more evanescent in transfused mice compared to those that were vaccinated. Anti-RBC alloantibodies decreased by 64% at week 13 after transfusion, while anti-NP antibodies decreased by 37% (p < 0.0001). Both vaccinated and transfused mice generated similar GC B (5.11% and 3.82%, respectively, p > 0.5) and Tfh cells (5.73% and 6.24%, p > 0.5). While vaccinated mice efficiently produced SLPCs (5142 splenic SLPCs per 20 million seeded), SLPC production in transfused mice (38 SLPCs, p < 0.001) was comparable to unimmunized controls (15 SLPCs, p > 0.5). A significant difference was also found in the number of LLPC in bone marrows of vaccinated and transfused mice 13 weeks after immunization (725 and 185 LLPCs, respectively, p < 0.001). Conclusion: This study indicates that the HOD mouse model of blood transfusion recapitulates the high rates of alloantibody evanescence seen in patients. Furthermore, higher rate of anti-RBC evanescence is likely due to decreased generation of both SLPCs and LLPCs relative to vaccination. Given that transfusion and vaccination generate similar early GC production, transfusion may induce a selective defect in extra-follicular plasma cell production. Background/Case Studies: Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) is an autoimmune disorder characterized by low platelet counts and an increased risk of bleeding. In most patients the formation of pathogenic antiplatelet antibodies likely causes accelerated platelet destruction and decreased platelet production. Anti-D (RhIg) is an effective first-line treatment for ITP but as a pooled donor-derived product, it comes with certain limitations. In addition, anti-D also carries an FDA-issued Black Box warning of serious complications that may occur in patients with ITP. To address if some of the potential side effects of anti-RBC antibodies can be separated from therapeutic activity, a murine model of passive ITP was utilized with two different anti-RBC antibodies. Two major adverse events were evaluated: 1) Anemia, as defined by a significant decrease in the RBC counts in the mice and 2) Inflammatory activity, as defined by a significant change in core body temperature. Study Design/Method: The monoclonal antibodies TER-119 and M1/69 recognizing different murine erythrocyte antigens were evaluated for their ability to ameliorate ITP in two well characterized inbred mouse strains (C57BL/6 and BALB/c) and the outbred CD-1 strain of mice. Erythrocyte numbers were evaluated over 8 days and compared to baseline counts from day 0. The body temperatures of the mice were measured rectally for 30 minutes post anti-RBC antibody injection. Results/Finding: Both TER-119 and M1/69 were able to ameliorate ITP in C57BL/6, BALB/c and CD-1 mice. TER-119 caused significant anemia (with a nadir at day 4) in all three mouse strains while M1/69 caused anemia only in C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice. Dramatic reductions in the core body temperature were seen post TER-119 and M1/69 injections in CD-1 and BALB/c mice but no significant change in temperature was observed for C57BL/6 mice with either antibody. Conclusion: Both TER-119 and M1/69 were able to ameliorate ITP in all three strains of mice but anemia was only observed in C57Bl/6 and BALB/c mice. We therefore conclude that anemia is not strictly required for ITP amelioration by anti-RBC antibodies in murine passive ITP. In addition, a change in body temperature (a major adverse event in mice) was observed for CD-1 and BALB/c mice but not C57BL/6 mice. We therefore also conclude that this inflammatory activity as assessed by body temperature is not required for ITP amelioration in murine passive ITP. Based on these conclusions, it may be possible to develop a monoclonal anti-RBC antibody that ameliorates ITP without causing these severe adverse events. Plasmin Eight lncRNAs (lnc-MARCH2-2:1, lnc-SLC2A2-1:1, lnc-WBSCR16-3:6, lnc-WEE1-2:1, lnc-ENTPD6-2:1, lnc-NKD2-1:1, lnc-FOXS1-2:1 and lnc-MAPK13-3:1) and four mRNAs (BCL2L1, CAPN2, MAPK14 and VAMP8) were chosen for validation by RT-PCR. Bioinformatics method was applied to construct lncRNA and mRNA co-expression profile. GO and KEGG pathway analyses predicted lncRNA's function, and cis-regulation analysis revealed the potential molecular mechanism of lncRNA on target gene expression. Results/Finding: There were 162 lncRNAs expression levels shifted on the 5 th storage day compared to 2 nd day, in which 4 were up-regulated and 158 were down-regulated, and 691 lncRNAs expression levels shifted, on the 8 th storage day compared to 2 nd day, in which 20 were up and 671 were down, respectively. While 246 lncRNAs were differentially expressed, 2 increased and 244 decreased between the 8th and 5th day. In addition, the number of lncRNAs had increased expression level was much greater than that had increased expression level. The result of RT-PCR was consistent with the microarray: lnc-MARCH2-2:1, lnc-WEE1-2:1 and lnc-NKD2-1:1 expression level increased; while lnc-WBSCR16-3:6, lnc-SLC2A2-1:1, lnc-ENTPD6-2:1, lnc-FOXS1-2:1 and lnc-MAPK13-3:1 reduced. Four targeted mRNAs BCL2L1, CAPN2, MAPK14, and VAMP8 were down-regulated during platelet storage. GO and KEGG pathway analyses revealed that many lncRNAs and co-expressed mRNAs were related to platelet aggregation, platelet activation, and endocytosis. Additionally, lncRNAs might have cisregulate the expression of genes implicated in platelet physiological function. Conclusion: This is the first study that analyze the stability of LncRNAs in banked platelet. Many lncRNAs altered their expression level during the storage. Moreover, those shifted lncRNAs likely have a role in regulating platelet physiological function. Background/Case Studies: Blood units are stored as packed red blood cells (PRBC) at 2-6°C, presumably to minimize the storage-induced cell lesion. However, at 4°C water is at its' most compact packing, and undergoes abnormal structural processes, among them the breakage of hydrogen bonds which affects the water interactions with neighboring molecules. This implies that during the routine cold-storage PRBC are subjected to repeated temperature fluctuations below and above the 4°C critical temperature, and the respective volume/density variations. These anomalies are expected to induce acceleration of PRBC lesion. The study presented here was aimed at testing this hypothesis. Study Design/Method: Six PRBC units, leukofiltrated and stored in SAGM, were employed. Samples of PRBC were collected from each unit, stored in small storage bags and divided into two groups. Units from group A (gA) was stored in a routine blood bank refrigerator where the temperature fluctuated between 2.5-5.5°C, and units from group B (gB) was stored at 5-6°C, assuring that the temperature did not go below 5°C. The PRBC lesion was monitored by the change in cells deformability, determined immediately after processing the PRBC on Day 1 (D 1 ) and after 35 days of storage (D 35 ), using the cell flow properties analyzer (CFA). The cell shape-change is expressed by the change in the cell elongation ratio (ER), calculated for each cell as ER = a/b, where a and b are the major and minor cell axes, respectively. The CFA image analysis provides the ER distribution in large RBC population, from which the fraction of the low deformable cell (%LDFC, ER≤1.5) in PRBC population was derived. Results/Finding: In accordance with previously obtained results, the deformability of PRBC from gA decreased considerably from D 1 to D 35 , while the deformability of PRBC from gB remained unchanged through the entire storage period (Table 1 ). In particular, Table 1 shows that on D 35 , the portion of the relatively rigid RBC (%LDFC) in gA PRBC was considerably higher ($51%) than that in gB ($39%). Conclusion: The present study shows that storing PRBC under conditions that expose them to the temperature fluctuation around 4°C (gA), induces a considerable elevation in the RBC rigidity, whereas when the exposure to these conditions is avoided (gB), the RBC deformability is unchanged during storage. Although of limited scope, this study demonstrates that the PRBC "quality", as expressed by the cell deformability, is maintained better when PRBC are not exposed to repeated temperature fluctuations below/ above the 4°C critical temperature, where the cells are subjected to the water anomalies. The Background/Case Studies: Despite the almost universal use of leukodepleted blood components, it has been shown that donor leukocyte engraftment (microchimerism) remains a long-term consequence of red blood cell (RBC) transfusion in some patient groups. The clinical consequences of having these remaining cells and the mechanism by which they survive following blood transfusion is unclear. Furthermore, the incidence of transfusion-associated microchimerism (TAM) may be affected by international differences in blood processing methods or transfusion practices. In Australia, 10% of trauma patients were found to have TAM despite the introduction of universal leukodepletion of RBC units since October 2008. The incidence of TAM has not been extensively studied outside of the trauma setting. This study aimed to analyze the incidence of TAM in patients with a major thermal injury following RBC transfusion. Background/Case Studies: There is a growing concern about the risks in the transfusion of packed red blood cells (PRBC), following numerous studies reporting negative transfusion outcomes, including reduced blood perfusion. RBC have unique flow-affecting properties, particularly deformability and adherence to vascular endothelial cells, defining RBC hemodynamic functionality (HF), namely their capacity to affect blood flow. In the search for the mechanism behind the negative transfusion outcome, we explored the effect of PRBC HF on transfusion outcome in β-Thalassemia-Major (TM) patients (routinely treated with frequent, life-long transfusions) and elder blood recipients with non-hemolytic anemia. Study Design/Method: The effect of PRBC HF was examined by the transfusion-induced change in recipients' skin blood flow (ΔSBF), hematocrit (ΔHct), and the time-interval between transfusions (TIBT). SBF was determined using a laser-Doppler-imager. PRBC deformability and adherence was determined using the/ a cell flow-properties analyzer (CFA). Results/Finding: In both groups of patients, ΔSBF and ΔHct increased with increasing HF of the transfused PRBC, with a highly significant correlation. ΔSBF was inversely proportional to the recipients' SBF before transfusion. The transfusion outcome also depended on the HF of the recipients' RBC (TR-RBC); when the PRBC HF was higher than that of the TR-RBC, the recipients' SBF increased (ΔSBF>0), and inversely, when the PRBC HF was lower than that of the TR-RBC, the SBF decreased (ΔSBF<0). In the TM patients, the time interval between consecutive transfusions increased with increasing PRBC HF, exhibiting highly significant dependence. Conclusion: This study provides, for the first time in humans, direct evidence that the HF of transfused PRBC is a potent effector of transfusion outcome. Determination of the PRBC HF vs. that of the recipient's RBC and conditions before transfusion can be used for selecting patient-specific blood units. Currently, PRBC are tested exclusively for immunological compatibility, and supplied primarily by the first-in-first-out (FIFO) criteria, while their functionality, the HF in particular, is completely ignored. The additional testing of RBC HF (of the transfused and the recipients RBC) introduces a new paradigm and technology into blood-banking, which would contribute substantially to improving transfusion therapy and enable personalized transfusion medicine. Background/Case Studies: Wnt signaling plays crucial roles in mammalian cells regulating aspects of cell fate, migration and polarity. Platelets posses many proteins of this signaling pathway; however, its role in platelet function is poorly understood. One study has shown that wnt3A inhibits platelet adhesion, shape change and aggregation. In this study, we investigated the role of wnt3A signaling in protein synthesis using its agonist sFRP-1 (soluble frizzled-releated protein) on washed and stored platelets. Study Design/Method: Levels of wnt3A and sFRP-1 were determined by immunoblot analyses of the respective proteins in plasma. Platelets (PLTs) prepared from whole blood collected in citrate as anticoagulant were washed with citrate-glucose-saline buffer and incubated with 50nM wnt3A, 300nM sFRP-1, wnt3A + sFRP-1 or kept untreated as control in the presence of 550 μM puromycin (Pm) followed by activation with 10 μM ADP for 15min. For storage experiments, aliquots of apheresis PCs were stored in small in-house prepared bags which mimic the storage features of common PLT bags. Two sets of aliquots were spiked with 550 μM Pm and 0, 150, 300 and 450nM sFRP-1 and stored for 4 and 8 days, respectively. PLT in vitro quality was assessed using platelet activation by CD62P binding, responsiveness in the presences of ADP in the CD62P assay, phosphatidyl-serine exposure by annexin-V binding and metabolic activity. Protein synthesis was monitored in lysates prepared in a Triton X-100-containing buffer by immunoblot analyses against Pm and determination of the band intensities using the Odyssey software on a Lycor imagining system. Results/Finding: The washed and activated PLTs showed a strong band pattern of synthesized proteins which was not affected by the presence of sFRP-1 or the combination of wnt3A and sFRP-1, but 2.4-fold reduced in the presence of wnt3A alone. For the storage study, we confirmed abundant amounts of wnt3A in plasma; however, the levels of sFR-1 were too low to be detected. Both on day 4 and day 8 of storage, sFRP-1 showed a concentration dependent 2-, 2.5-and 2.6-fold increase of Pm incorporation, respectively, compared to the untreated control. This trend was mirrored in increased glucose consumption and lactate production as well as platelet activation of 10 Background/Case Studies: Donated blood is processed in the blood bank for storage as packed red blood cells (PRBC). In the process of packed cell preparation (PCP), the blood is often subjected to removal of white cells by leukofiltration, to reduce the risk of adverse reactions. During this procedure, the RBC are exposed to high level of shear stress, which can induce alteration of the cell deformability. In the present study, we examined the effect of packed cell preparation process on the RBC deformability. Study Design/Method: Blood samples were collected from 25 healthy volunteer donors, and from the corresponding units following their processing as PRBC (PCP), which included leukofiltration. RBC deformability was determined using a cell flow-properties analyzer (CFA). The cell shapechange is directly visualized in a narrow-gap flow-chamber under controllable flow-induced shear stress. The cell deformability is expressed by the change in the cell elongation ratio (ER), calculated for each cell as ER = a/ b, where a and b are the major and minor cell axes, respectively. The CFA image analysis provides the ER distribution in large RBC population, from which several deformability parameters are derived, including and the fraction of the rigid, undeformable cells in the RBC population (%UDFC, ER ≤ 1.1). The portion of undeformable cells was derived for each RBC sample, before and after PCP (%UDFC B and %UDFC A , respectively), and its change was calculated as Δ%UDFC = %UDFC A -UDFC B . Results/Finding: The effect of PCP on the level of the undefromable cells depended on its initial level in the freshly-collected blood. In the samples with %UDFC B higher than 6-7%, the PCP reduced this fraction of the rigid cells. In contrast, when the initial fraction of the rigid cells was lower than 6-7%, the PCP increased the %UDFC B . Δ%UDFC for all the samples exhibited a clear linear correlation with UDFC B (r = 0.577 with significance of p = 0.004). Conclusion: As noted above, in the procedure of packed cells preparation the RBC are subjected to high shear stress. That probably provokes the opposite phenomena; (a) removal/destruction of the rigid cells, thereby reducing their level, on one side, and (b) mechanical damage to the cell membrane and subsequent reduction of the cell deformability, thereby increasing the level of % UDFC. The results of this study support the existence of this phenomenon. Background/Case Studies: Blood group A and B antigens of the ABO system and FORS1 antigen of the Forssman system (FORS), as well as structurally related glycans, isoglobotriaosylceramide (iGb3) and α1,3-galactosylepitope (α1,3-Gal-epitope), are synthesized by the actions of evolutionarily related α1,3-Gal(NAc) transferases with distinct glycosyltransferase activities and substrate specificities: Blood group A and B transferases (AT and BT), Forssman glycolipid synthase (FS), globotriaosylceramide synthase (iGb3S), and α1,3-galactosyltransferase (GT), respectively. Previously, it was shown that the amino acids at codons 266 and 268 of human AT/BT are crucial to define their distinct sugar specificities, elucidating the molecular genetic basis of the ABO glycosylation polymorphism of clinical importance in transfusion and transplantation medicine. Study Design/Method: To better understand the structural basis of α1,3-Gal(NAc) transferase diversification, we prepared eukaryotic expression constructs of those enzymes possessing AT-specific AlaGlyGly or Leu-GlyGly, BT-specific MetGlyAla, FS-specific GlyGlyAla, or iGb3S and GTspecific HisAlaAla tripeptide at the codons corresponding to 266-268 of human AT/BT. We then performed DNA transfection using appropriate recipient cells, existing and newly created, and immunologically examined the appearance of cell surface oligosaccharide antigens. Results/Finding: The immunocytochemistry results using monoclonal antiglycan antibodies after DNA transfection of expression constructs have revealed that several tripeptides other than the originals also bestowed transferase activity. Surprisingly, however, the repertoire of functional amino acids varied among those transferases. Quantification by FACS immunocytometry confirmed the differential effects on substrate specificities of α1,3-Gal(NAc) transferases. Interestingly, we have also observed transferase activity not corresponding to the enzyme, namely FS activity of human ATs with AlaGlyGly or GlyGlyAla. Conclusion: The tripeptides at codons corresponding to 266-268 of human AT/BT also affect acceptor substrate specificities, in addition to the known function in determining donor nucleotide-sugar specificities, which may have contributed to the generation of a diverse family of α1,3-Gal(NAc) transferases. Excluding primates, where LeuGlyGly is predominant, the Ala-GlyGly tripeptide is frequently present in ATs from many vertebrate species. Therefore, it is possible that those ATs may also exhibit FS activity under certain conditions where appropriate acceptor substrates are present. If this is the case, two genetic loci, GBGT1 and ABO, rather than GBGT1 alone, may specify FORS1 expression in those species. Background/Case Studies: The in vitro production of blood platelets is an important goal for transfusion in the present context of a sustained demand for controlled products free of infectious, immune and inflammatory risks. It is currently possible to produce platelets in vitro. However, for cultured platelets to be considered as a real alternative to transfusion, it is of paramount importance to demonstrate that these platelets are free of contaminants, such as nucleated cells or non-platelet cellular fragments. Study Design/Method: The aim of our study is to evaluate the effectiveness of an acoustic-based fractionation device to separate newly released platelets from residual megakaryocytes (MK) and cytoplasmic debris (CD). Platelets are produced in vitro from peripheral blood-derived CD34 progenitors following the protocol described in Strassel et al., Blood 2016. Platelets are released from the cell suspension following successive pipetting. Platelet recovery and purity are compared following standard centrifugation and fractionation using an acoustophoresis-based device that allows the separation of two objects with different acoustic properties. Results/Finding: Fractionation using a combination of two acoustic devices led to a significant reduction in the number of residual MK and CD MVs were obtained from cell-and debris-depleted PRBC supernatants by differential centrifugation and counted by high-sensitivity flow cytometry. Concomitantly, RBC deformability was determined using a cell flow-properties analyzer in which RBC shape-change is directly visualized in an arrow-gap flow-chamber and monitored as a function of shear stress. The cell deformability is expressed by the cell elongation ratio (ER), ER = a/b, where a and b = long and short axes of the cell, respectively. This calculation applies to each cell and provides the ER distribution in a large RBC population, enabling the derivation of several deformability measures such as the median ER (MER) and the percent of low deformable cells in the population (%, LDFC). Results/Finding: As shown in Table 1 , the MV level in the PRBC supernatant was inversely correlated with the RBC deformability (MER), and positively correlated with the fraction of the relatively rigid cells (%LDFC), both measures showing highly significant logarithmic dependence with MV levels. Conclusion: Formation of MVs is known to lead to a decrease in the content of the RBC membrane proteins (e.g., stomatin, flotillin 1, flotillin 2.). In accordance with that, we have previously reported that RBCs become progressively more rigid as stomatin is depleted from the cell membrane. Together with the present study, showing a clear association of MV formation with the decline in RBC deformability in stored PRBC units, it is proposed that MV formation is a significant factor accounting for increased RBC rigidity occurring during storage of blood units. In order to save lives in a more timely manner, the method of transfusion of frozen platelets is used in emergency situations to meet the needs. The purpose of this study was to compare the therapeutic effect of infusion of leukocyte-depleted frozen platelets and leukocyte-depleted fresh platelets. Study Design/Method: 110 patients with thrombocytopenia were selected, including 45 males and 65 females, aged 23-66 years, all of whom were given the first blood transfusions. Exclude immune factors that affect platelet transfusion efficacy due to multiple transfusions. They were randomly divided into two groups, of which 53 patients were infused with leukocytedepleted frozen platelets and 57 patients were infused with leukocytedepleted fresh platelets. The infusion of platelet was completed within 30 minutes at a rate that the patient could tolerate. The patients were tested for bleeding time before infusion, 1 hour after infusion, and elevation of platelet count in peripheral blood 24 hours after infusion. The data were statistically processed, the measurement data was checked by t test, and the enumeration data was analyzed with chi-square test. Results/Finding: There was no significant difference in the general data between the two groups (P>0.05). There was no statistically significant difference in bleeding time (5.2 ± 1.6 min VS 5.2 ± 1.5 min) between infusion of leukocyte-depleted fresh platelets and leukocyte-depleted frozen platelets (P>0.05). The platelet count (48.56 ± 8.95 x10 9 /L VS 31.45 ± 7.12 x10 9 /L) after transfusion of leukocyte-depleted fresh platelets and leukocytedepleted frozen platelets was statistically significant (P<0.01). Conclusion: There was no statistically significant difference in the bleeding time between infusion of the equivalent amount of leukocyte-depleted frozen platelets and leukocyte-depleted fresh platelets, suggesting that the hemostatic function of the two exogenous platelets to patients are close. The difference in platelet counts was statistically significant, and the platelet counts increased significantly in patients who had received leukocyte-depleted fresh platelets. The binding capacity of the cryopreserved platelet membrane surface adhesion receptor was significantly enhanced and the procoagulant activity was significantly increased. Therefore, infusion of leukocyte-depleted frozen platelets in an emergency can achieve effective and rapid hemostasis. Background/Case Studies: Human platelet lysate (HPL) contains abundant growth factors and cytokines boosting in vitro cell proliferation. A growing number of institutions use HPL as alternative to animal sera for manufacturing of cell-based medicinal products. Addition of porcine heparin is default to prevent HPL-supplemented media from clotting. To achieve an animal component-free culture system, a protocol for mechanical depletion of fibrinogen and coagulation factors has recently been introduced. Study Design/Method: In this study, we investigated the so far unclear influence of heparin on gene expression of stromal cells derived from umbilical cord (UC), white adipose tissue (WAT) or bone marrow (BM; each n=3). Stromal cells were isolated and propagated using HPL plus heparin vs. fibrinogen-depleted HPL plus/minus heparin. Whole genome microarrays were analyzed using R/Bioconductor followed by confirmative qRT-PCR. Immunophenotype, in vitro differentiation, proliferation, clonogenicity and immunomodulatory potency were investigated. Cell uptake of heparin was analyzed by fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry. Background/Case Studies: Accurate and precise red blood cells (RBC) quantification in hematopoietic stem cell transplant (SCT) products is important for processing and clinical aspects of stem cell transplantation. ABO or antigen/antibody mismatched RBCs can cause deleterious effects in SCT recipients, and products with >20 mLs may be subject to RBC reduction to an acceptable level for infusion. RBC quantification in the context of varying total product volumes and RBC amounts is performed regularly, but little is reported about the specific performance characteristics of RBC quantification in HSCT products from different sources, of different quantities and of varying RBC amounts and the potential effect on SCT processing. Study Design/Method: SCT product samples at a hospital-based cellular therapy laboratory undergo parallel determination of RBC content based on hematocrit (Hct) measurement by manual and automated methods. Manual hematocrit (mHct) was performed by centrifugation and direct observation, and automated hematocrit (aHct) was performed on a Sysmex automated hematology analyzer after 1:10 dilution. RBC volume was determined by multiplying Hct by product volume (mL). Samples were grouped by SCT source of apheresis (HPC-A) or bone marrow harvest (HPC-M). HPC-A products were further subgrouped by apheresis instruments used: Spectra Optia (Terumo BCT) or Amicus (Fresenius Kabi). Retrospective analysis of mHct and aHct was performed to determine if statistically significant differences between measurements exist by paired two-tailed student's t test, and if that resulted in crossing the threshold of 20 mLs RBC volume. Results/Finding: 154 SCT products were analyzed, 121 HPC-A products from 1/1/2018 -4/17/2018, and 33 HPC-M products from 1/1/2017 -4/18/2018. 106 and 15 HPC-A samples were collected on the Spectra Optia and Amicus apheresis instruments, respectively. 5 HPC-A products crossed the threshold of 20 mLs RBC volume: 4 HPC-A SCT products with >20 mLs RBCs with mHct fell below threshold with aHct, and 1 HPC-A SCT product < 20 mLs RBCs with mHct crossed the threshold with aHct. 4 of 5 of the affected products were collected on the Amicus. All HPC-M SCT products were >20mLs RBCs by either method. Conclusion: Hct measurement method can result in HPC-A SCT product RBC volume differences, which could potentially change the need for further processing in cases of mismatched SCT products that cross the 20 mL RBC volume threshold for RBC reduction. No changes in the need for additional processing of HPC-M SCT products were noted. Additional samples are needed to further analyze Hct differences in HPC-A products collected on the Amicus, and additional studies are warranted to determine impact on cellular therapy laboratory workflow and patient outcomes. Background/Case Studies: Genome editing with engineered nucleases, such as RNA-guided nucleases (CRISPR-Cas9), allows targeted genetic manipulations and holds great promise for the treatment of inherited and acquired disorders. However, the efficiency of genome editing is a limiting factor when large enough quantities of correctly edited cells are required. We recently devised a robust co-selection strategy by generating dominant cellular resistance to ouabain, a highly potent plant-derived inhibitor of the ubiquitous and essential sodium/potassium pump (encoded by the ATP1A1 gene). Using CRISPR technologies, we can generate ouabain-resistant alleles in ATP1A1 to coselect for corrective editing events at a second locus of interest. Faithful in vitro modeling of erythropoiesis to study specific genetic variants would be a useful tool for investigating gene function and help guide the management of complex clinical cases in the field of transfusion medicine. Study Design/Method: In this work, we have exploited CRISPR-based gene editing and ouabain co-selection strategies combined with a HSC-erythroid differentiation protocol to develop a cellular model showcasing desired genetic variants. We used a three-step culture method to efficiently produce cultured red blood cells (cRBC) from hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPC). Results/Finding: This erythroid-differentiation procedure yielded an average of 20, 000-fold expansion and $90% enucleation by day 18 when using mobilized peripheral blood HSPCs as a cell source. For gene-modification strategies, purified HSPCs were incubated in erythroid expansion medium for 24 h upon thawing, and then electroporated with ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes containing beta-globin (HBB) and ATP1A1directed guide RNAs, along with ssODNs aimed at inserting the sickle cell anemia-causing mutation (HbS) and ATP1A1's ouabain-resistance allele. Three days following transfection, ouabain treatment was added, and the differentiation protocol was continued up to day 18. On day 11 of culture, over 60% precise gene modification was obtained at the HBB locus. Background/Case Studies: Hematopoietic progenitor cells are typically cryopreserved using controlled rate freezers (CRF). Recently our lab observed an 8-9% increase in unacceptable freezing curves i.e., not meeting expected freezing curve parameters. Cryopreservation bag manufacturer (OriGen) recommends a maximum fill volume range but does not suggest an optimal minimum volume. It was theorized that lower than optimal freezing volumes could produce unacceptable freezing curves, and by determining the minimum volume one could lessen the rate of unsatisfactory freezing curves. Study Design/Method: A retrospective document review was performed on all clinical cell therapy product freezing curves from 12/1/15-3/24/17. In that timeframe, 240 freezing curves were generated and of those 20 were suboptimal. Nearly all unacceptable curves demonstrated an additional temperature spike prior to the heat of fusion. Many variables were examined for potential cause, including cell type, cell concentration, CRF calibration date, preventative maintenance performed and product volume. All products with unacceptable freezing curves were sampled for viability (acridine orange/ propidium iodide) using a frozen tubing segment. To explore impact of product volume, canisters were measured with a caliper to obtain their depth. Various volumes of water were added to the 250mL and 500mL OriGen CryoStore™ Freezing Bags, 250mL bags were each filled with 50, 60, 70 and 80mL of water; 500mL bags were filled with 90, 110, 130, and 150mL of water. Bags were placed in a press and depths were measured and recorded and the various fill volumes were compared to the depth of the canister. Results/Finding: The most common factor of the unacceptable freezing curves was a low product volume, as compared to the recommended maximum fill volume. The viabilities on all of the thawed segments were found to be acceptable at >70%. Conclusion: Fill volume plays a critical role in the ability of the sample probe to make continuous contact with the product bag. If the fill volume is low the bag may not contain sufficient weight to ensure continuous contact with the sample probe, undergoing or appearing to undergo a premature temperature spike during the initial cooling phase of the CRF. By comparing the fill volumes to the depth of the canister it was determined that the minimum depth for the 250mL CryoStore™ bag was 7.8mm (75mL of water) and the minimum depth for the 500mL bag was 8.9-9.5mm (130-150mL of water). Based on the data, we established a minimum volume of 70mL for the 250mL CryoStore™ bag and ≥ 135mL for 500mL bags. Since instituting minimum fill volumes, the frequency of suboptimal freezing curves has decreased to <1%. Background/Case Studies: The optimal cell concentration of cryopreserved autologous HPC, apheresis products published in the literature is less than 3 × 10^8 nucleated cells (NC) per ml. However, products with higher cell concentrations are more pragmatic for cell processing facilities, and may potentially reduce patient complications related to the total volume of product reinfused. Study Design/Method: We performed a retrospective analysis of post-thaw viability, neutrophil recovery, and platelet recovery to compare product and clinical outcomes between patients who received only lower concentration (<3 × 10^8 NC per mL), or only higher concentration (≥3 × 10^8 NC per mL) products. Autologous HPC, apheresis products were collected from 113 consecutive mobilized patients, processed to a fixed final product volume with variable cell concentrations, cryopreserved in 7.5% v/v dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) using a controlled rate freezer, and held in vapor phase over liquid nitrogen in monitored storage below -150°C. Results/Finding: All 221 cryopreserved HPC, apheresis products from 66 multiple myeloma patients and 47 lymphoma patients were included in the product outcomes analysis (see Table 1 ). The median cell concentration was 2.72 × 10^8 NC per mL in the lower concentration group compared to 4.10 × 10^8 NC per mL in the higher concentration group. There were no between-group differences in the median post-thaw viability (79% vs. 78%, P=0.49). All 92 patients included in the clinical outcomes analysis received at least a total of 3 × 10^6 CD34 + cells per kilogram (see Table 1 for exclusions), and there were no between-group differences in the total CD34 + cells per kilogram reinfused (6.31 vs. 6.12, P=1.00). Using CIBMTR definitions of recovery, the median days to neutrophil recovery (13 vs. 14, P=0.06) and platelet recovery (15 vs. 16, P=0.06) were not different. Conclusion: The post-thaw viability, neutrophil recovery, and platelet recovery were not different between patients who received only lower concentration (<3 × 10^8 NC per mL), or only higher concentration (≥3 × 10^8 NC per mL) products. In addition to greater simplicity in cell processing steps, higher cell concentrations in cryopreserved products offer potential Background/Case Studies: Long term storage of cellular therapy products requires vapor phase liquid nitrogen storage tanks. Due to the indefinite retention of cryopreserved products, the footprint of a large liquid nitrogen (LN2) freezer, and adequate connections to an LN2 supply, space requirements are challenging. To meet the storage demands, an off-site storage facility was commissioned. The large-scale transport of cellular therapy products has not been previously described. Study Design/Method: Case Study Results/Finding: The primary risks involved with transporting products is damage to frozen products and tanks themselves. The transport of small numbers of products increases the likelihood of warming events as well as the need to handle each product. Overall time for the relocation would be prohibitively increased. Therefore, moving of filled tanks was selected. A trial move of a freezer was performed to assess the effectiveness of all measures taken. A run was mapped out that had smooth roads (absence of potholes, railroad tracks, etc). A custom pallet with air dampened cushions and a hard rubberized surface was made that would offer shock absorption and support the weight of a full LN2 tank. Precision jacks and lifts were used to raise and lower the tank with full control. Masonite sheeting was laid on the tiled hallways for smoother transport. A moving truck with an air suspension system was used for the transport. A fully validated and functioning LN2 tank was filled with 61 frozen products (either mock or deceased patient products). The tank was slowly placed onto the pallet using jacks. It was secured with straps and put into the back of the moving truck. The pallet was secured into place in the truck to ensure it didn't move. The tank was also strapped to the sides of the truck for extra assurance that it wouldn't tip. The move occurred off-hours (early AM) with a police escort and transport at 5-8 mph was used to move the tank to the off-site location. After the tank relocation, all products were thawed and evaluated for any signs of breakage during the transport. All 61 products remained intact. Subsequently, 5 tanks have been moved with patient products without incident. Prior to the move of actual products, empty validated backup tanks were prepositioned in the offsite location as a precaution. Representative samples of products were examined from each tank to ensure integrity. Conclusion: The precautions taken in the plan proved to be a safe and effective way to transport full LN2 tanks with cryopreserved products. The successful transfer of full tanks to an off-site storage facility will allow for the laboratory to continue to meet patient needs by storing products indefinitely. Background/Case Studies: Autologous hematopoietic progenitor cell (HPC) transplantation requires mobilization of HPC to peripheral blood. Mobilization is performed with the administration of G-CSF alone (G) or associated with chemotherapy (G/CT). HPC products obtained by these two methods present difference in cell content, which could result in different clinical outcomes, such as hematologic recovery and adverse reactions (AR) to product infusion. This retrospective study aimed to evaluate rates of AR to product infusion according to type of cell mobilization, G-CSF alone or associated with chemotherapy. Study Design/Method: A total of 611 patients with lymphoma or multiple myeloma (MM) underwent mobilization and harvesting of HPC for autologous transplantation over the last 15 years, 267 with G and 344 with G/CT (285 of whom underwent transplantation at our institution). The apheresis procedure results in 2 bags (100 mL each), which are cryopreserved with DMSO at 10% and kept in liquid nitrogen container until thawed and infused. The evaluated AR were nausea/vomiting, diarrhea, arrhythmia, dyspnea and neurologic abnormalities (cephalea and encephalopathy) (5 possibilities of AR for each patient) during cell infusion or just after its completion. Results/Finding: Median (range) age were 54 (46-60) and 41 (29-55) years for groups G and G/CT, respectively (p < 0.0001). Peak of CD34 + cells/μL were 16.6 (8.88 -29.18) and 31. 1 (16.15-71.9 ) for G and G/CT groups, respectively (p < 0.0001). G products contained a higher number of granulocytes (x 10 3 /μL): 155.2 (113.2-205.1) vs 114.3 (68.31-178.1) (p < 0.0001) and platelets (x 10 3 /μL): 1590 (1010-2190) vs 392 (209.5-790) (p < 0.001). G group received a higher dose of DMSO (g/kg): 0.21 (0.14-0.57) vs 0.17 (0.11-0.71) (p = 0.012), and an inferior dose of CD34 cells (x 10 6 / kg): 3.28 (2.46-3.99) vs 3.72 (2.58-5.48) (p < 0.0001). Hematologic recovery (neutrophil ≥ 500/μL) occurred on day 12 (11-14) and 11 (10-12) for G and G/CT groups, respectively (p < 0.0001). AR occurred in 58.27% and 50.94% of patients in groups G and G/CT, respectively (p = 0.234), however, the number of reactions were 132 (in 635 possibilities) and 126 (in 795 possibilities) in G and G/CT groups, respectively (p = 0.016). In patients who received ≥ 2 bags of HPC (similar dose of DMSO) we observed a higher number of AR in G group (122 vs 75, p = 0.02). Female gender was associated with a higher rate of nausea/vomiting (23.84% vs 46.49%. p = 0.0001). Conclusion: Mobilization of HPC with G-CSF alone has many advantages, although it results in higher number of unwanted cells such as granulocytes and platelets (and less CD34 cells) in final product, which can explain. at least in part, the higher rate of adverse reactions during cell infusion that was observed. Finally, mobilization with G-CSF alone results in fewer CD34 cells transplanted and a protracted hematologic recovery. Addition of Plerixafor in Poorly Mobilized Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Donors Lefan Zhuang*, Pudpong Boriboonnangkul, Shirong Wang and Shan Yuan. Background/Case Studies: Peripheral blood stem cells (PBSCs) have become the predominant graft source for adult allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) in recent years. Granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) is the standard agent for PBSC mobilization. In poorly mobilized autologous donors, plerixafor is often added to improve collection outcomes. Up to 5% of allogeneic donors mobilize poorly with G-CSF only. In this study we reviewed our experiences with using plerixafor as a rescue agent in poorly mobilized allogeneic donors. Study Design/Method: We retrospectively examined all allogeneic PBSC collections from January 2013 to March 2018 at our center. Donors received G-CSF 10 mcg/kg daily for four days before undergoing apheresis collection on Day 5. Collections were performed with the MNC protocol on the COBE Spectra, Optia or Amicus apheresis instruments, and 18-20 liters of blood were processed over 6 hours. The goal of collection was 4.0x10 6 CD34 + cells/kg recipient weight. Plerixafor was added based on poor CD34 + cell collection yield after the first or second collection day. Results/Finding: Of the 851 allogeneic donors, 10 (1.2%) received one dose of plerixafor in addition to G-CSF on the first (8) or the second (2) day of collection due to poor collection yield. Plerixafor was well tolerated in all donors without significant adverse reactions. The CD34 + cell yield before (CTI20) Background/Case Studies: A minimum dose of 2 × 10^6/kg CD34 + cells is desired for autologous hematopoietic stem cell (HPC) transplantation to treat hematopoietic malignancies. The yield of CD34 + cells obtained by apheresis collection is largely predicted by peripheral blood CD34 + concentration (PCD34). Therefore, a common standard for proceeding with apheresis is a PCD34 of ≥ 20/uL as determined by flow cytometry (flow). By this criteria, some autologous HPC transplant candidates may be disqualified on the basis of poor anticipated collection yields. The goal of this study is to determine if alternative treatment options are not available and PCD34 is too low to report, should these patients still proceed to apheresis collection and transplant. Namely, can the minimum dose of CD34 + cells be obtained? If so, how many collections are required? Additionally, does the numerous number of collections have a negative impact on engraftment? Study Design/Method: Patients (n=54) with PCD34 too low to accurately report by flow (initial cutoff < 0.02%, changed to < 0.04%) using the International Society of Hematotherapy and Graft Engineering protocol were included in the study. Retrospective review of apheresis, laboratory, and electronic medical records was performed to collect data including diagnosis, number of patients who proceeded to transplant, mobilization regimen, number of collection attempts, number of apheresis procedures, apheresis method, CD34 dose collected and infused, neutrophil and platelet engraftment. Results/Finding: Patient diagnosis included non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (37%), diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (13%), multiple myeloma (13%), Hodgkin's lymphoma (11%), amyloidosis (9%), mantle cell lymphoma (7%), plasma cell leukemia (2%), Burkitt's lymphoma (2%), peripheral Tcell lymphoma (2%), primitive neuroectodermal tumor (2%), and germ cell tumor (2%). Almost all patients (n=51, 94%) were mobilized with neupogen and plerixafor (N/P). The Spectra Optia ® was used to collect and process 3 blood volumes in 49 (91%) patients. Of the 8 (15%) patients who did not proceed to transplant, 6/8 (75%) were not transplanted because the minimum dose of 2 × 10^6/kg CD34 + cells could not be collected. All 6 patients were mobilized with N/P, and 2 attempts to collect after rest were made in 5/6 cases. These 6 patients underwent a mean of 4 apheresis procedures (range 3-6) and collected a mean of 0.91 × 10^6/ kg CD34 + cells (range 0-1.90 × 10^6/kg). Of the 46 (85%) patients who did proceed to transplant, 11 (24%) required > 1 collection attempts. A mean of 4 apheresis procedures (range 1-9) were required to collect ≥2 × 10^6/kg CD34 + cells. The mean CD34 dose collected was 3.79 × 10^6/kg (range 2.05-7.04×10^6/kg) and the mean CD34 dose infused was 3.65 × 10^6/kg (range 2.01-7.04×10^6/kg). There were no incidents of delayed neutrophil engraftment (≤15 days). One (2%) patient demonstrated delayed platelet engraftment (≥30 days) and one (2%) patient failed to engraft platelets. Conclusion: Despite a PCD34 too low to report by flow, 85% of patients were able to collect ≥2 × 10^6/kg CD34 + cells after a mean of 4 apheresis collections and proceed to transplant. There were no cases of delayed neutrophil engraftment, and only infrequent cases of delayed or failed platelet engraftment. Therefore, disqualifying patients with no other treatment options from HPC transplant based on low PCD34 alone may deny patients of life prolonging or lifesaving therapy. Elizabeth A. Godbey*, Stephanie Dormesy, Bruce S. Sachais and Patricia Shi. New York Blood Center Background/Case Studies: Many transplant centers still process a fixed number of liters or total blood volumes for hematopoietic progenitor cell collection. Prediction algorithms to achieve target CD34 dose have been validated, primarily in autologous donors, but not widely adopted, perhaps due to ease of use. We thus validated in allogeneic donors a simple prediction algorithm, based on our center-specific 25 th percentile CD34 collection efficiency (CE), to directly calculate the number of liters to achieve CD34 target. Because CD34 CE is reported lower in allogeneic versus autologous donors, we also tested whether using the Cobe Spectra CFR tool, based on pre-apheresis MNC count, results in higher CD34 CEs compared to historical controls collected at a standard 1-1.5 ml/min. Study Design/Method: This retrospective, single-center analysis analyzed 96 allogeneic donors (93 NMDP, 3 related) collected with the Cobe Spectra MNC (n=55) or the Spectra Optia CMNC (n=41) procedures from Jan 2017 to Feb 2018. Peripheral blood CD34 counts drawn 0-1 hr pre-apheresis were used to calculate rounded-up liters to process as follows: (total target product CD34 (× 10 6 )) / (pre-CD34 per ul × 0.4). Because the actual/predicted liters to process varied (median 1.0, mean 1.2 ± 0.51), the actual CD34 dose collected was adjusted as follows: (actual total product CD34 × 10 6 )/ (actual volume processed/predicted volume to process). CD34 CE using the MNC-guided Cobe CFR tool was compared to NMDP historical controls (n=57) collected with the Cobe Spectra MNC procedure with a fixed CFR of 1-1.5 ml/min. Results/Finding: The adjusted CD34 dose achieved the target goal in 92% (88 of 96) of patients processing a median 2.5 donor TBV (range 1.1-6.2). The adjusted CD34 dose was a median 1.30 (range 0.85-2.19) and mean 1.37 (SD 0.28) times the predicted CD34 dose. The correlation between adjusted and target total CD34 was 0.79, due to variation in CD34 CE, evident by the 0.97 correlation between CD34 CE and adjusted/target CD34 ratio. The table shows CFR-relevant data. Weak correlations between CFR and 1) product granulocyte % (r=0.30) and 2) platelet CE1 (r=0.45) were seen, but their means were similar to those previously reported in allogeneic donors with a mean 1.5 TBV processed (Cancelas JA, Transfusion 2016). Conclusion: Our easy to use prediction algorithm using a conservative CE for volume to process may achieve a higher percent of collections reaching target CD34 dose compared to prediction algorithms based on regression analysis (Leberfinger, Transfusion 2017). Using an MNC-guided rather than fixed CFR may increase CD34 CE. Study population Background/Case Studies: Continuous mononuclear cell collection (CNMC) is an FDA-approved method of peripheral blood stem cell (PBSC) collection using the Spectra Optia (Terumo BCT) that has been shown to result in comparable to slightly improved collection efficiency (CE) and smaller product volumes compared to the MNC collection method on the Optia in adult populations. However the CMNC method has not been well studied in smaller pediatric patients. This study aimed to review our institution's PBSC collection experience in pediatric patients using the CMNC method. Study Design/Method: A retrospective review of data from autologous collection procedures performed on patients ≤ 40kg at a pediatric hospital from April 2017 to March 2018 using a CMNC protocol were examined. Patient demographic data, mobilization characteristics, pre-and post-procedure laboratory values, procedure details, PBSC product characteristics, and procedure-related adverse reactions (hypocalcemia, access complications, hypotension/hypertension, and transfusion reactions), were included in the review. Results/Finding: Twenty-four autologous collections were performed in 20 patients (mean weight: 15.9kg, range 7.7-34.9 kg) with neuroblastoma (NBL) or central nervous system (CNS) neoplasms (19 NBL, 5 CNS). All patients were mobilized with daily 10 mcg/kg GSCF following chemotherapy. Plerixafor was administered 12-16 hours prior to 3 collection procedures. Pre-and post-procedure lab values were: mean pre-hematocrit (Hct) 29.2% (range 22.3-37.1), post-Hct 27.9% (range 21.9-35.6); mean preplatelet count 87.4K/μL (range 37-228), post-platelet count 47.2K/μL (range 21-71); mean pre-WBC 17.1K/μL (range 2.48-59.1), post-WBC 13.5 (range 2.7-37.6). Eighteen (90%) patients received red blood cell primes. The mean AC infusion rate for collections was 1.7 mL/min/TBV (range 1.0-2.0) with a mean inlet rate of 23.4 mL/min (range 14.0-45), whole blood (WB) to AC ratio of 12:1, and mean collection flow rate of 1.0 mL/min (range 0.6-1.3). The mean procedure length was 202 min (range 90-459), with 4.0 blood volumes processed (range 1.3-9.3), Four of 20 patients (3 NBL, 1 CNS) required 2 collection days. Mean CE1 and CE2 were 66.2% (range 28.9 to > 100%) and 57.1% (range 17.5 to > 100%) respectively. Three of the 4 procedures with CE2 < 30% had collection flow rates <0.9 mL/min; 1 procedure was associated with a missed GCSF dose the day prior to collection. The mean final product CD34 count was 46.9x10^6/kg (range 5.0-118.2) with Hct 3.5% (range 2.5-5.0) in a volume of 196 mL (range 80-453). The target dose was achieved in 90% of patients. The procedures were tolerated with only 3 (12.5%) reports of asymptomatic hypocalcemia, which resolved with titration of IV calcium, and 1 (4.2%) CVL access complication. Conclusion: The CMNC method is an efficient and safe method of PBSC collection in the pediatric population under 40 kg. A New Flow Cytometry Approach to Assess Cord Blood Unit Potency Carl Simard* 1 , Diane Fournier 2 and Sonia Néron 1 . 1 Héma-Québec, Medical Affairs and Innovation, 2 Héma-Québec Cord Blood Bank Background/Case Studies: Regenerative potential of cord blood units (CBU) must be determined on a representative sample of the cryopreserved product before release to the transplant center. Most of the cord blood banks measure potency by using a colony-forming unit culture method (CFU), which delays the release of CBU by 7 to 14 days. To accelerate the distribution process of CBU, we developed a rapid method, based on the measurement of the response of CD34 + cells to interleukin-3 (IL-3). This IL-3 test is based on flow cytometry measurement of STAT5 phosphorylation on tyrosine-694 within CD34 + cells. Our IL-3 test was compared to the CFU method, currently considered as the gold standard, as well as the aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) enzyme-based assay. Study Design/Method: Ten cryopreserved CBU, aliquoted in tubes, were thawed following standard operating procedures (SOP) and analyzed for their content in CD34 + and CD45 + viable cells using the ISHAGE protocol. The ECLONE, a ratio of CBU numbers on pre-freezing CD34 cell numbers, and the proportions of ALDHBright cells and IL-3 -responsive CD34 + cells (IL-3 test), were determined for each CBU. We used samples stored for 24 hours at room temperature (RT) post-thawing to simulate an extreme warming case scenario, as well as a milder warming event by storing samples for 2-5 days at -80°C before thawing. We also compared the potency in segments, tubes and bags from five CBU using the CFU and IL-3 tests. Results/Finding: The IL-3 test was accurate when analyzing samples handled following SOP or subjected to 24h RT warming events (Table 1 ). Based on these results, we established an acceptability threshold of 55% of IL-3responsive CD34 + cells. The IL-3 test was the most sensitive to identify CBU subjected to warming events, identifying seven out of ten samples stored at -80°C, and all samples subjected to RT storage. Intra-assay performance was reproducible, with a CV of 8.0%. Segments and tubes showed mean differences of 7.0% and -1.5%, respectively, with their respective bags. These differences were not deemed significant, being inferior to intra-assay precision. Conclusion: Our new method for determining CBU potency is rapid, unbiased, and robust. The IL-3 and CLONE tests performed better than ALDH and viability tests at identifying samples subjected to warming events. The IL-3 test is sensitive and accurate. Moreover, the ease of gating CD34 + cells responsive to IL-3 is an asset for routine qualification of CBU. The IL-3 test described herein fulfills the requirements for a validation, and we intend to implement this method in our cord blood bank facility. An Study Design/Method: Our public Cord Blood Bank (CBB) clinical inventory has currently more than 60,000 CBUs, and has distributed over 5,800 clinical grafts for transplantation worldwide. In addition, the CBB has provided over 40,000 research CBUs to academic institutions, research laboratories and the industry. In all cases, research CBUs are provided without identifiers, and with mother's IRB-approved consent. The exchange of scientific, technical and logistical information between investigators and the CBB was managed predominantly via email, however, this approach is time-consuming for all parties, and may be associated with unnecessary delays. To improve communications and expedite the acquisition of CBUs with the specific characteristics required for the various laboratory studies, the CBB has established an efficient web-based application (WebResearch) to support the distribution of research CBUs. Results/Finding: The CBB WebResearch facilitates transactions such as: ordering research CBUs, providing automatic real time email confirmations/ notifications, uploading shipping documents, checking order status, tracking shipping information, allowing users to search for previous orders using various fields and print/upload reports of orders, etc., with bidirectional flow of communication. The CBUs provided for research can be: a) fresh, unprocessed, non-clinical grade units within 48 hours from collection, with limited information and no infectious disease testing, or b) frozen CBUs that have undergone volume-reduction, cryopreservation and storage in liquid Nitrogen, but do not meet criteria for clinical use. For those, an array of data may be available such as blood counts, flow cytometry data, bacteriology results, hemoglobin phenotypes, HLA typing, maternal infectious disease markers and blood group types. Background/Case Studies: At the frontier of transfusion medicine and transplantation, the field of Cellular Therapy (CT) is emerging. Most novel CT products are produced under investigation with no clear standardization across Cell Processing Centers. Across institutions the manufacturing protocols may vary depending on the type of CT product. The purpose of this study was to uncover any variations in manufacturing practices for similar CT products across different Cellular Processing Laboratories in institutions worldwide. Study Design/Method: An Exploratory survey to identify variations in manufacturing practices in novel CT products was designed and sent to Cellular Processing Laboratory Directors worldwide. The questionnaire focused first, on the processing methods used with regards to the type of CT being processed and also on five stages of the processing event: 1. collection, 2. purification, 3. in vitro expansion, 4. freezing and storage, and 5. thawing and washing. Secondly, the questionnaire focused on the level of environmental monitoring (EM) used for each CT product. Results/Finding: Out of 67 respondents to the survey, 56 had a Cellular Processing Laboratory. Thirty-one processed products under an investigational label, for either Phase I/II (n=27) or Phase III (n=17) clinical trials. HPC products, from peripheral blood (PB), bone marrow (BM), or cord blood (CB) were the most commonly processed by 75 % of the respondents. Lymphocytes (L) were the most commonly non-HPC products and handled under all five processing stages (i.e. 18 facilities). Similarly, facilities handling dendritic cells (DCs) (n=9), natural killer (NK) cells (n=8), and/or mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) (n=13) processed these products under all five processing stages. A minority of centers (<5) processed pancreatic islet cells (n=4), neural cells (n=3) and iPSCs (n=2). Purification methods varied for each type of product and by institutions (n) ( Table 1) . The EM, used for each CT product, is shown in Table 2 . Conclusion: This exploratory survey shows a wide variation in CT manufacturing practices across different Cellular Processing Laboratories. A better understanding of the effect of these variations on the quality of these CT products will be important for further novel CT development. Effect of Temperature and Time on Hematopoietic Stem Cell Post-Thaw Viability Elizabeth A. Godbey* 1 , Shawn Desince 2 , Nita Patel 2 , Shanlong Jiang 2 and Yvette C. Tanhehco 1 . 1 Columbia University Irving Medical Center, 2 New York-Presbyterian Hospital Background/Case Studies: To determine the effects of temperature and time on total cell viability of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) products cryopreserved in 7.5% DMSO after thawing. Study Design/Method: HSC product quality control (QC) vials from 9 deceased autologous donors whose HSC products were cryopreserved in 7.5% DMSO between 2007 and 2017 were obtained and thawed. Demographic information including age at donation, gender, diagnosis, pre-freeze viability, and length of cryopreservation were collected. One vial from each donor was stored at 4°C and room temperature (RT, $18-25°C) for up to 96 hours after thawing at 37°C. Total cell viability was measured using trypan blue dye exclusion assay at 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 24, 48, 72 , and 96 hours after thaw. A repeated measures ANOVA and Bonferroni posttests were performed using Graphpad Prism v5.0 to determine the effect of temperature and time on post-thaw viability of HSCs. Results/Finding: The mean age at HSC collection was 56 years, 67% of donors were female, and the mean product cryopreservation duration was 5 years. Eighteen vials from 9 donors (2 vials/donor) were thawed for paired viability measurements at 4°C and RT 0-96 hours post-thaw. The interaction between temperature and time was statistically significant (p=0.0088) indicating that time does not have the same effect on total cell viability at both temperatures. Time (p<0.0001) but not temperature (p=0.19) was found to significantly affect total cell viability post-thaw. Mean post-thaw viabilities for cells stored at 4°C and RT declined over time ( Table 1 ). The matching effectiveness was statistically significant (p<0.0001). No statistically significant differences were found in the mean viabilities for cells at each time point. The mean immediate (0 hour) post-thaw cell viability at 4°C and RT (70% vs 69%, p>0.05) met our acceptability criteria for post-thaw viability of ³60%. Cells stored at 4°C for up to 1 hour retained a viability (62%) greater than our acceptability criteria but cells stored at RT for up to 1 hour did not (viability of 57%). Conclusion: Total cell viability of HSC products decreases over time after thawing when stored at both 4°C and RT with a more rapid decline at Background/Case Studies: One of the major challenges in Laboratory Medicine is addressing the evolving needs of the patient's that we serve. These needs are increasingly met with limited resources. In the Hematopoietic Progenitor Stem cell Transplant Patient (HPSCT) population, mobilization regimens (drugs that increase the availability of stem cells for apheresis) have evolved. We subjectively felt that the use of new mobilization regimens resulted in increases in the required numbers of collections per patient resulting in increased technologist effort, increased usage of flow cytometry (specifically, donor pre-apheresis and apheresis product CD34 quantification), and increasing processing and reagent requirements. The purpose of this study was to provide objective data regarding the impact of evolving mobilization regimens on Blood Transfusion Service resources. Study Design/Method: We reviewed patient's medical records and Blood Transfusion Service records, including apheresis, processing and flow cytometry records. We documented mobilization regimens, required numbers of collections, total cells per collection, (total cells per kilogram body weight), and concentration ( diseases (AID) unresponsive to conventional therapy. This treatment aims to ablate auto-reactive clones of T and B cells, allowing the regeneration of a new and tolerant immune system. Mobilization and harvesting of HPC from the peripheral blood is an essential part of this therapy. HPC mobilization includes administration of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), alone or in combination with chemotherapy, aiming to harvest at least 2.0 × 10 6 CD34 + cells/Kg. This retrospective study had the purpose to analyze the mobilization characteristics according to each specific AID. Study Design/Method: A total of 193 patients were enrolled: Multiple sclerosis (MS) 101; Systemic sclerosis (SSc) 83; and Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 9. CD34 + cells were mobilized with cyclophosphamide (Cy 2 g/ m 2 ) associated with a median (range) G-CSF dose of 9.4 (4.9-12.5) μg/Kg/ day, initiated on the day following Cy administration and continued daily until cell harvesting. Autoimmune disease groups were not different for G-CSF dose. Harvesting was initiated when peripheral blood CD34 + cell counts reached a minimum of 10/mL. One patient with SLE failed to mobilize. Aphereses were performed using the cell separator COBE Spectra (Caridian BCTÔ, Lakewood, CO, USA). Collected HPC products were cryopreserved in a solution with dimethyl sulphoxide at 10%. Cell bags were placed into metallic racks and inserted into a -80 ºC freezer, where they were kept until thawed and infused, one to three months later. . Neutrophil recovery took place on day 9 (7-19), 10 (9-15), and 11.5 (9-13) for MS, SSc, and SLE, respectively (p < 0.001, MS vs SSc***, MS vs SLE**). HPC were harvested on day 8 (7-11), 8 (7.5-12), and 9 (8-11) of mobilization for MS, SSc, and SLE, respectively (p = 0.011, MS vs SLE**, SSc vs SLE*). Blood volumes processed were not different between AID groups. Most patients underwent a single session of apheresis, however 4 (50%) SLE, 1 (1%) MS and 5 (6%) SSc patients required 2 days (MS vs SLE: p < 0.001; SSc vs SLE: p = 0.0015). Conclusion: Patients with AID are efficient HPC mobilizers under the G-CSF plus 2g/m 2 cyclophosphamide regimen. Patients with SLE yield a lower number of mobilized HPC, and thus a lower number of collected CD34 + cells, than those with MS and SSc, despite higher days of apheresis. Evaluation of the Impact of Retrieval of Cord Blood Units for Clinical Application on Adjacent Units Remaining in Cryopreservation Aleisha K. Chamberlain, Kate S. Brown*, Jennifer L. Wheeler Buenger and Heather L. Brown. Cbr Systems, Inc. Background/Case Studies: Exposure to potential transient warming events during cryogenic storage of cord blood units (CBU) should be minimized so as to avoid adversely impacting post-thaw unit quality. Retrieval of a CBU from a manual liquid nitrogen dewar for shipment to a cell therapy center can involve exposure of the neighboring units in the rack to ambient air temperatures. We sought to investigate the impact of removing a CBU from storage on neighboring units by evaluating the post-thaw unit viability (PTUV) of CBUs released from the same dewar and same rack after different lengths of storage. Study Design/Method: A retrospective analysis was conducted using data for CBU releases from a private cord blood bank. To control for the variety of methods to determine viability, only CBUs with available PTUV data obtained by trypan blue were included. CBUs were classified as either the first or subsequent release from the same dewar and rack (Group 1 and 2 respectively). Randomly selected CBUs released from the same dewar as Groups 1 & 2 but a different rack and CBUs selected at random from different dewars served as controls (Group 3 and 4 respectively). Wilcoxon rank sum tests were used to examine differences with p-values < 0.5 considered significant. Data analyses were performed using STATA software (STATA Corp LP). Results/Finding: 292 of 440 units released had PTUV based on trypan blue staining. 36 CBUs (n=9 in each group) were included in the final analysis with 18 units, representing 9 pairs, released from the same dewar and rack. There were no significant differences in pre-cryopreservation unit viability between Group 1 and Groups 2, 3 and 4, respectively. There was no significant difference in PTUV between primary and secondary CBU releases from the same dewar and rack and PTUV of Group 1 and Groups 3 and 4 were similarly comparable. Conclusion: While this study is based on an actual use scenario, it is limited by the small sample size of paired units released from the same dewar and rack. However, our results are consistent with previous studies suggesting that removal of a cord blood unit from a conventional dewar under controlled and validated procedures does not affect the post-thaw viability of neighboring units. Conventional dewars and procedures for manual retrieval are consistent with regulatory guidelines and standards established to prevent loss of product quality during the normal lifecycle of a cryopreserved product. Validation of the BMP Platform on Spectra Optia® in a Pediatric Institution Theresa Bilodeau* 1 , Kent Soik 1 , Karen Sommer 1 , Deborah Holman 1 , Ralph Quinones 1,2 and Amy Keating 1,2 . 1 Children's Hospital Colorado, 2 University of Colorado School of Medicine Background/Case Studies: ABO incompatible bone marrow products often require manipulation to reduce red blood cell volume at infusion. Additionally, in the pediatric population, it is often necessary to reduce the overall product volume for patients with a low body weight. The Spectra Optia BMP platform provides a reliable method of bone marrow processing that yields a safe infusion product. Study Design/Method: A 2-phase concurrent validation was performed on 7 products infused to patients undergoing allogeneic bone marrow transplantation from ABO incompatible donors. Products were processed on the Spectra Optia per manufacturers recommendations and evaluated for TNC, MNC, and CD34 + recovery and residual red cell volume. The second phase of the validation was performed with the goal of improving MNC recovery. Institution specific acceptable parameters are: MNC and CD34 + recovery of ≥ 70%, TNC recovery of ≥ 25% and incompatible RBC volume of ≤ 0.3 ml/kg recipient body weight. Results/Finding: Validation results are summarized in the Table. In Phase I, 1 of 4 products had MNC recovery ≥70%. In Phase II, MNC recovery exceeded the desired parameter of ≥70%. All samples had acceptable CD34 + and TNC recovery. In all products, red cell reduction was above 95% and overall volume reduction was approximately 91%. The final incompatible RBC volume infused in all products was within our institution specific guidelines. 3 patients exhibited adverse events at infusion. 2 patients had reported hypertension and 1 exhibited fever within 24 hours of infusion. Conclusion: The Spectra Optia BMP platform provides a safe, effective and consistent method for processing ABO incompatible bone marrow products. The Automated Interface Management (AIM) system allows for less operator variability while ensuring optimal cell recovery. In the pediatric population, this method has resulted in products with more manageable volumes at infusion, incompatible RBC volumes well below what is allowable, and excellent cell recovery. Patients tolerated infusions with few adverse events, and smaller infusion volumes are more easily managed by nursing staff. Background/Case Studies: Patients undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) with major ABO incompatibility have an increased risk for delayed red blood cell (RBC) engraftment and prolonged RBC transfusion dependence. In these patients, the evaluation and reporting of the serologic ABO discrepancy between the forward typing (FT) and the reverse typing (RT) may clarify the status of RBC engraftment. The goal of this study was to compare the ABO FT and RT discrepancies in patients with major ABO incompatible HSCT, using two different serologic techniques and to correlate these with transfusion rate. Study Design/Method: We reviewed and compared FT and RT ABO serologic typing results and RBC transfusion needs, on 32 blood samples drawn from patients (n=7) with major ABO incompatible HSCT at either <100 days or ≥ 100 days post-transplant, using either automated gel (GT) versus manual tube (MT) methods. RT was performed using MT at immediate spin (n=32) or with an additional 15 min room temperature incubation (n=12). Data evaluated included: HSCT donor ABO FT and RT strength of reaction (graded w + to 4+) and number of RBC units transfused within 2 weeks prior to ABO typing. Differences in FT and RT grading was determined by GT grade minus MT grade. Groups were compared using student t-test. Results/Finding: The samples (n=32) were drawn at 63 ± 20 days (<100 days, n=16) and at 149 ± 55 days (≥100 days, n=16) post transplantation. At < 100 days and ≥100 post-transplant, no significant difference was observed in the reactivity of HSCT donor ABO FT for when using Gel compared to MT methods. Differences were observed in the reactivity of the RT for either anti A or anti B against HSCT donor in 5/32 samples (16%) with a stronger reaction using the MT method (-1.2 ± 0.45) (p>0.05). Furthermore, there was a significant increase in the detection (either w+, 1+, or 2 + ) of anti HSCT donor ABO in the samples [8/12 (83%)] tested with the MT method with a 15 minute incubation, compared to no reactivity detected by the gel method (p=0.001). At < 100 days, the transfusion rate was at 81% with a mean of 1 ABSTRACT 77A cellular therapies are developed from the patient's own cells, allogeneic cellular therapies may also be an option for patients. Allogeneic cellular therapies require that a healthy donor be willing and able to provide the starting material in order to produce the final cellular therapy, and consistency in donor experience and collections is critical for both cellular therapy manufacturers and the donors themselves. Utilizing extensive experience in cell sourcing, donor management, and cell collection, donors from a volunteer registry have been contacted and consented to provide starting material for research, clinical and/or commercial use, with strong emphasis on providing a positive donation experience for volunteer donors. Study Design/Method: Since 2016, volunteer donors have been contacted and consented to donate a mononuclear cell product collected by apheresis (MNC(A)) for therapies other than allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant. This effort has resulted in over 100 MNC(A) collections thus far. In order to donate this MNC(A) product, consented donors were asked to complete multiple phone calls as well as in-person appointments prior to collection in order to assess for medical fitness to donate, as well as to determine eligibility status. For these purposes, it was mandatory that donors meet the eligibility requirements of both the domestic regulatory agency and certain international regulatory agencies. For those donors that proceeded to collection, in the weeks following their donation, donors were sent an electronic satisfaction survey for completion. Donors were asked to rate their satisfaction with the donation process in thirteen key metric areas ranging from flexible scheduling to education materials, and explanation of risks to feeling appreciated and cared for. Results/Finding: Nearly 71% of the donors who donated MNC(A) from October through December 2017 completed the post-donation survey. Of these responses, the "Performance to Goal" was "Met or Exceeded" 100% of the time in all areas. On a 5-point scale, the average overall donor satisfaction experience was rated 4.73. Conclusion: On the whole, donors reported that their donation experience was positive, suggesting that a rich history of processes that support donors through stem cell donation translates to favorable donor experiences when donating other types of starting material for the cellular therapies market. Xueyu Jiang*. Shanghai Blood Center Background/Case Studies: In clinical, blood recipients are often accompanied by inflammation mainly caused by infection such as sepsis. Immune status of recipients may influence the effect of blood transfusion, and guidelines to blood transfusion in this condition have been discussed a lot. In fact, Clinicians in China do not give blood transfusion to patients with body temperature above 38°C mainly caused by inflammation except in urgent situation. Researchers have demonstrated viral mimic polyinosinic polycytidylic acid [poly (I:C)], a synthetic double-stranded RNA molecule induce robust antibody production in a mouse model of blood transfusion and it has been reported viral disorders demonstrated a trend towards increased risks in RBC alloimmunization in a human study. Here we investigated if transfusion to mice with simulated bacterial infection could boost stronger immune response and its underlying mechanism. Study Design/Method: We injected mice with both Gram-positive bacteria mimic lipoteichoic acid (LTA) and Gram-negative bacteria mimic lipopolysaccharide( LPS) and then transfused mice with human red blood cells to induce antibodies, as an simulated experimental system to study the effect of infection on RBC immunization. Mice were divided into a normal control group, a human RBC transfused positive control group receiving human RBC intravenously, an experimental group receiving LPS (3mg/kg) four hours before human RBC transfusion, an experimental group receiving LTA (5mg/kg) four hours before human RBC transfusion. Assessment of RBC immunization was performed by measuring serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) and immunoglobulin M (IgM) against human RBC weekly for two weeks. And the lymphocyte changes in spleen are also monitored by flow cytometry. Background/Case Studies: The success of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is related to HLA matching in unrelated donor-recipient transplantation. At present, the HLA-DPB1 genotyping has not been included in the routine test for donor selection. Studies have shown that HLA-DPB1 mismatch can increase the risk of GVHD, and HLA-DPB1 match can reduce the overall risk of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. This study will retrospectively analyze the association between HLA-DPB1 matching and short tandem repeats(STR) results in unrelated hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Study Design/Method: 106 individuals(53 pairs of unrelated donorrecipient) who underwent unrelated allogeneic HSCT with a 10/10 HLA allele matched donor in Zhejiang province were collected in this retrospective analysis. The genotyping of HLA-DPB1 for all the samples was performed by PCR-SBT method according to the previous report. The correlation between the HLA-DPB1 matching and short tandem repeats(STR) results for 106 samples (53 pairs of unrelated donor-recipient) after transplantation was analyzed. 13 STR loci and 1 sexual locus were detected for every donor and recipient by GeneScan method with the commercial PowerPlex Fusion system. All the results of STR were collected more than three times including one month,three months and six months after transplantation. Results/Finding: Of 53 donor-recipient pairs in our study, the STR results of 46 recipients showed successful hematopoietic stem cell implantation without relapse, the remaining 7 recipients showed a chimeric status. To study the association between HLA-DPB1 matching and STR results, implemented group and chimeric group were divided into three subgroups according to the result of HLA-DPB1 genotyping, shown in Table 1 . The HLA-DPB1 matching has no effect on the status of hematopoietic stem cell implantation according to the results of Chi-square test (P>0.05). Conclusion: HLA-DPB1 matching is not related to the result of short tandem repeats(STR) in unrelated hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Citrate Phosphate Dextrose -Too Much of a Good Thing? Matthew Wilgo*, Angela Dexter, Brad Blaney, Cassandra Kirwan, Jawad Husein, Troy Wang, Rebecca Gagnon, Damaris Nazario and Grace Centola. New England Cord Blood Bank, Inc. Background/Case Studies: One threat to the viability of any cord blood product is clotting (or coagulation), a normal physiological process in the body to prevent blood loss and initiate vascular repair. Anticoagulant is * The HLA-DPB1 matching included complete match(2/2), partial match(1/2) and complete mismatch(2/2). routinely used during the collection of cord blood to prevent clotting, with citrate phosphate dextrose (CPD) being the most common. Few studies have directly looked at the ratio of CPD to CB volume and its effect on viability. As cord blood collection volumes vary greatly, this study aims to address the effect of this ratio. Study Design/Method: Umbilical cord blood units (N=3) were obtained with consent and IRB approval. Each CB unit was mixed and aliquoted into 50ml conical tubes containing fixed amount of CPD. The final volume for all conditions was 30ml. Viability and total nucleated cell counts (TNC) were determined at time 0, 24 hours, 48 hours, and 72 hours. Units were kept with gentle agitation at room temperature. Viability was determined by flow cytometry utilizing 7AAD run on a Beckman Coulter FC500 with an ISHAGE analysis protocol. TNC was obtained on an automated cell counter using acridine orange. The percent loss of viability over time was calculated by obtaining the difference of the original viability (Day 0) and the viability at each subsequent day (Day 1, Day 2, Day 3). Statistical analyses (ANOVA, T-tests) were carried out in Graphpad Prism and Excel. Results/Finding: Loss of viability over time was directly affected by the concentration of CPD (p ≤ 0.01). Larger ratios of CPD to CB showed increased losses in viability compared to lower dilutions (p ≤ 0.01). In regard to loss of TNC there was no statistically significant difference between the dilution groups (p ≥ 0.05), but there was a significant difference between time points within each group (p ≤ 0.05). Table 2 shows the progressive loss of viability over time. Conclusion: Previous data review investigations suggested low CB volume loses viability faster. The data suggests that CPD may play a significant role in loss of viability over time in regard to high volumes of CPD in relation to small volumes of cord blood. A higher volume of CB to CPD does not appear to show indication of abnormal viability loss. In conclusion every cord blood bank should continue to strive to maximize the volume of cord blood collection and process it within a short a time frame as possible to ensure the highest quality cell product possible for its institution and/or clients. Background/Case Studies: Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is a complex procedure which requires optimal coordination between the clinical transplant service and the apheresis and processing teams. Infusion of the cryopreserved product necessitates optimal quality control to ensure stable engraftment of the cryopreserved CD34 + stem cells. Mobilization varies considerably among patients, especially patients with underlying hematological disease with extensive prior therapy. The current paradigm posits that 5 × 10*6 CD34 + cells per kilogram of recipient weight ensures engraftment of the ablated marrow. While this represents a calculated surplus of pluripotent stem cells homing to the marrow, there are many variables which may impact collection and quality of the final product. Our empirical observations postulated that there was an inverse correlation between the yield of CD34 + cells and subsequent post-thaw viability of the cells in the cryopreserved product. Study Design/Method: In order to evaluate the possible inverse correlation, data was gathered from autologous stem cell collections from 2014-2015, and parameters for each collection were tabulated. Data was parsed to ensure a standard apheresis protocol with respect to technique and collection parameters. We then evaluated the relationship between post-thaw viability and the CD 34 + cell yield of the collection procedures by linear regression trendline analysis. Results/Finding: Data from 51 sequential HPC collections incorporating yields from 24 autologous stem cell transplant candidates was tabulated. The CD 34 + cell yields ranged from 0.17 to 15.52 × 10*6 CD34 + cells per patient kg weight. The statistical mean CD 34 + cell yield of all the collections was 3.64 × 10*6 CD34 + cells per patient kg weight. The post-thaw viability of all the collections ranged from 47% to 89%. The statistical mean of post-thaw viability was 77%. This was comprised of between one and four apheresis collections per patient. All 24 patients received product infusions and there was 100% engraftment. While graphical scatter plot analysis demonstrated marked variability with respect to CD34 + cell yield vs post-thaw viability, regression trendline analysis of the relationship between CD 34 + cell yield as a function of post-thaw viability demonstrated a consistently negative slope. Conclusion: Based on this preliminary analysis, the post-thaw viability of autologous stem cell collection products shows an apparent inverse relationship with the procedural yield of CD34 + cells. However, many other variables deserve focused analysis to further improve the quality of mobilized peripheral hematopoietic stem cell yield. Background/Case Studies: Acute traumatic coagulopathy (ATC) leads to high morbidity and mortality after trauma, which is manifested by prolongation of prothrombin time (PT), decreased platelet function and clot firmness, and increased fibrinolytic activity. The myxoma virus protein Serp-1 is a member of serine protease inhibitor superfamily. Serp-1 has been shown to inhibit fibrinolytic serum proteases including plasmin, tissue/or urokinase plasminogen activator (tPA, uPA), as well as exert anti-inflammatory activity in various animal models. In this study, Serp-1 was administered in a preclinical ATC-model using a rat with polytrauma and hemorrhagic shock. We hypothesize that Serp-1 can improve the outcome of ATC. Study Design/Method: Isoflurane anesthetized Sprague-Dawley rats underwent polytrauma within 20 minutes followed by 40% hemorrhage. All rats were resuscitated (50% of shed volume) with fresh whole blood (FWB) from anesthetized donor rats at 60min after trauma. Serp-1 (1mg/kg, n=9) or vehicle (n=5) was given intravenously prior to trauma. PT was measured at baseline, 0, 45 and 120min after trauma. Lung wet/dry weight was measured at the end of experiment. Additionally, the whole blood from healthy human donors (n=9) was treated with Serp-1 (0.01mg/ml) to determine the direct effect of Serp-1 on hemostasis by rotational thromboelastogram; and on platelet function by impedance aggregometer (using adenosine diphosphate, protease-activated receptor-1, collagen, and U46619). Results/Finding: Serp-1 prior to trauma, modestly delayed the rise of PT immediately after trauma (0min), but not at 45 and 120min after trauma as compared to vehicle (percent change of PT to baseline at 0, 45 and 120min after trauma, Serp-1: -2.6 ± 1.0, 4.5 ± 1.1, 6.2 ± 1.5%, and Vehicle: 2.7 ± 1.0, 7.1 ± 1.4, 8.7 ± 1.3%). Limited resuscitation of FWB led to a significant rise in the wet/dry weight ratio of the lung, which was significantly attenuated by Serp-1 treatment (Serp-1: 5.27 ± 0.07 vs. Vehicle: 5.59 ± 0.07, p<0.05). Invitro, Serp-1 significantly decreased clotting time (Serp-1: 45.2 ± 2.1 vs. vehicle: 50.3 ± 2.5, p<0.05) and increased maximum clot firmness (Serp-1: 55.8 ± 1.6 vs. vehicle: 52.2 ± 1.6, p<0.05), but had no effect on platelet aggregation stimulated by any agonists. Conclusion: Serp-1 can directly potentiate the clot formation as measured by in-vitro assessment. Administration of Serp-1 in rats with ATC delays development of ATC by temporarily attenuation of PT elevation immediately after trauma. Serp-1 may also reduce acute lung injury in trauma through anti-inflammatory activity and attenuation of vascular permeability in addition to attenuation of trauma induced coagulopathy. This preliminary study suggests a potential benefit of using Serp-1 in severe trauma, and further investigation for optimal dosing and timing strategy is indicated. Survey on Impact of Thromboelastometry on a Hospital Blood Bank Elizabeth P. Crowe* 1 , Robert A. DeSimone 1 , Ruchika Goel 2 , Thorsten Haas 3 and Melissa M. Cushing 1 . 1 Weill Cornell Medicine, 2 Department of Pediatrics, New York Presbyterian Hospital, Weill Cornell Medicine, 3 Zurich University Children's Hospital Background/Case Studies: Viscoelastic testing by rotational thromboelastometry (VT) was implemented in our hospital blood bank to guide transfusion management of bleeding patients. To obtain ordering privileges for VT, clinical providers must complete an initial training course and pass an initial competency assessment. The aims of this study were 1) determine if users perceive VT results as practice changing, and 2) assess ongoing user knowledge and competency of VT. Study Design/Method: A brief online questionnaire including an annual competency assessment with 7 mandatory multiple-choice questions (5 scored/2 educational) was administered over 2 weeks. Competency questions were basic level and validated by 5 VT experts. All providers were required to complete the survey and pass the competency assessment (score ≥ 60%) to maintain VT ordering privileges. Additional education was offered to failing providers. Incomplete surveys were not analyzed. Results were compared to clinical/laboratory data collected in the blood bank's VT Quality Information Database (QIDB). Results/Finding: The response rate was 77% (88/114). Respondent demographics and ordering practice are reported in Table 1 . The most common user-reported indications for VT orders included trauma, cardiovascular (CV) and gastrointestinal (GI) hemorrhage. However, the most common indications in the QIDB were CV, GI, and postpartum hemorrhage. Half (36/72) of respondents who ordered or interpreted VT reported ordering at least once to investigate the possibility of hyperfibrinolysis. A minority of respondents (8/72;11%) reported ordering VT in a non-bleeding patient, most commonly for a pre-procedure baseline in coagulopathic patients. When deciding to treat a bleeding patient for whom VT was ordered, 38% of respondents wait for results of VT, 57% treat based on most recent standard labs available and use VT to confirm decisions, and the remainder base treatment decisions on clinical stability and severity of bleeding. In the QIDB, 18% (18/102) of VT were repeated to ensure that the defect improved after intervention; whereas, 33% (24/72) of respondents reported that they almost always order repeat VT. The mean score±SD for the competency assessment was 3.9 ± 1.2 out of 5 questions (78.4%). Respondents performed best on the low fibrinogen and hyperfibrinolysis case scenarios. Providers that repeatedly order VT in clinical practice were more likely to pass the competency assessment (p=0.001). Background/Case Studies: Coagulopathic bleeding is a serious complication of cardiac surgery. A key contributor is acquired hypofibrinogenaemia (plasma fibrinogen < 1.5-2.0 g/L), the standard treatment for which is cryoprecipitate. Purified fibrinogen concentrate is also used, but few comparative data exist and randomised trials are needed. The primary objective of the FIBrinogen REplenishment in Surgery (FIBRES) study is to demonstrate that a new fibrinogen concentrate (Octafibrin/Fibryga, Octapharma) is noninferior to cryoprecipitate. Study Design/Method: This is a pragmatic, multi-centre, active-control, randomised (1:1), single-blinded, non-inferiority, phase 3 trial in adult cardiac surgical patients with clinically significant bleeding due to acquired hypofibrinogenaemia. Patients undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) for whom fibrinogen supplementation is ordered within 24 hours will be randomised to receive 4 g fibrinogen concentrate or 10 units cryoprecipitate (dose equivalent). Research personnel obtaining outcome assessments will be blinded to treatment allocation. All randomised patients will receive fibrinogen supplementation according to clinical need. Patient consent at randomisation is waived, with written informed consent obtained as soon as possible therafter. Primary outcome is combined red cell, platelet and plasma transfusions within 24 hours of CPB. Secondary outcomes include blood products used within 7 days, major bleeding within 24 hours, fibrinogen levels and adverse events. Enrolment of 1,200 patients will provide > 90% power to demonstrate non-inferiority, based on a 20% non-inferiority margin, ≥ 550 patients/group and $10% drop-out rate. Safety reviews by the DSMB will be performed every 100 patients. An interim analysis will be performed at 600 patients with pre-specified stopping rules for futility and overwhelming efficacy. The pragmatic design and treatment algorithm align with standard practice, aiding adherence and generalizability. Results/Finding: This is the largest randomised study of fibrinogen concentrate versus cryoprecipitate in adult cardiac surgical patients conducted at 11 Canadian centers. Expected completion is late 2018, with results available in early 2019. Four-hundred of 1200 patients have been randomized as of April 2018 with no safety issue so far as assessed by the DSMB. Conclusion: Non-inferiority of the new fibrinogen concentrate compared to cryoprecipitate would support its use in cardiac surgical patients experiencing significant bleeding due to hypofibrinogenaemia, an under-studied yet high-risk bleeding population. The Each RBC unit is thought to increase recipient hemoglobin (Hgb) by 1 g/dl, but smaller increments may occur in this setting. A better understanding of recipient factors affecting Hgb increments could help providers better manage these patients. Study Design/Method: Data were collected as a part of the Red Cells in Outpatients Transfusion Outcomes (RETRO) study which is a prospective observational study of outpatient RBC Tx. Inclusion criteria were age ≥ 50, ambulatory, and at least 1 prior RBC Tx within 6 months. Subjects who reported active bleeding at the time of Tx were excluded. Hgb was measured pre-Tx, 30 minutes after Tx, and at 1-week post-Tx. Multivariable linear regressions of change in hemoglobin at 30 minutes and at 1 week were performed using backwards elimination to identify significant clinical variables. Results/Finding: A total of 208 subjects completed the study and were included in the analysis. Mean age was 66 (SD ± 9.3) years. Patients received 1 (73%) or 2 (27%) RBC units during the transfusion episode. Between baseline and one-week Hgb measurements, 38 of 208 subjects (18%) received 1-3 additional RBC units as part of patient care, and these subjects were included in the 1 week increment assessment. Mean change in Hgb was 0.6 g/dl/unit (SD ± 0.5) at 30 minutes and 0.9 g/dl/unit (SD ± 0.8) at one week. Hgb increment at 30 minutes decreased with larger patient blood volume (Nadler) and higher patient baseline Hgb, but increased with the RBC component volume transfused. Hgb change at one week increased with change in Hgb at 30 minutes, decreased with subject blood volume (Nadler), and was lower in patients hospitalized between Hgb measurements. Subject age, gender, non-RBC volume transfused, total RBC dose (1 week analysis only), and chemotherapy use (± 4 weeks from the study transfusion) were eliminated during backward elimination. Conclusion: In this cohort, most patients had a Hgb increment of less than1 g/dl/unit after Tx. Two recipient-specific factors influenced the Hgb increment at 30 minutes, and patient disease status was associated with the Hgb response after one week. While other donor-or unit-specific factors not captured in this study may also impact Hgb increment, our data suggest that pre-Tx recipient factors can help predict Hgb-response post-Tx. Providers should account for recipient circulating blood volume and pre-transfusion Hgb in addition to the expected increment per RBC unit to achieve Tx goals. Background/Case Studies: Platelet morphology and activation is believed to be important to the success of prophylactic platelet transfusion in thrombocytopenic patients. Developed in 1974, the Kunicki Morphology Score (KMS) evaluates the quality of platelets as they undergo morphological transformation due to conditions such as storage temperature and aging. A higher percentage of non-discoid platelets is believed to predict poor platelet recovery and survival after transfusion. In recent years, flow cytometry has emerged as the preferred tool for the quantification of platelet activation and surface marker-protein expression. P-selectin (CD62P) is a putative platelet activation marker. In this study, we have attempted to find the correlation between KMS and P-selectin expression in stored platelets and explore the possibility of using KMS as a cost-effective alternative to flow cytometry for platelet activation quantification. Study Design/Method: Apheresis platelets (AP) were collected (n=3 donors) in BCSI® 15 ml mini platelet storage bags at either 22˚C with agitation (RT) or 4˚C without agitation (4C). Samples were assessed on Day 0, 1, and 3 of storage for KMS using phase contrast microscopy. One hundred free floating, non-adherent platelets were assigned arbitrary grades based on their morphology KMS was calculated as the sum of all grades, with superior morphology (100% discs) equal to 400. To assess surface P-selectin expression (%), AP were stained with anti-CD62P antibody and analyzed on a FACS Canto I. Data were reported as means ±SEM. KMS and P-selectin expression data were analyzed for Pearson's correlation coefficient (r) using two-way ANOVA and with significance set at P<0.05. Results/Finding: High KMS was observed for Day 0 platelets (332 ± 9). Platelet morphology was highly preserved under RT storage conditions and similar KMSs on subsequent days (Day 1: 265 ± 29 and Day 3: 276 ± 23). Platelets stored at 4C had increased amoeboid morphology and decreased KMSs (Day 1: 138 ± 13 and Day 3: 126 ± 5). RT samples showed a marginal increase in P-selection expression (Day 0: 12 ± 2%, Day 1: 15 ± 3%, and Day 3: 22 ± 3%) whereas a significant increase was observed in 4C samples (Day 1: 47 ± 1% and Day 3: 61 ± 4%). KMS and P-selectin expression had a strong negative correlation (r = -0.878, P < 0.001). As expected, the percentage of non-discoid morphology displayed a strong positive correlation with P-selectin expression (r = 0.877, P < 0.001). The results from this study suggest that KMS is comparable to P-selection expression measured via flow cytometry, and a good indicator of platelet activation phenotype in stored samples. Therefore, Kunicki Morphology Score can be a quick and economic alternative to flow cytometry for platelet assessment. The Background/Case Studies: With the approval of four-factor prothrombin complex concentrate (4F-PCC, Kcentra) for the reversal of vitamin K antagonist-associated bleeding in the US, it has become a relatively common practice for 4F-PCC to be used in an 'off-label' fashion to correct coagulopathy caused by direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) such as anti-Xa inhibitors. However, the efficacy and safety of 4F-PCC have not been wellstudied in this scenario. Study Design/Method: We performed a retrospective observational study on the off-label use of 4F-PCC for reversing DOAC-associated bleeding in a level one trauma center between November 2014 and February 2017. The following data were collected: patient age, gender, weight, indications and dosage of 4F-PCC, INR and hemoglobin (Hgb) prior to and post 4F-PCC administration, clinical outcomes, acute and chronic thromboembolic events within 24 hours and 45 days of 4F-PCC administration respectively. In addition, the thromboembolic events (if documented by primary teams) post 4F-PCC infusions were subsequently evaluated by both authors to determine the potential contributions of 4F-PCC. Notably, five patients died within one week of their bleeds/4F-PCC administration, four due to irreversible brain damage associated with the initial intracranial bleeding, and one due to inoperable GI bleeding. We did not find any thromboembolic events within 24 hours of 4F-PCC administration. However, four patients (4/25 = 16%) had thromboembolic events 2-45 days after receiving 4F-PCC including stroke, myocardial infarct, atrial thrombi and non-occlusive IJ tube thrombi. Conclusion: Our data showed that 4F-PCC was relatively efficient in aiding the 'reversal' of DOACs for patients with severe hemorrhage. We did notice that 16% of patients experienced some form of thromboembolic events in the days-to-weeks after 4F-PCC administration, although the imputability of 4F-PCC in these processes (versus their underlying disease) is difficult to parse out. Additional, prospective studies would be warranted to further evaluate the safety of 4F-PCC for this off-label indication. Background/Case Studies: Supratherapeutic INR and major bleeding secondary to warfarin therapy occurs in approximately 4 % of the patients on chronic anticoagulation for atrial fibrilation. Available treatment options for reversal of anticoagulation include withholding warfarin, administering oral or intravenous vitamin K, fresh frozen plasma (FFP), and prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC). The use of PCC is now recommended for severe bleeds by several organizations and their respective consensus guidelines, including the ACCP. The Transfusion Service Laboratory at 1000 + bed health system recently recognized "warfarin reversal" as the transfusion indication for 20.1% of all plasma transfusions occurring in 2015. Furthermore, 85% of all plasma orders were for 1 or 2 units while the recommended dosing of plasma is 10-15ml/kg (3 to 5 units for most adults). A retrospective analysis of all plasma transfusions indicated only 49% of the orders were deemed "appropriate" and warfarin reversal accounted for 37% of all "inappropriate" orders. As such, a multidisciplinary team was assembled to address inappropriate use of plasma within this health system. Study Design/Method: The team evaluated current practice, examined available literature, reviewed and standardized transfusion guidelines, indications and related policies as well as provided education to key stakeholder groups. Internal anticoagulation reversal guidelines were updated to recommend use of PPCs for any emergent reversal of warfarin; while recommending use of vitamin K for all other patients. "Warfarin reversal" was removed as a transfusion indication for ordering plasma. In addition, weight-based clinical decision tools were created and incorporated into the electronic medical records which calculate a recommended quantity of plasma based on a predefined algorithm. During a six month period following all interventions, individual providers received timely feedback regarding inappropriate use of plasma. Results/Finding: In the six months immediately following the educational efforts, the percentage of plasma orders deemed "not appropriate" due to warfarin reversal decreased by 57% (from 37% to 16%). The number of 1 and 2 unit plasma orders decreased by 45%. The review also indicated many providers had modified the number of plasma units recommended by the clinical decision support tool; suggesting need for further intervention. Conclusion: Internal review of plasma utilization of a 1000 + bed health system identified concerns with ordering indication as well as dosing. Provider education and timely feedback appear to have positively impacted appropriate use of plasma transfusion. Further provider education will likely be needed to reinforce the message and further influence plasma dosing practice. Floor Moenen 1 , Yvonne Henskens 1 , Patty Nelemans 2 , Paul Verhezen 1 , Rick Wetzels 1 , Harry Schouten 1 and Erik Beckers* 1 . 1 MUMC+, 2 University of Maastricht Background/Case Studies: Prophylactic platelet transfusions are widely used in chemotherapy induced thrombocytopenia (CIT). However, platelet count alone is a poor predictor of bleeding.For adequate hemostasis the formation and sustainability of a stable clot are essential. Bleeding events in CIT patients with similar platelet counts might be influenced by changes in clot lysis potential in these patients. We hypothesized that bleeding risks in CIT with similar platelet counts might be influenced by changes in clot lysis potential. We investigated clot strength and susceptibility to tPA induced clot lysis as measured by tPA-ROTEM, an in-house designed whole blood rotational thromboelastometry assay, designed to assess clot firmness and stability. Study Design/Method: tPA-ROTEM results in CIT were compared with results in healthy individuals. tPA-ROTEM parameters wereclotting time (CT), clot formation time (CFT), α-angle (α), maximum clot firmness (MCF), LOT, LT and delta LS. Multivariable linear regression was used to identify independent determinants of the tPA-ROTEM outcome variables, including fibrinogen, FII, FVII, FXIII, plasminogen, a2-AP, tPA, PAI-1, TAFI, hemoglobin, platelet and leucocyte count. Also, tPA-ROTEM results in CIT before, 1 hour and 24 hours post-platelet transfusion were compared. Results/Finding: 72 consecutive CIT patients and 40 healthy individuals were included; 57 patients with 1 hour posttransfusion, and 45 with 24 hours posttransfusion results. CIT patients had low PAI-1 and TAFI levels, but expressed high FVIII, fibrinogen, D-dimer, VWF activity. Compared to healthy individuals, CT and CFT were significantly longer and MCF was significantly lower in CIT. LOT and LT were shorter in CIT patients. The delta LS in %/min was not significantly different. Combined LOT/LT results showed hyperfibrinolysis before platelet transfusion in 39% of patients had. Delta lysis speed was normal in most patients (94%). In multivariate analysis a higher plasminogen level was significantly associated with a shorter LOT/LT; higher leukocytes, PAI-1, a2AP, FXIII and FII were significantly associated with a prolonged LOT/LT. Higher fibrinogen was associated with decreased lysis speed. 62 patients received 65 platelet transfusions.1 hour post-transfusion, CFT was significantly shorter and MCF significantly higher, as compared to pre-transfusion values. Although a significant increase of CFT and decrease of MCF was noticed post-24 hours, both outcomes were still improved as compared to pre-transfusion. LOT/LT significantly prolonged 1 hour and 24 hours posttransfusion. LOT/LT results post-platelet transfusion indicated a 50% reduction of the number of patients with hyperfibrinolysis. Conclusion: tPA-ROTEM outcomes and determinants were in agreement with the expected changes associated with hyperfibrinolysis. CIT patients had slower clot formation and formed weaker clots, which were less resistant to fibrinolysis. A significant proportion of CIT patients had hyperfibrinolysis according to LOT/LT values. Platelet transfusions significantly improved resistance to fibrinolysis, especially 1 hour post-platelet transfusion. In most patients tPA ROTEM changed from a hyperfibrinolytic profile to a less hyperfibrinolytic or normal profile after platelet transfusion. Qiushi Wang*, Zhun Xing, Xinxin Hao, Guanghui Tong, Haixia Bai and Qiaoni Yang. Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University Background/Case Studies: Neonatal coagulation is different from that of adults in the first several days of life due to incomplete liver development, which results in clotting factor levels less than adults. The application of adult coagulation standards may affect abnormal clotting assessment in neonatal patients. The premise for managing clotting in newborns is to understand the normal clotting intervals of newborns. Accurate determination of coagulation anomalies will be conducive to more efficient treatments. Compared with adults, TEG has been reported less frequently in pediatrics, especially in neonatology, and even less in pathologic neonates. The establishment of TEG parameter intervals for healthy people at different ages is conducive to an expansion of TEG applications. Study Design/Method: To test the range of normal neonatal thromboelastography (TEG) values in the Chinese population and evaluate the coagulation status of newborns from pathologic pregnancies. A total of 105 neonates were enrolled in this study, as follows: 40 healthy neonates; 15 neonates from gravidas with gestational hypertension; 15 neonates from anemic gravidas; 15 neonates from diabetic gravidas; and 20 preterm newborns. Testing and comparative analyses were based on cord blood TEG, blood coagulation, and blood function testing. Results/Finding: Normal neonatal TEG participation differed from adults. The clot reaction time (R) value was 4.24 ± 1.22 min, which is lower than adults. The clot kinetics (K) value was 2.25 ± 1.05 min, which was the same as adults. The angle value was 61.89 ± 9.18°, which was similar to adults. The maximum amplitude (MA) value was 50.48 ± 4.75 mm, which was equivalent to the lower limit of adults. The coagulation index (CI) value was −0.52 ± 2.15, which was comparable to adults. Neonatal TEG parameters in pregnancy-induced hypertension and pregnancy-induced anemia were not significantly different from normal neonates. There were statistical TEG differences in the R, K, and angle values between newborns of diabetic gravidas and newborn of healthy gravidas. There were statistical TEG differences in the R and angle values in premature neonates. The neonatal TEG parameters have different intervals than adults, and the analysis results are also different from those of traditional coagulation tests, which need to be re-investigated. Background/Case Studies: The coagulopathy of trauma has been extensively studied over the last few decades. The value of viscoelastometry in guiding management of these patients have been well documented. Notably, studies about coagulopathy in burn patients are scarce. Several studies have shown that burn patients are hypercoaguable. However, most of these studies were done using samples collected after patient resuscitations or upon admission to the ICU. Additionally, although burn patients typically have normal to slightly elevated platelets, the platelet function has been questioned in several studies. Study Design/Method: We conducted a prospective observational study of burn patients (≥18 years) presenting to our level 1 trauma center. TEGs were ordered by the burn team on various patients and were not done as part of the study. Citrated samples were collected at patient presentation. Whole blood aggregation studies were performed immediately. The remaining samples were processed immediately and the plasma was kept frozen at -80 o C until testing. Additional samples were collected at days 3, 7, 10, 14, 21, and 28. Samples will be studied for microparticle number and identity, microRNA, cytokine/chemokine concentration, and coagulation factor (FVIII, FIX, FX, FV, FVII, PS, PC, von Willebrand factor antigen and activity) values. Results/Finding: To date, 41 patients have been enrolled in this study, which is still ongoing. The majority of patients had thermal burns caused by flame exposure. The mean ( ± SD) age of patients was 47 ± 16 (range 20-87 years) and 70.6% were male. The mean total body surface area burn (TBSA) was 9.7 ± 9.5 % (range 0.3-38.3%). The mean number of RBCs transfused was 0.6 (range 0-20 units). No patients received plasma or platelet transfusions and none died. Most TEG tracings were normal or had shortened R times. The mean platelet counts were within our reference range at all time points ( Figure 1 ). Most patients had abnormal whole blood aggregation in response to ADP, collagen, and arachidonic acid. This was very obvious even in patients with as little as 1% TBSA burn. No patients with abnormal platelet activity were on any platelet inhibitor therapy. Conclusion: The reason for this decreased platelet activity is unclear and further studies are ongoing. One theory is that the platelets may degranulate as a response to the acute phase reaction. This may produce higher percentage of platelet microparticles, which contribute to the hypercoaguable state that has been observed by others and by our TEG studies. The Background/Case Studies: Rigorous donor screening and blood product testing has reduced transmission rates of infectious organisms during blood transfusion, but the risk for transmission of emerging pathogens persists. Pathogen reduction is a method of sterilizing blood products resulting in decreased pathogen load. Previous studies have demonstrated alterations to coagulation factor levels in pathogen reduced cryoprecipitate (PR-cryo), but assessments of procoagulant microparticle (MP) activity after pathogen reduction are scarce in cryoprecipitate. The purpose of this study was to compare MP prothrombinase activity in samples of whole-blood (WB) and apheresis-derived (APH) cryoprecipitate with and without pathogen reduction. Study Design/Method: In this IRB-exempt study, donor plasma from group A donors was pooled and split to produce six identical APH and six identical WB cryoprecipitate units. PR treatment was performed on three APH and three WB units according to manufacturer recommendations with amotosalen and UVA light. The remaining three APH and three WB units served as non-PR-cryo controls. Procoagulant MP activity was assessed using a functional prothrombinase assay according to manufacturer instructions. Levels of thrombin were reported as phosphatidylserine (PS) equivalents. Comparisons between PR and non-PR-cryo groups were performed using independent samples t-test with significant results declared at p<0.05. Results/Finding: A significant decrease in prothrombinase activity was noted in WB PR-cryo compared to WB non-PR-cryo, but no significant difference was measured between APH PR and non-PR-cryo (Table 1) . Conclusion: Findings in this small study suggest that pathogen reduction may decrease prothrombinase activity in cryoprecipitate. This could potentially be explained by the sequestration of MPs by the amotosalen adsorption device during pathogen reduction. Further quantitative thrombin generation assays and functional assessments with thromboelastometry to evaluate the hemostatic equivalence of PR-cryo are warranted. Transfusion Hemosiderosis Could Be the First Step in a Two-Hit Model for Transfusion Associated Circulatory Overload (TACO) Philippe Renaudier* 1 , Francoise Bertrand 2 , Anne Damais 3 , Nathalie de Rekeneire 4 , Anne Schuhmacher 5 , Styliani Bartziali 5 , Andrée Heinricy 5 , Nicolas Malvaux 5 , Thierry Peyrard 6 and Jean-Claude Faber 7 . 1 Centre de Transfusion Sanguine -Croix Rouge Luxembourgeoise, 2 Hôpital Universitaire de Strasbourg, 3 Hôpital Jacques Monod, 4 Direction de la Santé, 5 CTS-CRL, 6 Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, 7 Association Luxembourgeoise des Hémophiles Background/Case Studies: TACO is a cardiogenic pulmonary edema triggered by a transfusion. Patients with chronic heart failure are at high risk of TACO. Systolic heart failure is a well-established risk factor, but diastolic failure might be more important (Lieberman L et al. TMR 2013; 27 : 206-12) . Study Design/Method: Herein we report two cases of TACO in which a diastolic heart failure related to a transfusion iron overload could be the first hit. Results/Finding: Case 1 : A 45 year old S/β sickle cell patient died 10 hours after liver transplantation indicated for haemochromatosis hepatic cirrhosis (Child & Pugh = 2). Diabetes and cardiac involvement with major iron overload in T2* and no signs of ventricular hypertrophy at the EKG (59% systolic ejection fraction with a major relaxation disorder) were associated diseases. Deferroxamine and deferasirox were introduced several times but stopped for side effects. Deferriprone was well tolerated but introduced too late. The patient died from post-surgery intractable hemorrhage and cardiogenic shock during vascular filling. She previously had a Grade 2 TACO at D-41 and a Grade 1 at D-28, which only risk factors were diastolic heart failure related to hemosiderosis. Case 2 : A 88 years old chronically transfused myelodysplasia patient received 47 Packed Red Cells (PRC) during 6 years, was referred to hospital for impaired general condition with fever. Upon arrival, her Hb was 7.8 g/ dL. A CT-scan showed hepatosplenomegaly. Two PRC were transfused slowly. Seven hours after completion, she experienced dyspnea with arterial desaturation, hypertension (180/70), bilateral crackles and increased BNP (2,747 pg/mL). IV furosemide and Isosorbide dinitrate were immediately administered, but the patient died of congestive heart and multiple organ failure. Because of the discrepancy between the severity of heart failure and any known cardiac history, a serum ferritin assay was retrospectively performed that showed a level >5,000 ng/mL. Conclusion: Cardiac hemochromatosis is characterized by diastolic dysfunction, arrhythmia and at the late stage by dilated cardiomyopathy. In a retrospective study among 98 consecutive TACO cases, 13 (29.5%) had an ejection fraction < 50% whereas 24 (54.5%) showed evidence of diastolic dysfunction (Lieberman L et al). By analogy with Transfusion Related Acute Lung Injury, we propose a two-hit model in which the red blood cells transfusion could be responsible for the first step by causing heart iron overload and consequently a diastolic dysfunction, and the second step by transfusing a fluid volume that remains intravascular. This hypothesis could result in considering iron chelation as a preventive measure to prevent TACO in chronically transfused patients. Background/Case Studies: It is widely accepted that point of care whole blood coagulation test devices are useful to detect coagulopathies with real time manner in massively bleeding situation such as major cardiac surgery. However, its implementation is still limited in Japan because of their costs and lack of public insurance supports. Study Design/Method: Fifty consecutive cases of elective cardiac surgeries with cardiopulmonary bypass were analyzed in this study. Blood samples were collected at three points, i.e. before surgery, just after termination of cardiopulmonary bypass and protamine administration, and after surgery, respectively. Laboratory data were measured by two point of care devices, TEG6s and Sonoclot, and routine coagulation /blood count tests, in all 150 collected blood samples from 50 cases. The data obtained by point of care devices were not provided to the clinicians, and consequently not to be used to determine transfusion indication on each case. First, we evaluated linear correlation of each laboratory examination's data by Pearson's test. Next, theoretical total blood loss was calculated by hemoglobin contents. Total amount of perioperative RBC transfusion was also recorded, and thorough clinical data were collected on each patient from the electronic records. We finally tried to establish a multi-variate linear regression model to predict perioperative bleeding and RBC transfusion amounts by measured laboratory data and collected clinical parameters. Results/Finding: In 50 cases included in this study, 40 cases received any type of transfusion, i.e., 39 cases of RBC transfusion (39%), 37 cases of plasma transfusion (37%), and 21 cases of platelet transfusion (42%), respectively. Average amount of RBC transfusion was 7.3 Japanese units ABSTRACT (approximately 3.3 US units). Measured parameters of TEG6s/Sonoclot, routine laboratory platelet counts, and fibrinogen value were strongly correlated each other. On the contrary, ACT value of routine coagulation test was not correlated with TEG6s and Sonoclot parameters. In multi-variate regression analysis, we failed to establish a rational and comprehensive linear regression model. Although operation time and ACT value at termination of cardiopulmonary bypass were strongly associated with perioperative bleeding and amount of RBC transfusion, extracted explanatory variables of Sonoclot/TEG6s paradoxically exhibited inverse correlation to bleeding tendency on platelet/coagulation functions, suggesting hidden confounding factors in this study population and the limitation of the study design. As only significant point of care test explanatory variable, Sonoclot PF value at termination of cardiopulmonary bypass was correlated to platelet transfusion volume as well as operation time and preoperative platelet count. Conclusion: ACT value at termination of cardiopulmonary bypass can be a useful predictor of perioperative bleeding of major cardiac surgery. Although Sonoclot/TEG6s measurement parameters may be used as independent parameters to conventional ACT test, further intervention studies will be required to determine its usefulness in major cardiac surgery on the Japanese population. Elimination of "Other" as a Transfusion Indication Statistically Reduced the Number of Patients Who Were Transfused Jessica L. Jacobson* 1 and Lilly M. Sorkin 2 . 1 Bellevue Hospital-NYULMC, 2 The Brearley School Background/Case Studies: Historically 25% of our RBCs orders were placed using "other" as the transfusion indication. The blood bank performs prospective auditing of all orders which contain a lab value as part of the indication. Although in many instances the patient satisfied a specifically approved transfusion indication, the ordering provider selected "other" to bypass the prospective auditing process. During 4Q15, "other" was removed as an indication from the CPOE system. Now if a physician needed to place an order outside of approved criteria, he/she would need to call the blood bank and explain why the RBC transfusion was required and document the reason in the patient's EMR. Removal of the "other" indication made the process of ordering potentially medically unnecessary RBCs harder. We sought determine the impact of this change on the total number of blood products and patients being transfused. Study Design/Method: Quarterly transfusion statistics including the number of RBCs, SDPs, plasmas, and patients transfused from 1Q2014 to 4Q15 (pre-elimination of "other") were compared to those from 1Q16 to 4Q17 (post). The data was tested for statistical significance using the 2- The majority of the units transfused (42/55), were attributed to surgical subspecialties and emergency medicine. A post-transfusion INR was available for most transfusion events and demonstrated no significant change from the pre-transfusion baseline. Finally, the most common indications for transfusion that could be discerned included hypovolemia and bleeding (i.e. plasma transfused with red blood cells). Conclusion: A daily audit of plasma transfusions revealed that single-unit transfusion events are relatively common and include transfusions to patients with normal coagulation values. Surgical subspecialties and emergency medicine accounted for the majority of these transfusions. These likely represent inappropriate transfusions and opportunities to improve practice institutionally. Though single-unit red cell and platelet transfusions represent desirable practices, single-unit plasma transfusions are an undesirable quality improvement metric. Chisa Yamada* 1 , Meghan Delaney 2 , Angela C. Lee 2 and Maureen Edelson 3 . 1 University of Michigan, 2 Children's National Health System, 3 Background/Case Studies: Hyperkalemia is a rare life-threatening complication of RBC transfusion. Stored RBCs leak intracellular potassium (K) due to an inhibition of the membrane ATP pump and gamma irradiation potentiates the K leak further. RBC transfusions administered slowly have been shown to have little effect on serum K concentrations, however, massive and rapid transfusions may cause temporal hyperkalemia, especially when the patient's total blood volume is small and the serum K in the transfused product is high. While there are many case reports, the occurrence of transfusion associated hyperkalemia (TAH) and characteristics of patients and implicated blood products have not been studied systematically. A multi-institutional study of TAH was conducted through the AABB Pediatric Subcommittee, and the data from two facilities is reported here. Study Design/Method: For the study period of 9/1/2015-8/31/2016, medical records of patients aged <18 years old who had K levels above reference range within 12 hours after or during a RBC transfusion were reviewed for patient demographics, medical history and co-morbidities, symptoms and treatment for hyperkalemia, as well as the age, volume, and modifications of transfused RBC units. Results/Finding: Total 2,085 patients received total 11,586 RBC transfusions. Hyperkalemia within 12 hours after or during the RBC transfusion was found in 14 patients (0.67%) who received 41 RBC transfusions (42% irradiated). Median K increase from previous K level before the hyperkalemia was 1.6 mmol/L. Patient's median age and weight at the time of transfusion was 0.2 years old and 4.9 Kg respectively. All patients had serious comorbidities including prematurity in 5 patients, cardiac dysfunction in 8, renal disease in 4, sepsis in 3 and brain lesions in 2 patients. High volume of RBCs was used for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) in 4 patients, which was not associated with mortality. Mortality occurred in 4 patients within 3 days of hyperkalemia occurrence. Among them, 3 patients had decreased follow-up K after hyperkalemia occurrence (2 were treated for hyperkalemia), and 1 patient (0.05%) died soon after hyperkalemia was noted during the transfusion. This patient was transfused 55% of patient's estimated total blood volume with irradiated RBCs within 3 hours before the hyperkalemia occurrence. Overall, 14 patients received median 77% of estimated total blood volume within 12 hours before hyperkalemia occurrence and median age of RBC units transfused was 13.0 days old. Conclusion: Fourteen patients (0.67%) experienced hyperkalemia within 12 hours after or during RBC transfusions and 1 patient had hyperkalemia at the time of death possibly attributable to RBC transfusion. Patient's median age and weight at the time of hyperkalemia with transfusion were 0.2 years old and 4.9 Kg respectively. Cardiac dysfunction was the most common risk factor for possible TAH, and prematurity, renal dysfunction and ECMO associated massive RBC transfusion were also associated with higher risk of TAH. Additional data from other facilities is pending. Perioperative Background/Case Studies: Tranexamic acid (TXA) is an inexpensive and widely available anti-fibrinolytic agent known to reduce red blood cell (RBC) transfusion in cardiac surgery and selected orthopedic surgeries. While its use in cardiac surgery is routine, its use and effectiveness in non-cardiac surgeries with comparable rates of bleeding and transfusion are uncertain. The objective of this study is to evaluate TXA utilization patterns in non-cardiac surgeries at high risk for transfusion. Study Design/Method: To accurately characterize TXA use in non-cardiac surgeries at high risk of perioperative RBC transfusion, we completed a retrospective cohort study to evaluate all patients ( ≥ 18 years of age) undergoing non-cardiac surgery at five hospitals in two cities between January 1, 2014 and December 31, 2016. We identified non-cardiac procedures at high risk for transfusion using the standardized Canadian Classification of Health Interventions (CCI) procedure codes contained within the hospital Discharge Abstract Database (DAD). We linked the DAD with transfusion databases and laboratory databases to obtain supplementary transfusion and laboratory data. To evaluate contemporary TXA utilization patterns in the identified cohort of highrisk procedures, we performed a chart review (n=2000 charts) and database query. We described the proportion of patients who received intraoperative TXA. We also described details of TXA dosing. Results/Finding: In 5 cities, we identified 95 non-cardiac open surgeries associated with a transfusion rate ≥5%. In this cohort, tranexamic acid was used in 13.3% of surgeries (range 0% to 83%). TXA usage was highest in orthopedic and spine surgeries, including total hip arthroplasty (75%), femur osteotomy (74%), pelvic osteoplasty/osteotomy (56%), vertebrectomy (48%) and vertebral fusion (45%). When we excluded orthopedic and spine surgeries, TXA use was limited to 2% of open surgeries. The mean time from the operation start time to TXA administration was 97 minutes (77 minutes). TXA was administered as a bolus in 91%, and as an infusion in 28%. The mean TXA dose was 940 mg ( ± 239 mg). Conclusion: Tranexamic acid is routinely used in cardiac, orthopedic and spine surgery, yet utilization in other surgical domains at high risk for perioperative red blood cell transfusion remains low. Each year, greater than 30,000 deaths and 65,000 injuries are attributed to firearms in the United States however transfusion requirements for these patients are not well understood. In this study, we sought to determine how blood utilization and mortality differs between victims of gun violence versus victims of non-gun related trauma for patients requiring transfusion at a level-1 trauma center in an urban setting. We also assessed the cost of transfusion in these patients. Study Design/Method: The State Trauma Registry was reviewed for all trauma patients who presented to a tertiary care facility from January 2005 to June 2017. The study population was limited to patients who received any blood product during their hospital course. Patients were categorized based on mechanism of injury: 1) gunshot wound (GSW) or 2) all other trauma (non-GSW), and the number and type of all blood products were assessed. The primary outcomes were mortality, blood utilization, and the cost of transfusionwith costs assessed by two methods: 1) blood acquisition costs, and 2) activity-based costs (total cost of transfusion including overhead). Results/Finding: Data are shown in the table. The GSW patients were younger, more likely to be male, and had a higher injury severity score. Among the 1,336 trauma patients requiring blood product administration, 538 were victims of gun violence (40.3%). Mortality in the Emergency Department (ED) was ≈6 times higher, and overall mortality was ≈2.5 times higher in the GSW cohort compared to the non-GSW cohort. GSW patients requiring transfusion demonstrated an approximate 13% ED mortality and a 33.5% overall mortality. GSW patients received on average ≈2 times the amount of blood products per patient compared to non-GSW patients (including PRBCs, FFP, platelets, and cryoprecipitate). For the 540 transfused GSW patients, ≈$6 million went to activity-based transfusion costs. The average transfusion cost per patient was ≈2 times higher in GSW victims versus non-GSW trauma patients. Conclusion: Compared to other traumatic injuries, gunshot-associated injuries are associated with substantially greater mortality as well as greater blood utilization and costs. Transfused GSW patients are a select high-risk group, since previous reports from our own institution including all GSW victims (transfused or not) report one-half the mortality rate we report here.  ABSTRACT TRANSFUSION Study Design/Method: A prospective and retrospective cross-sectional study investigated non-pediatric MICU patients who were transfused (n=120) and who had no transfusion (n=120) between January 1 and June 30, 2017. This study utilized this facility's Laboratory Information System and Electronic Medical Record system to identify (1) patient demographics, diagnosis, and anemia status (pre-admission, specified or undetermined), (2) hemoglobin (Hgb) tracking during admission, (3) transfusion triggers, (4) laboratory phlebotomy performed, and (5) number of RBC units transfused. Chi Square and t-tests were used to analyze the data. Results/Finding: For the study population investigated, an undetermined anemia status was identified for the majority of transfused (39%) and untransfused (73%) patients. The mean total phlebotomy blood loss in transfused patients was 280.18 mL while the phlebotomy blood loss of untransfused patients was 131.23 mL (p < 0.0001). 38% of transfused patients only received 1 unit of RBC's during their admission. The change in Hgb from admission to discharge was interpreted and with 95% confidence it was determined that Hgb values changed between -1.37 and -0.33 g/dL between groups. The overall change in Hgb was not significant between groups (p=0.015). Transfusion triggers initiated by clinicians had a mean Hgb value of 6.64 g/dL and median Hgb of 6.70 g/dL. Conclusion: There is evidence to suggest that iatrogenic anemia is a cause for transfusion in the MICU population at this facility. Though the transfused population was admitted with lower Hgb levels, discharge Hgb levels were lower in both study and control groups. Higher Hgb levels in the control group possibly mitigated the need for transfusion intervention. Also, an undetermined anemia classification was identified in the highest frequency for both study populations. These data may relate to diagnostic phlebotomy and iatrogenic anemia within the transfused population. Many patients received only 1 unit of RBCs (average volume 320 mL) during the admission which corresponds to the average total blood loss. Based on transfusion trigger data and guidelines at this facility, clinicians are not unnecessarily transfusing patients in the MICU patient population. A total of 28 stable, non-refractory hemato-oncology patients were enrolled in the study after fulfillment of inclusion criteria. The study was approved by the Institute Ethics Committee. Patients received apheresis platelets as low dose (1.5X10 11 platelets /unit), medium dose (3x10 11 platelets/unit) and high dose (>4X10 11 platelets/unit) at different time points in a sequence of standard, low and high dose as and when a request was received based on his/her pre transfusion platelet count and clinical profile. The post transfusion counts were assessed after 20-24 hours of transfusion and post transfusion response indicators were calculated in terms of platelet increment, corrected count increment (CCI), percent platelet recovery (PPR). Transfusion free interval and the bleeding events were also recorded for different doses. Results/Finding: Post transfusion response indicators CCI and PPR were comparable for standard dose (CCI=12553 ± 7598, PPR=36.11 ± 24) and low dose (CCI=12279 ± 10842, PPR=35.00 ± 31.7). Post transfusion increments were comparable with standard (22318.18 ± 12159) and high dose (22636.3 ± 18062), however CCI (p=0.006) and PPR (p=0.008) were better with standard dose and were statistically significant. Higher post transfusion increments were observed with high dose as compared to low dose, however CCI (p=0.04) and PPR (p=0.05) were better with low dose and were statistically significant. The transfusion free interval after the standard dose, low dose and high dose was 3.71 ± 3.4 days, 3.36 ± 4.4 days and 7.24 ± 7.9 days respectively, however,the difference was not statistically significant. Donor exposure to patients was significantly (p=0.000) reduced to 17.5% owing to the splitting of platelet products to form customized doses for the transfusion Conclusion: Standard dose of apheresis platelets is the best choice for adequate post transfusion response in hemato-oncology patients however, the possibility of low dose as an alternative to standard can be considered in stable thrombocytopenic patients owing to the comparable post transfusion response indicators (CCI and %PPR) in the two groups The Background/Case Studies: Target based transfusion strategies aim to provide enough blood to achieve a selected target Hgb/HCT. Due to the significant variability in response to transfusion in the transfusion dependent patient, blood is usually ordered empirically rather than to achieve a specific goal for Hgb or transfusion schedule. In these patients both the dose of red cells transfused and the degree of red cell production influence how long a given transfusion may keep a specific patient above a desired target Hgb. An individualized model to guide transfusion could improve the precision of ordering and reduce unnecessary visits as well as units transfused. Based on this we developed a computer algorithm for decision support capable of individualized transfusion recommendations for the transfusion dependant patient. Study Design/Method: The Hematology Blood Utilization Calculator or HEME BUC predicts an individual patient's response to transfusion based on data from past transfusions. The calculator pulls information from the electronic medical record to calculate transfusion half-lives for up to 6 prior transfusions. These half-lives are used predict the response to future transfusion given the patient's current Hgb and weight. Options are then presented to the ordering provider to select a transfusion dose, in units, which determines a follow-up time over which the patient is expected to stay at or above the selected target Hgb. We performed a prospective pilot of the HEME BUC in patients with transfusion dependent anemia with the primary outcome being the percentage of patients that return as scheduled with a Hgb at or above (within 0.5g/dL) the selected target in an intent to treat fashion. Results/Finding: Over nine months, 148 transfusions were ordered using the HEME BUC of which 117 had complete data for analysis. A target Hgb of 8 was selected in 80% of cases. Forty-five percent of transfusions were single unit and 55% were two units, which represents a significant increase in single unit transfusions from historic orders. The mean predicted time to return after transfusion was 10.5 days and 75% of patients had follow-up within 3 days of the selected BUC return time. Overall, in 91% of transfusions, patients returned with a Hgb at or above target. Conclusion: The HEME-BUC provides flexible and individualized transfusion recommendations in transfusion dependent patients using an adaptive mathematic algorithm that learns from each patient's personal experience with RBC transfusion. Within the options presented by the HEM-BUC, over 90% of patients remain at or above the target hemoglobin selected by the ordering provider. Further studies to expand the role of such adaptive/learning decision support technologies are ongoing. Efficacy of Intravenous Iron Administration in Women with Heavy Uterine Bleedinga Retrospective Study Soraia Campaniço, Catarina Jacinto Correia, Ana Oliveira* and Carla Pereira. CHLN -Hospital de Santa Maria Background/Case Studies: Heavy uterine bleeding (HUB) has been reported to cause iron deficiency anemia in one-fifth to two-thirds of affected women. HUB not only carries important clinical problems, but also emotional and social issues, limiting normal activity and affecting significantly the quality of life. Anemia due to HUB can potentially be treated with iron therapy. The objective was to evaluate efficacy of intravenous administration of ferric carboxymaltose in correcting iron deficiency anemia due to heavy uterine bleeding using real life data from a Terciary Center/Hospital with a DayCare Hospital dedicated to Patient Blood Management (PBM). Study Design/Method: Retrospective study with selection of 24 women referred to the ImmunoHemotherapy DayCare Hospital from the Gynecology/Obstetrics Department with a medical appointment between January to April 2018 with diagnosed iron-deficiency anemia secondary to HUB due to non-oncological causes. Collection of laboratory data, including hemoglobin concentration, ferritin levels and transferrin saturation previous to administration of intravenous ferric carboxymaltose and comparing those values 3-4 weeks after therapy, observing the effect of iron therapy in anemia and body iron stores on this subset of anemic patients. Results/Finding: The medium age of the women referred from Gynecology appointments after the diagnose of iron-deficiency anemia for follow-up and management in the ImmunoHemotherapy DayCare Hospital and selected for the study was 44.9 years. Previous to therapy, the medium hemoglobin concentration was 8.43 g/dL, with a ferritin medium value of 15.2 ng/mL and a medium transferrin saturation of 7.57%. On laboratory reevaluation 3-4weeks after intravenous iron therapy, there was a rise in hemoglobin concentration to a medium of 12.9 g/dL (increase of 4.47 g/dL). There was also a ferritin increase of 194 ng/mL to a medium of 209 ng/mL and an improvement on transferrin saturation, with an increase of 19%, obtaining medium values of 26%. Of those women treated on the first visit, 75% didn't need additional intravenous iron therapy on reevaluation. There was also report of improvement of clinical symptoms and quality of life. Conclusion: Women with HUB commonly have iron deficiency anemia, therefore it is important to assess iron body stores on these patients and if appropriate, initiate the most adequate treatment. It is also important to establish good inter-department communication between the different medical specialties that will provide the assessment, follow-up and treatment to this particular subset of the populationa well-established protocol between the Gynecology/Obstetrics department and the ImmunoHemotherapy DayCare Hospital is essential to a better management of anemia in these patients and to facilitate the referral procedures and reduce the time until proper treatment. Intravenous iron is a safe and effective therapy, with quick replenishment of body iron stores and correction of anemia with few administrations and is therefore the therapeutic of choice in this particular clinical entity. PBM programs have facilitated the interdisciplinary management of anemia while reducing blood transfusions whether in medical settings as well as perioperative settings and should continue to be implemented. Background/Case Studies: Patient Blood Management (PBM) principles are highly applicable to surgical practices. An ideal PBM approach is multifaceted, multi-modal, and multidisciplinary in design, implementation, and execution. The goal of this investigation was to assess changes in transfusion behaviors before and after implementation of a robust PBM program at a large tertiary care surgical center. Study Design/Method: This is a single center observational study of PBM implementation for a large and diverse surgical practice from 2012 through 2017. Formal multidisciplinary PBM efforts were initiated early in 2014. This consisted of multiple simultaneous interventions, including education (presentations and online training modules), standardization of transfusion guidelines, and electronic clinical decision support (CDS) rules for transfusion ordering, advanced transfusion analytics, and provider specific transfusion reports. Transfusion data derived from 2012 and 2013 were used as baseline information. The majority of the PBM efforts were initiated in early 2014 with the subsequent years comprising the post-implementation cohort. Outcomes included annual blood product transfusion totals and percentages. For surgical patients receiving at least one unit of allogeneic RBCs the frequency and percentage of patients discharged from the hospital with hemoglobin values > 10 g/dL was also assessed. Results/Finding: A total of 293,139 surgical patient admissions were included, with the annual surgical volume increasing by 8.8% from 2012 to 2017 (46,785 to 51,310; p < 0.05). The percentage of surgical patients transfused with one or more units of allogeneic RBCs decreased from 11.2% to 7.7% over the study period (p < 0.05). The percentage of patients receiving plasma decreased from 3.7% to 2.5%(p < 0.05), with relative stability in platelets (2.8% to 2.7%), and cryoprecipitate (1.0% to 1.3%) utilization. For the patients receiving RBCs, the number of patients discharged with hemoglobin values >10 g/dL decreased by more than 40% (21.1% to 11.9%; p<0.05) Conclusion: PBM implementation efforts for a large surgical practice were associated with substantial reductions in RBC and plasma transfusions, with minimal effect on the utilization of platelets and cryoprecipitate. Additionally, patients receiving RBCs were more likely to be discharged with hemoglobin values < 10 g/dL, suggesting increased tolerance of postoperative anemia. Further efforts are underway to assess relationships between changes in transfusion patterns and patient centered outcomes. Background/Case Studies: The transfusion of red blood cells (RBC) is essential for hematopoietic stem cell transplants (HCT). The risk of transfusion reactions (TR) and the cost of blood has led to efforts to reduce blood use. Patient blood management (PBM) recommendations include transfusing 1 rather than 2 units when RBC are needed. We changed our inpatient practice to transfuse just 1 instead of 2 units of red blood cells (RBC) when HCT patient's hemoglobin < 8g/dl. Our hypothesis is that this would reduce RBC utilization. We describe the impact of this change on RBC utilization, prevalence of transfusion reactions, and nursing staff workflow. Study Design/Method: We included patients > 18 years who received an allogeneic HCT between 7/1/2015 -6/30/2017. On 7/1/2016 we changed our practice to transfuse 1 instead of 2 units of red blood cells (RBC) when the hemoglobin was < 8g/dL. We compared RBC utilization in patients receiving allogeneic HCT in the 12 months before (control arm) and after implementation of this new practice (intervention arm). We used regression models to estimate the independent effect of transfusion practice (1 vs. 2 units/episode), length of hospitalization, the conditioning regimen, and donor type for patients who received at least 1 RBC unit. The outcome variable was total number of inpatient transfusions. In addition, a survey assessed the impact of this. Results/Finding: 176 patients were included in this analysis (100 in control group; 76 in the intervention arm). Cohorts were matched for age, primary diagnosis, graft source and conditioning regimen. The median number of RBC units transfused/patient was identical in both arms (4. Interquartile range 1-9 units/patient). The mean number of RBC transfusions were 7.2 vs 6.1; however, this difference was attributable to a few highly transfused patients. Using the regression model, only length of stay (relative increase of 1.035 units/day; 95%CI, 1.027-1.044) was an independent predictor of the number of RBC units a patient received. When data were normalized/1000 patient days, the control arm received 230 units vs the intervention arm, which received 195 units, resulting in a reduction of 35 units transfused/1000-patient-days. There were 0.07 TR/patient (standard deviation [SD]: 0.29) for the control arm vs 0.05 reactions/patient SD: 0.23) in the intervention arm. The survey of RNs showed that 39 (78%) felt that it positively affected the workflow, 10 (22%) were neutral, and 1 RN felt it had an adverse impact. Conclusion: We found no significant difference in the median number of RBC units transfused and the number of transfusion reactions per patient, as compared to historical controls. There was a modest reduction in RBC utilization based on units transfused/1000-patient-days. In addition, there was a positive impact on RN workflow. Kinnera Chada* 1 , Joyce Obidi 1 , Joann Gruber 1 , Graca Dores 1 , Emily Storch 1 , Alan Williams 1 , Juan Banda 2,3 , Saurabh Gombar 2 , Deepa Balraj 2 , Ross Hayden 4 , Daniel Hood 4 , Thomas Falconer 3,5 , Karthik Natarajan 3,5 , Eldar Allakhverdiiev 3,6 , Sara Dempster 3,7 , Christian Reich 3,7 , Nerissa Williams 7 and Azadeh Shoaibi 1 . 1 Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), Food and Drug Administration, 2 Stanford University, 3 Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics, 4 Regenstrief Institute, 5 Columbia University, 6 Odysseus Data Services Inc., 7 IQVIA Background/Case Studies: Assessment of whole blood and blood component utilization comprises a vital piece of information to promote optimal and safe blood supply management. While some clinical guidelines have been developed for blood component use over the past decade, the practical impact of these guidelines is uncertain. The aim of this study is to assess the prevalence of whole blood and blood component transfusion in the Biologics Effectiveness and Safety (BEST) Initiative from 2010 to 2017. Study Design/Method: We used electronic health records and health claims databases from the BEST Initiative, a Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) Sentinel Program component. Three data partners participated and provided records for approximately 27 million patients. Transfusion events were captured using medical billing and reimbursement data, including the International Classification of Diseases Clinical Modification -Ninth or Tenth Revision (ICD9-CM or ICD10-CM), Current Procedural Terminology (CPT), and Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) codes. These codes were further categorized to identify transfusion events for whole blood, red blood cells (RBC), platelets, and plasma. An event was defined as occurrence of component specific codes per person regardless of the number of units transfused. Results/Finding: Table 1 shows transfusion of whole blood and blood components from 2010 to 2017. Of the 390,168 total transfusion events in this period, RBC comprised most of transfused components (n=269,402; 69%) with platelets, plasma, and whole blood accounting for 91,130 (23%), 26,164 (6.7%), and 3,472 (0.9%), respectively. Over this period, overall transfusion events and that of whole blood decreased. The transfusion of plasma and platelets slightly fluctuated whereas RBC transfusions had a slight increase in 2011 but showed a decline from 2012 to 2017. Conclusion: This study demonstrates that medical billing and reimbursement data in medical records capture blood transfusions and provide additional capability for the CBER hemovigilance system. We observed an overall decline in whole blood and RBC transfusions between 2010 and 2017 in the Sentinel BEST Initiative. Hemovigilance activities, including whole blood and blood component utilization trends, can inform and encourage implementation of transfusion guidelines for managing blood resources in the United States. Appropriateness of Red Blood Cell Transfusion Following Computerized Provider Order Entry Alerts Jacob C. Snyder* 1 , Mohamed Osman 2 , Anna W. Rains 2 and Christopher T. Clark 1 . 1 University of Tennessee Graduate School of Medicine, 2 Univeristy of Tennessee Medical Center Background/Case Studies: Computerized provider order entry alerts (CPOE) with clinical decision support can reduce inappropriate transfusion. The goal is to determine if the alerts truly decrease inappropriate transfusion or just delay red blood cell (RBC) transfusion. The goal is to determine effectiveness of CPOE alert system in lowering RBC transfusion rates and determine what patient populations are receiving additional RBC units after the alert. Study Design/Method: Retrospective 6-month data of CPOE alerts aimed at restrictive strategy and promoting 1-unit transfusion ordering practice for RBC transfusion are collected (June 1 through November 30, 2016). Alerts fire based on specific criteria in an effort to avoid alert fatigue in providers. Transfusions are reviewed for appropriateness based upon 2012 AABB RBC transfusion guidelines. Patient population consists of inpatients, and excludes intraoperative transfusion, massive transfusion, and outpatient transfusions. Patients receiving additional units within 48 hours after the alert are reviewed for appropriateness, hemoglobin levels pre-and post-transfusion, demographics, listed indication for transfusion, and clinical scenario. Results/Finding: After initial 2-unit order, alert fired 226 times. Initial 2-unit order was cancelled 24 times, changed to 1-unit 151 times, and continued 51 times. Of the patients receiving 1 unit, 42 patients received additional RBC units and 109 patients did not receive additional RBC units within 48 hours of the initial alert. With CPOE alerts, 157 RBC units were saved during this 6-month period, resulting in product acquisition cost savings of nearly $27,000. The alerts resulted in a 35% reduction of number of RBC units transfused in this population. The clinical setting in the additional unit population included: Gastrointestinal (GI) bleed (39%), sepsis (22%), surgical patient (14.5%), oncology diagnosis (9.6%), non-GI active bleeding (7.3%), trauma (4.9%), and other (2.4%). All final initial 1-unit orders met AABB guidelines, while only 5% (2 of 42) of the additional units did not meet criteria. The average age of patients receiving additional units is 55 years-old (15-92) with male to female ratio of 1.4:1. Conclusion: CPOE alert system with clinical decision support is effective in reducing inappropriate RBC transfusion. The most common setting for additional transfusion was GI bleeding (39%) in which there was continued blood loss. The vast majority of patients receiving RBC units following the alert had clinical situations meeting guidelines. Therefore, the alerts are effective in promoting restrictive transfusion strategy and 1-unit RBC orders without delay in transfusion needs. Background/Case Studies: Plasma is routinely transfused for non-evidence-based indications, exposing patients to risks including transfusionassociated circulatory overload, alloimmunization, and hemolytic transfusion reactions. Clinical orders for plasma transfusion at our academic medical institution occur through a computer provider order entry system (CPOE) that filters the patient's most recent labs through evidence based and institution-chosen transfusion guidelines. Orders not meeting guidelines trigger a request for further information. Providers choose indications from pre-populated, pull-down menus (e.g. "DIC with INR > 1.5") and/or add a comment. The laboratory data, selected indication, and comment are collected for retrospective review. Study Design/Method: Plasma override orders from January 2016 to December 2017 were reviewed to determine prefixed indication, most recent INR, free-text comment and the attending service/department. Each order was assigned one of the following codes: I-Indicated, NI-Not Indicated (based on institutional and AABB guidelines), NMI-Need More Information, P-Protocol and NIC-Non Indication Comments. Free-text comments were each assigned a code, tabulated, and analyzed. The most common words in free text indications included "bleed", "bleeding" or "hemorrhage" (315 times), "INR" (140 times), and "transplant" (45 times Background/Case Studies: Anemia is a deficiency in the total amount of red blood cells (RBC) or hemoglobin (Hgb) concentrations that affects the oxygen carrying capacity. It is prevalent in up to 50% of all hospitalized patients. The appropriate treatment varies based on etiology, with iron deficiency being the most common cause. Anemia is an independent risk factor for hospitalization, readmission, prolonged length of stay, diminished quality of life, and increased risk of morbidity and mortality. This newly developed laboratory anemia panel provides more efficient assessment and anemia screening through one simplified order algorithm. Study Design/Method: A reflexive algorithmic anemia panel was established in our lab on June 2017. Medical records of 57 adult patients screened for anemia using this reflexive panel were retrospectively reviewed over an 11 months period. Patient characteristics and treatment modalities were collected along with clinical and laboratory data including iron studies. Results/Finding: A total of 44 (77%) patients were found to be anemic with the most common diagnosis being iron deficiency anemia (n=32, 73%). Significant improvement in the post treatment Hgb was observed when compared to the screening Hgb (10.5 ± 2 vs. 8.6 ± 1.5; p<0.0001). Similar improvements were also detected in MCV and RDW indicating improved RBC and Hgb production (Table) . The average treatment duration was 206 +29 days. Oral iron replacement therapy was the most common intervention (n=23, 52%). Two patients were treated with IV iron and one patient was treated with folic acid. No significant reactions or complications were reported. Conclusion: This newly developed reflexive algorithmic anemia screening panel provides timely diagnosis and earlier initiation of management while utilizing laboratory resources more efficiently. Patients in our study cohort showed significant increase in Hgb indicating successful management and follow up of anemia. Background/Case Studies: Despite acknowledged benefits of Patient Blood Management (PBM), implementing effective programs remains challenging especially for multi-hospital healthcare systems serving multiple states. A large healthcare system with 45 hospitals in 14 states, on a total of 12 electronic medical record platforms, with an initial system-wide blood acquisition expenditure blood spend of $18M annually, formed an interdisciplinary partnership to expedite a comprehensive PBM program in less than a year. Study Design/Method: An implementation plan was developed to support first year goals: establishing a PBM infrastructure, developing state of the science transfusion guidelines and order sets, disseminating education, and providing system and provider level data. The team developed a prioritization matrix formula consisting of hospital size, data availability, and transfusion volumes to guide efficient workflow. Strong emphasis was placed on each phase to maximize behavioral modification effects. A system level PBM Steering Committee formed individual PBM task forces throughout 25 hospitals to carry out the strategic plan. All in-scope hospitals implemented guidelines and CPOE blood order sets. The committee launched an awareness campaign across all hospitals and delivered CME /CE educational programs at the largest hospitals. Transfusion data reports were developed for the hospitals utilizing one of the system's largest information technology platforms (n=12 sites). Key performance indicators (see below) form the basis for evaluating the program. Results/Finding: Over a 7-month period, through process-driven and aggressive oversight, RBC utilization declined $13% for the system overall, despite a 3% patient volume increase. There was an $16% decrease in transfusion volume at the 12 sites for which data reports were implemented. Overall, RBC transfusions at hemoglobin (Hgb) > 8g/dL declined 5%, RBC transfusion at Hgb <7g/dL increased by 7% and single unit orders increased 12% during the first 6 months. The healthcare organization's blood acquisition costs declined $2.3M; $/average patient day fell to $8.48 during 2017 vs. $9.81 in baseline year 2016 (14.3%). Conclusion: Creating a comprehensive PBM program in an expansive healthcare structure requires innovative strategies to successfully scale key programmatic components. Direct and regular access to key decision makers along with streamlined decision-making processes, provider education, CPOE, and data and analytics were key drivers for success. Findings show a significant reduction in red blood cell utilization is possible across a large system over a one-year time frame Background/Case Studies: Allergic transfusion reactions are the most common adverse reaction to blood products. There is a wide range of severity of reactions but they are usually mild, occur within 2 hours of transfusion, and present as cutaneous manifestations such as localized urticarial lesion and pruritus. The presumed mechanism is mast cell degranulation and histamine release. Diphenhydramine, an inverse agonist of histamine H1 receptor, is the most commonly used medication to alleviate symptoms. It has not been proven to prevent allergic reactions although it is recommended as a premedication in patients with history of allergy to blood transfusion. Study Design/Method: We conducted a retrospective analysis through our blood bank software, HCLL™ Transfusion (Mediware, Lenexa, KS), to find all cases accessioned for reaction workup and narrowed it to allergic reactions from June 2010 to August 2017. Then, we reviewed pathologist interpretation reports for each reaction. Our outcomes were categorized according to implicated blood products, volume transfused (partial/incomplete, complete), premedication and post-medication, attempted repeat transfusion within 48 hours of reporting a reaction, and severity (severe, non-severe/mild . For analysis purposes, the total number was rounded to 164. Mild allergic reactions were reported in 77% of cases while severe reactions were seen in 23%. The majority of mild reactions, 39%, were associated with RBC while the majority of severe reactions, 50% (19/38), were associated with platelets. There was no premedication in 83% of mild reactions but there was post-medication in 80% of cases. Incomplete transfusion was seen in 63% of all cases of which 72% were associated with red blood cells. Thirty three percent of patients with mild reactions had incomplete/partial transfusions and were transfused again within 48 hours of the reaction. This represents 16% of all allergic reactions. Conclusion: Incomplete transfusion occurred in many mild allergic transfusion reactions. The majority of these reactions resolved with treatment and could have in theory been completed hence representing a significant waste of blood product. Our results present an opportunity for quality improvement regarding management of mild allergic transfusion reactions. While making patient safety our first priority there is an opportunity to minimize or avoid blood products wastage in many of these reactions. Background/Case Studies: Alloimmunization to human red cell antigens plays an important role in the management of patients with Sickle Cell Disease (SCD). Our pediatric center supports a large population of SCD patients, including many on chronic transfusion protocols, and, in order to reduce the risk of alloimmunization, we have, since 2002, selected our red cell donors so as to match their Rh (C, E) and Kell (K) phenotype to that of the recipient. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the state of alloimmunization in this patient population to assess the benefit of this approach. Study Design/Method: For 34 chronically transfused patients, every donor unit transfused was traced back through patient electronic records and compared to the donor antigen profile on record at the blood collection facility using methods developed by an independent data analysis group. We reviewed each patient's transfusion history, which was comprised of a median range of 96.5 months of transfusion data, and determined how often a mismatch resulted in the formation of alloantibodies. To compare the alloimmunization state of our patients with that of a reference population, studied prior to the adoption of C, E and K matching (Castro2002-https:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12147019), we generated the allo-antigen distributions for both populations. Results/Finding: Our program has achieved a significant reduction in the incidence of alloimmunization to C, E and K in our population, and it has limited the proliferation of antibodies often observed in chronically transfused patients. Thus, while the allo-antibody distribution in the population studied by Castro and colleagues extends to as many as 9 antibodies per patient, ours is limited to at most 3. Nevertheless, 32.4% (=11/34) patients, having received dozens of transfusions, made at least one allo-antibody, including antibodies to Js(a) (3/11 = 27.2%), Fy(a) (18.2%), V (18.2%), Kp(a) (10%) and e (1/11), along with C (4/11) and E (3/11). Interestingly, we observed instances, including anti-Fy a , in which an antibody was formed only after repeated exposures to Fy(a+) red cells. Conclusion: The data obtained from our patient cohort is consistent with the prediction of Castro and colleagues, and the conclusions of subsequent studies (e.g. Shafi2014 -https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24628032), namely that an overall reduction in sensitization is possible by carefully selecting donors whose antigen profile matches that of the recipient. The implementation of novel algorithm for selecting donor units over a large set of antigens, with quantitative consideration of the immunogenicities of individual antigenic determinants, we believe will achieve further improvement in the prevention of alloimmunization. Background/Case Studies: Maximum surgical blood ordering schedules (MSBOS) were first described in the 1970s to provide some guidance for surgeons about how much blood should be ordered in the pre-op phase. The goal was to cut down on unnecessary type and cross orders and to make sure an appropriate quantity of blood was available for surgeries likely to require transfusion. This concept, the recent emphasis on patient blood management, and newer surgical techniques have all contributed to a decreased utilization of blood products and unnecessary crossmatches. One unintended consequence to these policies might be an underutilization of type and screens. Most operations do not require blood transfusions routinely. Yet if an unexpected complication arises during an operation, the lack of a type and screen can have negative consequences if emergency release blood is needed. Study Design/Method: We evaluated all scheduled operations at our institution over a 4 week period. For each procedure we identified if the patient had a type and screen on file within 3 days of the operation (within 14 days for cardiac procedures). The results were compared to published MSBOS guidelines that recommended which procedures should have a type and screen. Results/Finding: A total of 1622 scheduled procedures were identified with type and screens on file for 317 (20%). On average there were 81.1 procedures a day with 16 type and screens ordered. All of the urology, cardiovascular, and gastrointestinal surgeries that had a type and screen recommended by a published MSBOS had a 100% type and screen rate at our institution. Other procedures that were recommended to have a type and screen had varying rates of compliance including open hysterectomies (25%), ovarian surgery (5%), spinal fusions (57%), laminectomies (33%), hip replacement (92%), knee replacement (31%), open shoulder (25%) and neck dissections (17%). There were inconsistencies amongst different surgeons in the frequency of ordering a type and screen for the same procedure and also inconsistencies for the same surgeon on different days. Conclusion: Many of our surgeons are able to complete most of their operations with minimal blood loss and little need for transfusions, but many procedures are also being performed without a type and screen on file. While most of these procedures have no need of blood, orthopedic, gynecologic and ENT surgeries all have potential for high blood loss due to unexpected complications or unusual anatomy. If the patient already has an alloantibody that was unidentified, emergency release O negative blood could lead to hemolytic transfusion reactions. The inter-surgeon and intra-surgeon variability across the hospital demonstrates a lack of a unified approach to the utilization of type and screens and shows that the push to decrease overutilization of blood products has possibly swung the pendulum towards underutilization. Nurses Study Design/Method: The study adopted a qualitative research approach and employed the direct application of knowledge to change the understanding and influence the thinking and behavior of nurses toward transfusions. Purposeful sampling of 10 nurses selected based on the inclusion criteria that nurses have no previous knowledge about PBM and be working in a clinical area where blood products are administered. Data were collected via face-to-face interviews with follow-up questions via email, if needed. Results/Finding: Themes generated from data analysis revealed an increase in knowledge (10/10) related to associated risk factors and adverse reactions of blood transfusions; competence (8/10) conveyed in performing expertly and acting independently; confidence (7/10) voiced in becoming inquisitive, making decisions, and educating colleagues; and motivation (4/10) to spreading knowledge and educating other nurses and providers. All participants initiated action plans to share their knowledge, spread awareness, and provide support to their clinical units through exploiting presentations, learning modules, in-services, and creating reference pages for PBM. Feeling empowerment was mutual among 8 participants who were enthusiastic to inform others about risks associated with transfusions, ensure safe and appropriate use of blood products, and encourage patients to make educated decisions on transfusions. Only 2 participants reported empowered, but not to the extent of challenging the inappropriate ordering of blood products. Background/Case Studies: Therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) is a procedure used to remove pathologic substances in the plasma. However, the procedure also depletes plasma coagulation factors, which can lead to major bleeding. The goal of this study was to evaluate performance of a mathematical model for predicting post-procedure coagulation factor levels in a cohort of hospitalized patients. A smartphone app based on the model was created for determining how much plasma replacement is needed to achieve a target post-TPE factor level. Study Design/Method: Our model utilizes patient weight, pre-TPE hematocrit and pre-TPE coagulation factor levels, as well as the volumes of plasma processed and plasma replaced. Model accuracy was assessed by comparing predicted versus measured post-TPE fibrinogen and antithrombin levels for 49 inpatient TPE procedures occurring at a large academic medical center between 2013 and 2017. Upon model validation, a smartphone app was developed for iOS and Android devices. Results/Finding: Minor adverse events occurred for 25% of patients, all of which resolved spontaneously or with management. No bleeding or thrombotic complications occurred. The mean difference between predicted and measured post-TPE fibrinogen concentrations was 4.3 mg/dL (SD ± 23.1, range: -66 to 44), while percent difference between measured and predicted fibrinogen concentration was 3.10% (SD ± 12.8, range of -29 to 30). The mean difference between predicted and measured post-TPE antithrombin concentrations was 3.4% activity (SD ± 9.4, range -18 to 33), while mean percent difference between predicted and measured antithrombin percent activity was 3.75% (SD ± 13.1,range -25 to 36). Conclusion: Our model reliably predicts post-TPE fibrinogen and antithrombin concentrations within 25% of the measured value. When maintenance of critical factor levels is essential, clinicians should consider targeting coagulation factors 20-25% higher than projections. The app, Plexfactor, greatly simplifies calculation of plasma replacement needed to achieve a target post-TPE factor level. It is available free for iOS and Android. treating pediatric patients and cross-reference this with actual apheresis procedure performance data. Study Design/Method: In this descriptive 2-part pilot investigation consisting of a survey and retrospective analysis, 3 members of the ASFA Pediatric Subcommittee each listed what 10 disease indications they believed were the most important 10 conditions for which apheresis should be performed in children. This list was based on the participants' own medical judgments/experiences and were not restricted to any source material. Each member then collected pediatric apheresis procedure data from their respective centers for the 2014 calendar year. To keep analyses consistent, the 2013 ASFA Guidelines were used, as this was the most current version available during the study period. Results/Finding: The 10 top conditions for which the 3 respondents felt apheresis therapy should be performed in children were: humoral rejection of various solid organ transplants (5), thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (3), acute sickle cell disease crisis (3), graft versus host disease (3), sickle cell disease maintenance therapy (2), myasthenia gravis (2), Guillain-Barre syndrome (2), focal segmental glomerulosclerosis recurrence (2), ABO incompatible liver transplant desensitization (1), acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (1), familial hypercholesterolemia (1), rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (1), neuromyelitis optica (1), anti-N-methyl-D-asparate receptor encephalitis (1), multiorgan failure/sepsis (1), and fulminant Wilson disease (1). In the retrospective procedure analysis, 82 children were treated with apheresis; 65 (82%) had diagnoses in the "top 10" conditions to treat. Patients with treated conditions not in the "top 10" included: leukapheresis for acute leukemia (5), cold agglutinin disease (2), meconium aspiration hemolysis (2), atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (2), and 1 patient each for diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, systemic lupus erythematosis, brochiolitis obliterans syndrome, malaria, hypereosinophilia, and major ABO incompatible stem cell transplant. All conditions except anti-N-methyl-Dasparate receptor encephalitis, meconium aspiration hemolysis, and hypereosinophilia were listed in the ASFA Guidelines. Conclusion: There is heterogeneity in what are considered the most important conditions to treat pediatric patients by apheresis professionals, and uncommon conditions neither listed as most important nor in the ASFA Guidelines are treated with apheresis. These findings provide the ASFA Pediatrics Subcommittee justification to perform a multicenter analysis to help clarify these issues. 3]) who were followed without PE. Treatment group patients were underwent a single volume therapeutic PE. All the patients had two or more fold increase of at least two anti-heart antibodies (AHA) level (to cardiac nuclear antigens, endothelial, cardiomyocytes, conduction and smooth muscle cells antigens) and underwent endomyocardial biopsy (EMB, n=17), cardiac CT (n=38), MRI (n=21), myocardial perfusion scan (n=39), and coronary angiography (n=20) to diagnose myocarditis. All the patients were treated either with immunosuppression drugs or without them. Echocardiographic parameters and AHA level detection were assessed at baseline and with two follow-up (FU) visits in about 6 and 12 month in both groups. We also evaluated a 6minute walk test (6MWT) were classified as responders vs. 6 (32%) responders in the control group. Responders in the study group were characterized by initial higher systolic PAP (44 ± 13.4 vs. 27.9 ± 6.0, p<0.05). Six (43%) treatment group patients and 17 (89%) control group patients got methylprednisolone (p<0.05). The mean dose was 11.8 ± 6.6 and 21 ± 12.4 mg per day respectively (p<0.05). Conclusion: PE improves cardiac function and daily activities in patients with iDCM. There were 50% study group responders. Systolic PAP 28.5 mmHg and higher was good outcome predictor of PE efficiency. PE helps avoid using immunosuppressive medications or reduce high doses of it. Transfusion Management of Erythropoietic Protoporphyria in a Post-Orthotopic Liver Transplant Patient Brian D. Adkins* and Garrett S. Booth. Vanderbilt University Medical Center Background/Case Studies: Erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP) is a disorder of heme synthesis caused by an abnormality in the terminal enzyme ferrochelatase. Protoporphyirin (PPIX) accumulates within red cells and deposits in the skin and liver manifesting as photosensitivity and less commonly liver disease. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) corrects the enzymatic abnormality, but patients may also require orthotopic liver transplant (OLT). In the post-OLT period multiple therapies have been employed to reduce plasma PPIX levels, such as simple transfusion and hemin infusion which reduce PPIX production. Therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) and red blood cell exchange (RBCx) have been shown to transiently improve laboratory values and histologic findings but fail to prevent progression of liver disease. As such, the 7th edition of the American Society for Apheresis guidelines categorized EPP as a category III indication for apheresis. We herein present a pediatric patient with EPP who underwent OLT as a bridge to SCT and was managed with simple transfusion, TPE, and RBCx. Study Design/Method: We present a 17-year-old male with EPP and recurrent hepatic porphyria crises. The patient presented with right upper quadrant pain, transaminitis, and anemia (hemoglobin 8.9 mg/dL, hematocrit 27%). He was started on hemin (Panhematin; Recordati Rare Diseases Inc, Lebanon Brunswick, New Jersey) and daily TPE while undergoing evaluation for OLT. After OLT, he was started on RBCx every 3 weeks and underwent a total of 12 RBCx procedures. TPE was gradually weaned from daily to once a week with a total of 47 TPE procedures performed. Additionally, the patient's hemoglobin threshold was raised to 9 mg/dL to suppress erythropoiesis. Results/Finding: In the 10 months following OLT, the patient's mean hemoglobin and hematocrit were 8.6 mg/dL and 27%. The patient continued to have elevated PPIX (mean=1105.8, normal < 20 μg/dL) and total plasma porphyrin (mean=1180.1, normal < 80 μg/dL) with associated diffuse axonal polyneuropathy. He additionally continued to have elevated liver enzymes and post-transplant liver biopsies showed increasing iron deposition, mixed inflammation, and increased fibrosis. The patient also developed hypogammaglobulinemia associated with chronic TPE. The patient was ultimately transferred due to the high acuity of care and is preparing for HSCT. Conclusion: TPE and RBCx are often employed in the management of EPP patients despite being an ASFA category III indication. In our experience PPIX and total porphyrins remained elevated and the patient had continued liver injury. Chronic red cell transfusion maintaining a hematocrit of >39% has been shown to improve symptoms in a patient with congenital erythropoietic porphyria by suppressing erythropoiesis; however, our patient was not transfused to that level. Interest has waned in hypertransfusion with patients being successfully managed by hemin infusions, which have a lower iron burden, though this treatment was also inadequate in our patient. As it stands apheresis remains insufficient in impacting the long-term effects of EPP and hypertransfusion remains incompletely explored. Early Plasma Exchange Is Effective in Anti-Thymocyte Globulin-Associated Serum Sickness Sarita Joshi* 1 and Kristin Ricci 2 . 1 Section of Transfusion Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, 2 The Cleveland Clinic, Section of Apheresis Background/Case Studies: Anti-Thymocyte Globulin (ATG) is a potent anti-rejection agent for kidney allograft recipients. Serum sickness (SS), an immune complex mediated condition, occurs in 7-27% of kidney transplant patients who receive rabbit ATG (rATG). Prior rabbit exposure is considered a risk factor for SS development. Patients classically manifest with high fevers, polyarthritis, arthralgias, rash, lymphadenopathy, renal failure and rarely with rapidly progressive paralysis. Treatment includes corticosteroids, antihistamines, and symptomatic therapy. Case series suggest effectiveness of 1-2 therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) procedures in the management of rapidly evolving serum sickness. We report a case of rATGassociated SS in a renal transplant patient who improved after a single plasma exchange treatment. Study Design/Method: Case report and literature review. Results/Finding: A 36 year old female with end stage renal disease secondary to anti-GBM antibody (Goodpasture) disease presented ten days after a deceased donor kidney transplant with debilitating polyarticular arthralgias, pleomorphic rash, severe allodynia and rapidly progressive upper limb weakness. She had received a total of 625 mg of rATG as induction therapy for her transplant. At presentation, she had severe joint tenderness, upper and lower extremity swelling and proximal, bilateral upper extremity paresis. She had been ambulating normally the evening prior to admission. Imaging of the brain and spinal cord was unremarkable. Hypercoagulability and other causes of neuropathy were ruled out. Her complement levels were low. The patient had undergone a course of TPE early in her posttransplant course for suspected antibody-mediated rejection, which was later excluded. She had no prior exposure to rabbits. However, her past medical history was significant for exposure to rATG during a prior renal transplant. She had no past history of serum sickness. Due to the severity of her symptoms and lack of response to corticosteroids, plasma exchange using albumin replacement was initiated. Following the procedure, the patient noticed an impressive reduction in pain. The next day her rash waned, swelling had subsided and she regained upper extremity function. She was able to ambulate with a walker at the point of discharge, a week later. No additional apheresis treatments were performed. Conclusion: Early plasma exchange is highly effective at reversing the symptoms of serum sickness, especially in patients with rapidly progressive neuropathy, weakness and severe pain, who are refractory to corticosteroids. Current apheresis guidelines do not list SS as an indication for TPE. This report and a review of literature support the inclusion of TPE for Serum Sickness, as a Category III indication with a Grade 1C level of evidence, for future practice guidelines. year-old female with a history of 2 uncomplicated term pregnancies, for which she appropriately received Rh immune globulin. In spite of this, the antibody screen became positive in an anti-D+C pattern during her 3 rd pregnancy, which unfortunately ended in an intrauterine fetal demise at 26 weeks. She then presented to our institution for prenatal care for her 4 th pregnancy at 6 weeks 6 days gestation. Her husband is homozygous D/D. Study Design/Method: Reference lab testing revealed the presence of anti-D, anti-G, and anti-E antibodies, and was negative for anti-C. The anti-D+G titer was 1:4,000 and the anti-E titer was 1:2,000 initially (see table 1 ). At 11 weeks and 0 days the patient underwent a three day course of plasmapheresis. On her third day of plasmapheresis, she also had IVIG administration. Weekly antibody titers were followed clinically, and the patient was managed with weekly IVIG administration until intrauterine transfusion (IUT) was possible. At 22 weeks 7 days gestation the patient underwent IUT for middle cerebral artery peak systolic velocity greater than 1.5 MoM by Doppler ultrasonography. She had a total of 5 IUTs, every 3-4 weeks, until delivery ( supplementation. Serious side effects such as anaphylaxis are very rare. In such cases, unfractionated heparin (UFH) can serve as an anticoagulant during apheresis; however, no guideline for stand-alone UFH dosing during apheresis is available. We report on a patient who developed anaphylaxis to ACD-A during plasmapheresis; we successfully used UFH as a standalone anticoagulant. Study Design/Method: A 55-year-old man with chronic kidney disease caused by focal segmental glomerulosclerosis presented to the nephrology clinic for his third kidney transplantation. The first and second transplantations had been performed at the ages of 25 and 34 years. The only available kidney donor was his wife, who was blood-group incompatible. The patient's blood type was A + ; his wife's was B + . After admission, plasmapheresis was commenced to deplete anti-ABO antibodies (a preconditioning protocol). A 1.0-volume plasma exchange featuring ACD-A anticoagulation with Spectra Optia (Terumo BCT, Lakewood, CO, USA) was planned every other day. The replacement fluid was AB + fresh frozen plasma (FFP). During the first plasmapheresis session, the patient developed generalized itching. About 10 min after commencement of the second session, he developed urticaria, followed by dyspnea, hypotension, and loss of consciousness. Plasmapheresis was stopped immediately, and intravenous dexamethasone and chlorpheniramine maleate were administered; the symptoms disappeared in about 1 h. Thereafter, skin prick and intradermal citrate tests yielded strongly positive results. We thus used UFH as a standalone anticoagulant during plasmapheresis, eliminating ACD-A. The replacement fluid was changed from FFP to albumin because FFP contains citrate. When UFH was infused continuously during plasmapheresis, the whole blood:UFH ratio was held at 1:28. A 1.5-volume plasma exchange was performed during every plasmapheresis session. Results/Finding: We successfully performed five plasmapheresis sessions using UFH as the sole anticoagulant. Two sessions were scheduled preoperatively (to deplete anti-ABO antibodies) and three postoperatively (to remove class II anti-HLA donor-specific antibodies). The patient underwent successful kidney transplantation and maintains good graft function at 3 months of follow-up. Conclusion: When a patient develops an allergic reaction to citrate during plasmapheresis, UFH can be used safely as a stand-alone anticoagulant. Background/Case Studies: Therapeutic phlebotomy (TP) is the standard treatment for patients with blood disorders resulting in excess red cell production. A Double Red Blood Cell (dRBC) procedure offers an alternative to therapeutic phlebotomy. This option is potentially a more efficient means of depleting excessive red cells than TP. A sixty-eight-year-old male presented to our hospital's emergency room with altered mental status and stroke-like symptoms. The patient's past medical history was notable for hypertension, hypothyroidism, and possible hemochromatosis. On physical examination, he was confused, tachycardic, and plethoric. Initial laboratory results showed an elevated hemoglobin (Hgb) and hematocrit (Hct) at 19.6 g/dL and 54.8% respectively. His other laboratory results such as white blood cell (10.27 × 10 9 ) and platelet count (150 × 10 3 ) were within the normal range. Study Design/Method: We performed an emergent, back-to-back dRBC procedures on the patient given his rapid clinical deterioration. We monitored the patient's CBCs through the course of the dRBC procedure (Table 1) . Results/Finding: After the completion of two consecutive dRBC procedures, the patient's total Hgb and Hct levels decreased by 27.6% and 25.3% respectively. The first dRBC collection was 22 minutes in duration with removal of 345 mL of red blood cells (RBCs). The second dRBC collection was 21 minutes with an additional removal of 456 mL of RBCs. Albumin was administered during the procedure as a replacement fluid instead of isotonic saline to maintain appropriate intravascular oncotic pressure. No adverse events were noted during both procedures and the patient tolerated them without any difficulty. Conclusion: Utilization of an automated double red cell collection allowed for a donor apheresis instrument to be used therapeutically in treating a Background/Case Studies: Patients who undergo a series of therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) often receive steroids as part of treatment for the underlying disorder. When using 5% albumin as replacement fluid, fibrinogen is often followed to assess the need for fresh frozen plasma (FFP) as part of replacement fluid. As steroids can affect many laboratory parameters, we hypothesized that use of steroids may affect fibrinogen levels during TPE series. This study evaluated whether steroid use during a series of TPE predicted the need to use FFP as part of replacement fluid due to hypofibrinogenemia. Study Design/Method: We retrospectively reviewed consecutive patients at our academic medical center from 01/2017-03/2018 who underwent a TPE series with 5% albumin as initial replacement fluid. Patients with diagnoses for which FFP was indicated as replacement fluid were excluded. Indication for TPE, concurrent use of oral or intravenous steroids, trend in fibrinogen, and whether FFP was ever used as replacement fluid due to hypofibrinogenemia were noted. Statistical analysis was performed using Background/Case Studies: Bacterial contamination of recovered tissue allografts poses a serious threat to transplant recipients. Antibiotic disinfection is a standard practice utilized in cardiac valve (CV) allograft treatment in an effort to reduce the risk of bacterial contamination, however the composition of the antibiotic cocktail as well as incubation conditions can vary widely depending on the tissue bank. Changes to antibiotic availability and recent revisions to Canadian health standards have resulted in a requirement for further quantitative validation of tissue allograft bioburden reduction. The purpose of this study was to investigate the efficacy of the revised antibiotic cocktail on intentionally contaminated CV allografts, in order to quantitate bioburden reduction and define the optimal incubation temperature for the disinfection process. Study Design/Method: Disinfection solution, composed of vancomycin (50 μg/mL), tobramycin (80 μg/mL), and cefoxitin (240 μg/mL) in RPMI and was inoculated with 10 5 CFU/mL of five challenge organisms considered medically significant in tissue banking at 4°C and 21°C. Following 24 hours of incubation, the remaining CFUs were counted and log reduction was calculated. To further evaluate the appropriateness of a disinfection incubation range of 24 hours ± 2 hours, four CVs were bisected and inoculated with 10 6 CFU of challenge organisms before being placed in the disinfection solution. At each time point one half of the allograft was removed and washed in Lactated Ringer's solution before recovering the remaining bacteria in sterile saline by sonication and mechanical shaking. The final recovery solution was filtered and quantified for bacterial growth. Results/Finding: Recovery efficiency of the sonicated CV allografts was higher for aerobically vs. anaerobically cultured microorganism (61.89 % vs. 47.65 %). Maximal inhibitory dilution (MID) of the updated antibiotic cocktail utilized throughout the validation study demonstrated that the working concentration of antibiotics was more than sufficient to inhibit growth of all five challenge microorganisms. The most sensitive organisms were Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes which were both inhibited at a dilution of 1/128, followed by Escherichia coli (1/32), Clostridium sporogenes (1/16) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (1/8). In the absence of antibiotics, challenge organism growth at 4˚C remained relatively stationary (0.09-log ± 0.09 and 0.30-log±0.06 for aerobic and anaerobic cultures respectively). Incubation with antibiotics at this temperature resulted in a 1log reduction in growth (-1.09 (±0.07) aerobic and -1.18 (±0.11) anaerobic). When the incubation temperature is increased to 21˚C there is greater than 2-log increase in bacterial growth after 24 hours (2.64 ± 0.07 aerobic and 2.51 ± 0.25 anaerobic), but the the bioburden reduction was increased to over 4-log at this incubation temperature (-4.11log±0 .05 for aerobic and -4.10log±0.15 for anaerobic). Conclusion: This study demonstrates cardiac valves are optimally decontaminated in the proposed disinfection solution cocktail when the incubation temperature was increased from 4˚C to 21˚C. The disinfection protocol was shown to reduce bacterial bioburden by greater than 4-log for both aerobic and anaerobic challenge organisms. Background/Case Studies: MMA is a test used to predict the clinical significance of alloantibodies. It is most often used to assess antibodies directed at high prevalence antigens, however, it may also be used to assess common antibody specificities to find blood for patients with difficultto-find antigen requirements. MMA results greater than 3% reactivity result in a transfusion recommendation for antigen negative blood; the negative reference range for the MMA in our laboratory is 0-3%. Study Design/Method: In 2011, MMA data was presented. In this review, the data are updated and the previous data was incorporated using results from 1995 through 2017. The assays were performed as previously described (Transfusion 1987; 27:449-452) . Testing was performed with fresh complement (C') and without fresh complement (NC') added to the test system. Results/Finding: The following table contains MMA results for 402 serum samples tested. Some of these antibodies have been reported to have varying degrees of significance. Others were tested because there were insufficient blood products available to support transfusion needs. Conclusion: Anti-Yt a continues to be the most tested specificity, with 119 of 195 samples yielding positive results (61%). Of the common specificities tested, one example of anti-s demonstrated reactivity below the cut-off while 3 of 11 examples of anti-M (27%) yielded positive results. Emphasizing the importance of testing with and without C', 10 sera were only positive with fresh C' added, and 22 were only positive with no C' present. These MMA results indicate a continued need to evaluate red cells for transfusion for each patient and not by antibody specificity alone. Results/Finding: Prior to and following transfusion, NT-proBNP levels were significantly elevated in patients with TACO (n=160) and Possible TRALI (n=51) compared to those with TRALI (n=12), TACO/TRALI (n=7), and controls (n=335) (p < .001 for overall comparison). Pre-and post-transfusion NT-proBNP were significantly higher in possible TRALI cases compared to TACO cases (p-value = 0.03 and 0.04). Neither differences in (delta) nor ratios of post-and pre-transfusion NT-proBNP were different in cases of TACO compared to those of Possible TRALI (p=0.67 & p=0.27). However, the ratio of pre and post-transfusion NT-proBNP were significantly different between TACO and TRALI cases (p=0.013). Pre-transfusion NT-proBNP levels were higher in cases of TACO (1710 (IQR 389-3850)) compared to that of controls (536 385) ) in subjects without a history of congestive heart failure or kidney disease (p<0.001). NT-proBNP levels correlated with the severity of pulmonary edema as measured by the degree of hypoxemia (PaO2/FiO2) (r=-0.27; p<0.001) and hospital mortality (p<0.001). (TS29) blood bank policy. While FDA-approved in 2014, some concerns have remained related to the hemostatic efficacy of these products, since posttransfusion platelet recovery has been shown by some to be lower than that seen with CONV platelets. To assess the use and efficacy of these products, we analyzed platelet and red cell utilization over the 16-month transition period. Study Design/Method: For all transfused adults age 18 years and older, we assessed platelet use for those who received only PR or CONV platelets. As an indicator of hemostatic efficacy, we also assessed red blood cell (RBC) utilization by these patients in the 24-hour period following any platelet transfusion. Numbers shown are mean±1SD and significance was p<0.05. Background/Case Studies: Preoperative autologous blood donation (PABD) has been declining in use and may be considered in patients who are undergoing elective surgery with significant blood loss if the likelihood of transfusion exceeds 10%. However, PABD rarely has clear indications and is known to increase the risk of perioperative anemia. Compensatory erythropoiesis requires at least three weeks and has not being associated with gender. Here we report perioperative anemia data and gender differences in compensatory erythropoiesis and transfusion associated with the PABD program at our institution. Study Design/Method: This is a retrospective study of the PABD program at our institution over a two-year period (January 1, 2016 to December 31, 2017). The following data were collected from the patient medical records: patient characteristics, hemoglobin values, dates of autologous blood donation, and transfusion of any blood products. Hemoglobin decrease for females and males were calculated and compared. Statistical analysis was performed using STATA 13.1 (StataCorp LP Texas, USA). Results/Finding: 118 patients underwent PABD and donated a total of 141 autologous RBC units. 51% were females and the mean age was 45.3 (range 12-79). 83% donated one unit, whereas the rest donated 2-5 units. Review by a transfusion medicine physician showed that none of these autologous units were indicated. The mean number of days between PABD and date of surgery was 18.9 days. The baseline hemoglobin (Hgb) prior to autologous blood donation for all patients was 13.9 ± 1.5 g/dL, 13.1 ± 1.2 g/ dL for females and 14.8 ± g/dL for males (p<0.05). Hgb levels measured after autologous donation but prior to surgery were 12.5 ± 1.4 g/dL; 11.7 ± 1.2 g/dL for females and 13.5 ± 1.1 g/dL for males (p<0.05). The mean Hgb decrease after donation was 1.3 ± 0.9 g/dL; 1.3 ± 0.9 g/dL for females and 1.2 g/dL ± 0.8 g/dL, (p=0.76). More female patients (42%) received the autologous transfusion as compared to male patients (32%), but the difference did not reach statistical significance (p=0.39). 95 units (67%) were wasted from 79 patients. Of the patients who were transfused autologous units, 6 patients received allogeneic blood products in addition to autologous units, and 80% of patients had post-operative Hgb>10 g/dL. Conclusion: The indications for PABD were not clear. In contrast with male, female patients became anemic and did not show compensatory erythropoiesis at the 19-day interval between donation and surgery. Additionally, more female patients were transfused compared to males. Although these differences did not reach statistical significance, they may reflect gender-associated physiological differences. Transfusion of autologous units was also not justified by patient post-operative Hgb values in a major patient subset. Background/Case Studies: Early and balanced administration of platelets is beneficial for the bleeding patient. Rapid infusion systems and fluid warmers are commonly used during perioperative and massive transfusion in order to keep pace with bleeding and prevent hypothermia. In the United States these devices are not approved for platelet administration due to lack of data, and many physicians are reluctant to use them. Avoiding these devices can lead to delayed and reduced platelet transfusion, which is associated with mortality in bleeding patients. We sought to determine the effect of a clinical rapid infusion system and fluid warmer on the in-vitro function of stored apheresis platelets. Study Design/Method: This study was approved by the University of Wisconsin Institutional Review Board. Units of apheresis platelets less than 48 hours past clinical expiry date were supplied by the hospital blood bank. After mixing, a 2-mL sample was sterilely obtained from each unit. The remaining volume was then run through a commercially available rapid infuser system (The Belmont Rapid Infuser RI-2, Belmont Instrument Corporation, Billerica, MA) at a rate of 500 mL/min while warmed. After the entire unit was infused, a second 2-mL sample was drawn from the most proximal port on the outflow line. A platelet count and maximum amplitude by thromboelastogram (TEG™, Haemonetics, Braintree, MA) was measured from each sample. We estimated that testing 10 units would give us greater than 99% power to detect a difference in pre-and post-infusion TEG™-MA of 10 mm using the paired t-test, with a p-value < 0.05 considered significant. The study was repeated with a parallel sampling protocol using 15-mL platelet aliquots incubated for 5 and 20 minutes in a fluid warmer (Ranger®, 3M Corp, Minneapolis, MN). Results/Finding: All units reached the goal infusion rate of 500 mL/min. No infuser or circuit malfunctions or clotting were observed. Average post-infusion temperature was 37.4°C (range 36.1 -39.0). There was no statistically significant change in post-infusion TEG™-MA was (mean 0.1 mm, 95% CI -2.7 -2.8, p = 0.973). The minimum and maximum differences in post-pre TEG™-MA were -6.7 and 7.9 mm, respectively. There was a statistically significant increase in post-infusion platelet count (mean 27 × 103 cells/ mm3 95% CI 4 -49, p = 0.047) equivalent to a 3% change from baseline platelet count. Similar results were seen with the fluid warmer (Table 1) . Conclusion: In a well-powered study, we were unable to detect any significant effect of high-speed rapid infusion or warming on the in-vitro function of stored apheresis platelets. There was a statistically significant increase in post-infusion platelet count, probably the result of disaggregation of small platelet aggregates leading to higher numbers in automated cell counters. These results strongly suggest that rapid infusion and warming of apheresis platelets is safe. Available guidelines recommend transfusing donor and recipient plasma compatible platelets. However, when platelets are suspended in additive solution, and due to the lower plasma content, respecting cell ABO compatibility seems to be a reasonable approach in order to optimize post transfusion platelet counts. Our objective was to compare two different strategies for platelet selection in ABO incompatible HSCT. Study Design/Method: We reviewed data from two different platelet transfusion protocols used in patients undergoing ABO incompatible HSCT in our hospital: protocol A in which the platelet transfused were plasma compatible with donor and recipient (ABO donor group in major incompatibility and ABO recipient group in minor incompatibility), and protocol B in which the platelet transfused were of the same ABO group than red blood cells concentrates (ABO recipient group for major incompatibility and ABO donor group for minor incompatibility). These protocols were followed when specific ABO platelets were available. Packed RBCs (RBCC) were transfused if the hemoglobin level of patients was 80 g/dL and prophylactic pooled PLTs were transfused at PLT counts 20 × 10 9 /L. PLT transfusion independence was defined as the last PLT transfusion, with no PLT transfusions in the following 7 days. RBC transfusion independence was defined as the last transfusion, with no RBC transfusion in the following 30 days. We recorded transfusion requirements at 30 days after HSCT. SPSS software (v 15.0) was used to perform statistical analyses. The decrease in transfusion is consistent with trends reported elsewhere. The increase in ARs may be due to increasing incidence and increasing user familiarity with the HM. Within bed size groups, facilities with outlying AR rates are clear. Limitations include lack of data validation, and possible inconsistent case definition interpretation and application. This could lead to under-or over-reporting of ARs. MDPH has collaborated with the CDC to improve the HM, including clarifying reporting of discarded products and testing automated case definitions. These analyses allow for the detection of trends in usage and AR incidence, providing actionable data. Future work will assess the impact of surveillance, and attempt to detect anomalous rates associated with specific products. Wider use of the HM will allow for more representative surveillance, and ultimately safer transfusion medicine practices. (TS37) 100 000), five were related to AHTR (including two ABO incompatible IBCTs), two to TRALI, and one case each to bacterial infection and TACO. Conclusion: During the study period, despite a significant decline in the use of blood products, the number of reported AEs remained steady, reflecting increased knowledge of hemovigilance. Despite the high quality of blood products, serious adverse events do occur and human errors account for many of them. For example, for most cases of severe dyspnea, especially TACO the doctors are unable to recognize the cause or possibility for prevention. Likewise, we have yet to see any improvement in the number of AHTRs resulting from blood components intended for another person, reflecting serious deviations from SOPs for patient identification. In the future, we need to focus on improving unsafe practices throughout the entire blood chain, especially the bed side procedures. Checklists to ensure patient identification and risk assessment for TACO, or the revised reporting criteria by the joint AABB-ISBT-IHN TACO task force will be very welcome. Background/Case Studies: Appendicitis is a common cause of acute abdominal pain and is typically managed with either antibiotics alone or in combination with surgical intervention. Hematologic malignancy and its treatments cause pancytopenia which increases the risk of surgery and post-surgical complications. Neutropenic patients, however, may not have sufficient immune response to clear a localized infection even with appropriate antibiotics. Granulocyte transfusions have previously been evaluated in the treatment of neutropenic patients with refractory bacterial or fungal infections but have not been extensively reported for the medical management of acute appendicitis. Study Design/Method: This is a case series of 3 adult patients with hematologic malignancy undergoing chemotherapy who developed acute appendicitis and were managed medically with antibiotics and granulocyte transfusions. Granulocytes were obtained via granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and dexamethasone stimulation of volunteer donors for apheresis with hydroxyethyl starch for a goal dose of 4.0 × 10 9 granulocytes per transfusion. Absolute neutrophil count was determined prior to and within 2.5 hours after administration of granulocytes. Vital signs and oxygen saturations were measured before, during, and after each transfusion. Results/Finding: At the time of granulocyte infusion, all 3 patients were initially severely neutropenic with undetectable neutrophil counts and were deemed not to be surgical candidates. Granulocyte transfusions were generally well tolerated, with one patient having two reported episodes of fevers and chills. Patients received between 3-4 granulocyte transfusions over a range of 6-9 days until there was evidence of clinical or radiologic improvement. All 3 patients showed immediate increases in their measured absolute neutrophil counts; these increases were highly variable, with a mean increase of 1.35 but ranging from 0 to 4 thousand neutrophils per microliter (Table One) . On days following granulocyte transfusions patients frequently developed either fever or increased abdominal pain, likely related to increased appendiceal inflammation in response to the granulocytes. Imaging studies in all 3 cases gradually improved, showing resolution of inflammatory findings and reduction in appendiceal distention. Conclusion: Three adult neutropenic patients with hematologic malignancy and radiologically confirmed acute appendicitis were managed with granulocyte transfusions and antibiotics with resolution of their acute appendicitis. Further investigation is necessary to determine if granulocyte infusions provide therapeutic benefits in the treatment of localized infections in neutropenic patients.  Background/Case Studies: Platelet transfusion is a standard approach to prevent or treat bleeding in thrombocytopenic patients. Due to implementation of improved donor history questionnaires and donor testing protocols, the risks of platelet-associated transfusion transmitted infections have decreased over the years. Sepsis from bacterial contamination of platelets, however, still remains a concern. To further mitigate this risk, our institution migrated our platelet inventory from CONV platelets to an FDA licensed PR platelet product for all patients. Supply constraints during the transition, however, necessitated maintenance of a dual inventory of CONV and PR platelets. We analyzed the incidence of transfusion reactions between We considered both CONV platelets, analyzed with a bacterial detection assay as a safety measure, and PR platelets to represent the standard of care at our institution. Accordingly, when platelets were requested, either product was dispensed by the blood bank as per usual blood bank inventory management policy. For our study, we analyzed the type of platelets transfused, category of any transfusion reaction, and patient demographics. For patients who received both PR and CONV platelets, the reaction was ascribed to the appropriate product based on the timing of the reaction in proximity to the transfusion and the nature of the reaction using National Hemovigilance Network Guidelines. Results/Finding: A total of 79 transfusion reactions were identified following 12,351 platelet transfusion episodes ( . 227 ATR (53.7%) were reported as allergic, 98.2% were non-severe, and in 13 patients the same ATR was identified more than once as they underwent more than one transfusion. In these patients, it was found that the shortest interval between the notification of an ATR, and another was one month, and in a patient the same type of ATR was notified, with an interval of 5 months, being transfused in two different institutions. Of all reported allergies, 69.2% meet a degree of probable or definitive. In addition, 5 cases were life-threatening (3 TACO and 2 TRALI) and one caused death (TACO). Conclusion: Although the haemovigilance programs focus mainly on the notification of severe ATR when individual monitoring of each patient is reported, it is considered relevant for the safety of them to identify the transfusion history in order to mitigate the appearance of new ATR. We also collected the same data for any reactions with positive residual culture results from 2012-2015, to enrich the dataset for positive results. We limited the analysis to reactions in which a single PLT or RBC was implicated; reactions involving plasma, cryoprecipitate, or multiple products were not included. We analyzed the AABB culture criteria to assess their sensitivity and specificity for detection of positive residual product cultures in PLTs compared to RBCs. Definite STR was defined as a reaction with concordance between the bacterial species isolated from the implicated unit and from the affected patient. In a possible STR the unit culture was positive but the patient culture was either negative, discordant or the patient was not cultured. Visual inspection of the plasma was negative for hemolysis. Antibody screen was repeated and found to be negative. The direct antiglobulin test (DAT) was positive, and anti-A 1 was identified in the eluate. Anti-A titer of the PP platelet unit was 64. The blood supplier was notified; their testing revealed that 4 of 5 donors had anti-A titer < 200 at immediate spin, while the fifth had anti-A titer of 2048 with saline-IgG (Table 1) . Conclusion: Our transfusion medicine service and the blood supplier agreed that this patient experienced an AHTR due to a high titer anti-A donor in the PP platelet unit. Fortunately, this patient recovered in less than 24 hours and was discharged 1 week later. While it may be tempting to think that PP platelet units dilute high titer antibodies, this case serves as a reminder that out of group transfusion of any platelet, pooled or otherwise, has the potential to cause AHTRs. Bottles that remained negative after five days of incubation were called negative and discarded. Results/Finding: According to the package insert for the Verax test, the limit of detection for both P.aeruginosa and S. aureus is 8200 CFU/mL of platelets, which falls right in the middle of the range tested with spiked specimens. The limit of detection for our culture method was not reached in this study indicating the sensitivity is less than the lowest dilution tested (1.5 × 10 1 CFU/mL) for both S. aureus and P. aeruginosa. The bottles spiked at the lowest concentration were nearly 1,000 fold below the concentration required to give a positive Verax result and still went positive in less than a day. Screening tests usually identify mild deficiency (<7 mg/dl), however secondary testing is necessary to identify true deficiency (IgA < 0.05 mg/dL) and demonstrate the presence of antibodies against IgA. We present data from a hospital-based surveillance program for SIgAD in an effort to identify patients at risk for possible severe transfusion reactions. Study Design/Method: From 7/1/2018-4/1/2018, an automated weekly report of low IgA results (<7mg/dL) based on data resulted from our immunology department was analyzed by the transfusion medicine service. We retrospectively reviewed the electronic medical record (EMR) to assess each patient for SIgAD, and developed an algorithmic approach to identify patients presumptively before discussing each patient with the clinical team, making additional testing recommendations for true IgA deficiency, and documenting the concern for possible transfusion reactions and delayed blood products in the EMR. The goal was to categorize each patient as SIgAD (at least low IgA) or true IgA deficient and assess for IgA antibodies. Results/Finding: There were 75 low IgA test results for 52 patients. A new diagnosis of SIgAD was made for 10 patients, of which five were unexpected based on the clinical impression at the time of the testing. Nine patients with a known diagnosis of SIgAD were also identified: their diagnosis and history already noted in the EMR. Of these 19 cases, three patients had true IgA deficiency with anti-IgA antibodies testing performed: one new and two known cases. Three patients had low IgA and IgM. The remaining 30 patients had at least one of a number of diagnoses that explained the low IgA result. For each new diagnosis of SIgAD, the ordering physician was contacted by fax, email, page or phone. We recommended additional testing to include high sensitivity IgA level and anti-IgA ELISA, and documented possible issues related to transfusion and IVIG administration in the EMR. There were no identified cases of severe allergic transfusion reaction in low or IgA deficient patients. Conclusion: This retrospective chart review identified 10 new cases of SIgAD in our patient population, including five patients with SIgAD for whom an immunodeficiency of IgA was an unexpected finding. This review allowed us to make testing recommendations in their work up and discuss these cases with their provider. Of these new cases, one patient was identified as having true IgA deficiency and anti-IgA antibodies, and testing for nine patients is not completed. This study highlights the importance of communication between the transfusion medicine service and our clinical colleagues, and the interdisciplinary effort needed to help avoid possible patient harm. Table 1) . None of the deaths were associated with transfusion complications. An unexplained drop in the hemoglobin (Hgb) level by 4.6 ± 0.38 g/dl at an average of 4 days following ERTs was experienced by 27 (71%) of the surviving patients. An association between the changes in Hgb levels and the amount of incompatible plasma volumes transfused was not established. A higher mortality rate was present in patients that received >75% of blood volume replaced by incompatible plasma, compared to lesser percentages (Table 1) . Conclusion: Incompatible ABO plasma transfusion in ERTs is a safe and lifesaving strategy that is not associated with increased transfusion related adverse events. Incompatible plasma transfusions accounting for >75% of blood volume was associated with an increased mortality compared to a lesser percentages. However, overall severity of injury cannot be ruled out as a confounding factor leading to increased mortality in this high risk group. Background/Case Studies: During a massive transfusion event, the time required to issue large quantities of blood products and transport them to the patient can be problematic; clinicians often stockpile blood products at the bedside for better availability. Prompted by moving to a new building in which the blood bank was far from the operating room, we implemented the use of Hemoroam 15XL mobile blood storage refrigerators (MBRs) (Roemer Industries, Santee, CA) at our university health system, which includes 2 hospitals, a Level I trauma center, an obstetrics service and a liver transplant service (750 inpatient beds, transfusion volume: 23,000 red cell units annually). Our new massive transfusion protocol (MTP) utilizes a rotation of 3 MBRs to keep blood products continuously available at the bedside. Study Design/Method: Approval and funding were obtained from the hospital administration, and 10 MBRs were purchased and validated. A new standard operating procedure (SOP) for the MBR was implemented, and our blood issuing SOP was updated. Previously, our issue process involved a courier reading the product information to a technologist. In the new process, one technologist issues products in the computer system, and a second technologist checks the products in the MBR against the printed report. The first MBR is stocked with 10 units of red cells and 10 plasma. A room-temperature drawer contains 1 apheresis platelet and if ordered, cryoprecipitate. When the first MBR is issued, a second is prepared. After the second MBR is issued, a third is prepared. The third MBR is issued upon the return of the first, and the cycle can continue as long as the MTP is active. The MBRs were piloted with the liver transplant program, and usage was subsequently expanded to the entire health system, including MTPs and other high-volume transfusion events upon request. Issuing time and usage trends were evaluated. Background/Case Studies: Orders were received to transfuse 2 units of platelets (PLTs) to a 17 year old neutropenic patient with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) in the outpatient setting. Two apheresis PLTs were allocated and issued at about 11 am and transfused within the next hour. There were no signs of a transfusion reaction noted during or immediately after the transfusion but approximately 30 minutes after completing the outpatient visit, the patient returned to the Emergency Department (ED) with fever and chills. Blood cultures were collected and the patient was admitted to the hospital. Initial thought was that the patient's central line (port) was contaminated. The following evening the septic symptoms were linked to the transfusion and a transfusion reaction was reported to the transfusion service (TS). Study Design/Method: The blood supplier was notified of the transfusion reaction, but the original PLT containers were no longer available for culture. The 1 st unit transfused had a concurrent plasma available and a second PLT container from this same collection that was transfused to a patient in another hospital facility without any reports of adverse reactions. The 2 nd unit transfused was part of a triple collection with a 2 nd container returned to the blood supplier due to the presence of clots on the 4 th day after collection. The 3 rd PLT container from the 2 nd unit transfused had been transfused to a post-bone marrow transplant patient about 6:30 am on the same day as the other transfused container with no signs or symptoms of a transfusion reaction. Cultures from the concurrent plasma of the 1 st unit transfused were negative, but cultures from the clotted PLT from the 2 nd unit transfused were positive and identified as Methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus. Blood cultures from the septic patient also grew Methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus. Results/Finding: The initial culture performed on the parent PLT product by the blood center was sampled 24 hours after the collection and was negative after 5 days incubation on the BACT/ALERT ® instrument; additionally, the initial samples were subsequently plated after notification of the transfusion reaction and found to be negative. All 3 PLT containers from the suspect collection were tested at the hospital using point of issue bacterial testing (Verax Platelet PGD® Test) on midnight of day 3 into day 4 and found to be negative for the presence of bacteria. S. aureus from the patient blood culture and the positive PLT container were sent for genotyping and found to be identical, indicating that the patient's septic reaction was caused by the transfused PLT product. Conclusion: Although point of issue bacterial screening was performed, it appears that the level of bacteria was below the limit of detection which may have resulted in the false negative results. On the clinical side, even after symptoms of a reaction were present, the initial assumption was that the patient had a central line-associated blood stream infection (CLABSI). Discussion with clinical staff shows that the current CLABSI investigation process does not include checking to see if blood products have recently been given that may have caused patient to be septic. The other lesson learned was that the TS did not realize that the clot found in one of the containers might indicate the presence bacteria and that the co-components should have been removed from the inventory. Background/Case Studies: Identification of septic transfusion reactions (STR) relies on recognition of signs and symptoms and prompt reporting of suspected transfusion reactions. Clinical signs and symptoms associated with possible STR include fever, hypotension and tachycardia. Current AABB criteria define fever as >/ = 38C with a rise of >/ = 1C; however, hypotension and tachycardia are undefined. The goal of this study was to compare subjective reported symptoms to objective recorded vital signs by analyzing a large database of transfusion reaction reports in adults (> 15 years). Study Designs/Method: We collected retrospective data for all transfusion reactions that resulted in culture of the residual product during calendar year 2016. We also collected the same data for any reactions with positive residual product culture results from 2012-2015, to enrich the dataset for positive results. Vital signs changes were defined as follows: 1) Fever: > /=38C and increase of 1C; 2) Hypotension: systolic blood pressure (SBP) < / = 90 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure (DBP) < / = 60 mmHg and 15% decrease from baseline; and 3) Tachycardia of HR > / = 100bpm and 15% increase from baseline. Reported subjective and observed objective vital signs were compared for precision and accuracy of reporting. Results/Finding: Reaction vital sign data from 807 adult transfusion reaction reports were analyzed. Fever was reported in 490 reactions, 120 of these (24%) did not meet AABB criteria whereas 3 of 317 (1%) reactions with no fever reported had a fever meeting AABB criteria. Hypotension was reported in 126 reactions, 31 of these (24%) did not meet definition for hypotension, whereas 48 of 681 (7%) reactions with no hypotension reported had hypotension. Tachycardia was reported in 263 reactions, 109 of these (41%) did not meet definition for tachycardia, whereas 25 of 544 (5%) reactions with no tachycardia reported had tachycardia. A comparison of the precision and accuracy of subjective reporting compared to defined criteria is shown in the table. Conclusion: These study results indicate that the accuracy of reporting fever, hypotension, and / or tachycardia, during a blood transfusion in adult patients, is high (greater than 80%) but could be further improved. Indeed subjective reporting is associated with a high false positive rate (greater than 20%) despite a high negative predictive value (greater than 90%), meaning that transfusion associated vital signs changes tend to be overreported. Improved Pairwise Kinship Analysis Using Massively Parallel Sequencing Ran Li and Hongyu Sun*. Sun Yat-sen University Background/Case Studies: At present relationship testing is usually performed by detecting 15$23 STR loci using capillary electrophoresis technology. Powerful discrimination can be obtained for parent-child relationship but it may not be confident enough to determine more distant relationships. More genetic markers are needed for the distant relationships. Massively parallel sequencing (MPS), also known as next generation sequencing (NGS), offers the possibilities to analyzing multiple types of markers in a single reaction. In this study, we evaluated the performance of the Fore-nseq™ signature system, a novel typing system based on NGS platform, for pairwise kinship analysis. Study Design/Method: 67 individuals from two families were analyzed to explore the efficacy of the Forenseq™ signature system for pairwise kinship analysis. Amelogenin, 27 autosomal STRs, 24 Y-STRs, 7 X-STRs and 94 identity informative SNPs were analyzed simutaneously in one reaction. 5 types of pairwise relationships including parent-offspring, full siblings, grandparent-grandchild, uncle/aunt-nephew / niece and first cousin were selected from these two families and the corresponding likelihood ratios (LRs) were calculated using either sequence or length genotype data (i.e., LR sequence and LR length ). In addition, the system powers of the STRs and SNPs in the panel were also estimated by simulation. Results/Finding: 54, 9 and 5 additional alleles were observed based on sequence for autosomal STR, Y-STR and X-STR respectively compared to those based on length and 11 novel alleles were identified. 5 mutations were found for STRs but no mutation was observed for SNPs. For 27 autosomal STR loci, the LRs were increased from 9.20, 7.87, 2.01, 2.07 and 0.42 for log 10 LR length to 11.52, 10.12, 2.61, 2.60 and 0.52 for log 10 LR sequence for paternity index (PI), full siblings index (FSI), grandparentgrandchild index (GI), uncle/aunt-nephew/niece index (UNI) and first cousin index (FCI) respectively. PI values for 94 SNPs separated more than those of 27 STRs if two individuals were non-parent-offspring relatives. For the simulation study, the effectiveness was 1 for the parent-offspring relationship at the thresholds of -4≦log 10 LR≦4 and was > 0.9996 for full siblings at the thresholds of -2≦log 10 LR≦2 With an low error rate of 0.47%, 92.79% of second-degree relative pairs could be determined at the thresholds of -1≦log 10 LR≦1, while the effectiveness was only 0.4302 for first-cousins with a relatively high error rate of 2.32%. Conclusion: STR typing according to the sequence information were more polymorphic, which increased the discrimination power for kinship testing. Compared to these 27 STR markers, 94 SNP markers in this panel had advantages in paternity testing especially when mutated STRs were involved or when a relative was an alleged parent. This panel was powerful enough to resolve paternity testing, full sibling testing and most second degree relationships testing with a very low error rate, while more markers were still needed for first-cousin testing. Conclusion: These data support the continued rejection of all samples that do not meet the local patient and phlebotomist identification criteria. Furthermore, these data support performing both an ABO and RhD typing on samples that are collected to verify the fidelity of the initial ABO and RhD typing on patients without a historical ABO and RhD typing on file. Background/Case Studies: During cardiovascular surgery (CVS), infants < 4 months of age are exposed to large volume transfusions. The evidence supporting the use of AS1 RBCs in large volume transfusions is not well established. Blood bank at our institution has performed a volume reduction of the AS1 RBCs for infants < 4 months of age undergoing CVS. It has been a labor intense process and decision was made to switch to washing of the AS1 RBCs by using the Catsmart Cell Saver by Fresenius Kabi. The purpose of this study was to establish that change in process, from volume reduction to washing AS1 RBCs in the Catsmart Cell Saver, prior to placing the patient on the cardiopulmonary bypass will provide safe and consistent results. Study Design/Method: First, we analyzed laboratory characteristics of 6 AS1 RBC units pre and post volume reduction and pre and post cellwash using the Catsmart Cell Saver (table not included in this abstract). Second, samples were obtained at four time points including a sample from the unmanipulated AS1 red cells (pre cellsaver), a sample after the post cellsaver wash, a sample from a pump (bypass prime) and a sample collected 5 minutes after the patient was on the bypass. Blood samples were analyzed for analytes considered clinically significant if outside of the normal range. The blood samples were collected on seven cases at the time of CVS in infants < 4 months of age. Testing was performed on a GEM 4 blood gas analyzer and osmolality was performed on the Advanced Instrument Micro-Osmometer. This particular test was not part of the standard electrolyte panel tested at the time of the surgery thus it was omitted from the last (bypass) time point. Results/Finding: Pre and post red cell washing Conclusion: Potassium and glucose concentrations were high in the RBC AS1 units prior to any manipulation and concentrations were significantly decreased with washing, and increased or stayed the same with volume reduction. Plasma free hemoglobin was slightly elevated prior to any manipulation and was increased with any manipulation of the RBC units, more so with volume reduction then washing. Osmolality was mildly elevated prior to any manipulation. It was about the same after volume reduction and decreased after washing. Lactic acid was elevated in the RBC units prior to washing and was significantly decreased after washing. Summary: Washing of the red cells, using the CATSmart Cell Saver by Fresenius Kabi, prior to major CVS in infants < 4 months of age, is safe as shown by this study. Washing might be somewhat better then volume reduction in providing a final red cell product with electrolyte concentrations close to the normal physiologic values. Retrospective chart review influenced adjudication most often in bleeding patients (Table) . Transfusions for upcoming procedures were only generally appropriate when a single unit was ordered and hemoglobin levels were <8 g/dL. Conclusion: Criteria for prospective screening were largely considered suitable even after further detail was gathered on retrospective review, with the potential exception of bleeding patients. We propose prospective screening of RBC transfusion is likely otherwise appropriate and medical/ surgical wards may be initial targets for intervention. Background/Case Studies: The hemolytic disease of fetus and newborn (HDFN) caused by certain maternal IgG antibody to infant's red blood cell (RBC) antigen is well recognized and typically can be managed effectively with phototherapy, IVIG, transfusion and/or exchange transfusion. Here we report a case of prolonged HDN with a possible inhibition of hematopoiesis, despite intense phototherapy, IVIG, and multiple transfusions. The infant eventually responded to erythropoietin treatment. Study Design/Method: All tests were performed by routine tube method using PEG, LISS, Saline or by use of IgG gel cards. Acid elution and EDTA-Glycine acid treatment (EGA) of RBCs were also performed. Identification of anti-D, anti-C and/or anti-G in maternal plasmawere performed by differential adsorption/elution using papain-treated R2R2 and r'r adsorbing cells. Titration of anti-D and/or anti-G in mother's and infant's plasma is performed by use of R2R2 and r'r indicator cells. RHD genotyping of the newborn was performed using PCR-RFLP and PCR-SSP targeting exon 7, intron 4, the RHD pseudogene, and Rhesus box identity regions initially. Further evaluation by Sanger sequencing for RHD and RHCE exons 1-10 was also done to determine the underlying RH genotype. Results/Finding: The mother was G1P0, with a history of hepatitis and drug use. Middle Cerebral Artery Peak Systolic Velocity and antibody titer were performed throughout pregnancy and there was no indication of HDFN or fetal hydrops. Her blood type is A negative. Anti-D and anti-G were  TRANSFUSION 2018 Vol. 58 Supplement S2 ABSTRACT identified by differential adsorption/elution method. The last antibody titer was performed 50 days prior to delivery. Using R2R2 cells, plasma was reactive up to 1:2048 dilution and titer using r'r cells was 1:64. The full term male infant was not visibly jaundiced or hydropic(Total Bili 5.9 mg/dL, Direct Bili 0.9 mg/dL) with Hct of 42%, but had an elevated retic count (9.7%) at birth. Peripheral blood smear showed marked polychromasia with increased nucleated RBCs. He was breast fed right after birth, but with poor feeding for many of the days. The infant blood type was A positive. D antigen typing was predicted by genomic testing due to serologic blocking of D antigen on cord cells (DAT anti-IgG 4+).Genetic sequencing of RHD gene revealed the nucleotide substitution c.1136C>T, which is associated with RHD*DAU0 allele. Acid eluate prepared from the infant's RBC demonstrated anti-G and anti-D. Note that whole blood exchange was not performed due to venous access,care issues and the fact that bilirubin was only mildly elevated. The newborn's anemia was prolonged almost 9 weeks after birth. Severely decreased reticulocyte count (0.2%-0.3%) was observed from 5 to 8 weeks after birth. It is interesting to note the mild initial presentation of HDFN, prolonged clinical course, as well as drastic decrease of retic count and rapid response to erythropoietin treatment. Conclusion: Here we reported a clinical presentation of prolonged HDFN due to anti-D and/or anti-G. With the low retic count and positive DAT of reticulocytes, possible inhibition of hematopoiesis by passively transferred maternal antibody was suspected. Severely low reticulocyte count was not observed until 5 weeks after birth. Therefore, we also hypothesize that the coating of anti-G may protect against severe hemolysis or inhibition of hematopoiesis by anti-D at birth. Background/Case Studies: The birth of conjoined twins constitutes a rare congenital malformation, with an estimated incidence between 1:50,000-1:200,000 births 1 . Conjoined twins usually present with complex anatomical conjunction, multiple congenital anomalies, and varying degrees of conjoined circulation, posing multiple challenges in transfusion and anesthetic management. This case series aims to summarize our experience in the transfusion management of three sets of conjoined twins undergoing separation surgery at a single institution. Study Design/Method: Medical records of conjoined twins admitted to our hospital for surgical separation from 2007 to 2017 were retrospectively reviewed. Three sets of conjoined twins underwent surgical separation under general anesthesia. Preoperative evaluation was performed to determine the extent of anatomical conjunction and associated anomalies. Anesthesia was simultaneously induced in all conjoined twins. Blood usage was tracked through the anesthesia record and transfusion service laboratory information system. Results/Finding: 3 sets of female twins were identified; 2 sets of twins were thoraco-ompalopagus and 1 set of twins was thoraco-omphalo-ischiopagus. A multidisciplinary approach was used in the operative planning involving anesthesia, pediatric surgery, plastic surgery, radiology, transfusion medicine, operating room staff, biomedical engineering, nursing staff, and clinical care units. Intradepartmental anesthesia-transfusion planning meetings involved the director of transfusion service, senior and junior transfusion medicine attending physicians, fellows, residents, laboratory manager, and staff supervisors. Based on transfusion-anesthesia meetings, special needs of the blood components were typical for pediatric transfusion with modifications based on hemodynamic considerations and the potential for massive transfusion, i.e. leukoreduced, fresh, etc. All conjoined twins were successfully separated. Estimated blood loss ranged between 400 mL and 700 mL during separation and reconstruction with red blood cell transfusion ranging between 13 mL/kg and 30 mL/kg. ). Non-specific auto-antibody was determined in 24%, anti-Lea 18%, cold-antibody 17%, anti-P1 9% and anti-E 9% ( Table 1 ). The most frequent reason for Ag-positive RBC transfusion was 'negative for indirect anti-globulin test (IAT)' (41%), followed by 'detection of non-specific auto-antibody' (26%), and 'lack of time for preparing Ag-negative RBCs' (2%) ( Table 1) . Clinically apparent hemolysis was observed in 4 cases (1%). Two were positive for anti-Jra, one each for anti-E+anti-Dib and anti-E. Ninety-nine (13%) of 765 cases without adverse effects had the clinically significant antibodies, such as anti-E (30%), anti-Lea (19%) and anti-Jka (10%). Conclusion: This is the first multi-center collaborative study on backgrounds, reactions and outcome of Ag-positive RBC transfusion. These data will be helpful for the patients who have irregular antibodies to RBC antigens. There was no increase in the total number of products used with the reduced pack size, but rather a slightly different distribution pattern of usage over time (See Table) . The majority (53%) still used 1 pack or less. In addition to reducing TAT, the uncrossmatched status of the first round led to productive discussions between lab technologists, residents, and physicians. When a physician preferred to wait rather than take uncrossmatched, it allowed time for discussion about the most suitable protocol. Conclusion: In conclusion, the review process put into place at this Level 1 Trauma Center allowed for proposal and monitoring of two effective MTP protocol changes. The main effects of the Backup Pack implementation were on RBC inventory, lab TAT, and productive discussions. While a number of MTP's used more packs after the reduction in pack size, the overall picture did not differ. Greater than half (53%) of MTP's used only the initial pack whether the pack was large (6:6:1) or small (4:4:1 Study Design/Method: An assessment of our current OR blood supply chain revealed a complex process with anywhere from 20 to 34 steps to get blood from the blood bank to a patient in the OR suite, several areas for handoff failures and typical transport times of 30 minutes to as long as 60 minutes in some instances. Blood units, received but not needed for immediate transfusion, were stored in unlocked refrigerators in the OR Core. Units for multiple patients were stored in the same refrigeratorincluding units for those patients who were no longer in the OR-with no mechanical barrier in place to prevent removing the wrong unit. Additionally, there was no effective way to control access to refrigerators, monitor temperature or maintain traceability. Results/Finding: We went live in July 2013 with BloodTrack OnDemand using a HaemoBank device in our 20-room OR, post-anesthesia care unit (PACU) and cardiovascular recovery room (CVRR). The table below summarizes the results. Supply chain complexities were reduced, eliminating 22 steps. Blood availability in the procedure room is now < 5 minutes-an 83% faster delivery time -without requiring OR staff to leave the inner OR core. Blood wastage, which was previously 5.4% of units issued to the OR, decreased by 78% to 1.1%, saving approximately $90,000 annually. These efficiencies enabled the blood bank to reposition staff and eliminate 1.0FTEs. Blood bank workload related to preparing, packaging and transporting blood productsand tracking down missing or delayed unitshas been significantly reduced. In 2017, a second HaemoBank was installed in a new CVRR/ICU unit. With this addition, the average number of units dispensed from a controlled remote dispensing device increased from 14% to 25% of total red cell usage. Lastly, and most importantly for our patient safety, BloodTrack electronically captures and records blood product movements and verifies that the right blood is removed for the right patient. Conclusion: Implementing BloodTrack OnDemand with HaemoBank devices to manage blood product allocation for the hospital's OR, PACU and CVRR has significantly streamlined the hospital's processes, eliminating hand-off risks, improving availability and reducing costs. Effect of Riboflavin and Ultraviolet Light Pathogen Reduction Treatment on Blood Type Testing Using the Gel Column Agglutination Method Suzann Doane*, Susan Yonemura, Ozus Lohani and Susanne Marschner. Terumo BCT Background/Case Studies: A pathogen reduction device that uses riboflavin and ultraviolet light (R+UV) to reduce the potential infectious pathogen load and to inactivate white blood cells (WBC) in whole blood (WB) products intended for transfusion is in development. Several substances have been shown to interfere with ABO blood group testing due to patient sera reactivity to non-blood group agglutinins such as acriflavin (dye used in anti-B typing serum), neomycin (antibiotic), and some monoclonal antibodies (daratumumab) used in immunotherapy, to name just a few. One step in the development process for R+UV leukoreduced red blood cells (R +UV LR-RBC) was to ensure that riboflavin or any other elements of the treatment process would not alter or otherwise interfere with blood type antigen testing. There are various manual and automated blood group typing methods employed in the U.S. One of the more common methods (automated and manual) is the gel column agglutination (GCA) method. This study evaluated the use of GCA for testing the blood type and Rh factor of RBC from untreated WB, R+UV treated WB (R+UV WB) and R+UV LR-RBC. Study Design/Method: Ten (10) Grouping cards. Samples were tested for blood type, with additional unit characterization via cell quality measurements. Results/Finding: On the day of processing, all unit blood types and Rh factors matched those recorded by the collecting blood center, with no changes observed after R+UV light treatment or as R+UV LR-RBC. Cell quality parameters were in the expected ranges for R+UV-light-treated WB based on historical data, with key parameters of pH well above and % hemolysis well below the required values of >6.2 and <1%, respectively. Conclusion: Pathogen reduction using R+UV light did not interfere with A, B, AB or O blood types or Rh factor of RBC from treated WB or R+UV LR-RBC when tested with a common GCA testing system. Faisal Huq-Ronny* 1 , Beth A. Dy 2 and P. Dayand Borge 2 . 1 Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, 2 American Red Cross Background/Case Studies: Septic transfusion reactions can occur in any patient transfused with a contaminated blood product. However, in some patients exposed to a contaminated unit, they exhibit no signs of a reaction while in others the reaction is severe. The overall clinical circumstances of a patient exposed to a contaminated unit may affect the likelihood of a reaction. In this study, we assessed the incidence of patient diagnoses and the presence of neutropenia in septic transfusion reaction cases. Study Design/Method: We reviewed all highly probably/definite septic transfusion reactions reported to the American Red Cross from January 2012 to December 2016. The clinical diagnoses of the patients were recorded and the patients were categorized as follows: hematologic malignancy (including transplants), aplastic anemia/pancytopenia (including  transplants), solid organ transplant, other hematologic condition, non-hematologic cancer, cardiac/cardiovascular condition, infection, obstetric/gynecologic condition, accident/trauma, renal failure. The patients' neutrophil count statuses were recorded as definite, likely (not specifically recorded but likely given other clinical factors in the patient's history/record), and possible (based on clinical diagnosis). Results/Finding: Of the 49 cases reported, 24 (49%) occurred in patients with hematologic malignancy (21 cases, 42.9%) and aplastic anemia (3 cases, 6.1%). Neutropenia was present as definite, likely, or possible in 14 (28.6%), 5 (10.2%), and 9 (18.4%) of all cases respectively. The percent incidence of definite/likely neutropenia or definite/likely/possible neutropenia in all cases was 38.8% and 57.1% respectively. 12 (85.7%) of the cases with definite neutropenia were in the hematologic malignancy and aplastic anemia combined categories and in those combined categories, 50% of the cases were in patients with neutropenia. In the same combined group, definite/likely neutropenia was present in 16 cases (66.7%) and definite/likely/possible neutropenia was present in all 24 cases (100%). Conclusion: Among the reported septic transfusion reaction cases, patients with hematologic malignancies or aplastic anemia are more common than those with other diagnoses. Neutropenia or risk for neutropenia is also more common in these groups that have had septic transfusion reactions. These findings may be due to the frequency of blood product transfusion in these groups, but other causes may be present. Further clinical assessment is warranted. Background/Case Studies: Emergent neonatal transfusions are fraught with challenges. The blood bank (BB) and neonatology services must provide blood in a timely manner while simultaneously adhering to proper blood banking standards and navigating hospital processes and information systems. As they can occur outside of the controlled setting of a neonatal ICU, neonatal transfusion immediately following birth poses its own unique challenges. We describe here our institution's experience in developing a protocol for these particularly difficult scenarios. Study Design/Method: The need for an inter-departmental protocol addressing immediate-postnatal red blood cell (RBC) transfusions was recognized, specifically in the settings of the delivery room, operating room, and emergency department. Key stakeholders included: BB, neonatology, nursing, emergency, hospital admission/registration, laboratory information systems, and information technology services. Challenges to be addressed involved: 1.) unique identification of an unborn patient, 2.) documenting transfusion for said patient in the immediate post-natal period, 3.) efficient communication to BB, and 4.) rapid provision of unmodified, non-crossmatched RBC units while adhering to regulations and standards set forth by the FDA and accrediting agencies. Through multiple meetings, a protocol was drafted to define the respective roles of the BB and neonatology services. Results/Finding: After several revisions, the protocol outlined the following: 1. Neonatology creates a pending neonatal admission profile in the electronic medical record with two unique identifiers assigned immediately. 2. If transfusion is deemed necessary, neonatology telephones the blood bank for a "Code Baby Blood"an unambiguous prompt for this emergent situation. 3. BB is given the neonate's unique identifiers and a request for RBC under emergency release, read back for confirmation. 4. BB issues one whole unit of additive solution packed RBC, group O, Rhnegative, leukoreduced, hemoglobin S negative, non-irradiated, freshest available. 5. If not yet performed, BB performs maternal type and screena positive screen prompts immediate follow-up testing of the issued unit. Two timed simulations were conducted to identify areas for improvement. The first was completed in 13 minutes, and the second in 8 minutes. Conclusion: A thoughtful protocol for immediate-postnatal neonatal transfusion helps to streamline efforts and decrease confusion among caregivers in these situations. Our experience reflects one possible approach within the physical and logistic limitations of our institution. Future efforts will disseminate knowledge of this protocol to all potentially-involved caregivers within the hospital. Background/Case Studies: Selection of a compatible red blood cell (RBC) unit does not include matching for donor sex. This systematic review and meta-analysis aims to summarize the evidence examining the impact of sex-mismatched RBC transfusion on recipient mortality. Study Design/Method: Ovid MEDLINE, Ovid EMBASE, CINAHL, PubMed, Web of Science, and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews were searched up to January 12, 2018 to identify randomized control trials (RCTs) and observational studies examining the impact of donor sex on recipient outcomes. A meta-analysis was conducted on eligible studies and generated pooled hazard ratios (HRs) using a random-effects model. A three-level meta-analytic model was applied to emphasize the unknown dependence among the effect sizes. Prespecified analysis was done on the subgroup of cardiac surgery patients. Study quality was in duplicate using the ROBINS tool and certainty of the evidence for all outcomes was assessed using GRADE. Figure) . In the subgroup of cardiovascular surgery (n = 57,712), there was no significant increase in mortality with sex-mismatched transfusions (pooled HR 1.08; 95% CI 0.95-1.22). The data were prone to confounding, selection bias and reporting bias. Certainty of the evidence was very low. Conclusion: Sex-mismatched RBC transfusions were associated with an increased risk of death in this pooled analysis. However, the certainty of the evidence was very low from observational studies. There is a pressing need to further study the impact of donor sex because of its potential widespread impact. Background/Case Studies: The role of immature platelets in transfusion increments has not been elucidated. Immature platelets in single donor platelet (SDP) have greater longevity and are more biologically active than their mature counterparts, and have been used as diagnostic markers in thrombocytopenic patients. In this study we looked at the absolute immature platelet counts in SDP units given to neonatal patients receiving multiple transfusions to determine if they affect platelet recovery/increment. Study Design/Method: SDP units for neonatal patients were identified at the time of aliquot preparation. A total of 12 SDP transfused to 3 patients (4 SDP/patient) were identified over a one-month period. A 1-2 mL sample for A-IPC measurement was collected from units at time of aliquot preparation. Samples were analyzed using an automated hematology analyzer for complete blood count (CBC) and percent immature platelet fraction (%-IPF). A-IPC was obtained by multiplying platelet count times %-IPF. Percent platelet recovery (PPR) was obtained with formula: [post-transfusion platelet countpre-transfusion platelet count]/[(unit platelet count × splenic factor)/(total blood volume (TBV))], where splenic factor is 0.67 and TBV was body weight times 100 mL/kg for < 37 weeks estimated gestational age (EGA) or 85 mL/kg for > 37 weeks. Post-transfusion CBC were obtained within 24 hours. Results/Finding: Of the 12 SDP transfused to 3 patients, SDP platelet count (×10 9 /L) of 822 ± 418, %-IPF of 1.75 ± 0.91%, A-IPC (×10 9 /L) of 18.10 ± 10.83, and PPR (%) of 972.57 ± 945.66 are shown in Table 1 . %-IPF did not appear to correlate with platelet increment and instead the A-IPC indicated that A-IPC of 13-20 × 10 9 /L lead to approximately 40% improvement in platelet count. Higher A-IPC appear not to provide additional benefit which could be secondary to reduction in physiological capacity of higher numbers of immature platelets by irradiation.  Background/Case Studies: Electronic issue (EI) has been shown to improve the efficiency of hospital blood banks and provides the ability for blood banks to respond quickly to urgent requests for patients with a known blood group and recent negative antibody screen. This study evaluated the extension of EI to allow the release of blood in 2 ways: 1) away from the blood bank, close to the patient -utilizing the electronic remote blood issue (ERBI) a networked electronic remote blood release system, and 2) where blood bank staff issue blood using the same ERBI process but at a blood refrigerator in the blood bank. Study Design/Method: Of the 5 study sites (4 in UK and 1 in USA), 3 sites performed ERBI at blood refrigerators remote from the blood bank and 2 at blood refrigerator in the blood bank. Retrospective data were collected from the ERBI software databases and each blood bank laboratory information system (LIS). Prospective 'time and motion' study data collection methods were used to determine the blood bank and clinical staff time for each step of the blood issue processes for a unit of red blood cells. Results/Finding: ERBI from remote blood refrigerators (Table 1) • The time taken for blood units to reach the clinical area was reduced in 3 hospitals using ERBI at remote blood refrigerators. • Blood bank staff time was not increased for ERBI blood. • Blood bank efficiency was improved. The issue:transfusion (IT) ratio was lower for blood units obtained from the ERBI refrigerators when compared to EI from the blood bank. The staff cost of performing ERBI was reduced when compared to non-ERBI at all 3 sites; the median reduction was $1.65 (range $1.08-$2.09) per unit. • ERBI from blood refrigerators in the blood bank ( Table 1) • The time taken for clinical staff to obtain blood was not reduced with ERBI at a blood refrigerator in the blood bank but blood bank staff time to perform an ERBI was reduced compared to EI performed in the blood bank: median 240 (range 180-300) seconds/unit. • There was a mean increase in cost per blood unit for ERBI by clinical staff at these refrigerators of $0.19 (range $0.16-$0.21) per blood unit. Conclusion: ERBI at remote refrigerators improves the efficiency of transfusion by reducing the time taken for blood units to reach patients, clinical and blood bank staff time, and costs. The same benefits are not realized with ERBI from a blood refrigerator in the blood bank except that the time involved is shifted from blood bank to clinical staff collecting the blood. Background/Case Studies: Major Hemorrhage Protocols (MHP) can provide a timely, coordinated delivery of blood products for the bleeding patient. Evidence from military and civilian trauma studies advocate a ratio based transfusion protocol approach, which is now widely adopted by hospitals treating patients with diverse bleeding etiologies. This study investigates the success of a MHP in a tertiary university hospital in achieving these aims, including blood product wastage where the sole plasma product is frozen Solvent Detergent (SD) plasma. Study Design/Method: A retrospective analysis of MHP activations over 4 years (2014-2017) was performed. Data was collected using the hospital laboratory information system and electronic patient record database, to determine the number, location, clinical indication of the MHP activation, and evidence of blood product wastage. Results/Finding: One hundred and forty one MHP activations (male, 67%) occurred. Seventy two (51%) occurred in the Emergency Room (ER), 33 (23%) in the Operating Room (OR) and 16 (11%) in Intensive Care. Trauma accounted for just 34 (24%) activations. Gastrointestinal was the most common at 37 (26%) followed by vascular surgical bleeding events at 25 (18%). In 57% of cases emergency group O RhD negative red cells were used prior to MHP activation. When MHP was activated, pre-specified blood packs were requested rather than individual components (off-protocol) in 74% of cases. The median red cell:plasma ratio transfused was 3:2. Post activation delivery time of products varied by product type. Red cell and plasma median delivery times were 22 and 45 minutes respectively. Blood product wastage was significantly higher with plasma (18%) compared to red cells (2%). MHP activation analysis revealed plasma wastage in 46 of 141 (33%) activations. The majority occurred in the ER (plasma wastage, 29 of 46 (63%)) which also has the majority of MHP activations. In 14 of all 46 (30%) wastage cases death occurred prior to transfusion. Where ≤ 4 units of red cells were transfused, plasma was wasted in 25 of 46 (54%) cases. Conclusion: This study demonstrates that trauma is not the most common cause of MHP in this tertiary center. When activated a relatively high red cell: plasma ratio is achieved. Plasma wastage is high and reflects a limited post thaw shelf life. Non protocol MHP activations and plasma wastage that occurs in low red cell transfusion events indicate the need for continuous education for staff involved in MHP activation. Future efforts to reduce plasma wastage would necessitate increased post thaw shelf life. This would require change in licensure or manufacture of alternative plasma product in this region. Heather Toeppner* 1 , Jerry Squires 1 and Michelle Sharp 2 . 1 Medical University of South Carolina, 2 MUSC Health Background/Case Studies: According to the College of American Pathologists (CAP), approximately 169,000 adverse events occur in U.S. hospitals annually due to specimen identification errors, with 55% of all ID errors resulting from labeling errors. Mislabeled specimens are associated in almost 35% of actual or near-miss patient safety events and pose a serious concern in the Blood Bank (BB). From 2014-2016, there were 29 cord blood specimen labeling errors identified as either mislabeled or unlabeled. In 2016, our organization implemented a second independent sample requirement for ABO blood group verification. While this collection process improved outcomes with type & screen specimens, cord blood specimen collections in the Labor & Delivery (L&D) unit continued to demonstrate inconsistencies in labeling practices. A performance improvement initiative was identified by BB and the Transfusion Stewardship Officer. Study Design/Method: Standard of practice in obstetrical units is for cord blood samples to be collected from the newborn at delivery of all group O and/or Rh negative mothers. L&D is a unique environment in that when a pregnant patient delivers a newborn(s) there are 2 or more patients present in one hospital room which increases the risk of specimen labeling errors. In an attempt to improve the collection and labeling process, a Cord Blood Collection Kit was piloted in June 2016. This prepared collection kit was kept in the patient's room and contained a clear storage bag, a 2mL specimen tube with a neon green advisory label "CORD BLOOD USE ONLY" and a red bio-hazard bag for delivery. Results/Finding: Cord Blood Collection Kits were piloted for 90 days in June 2016 in 9 inpatient rooms of L&D. This 3-month trial resulted in a 93% decrease of cord blood specimen labeling errors. Based on this outcome, L&D leadership agreed to the official adoption of the prepared collection kits for best practice purposes, which, in a 2-year period, has demonstrated an almost 80% reduction in cord blood specimen labeling errors. Conclusion: Prior to the implementation of the prepared collection kits, cord blood specimen collection and labeling practices within L&D were inconsistent and non-compliant as evidenced by incidents reporting. After 6 months of prepared collection kit usage, L&D leadership recognized the marked decrease in specimen collection errors, the ease of use of the prepared kits, and the low cost of this intervention. These elements, together, contributed to the ongoing success within the department for improving cord 3) and a reticulocyte count of 3%. Peripheral blood smear did not reveal any schistocytes, polychromasia or spherocytosis. Hemoglobin concentration remained essentially unchanged throughout the rest of the stay and patient was discharged. The patient was readmitted one week later with hemoglobin of 3.3g/dL, again without active bleeding or hemolysis. An additional 6 Units of RBCs resulted in an increase from 3.3 g/dL to 3.5 g/dL. The patient typed as R2r, K-1, Fya, M and S negative. On account of this, a Rh (D) negative (rr), K-1 negative unit was transfused in order to serially monitor the allogeneic cells which demonstrated shortened survival of the RhD negative cells. A partial splenectomy was performed using embolization of the splenic artery, which resulted in a stabilization of the hemoglobin around 7g/dL. Based on the apparent stabilization of the hemoglobin after splenic artery embolization, a surgical splenectomy was performed resulting in a hemoglobin increase to $12 g/dL. The patient remains transfusion free 140 days post-splenectomy. Conclusion: Severe refractoriness to RBC transfusion is a rare event. Although the spleen is the likely culprit organ, there are few reports of the outcome of splenectomy, and frequently a reluctance to perform splenectomy in such patients. Our case illustrates that splenic artery embolization may be a useful initial approach and a potential predictor of the utility of a subsequent surgical splenectomy. Hemoglobin on arrival was 7.6 g/dL and decreased to 6.2 g/dL on hospital admission day 2. Given the patient's long history of transfusions with multiple known antibodies (Anti-C, anti-e, anti-Jk b , anti-K, warm alloantibody and recently identified cold reacting anti-N) and previous delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction (unidentified alloantibody), red blood cell transfusion was avoided. Due to a continuing downtrend in the hemoglobin, she was given one compatible unit (C=, e=, Jk b =, K=, N+) of packed red blood cells. Study Design/Method: A transfusion reaction work-up was requested by the clinical team due to a progressive decrease in hemoglobin from 6.2 g/dL to 2.3 g/dL following RBC transfusion (C=, e=, Jk b =, K=, N+). Given N antibodies are typically IgM and cold reacting, the transfused unit was N+. A direct polyclonal Coombs (DAT) was performed on the pre-transfusion and post-transfusion samples. Based on positive post transfusion DAT and negative pre-transfusion DAT, an antibody screening test was performed. Results/Finding: The patient's pre-transfusion DAT was negative, however post-transfusion polyclonal and IgG DATs were positive and negative for complement (C3). An antibody screen post-transfusion was also 2-3 panpositive on Gel and LISS on both screening and subsequent red cell panels. An initial elution was also pan-positive at 37°C. Adsorption was performed with R1R1, R2R2, rr cells. The resultant eluate was consistent with IgG anti-N. A red cell genotype showed the patient to be N=, C=, e=, K=, Jk b = and Do a =. Antibody identification showed an anti-N reactive at AHG and IgG while being nonreactive with C3. Previous unidentified antibody was found to be Do a . The patient was subsequently transfused with 1 of 2 crossmatch compatible units.She had a good response of an increase of 1g/dL with no repeat hemolytic reactions. Patient recovered after treatment of reactivated warm autoimmune hemolytic anemia and medical support with Hemopure ® . The patient was ultimately discharged home. Conclusion: Anti-N is usually a naturally occurring IgM/IgG cold-reactive, non-RBC stimulated antibody. They act as agglutinins in tests performed at temperatures below 37°C. However, few cases of warm reacting anti-N have been described. The presence of warm reacting anti-N in the eluate combined with the patient's severe anemia in the days following N + red cell transfusion resulted in a delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction secondary to a warm alloantibody to anti-N. In conclusion, the presence of new onset anti-N in patients with recurrent red cell transfusions may merit the administration of N = red cells. were identified over a one-month period. A 1-2 mL sample for A-IPC was collected from units at the time of aliquot preparation for patient transfusion. Samples were analyzed using an automated hematology analyzer for complete blood count (CBC) and percent immature platelet fraction (%-IPF). A-IPC was obtained by multiplying the platelet count times %-IPF. Samples were separated into groups depending on the time elapsed from the aliquot issue to sample run time; < 24 hours, between 24-48 hours, and between 48-72 hours. There were no samples analyzed after 72 hours. Results are reported as mean ± standard deviation (SD) unless otherwise indicated. Results/Finding: Of the 14 aliquots identified, there were 9 unique units and 5 unique patients, with unit platelet count (x10 9 /L) of 1035.29 ± 237.79 (range 673-1453), %-IPF of 2.19 ± 0.97% (range 0.60-3.70), and A-IPC (x10 9 /L) of 22.23 ± 11.03 (see Table 1 ). There was no statistical difference from the mean between platelet count, %-IPF, or A-IPC when separated into <24 hours, 24-48 hours, or 48-72 hours. Background/Case Studies: Acute traumatic coagulopathy has been associated with increased mortality. Studies have shown that prompt administration of plasma products in a high plasma:red cells ratio in a trauma setting can improve outcomes. Prior to April of 2017, Transfusion Medicine (TM) supplied thawed plasma (TP) for trauma patients after initiation of a massive transfusion protocol (MTP). 4 type A and 2 AB TP were typically pre-thawed on weekdays and 4 type A and 4 AB were typically pre-thawed on weekends. The first round of the MTP consists of 8 TP, so often 2 more plasma had to be thawed to fulfill the first round, delaying those products by a minimum of 25 minutes. In response to a request from Trauma service and in an effort to improve plasma supply times, TM started supplying liquid plasma (LP) in April of 2017 for the first round of MTPs. This plasma product does not require thawing. TM's labeling and dispensing practices were also modified in an attempt to further decrease time to supply plasma products. This study was performed to determine if the switch to LP and the modifications to TM's labeling/dispense procedures resulted in a significant decrease in time to provide plasma for the first round of a MTP. Study Design/Method: This was a non-experimental, retrospective study. Times from initiation of the MTP to dispense time of plasma for the first round were gathered from 1/1/2017 to 4/15/2017 and from 1/1/2018 to 3/31/2018 to determine the dispense times before and after TM's provision of LP and labeling and dispense procedure modifications respectively. Mean dispense times were calculated for each time period. A two-sample t test was performed to evaluate the two period mean difference for significance. Results/Finding: A total of 76 records were retrieved. 16 records were excluded as no plasma products were transfused, thus we were unable to determine the dispense time. The mean pre-LP and procedure modifications time to dispense was 9.81 minutes (n = 30, SD = 4.43) and the mean post-LP and procedure modifications was 5.66 minutes (n = 28, SD = 3.10). The difference between the means was significant (p < 0.01). Further differentiation by shift also showed a reduction in mean dispense time, with the following results: Day Shift 9.67 minutes (n = 6, SD = 3.50) to 5.43 minutes (n = 7, SD = 3.05), Evening Shift 10.86 minutes (n = 15, SD = 4.73) to 6.64 minutes (n = 10, SD = 3.30), and Late Night Shift 8.67 minutes (n = 8, SD = 5.15) to 4.82 minutes (n = 12, SD = 2.93). These results were significant for Evening Shift (p = 0.04) and Late Night Shift (p = 0.03) but not Day Shift (p = 0.07). Conclusion: By switching to LP from TP for the first round of a MTP and modifying the labeling and dispense procedures, TM was able to significantly reduce the time required to supply plasma during a MTP. Jenna Khan* 1 , Jennifer Hoek 2,3 and Nabiha H. Saifee 2,3 . 1 University of Washington Medical Center, 2 Seattle Children's Hospital, 3 Bloodworks NW Background/Case Studies: Studies of transfusion recipients with weak D types 1, 2, or 3 have not shown anti-RhD alloimmunization; thus, RhD-positive blood products may be safely administered allowing better management of limited RhD-negative inventory. Serologic typing for RhD has variable results depending on the specific reagents and methodologies used and cannot easily distinguish weak or partial RhD variants. This study aims to evaluate the impact of RHD genotyping on inventory of RhD negative blood products at a single tertiary care pediatric hospital. Study Design/Method: Transfusion history from March 2010 to March 2018 and initial ABO/RhD typing was reviewed for pediatric patients less than 18 years of age at the time of most recent ABO/RhD typing and with a documented serologic weak D positive test. Initial ABO/RhD typing at our institution includes gel column technology from Ortho-Clinical Diagnostics (Raritan, NJ) with pre-loaded anti-D and tube testing using a monoclonal IgM anti-D blend with polyclonal IgG anti-D (BioClone, Ortho). Serologic weak D testing was performed if anti-D results were weak to 1 + or discrepant (e.g. anti-D reagent in gel shows 2+, but tube is negative or weak). The incidence of anti-RhD alloimmunization and blood product exposure by gender was evaluated. The number of RhD negative units that could be replaced with RhD positive units if RHD genotyping was performed was determined based on an estimated 80% prevalence of weak D types 1, 2, or 3 in an ethnically mixed US population and our local transfusion practice to give RhD positive blood products to males with weak RhD phenotype and RhD negative blood products to females with weak RhD phenotype. Results/Finding: Of 13,187 patients less than 18 years old with ABO typing, forty-eight (0.4%, 23 female, 25 male) were identified to be serologically weak D. 56 RBCs and 43 platelets were transfused to these weak D patients (21 RBCs and 15 platelets to females; 35 RBCs and 28 platelets to males). About 31% of weak D patients received any RBC or platelet transfusions with 69% of these transfusions going to five patients. There was no anti-RhD alloimmunization detected. It is estimated that $17 RBC and $12 platelet transfusions could have been replaced with RhD positive products during this 8 year time period had RHD genotyping been performed. Conclusion: Given the variable rate of transfusion to weak D patients, the decision to perform RHD genotyping should take into consideration the likelihood of transfusion. Although there was no reported RhD-alloimmunization, our population is predominantly Caucasian and there was a limited number of transfusions and limited follow-up. It remains particularly important to prevent alloimmunization in the pediatric population as they will have a greater lifetime risk of associated morbidity. To maximize the benefit of RHD genotyping better mechanisms need to be developed for this information to be accessible across institutions to optimize care and prevent repeat testing. Stephanie M. Labib* 1 and Shauna L. Background/Case Studies: Hemorrhage remains a major cause of potentially preventable deaths. A rapid and effective response is vital for a successful outcome after major blood loss. In our institute, the Transfusion Service responds to massive hemorrhage by following a previously developed massive transfusion protocol (MTP). However, the time it took to issue blood products was too long and the clinical feedback has been unsatisfactory. Recently, multiple changes have been made in our MTP to improve the efficiency of the Transfusion Service in responding to such clinical settings. Study Design/Method: Based on a root cause analysis of the clinical issue, the following changes were made: 1) redesigned the paperwork and safety check logistics; 2) pre-assembled MTP packs; 3) optimized/centralized the equipment arrangement in the blood bank work space and 4) MTPrelated staff training. To evaluate the effects of these changes, the length of time from blood bank notification (i.e. activation of MTP protocol) to issuance of the blood products were recorded and compared with previous cases. Paired t-test was used for the statistical analysis. Results/Finding: The average time spent from receipt of the call to issuance of the products before implementation of these changes was 10.10 ± 0.06 minutes (n=4). After these changes, the time spent was dramatically reduced nearly ten-fold 1.75 ± 0.13 minutes,(n=4), P < 0.001. There was no safety-related incidents reported. In this study, we demonstrated that the work efficiency in the blood bank under emergency conditions can be significantly improved by strategically rearranging the order of work flow (e.g. pre-assemble blood products instead of assembling blood products after the activation of MTP). For this extremely time sensitive task, optimizing equipment spatial arrangement to reduce the staff walking distance, redesigning a set of simplified/ goal-orientated paperwork, and relevant personnel training can all contribute to the improved Transfusion Service efficiency without compromising patient safety. Ordering Auditing Report for pediatric pts from 01/01/16 through 12/31/16 was performed. Pts met the following inclusion criteria: inpatient, age 0-18 years, and a minimum of 1 plt order during admission. Neonatal Intensive Care Unit pts were excluded. The parameters of total number of plt orders with indications, clinical services ordering plt, plt transfusion orders indications, procedure associated plt orders, plt count within 24 hours of order, and minimum/maximum plt orders per pt were analyzed with descriptive statistics used to summarize results. Results/Finding: Ninety three pts were included. Fourteen clinical services placed 698 plt orders in total with accompanying indication (mean plt count 44x10E9/L; median 22x10E9/L) see Table. Service that most frequently ordered plts was Bone Marrow Transplant followed by Hematology Oncology. Over 75% of 698 orders were associated with a procedure, and in 25% of those an invasive procedure indication was selected. Mean plt count was 20x10E9/L in pts whose indication was prophylaxis against spontaneous hemorrhage. Sixty six percent (n = 61) of pts had multiple plt orders (mean 11, median 7, range 2 -91). Of the pts with multiple plt orders, 52/61 (85%) had orders associated with more than one indication, whereas only 9 pts (15%) had orders with just one indication. Conclusion: Plt transfusion orders are common among pediatric patients at our institution, with the majority of pts receiving more than one order. Further studies are required to characterize ordering patterns and indications for pediatric plt transfusion. Background/Case Studies: The G antigen is an Rh antigen found on red blood cells that also express either D or C antigens. Anti-G is difficult to distinguish on an antibody panel, where it may be confused with anti-D plus anti-C. Since anti-G is commonly found in alloantibody mixtures with anti-D and/or anti-C, the contribution of a solitary anti-G alloantibody in causing hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn (HDFN) is unclear. Two prior case reports of isolated anti-G in pregnancy demonstrated no evidence of hemolytic disease in one D+, C-infant and moderate hemolytic disease requiring prolonged phototherapy in the second D+C + infant. Study Design/Method: A 26-year-old G4P0030 O negative woman was referred to our maternal-fetal medicine service at 36 5/7 weeks gestation for hypertension and alloimmunization with anti-D and anti-C alloantibodies. These alloantibodies were first identified 4 years ago after an ectopic pregnancy; at that time she had received prophylactic RhIg and had been transfused O negative red blood cells. During her current pregnancy she had been followed with serial antibody titers and middle cerebral artery (MCA) Doppler ultrasound by the referring hospital. Although both anti-D and anti-C titers were elevated above the threshold of 16, MCA Dopplers showed no evidence of fetal anemia. She did not receive prophylactic RhIg during this pregnancy due to the previous diagnosis of anti-D alloantibody. Upon arrival at our hospital, G differentiation testing was performed which revealed the presence of anti-G plus anti-C, but no anti-D alloantibody. Results/Finding: An O positive infant was delivered at 37 1/7 weeks due to maternal hypertension. The neonatal DAT was positive, and the eluate reacted with all D + or C + cells, consistent with anti-G. The neonatal RBCs were D+C-. On the first day of life, the infant developed an elevated bilirubin level, and required 2 days of phototherapy for treatment of HDFN. Hematocrit remained stable and no transfusions were given. Conclusion: Once the presence of anti-G and the absence of anti-D was established, RhIg prophylaxis was administered to the mother postpartum. Anti-G should be suspected in a pregnant woman when anti-D and anti-C appear simultaneously on an antibody panel, and prophylactic RhIg should be administered if anti-D is not present on G differentiation studies. In this case the only maternal alloantibodies were anti-G and anti-C, and the infant was negative for C antigen. This case demonstrates development of mild HDFN attributable to an isolated anti-G alloantibody. Background/Case Studies: Massive transfusion of greater than 10 units of RBC in 24 hours is a well described but increasingly uncommon event. In a previous report, only 55 of 309 massive transfusion protocol (MTP) activations met the old 10 unit criteria to understand other episodes of high rate-of-blood-use. We reviewed a year of blood use in a high acuity hospital for non-MTP-activation episodes that met the Critical Administration Threshold-1 (CAT-1) definition of three blood components administered in one hour. Study Design/Method: A year's worth of blood use in a 440 bed urban county hospital was reviewed for episodes of CAT-1 that occurred outside of MTPs. Descriptive statistics of patients and episodes were assembled into tables and graphs using microcomputer spreadsheet software. Results/Finding: The hospital admitted 16,967 patients and administered 13,668 blood components in 2017. There were 309 MTP activations, 77% for trauma, and 195 non-MTP CAT-1 episodes. Such episodes occurred in secondary surgeries for trauma patients, for episodes of bleeding in in nontrauma related surgeries, and in patients with severe GI bleeding. In-hospital-mortality was low in the surgical bleeding situations, higher with the GI bleeds. Conclusion: Apart from conventional massive transfusion situations, smaller episodes of high-rate-of-blood use occur frequently in the acute care hospitals. With rapid correction they are of low mortality. Transfusion services need to be able to support these situations with rapid responses of hemostatic products. Only emergency room and the neurology intensive care unit were considered, as these departments manage the majority of ICH patients and undergo the standard protocol when requesting blood products. The standard protocol for platelets requires initial review of clinician's order by lab personnel to verify patient's confirmed blood type, a current platelet count (within 24 hrs), and number of previous platelet transfusions (within 24hrs). Orders for two or more adult dose platelet units and platelet count-related concerns require further auditing at the blood bank by pathology resident or fellow. Counts exceeding 20K cells/mcL in non-emergent units or 50K cells/ mcL in actively bleeding patients require follow-up to determine clinical need. In suspected brain bleeds, the clinical goal is to maintain platelet count at above 100k cells/mcL, thus a majority of platelet requests for such patients undergo the standard protocol on the basis of the platelet count alone. In addition, the absence of confirmed blood type may present a delay as it requires blood draw and testing prior to releasing platelet for transfusion. Three TATs were defined: time from admission or symptom presentation to transfusion (TAT1), time from platelet request to issue (TAT2; Blood Bank-dependent), and time from platelet issue to transfusion (TAT3; department-dependent). Results/Finding: Our initial TAT1 yielded significant results, reducing TAT by >50% in both ED and non-ED (Neuro-ICU) patients. The blood bank dependent TAT, TAT2, also reduced TAT in both patient groups (>50%). Data pertaining to department-dependent TAT showed overall reduction but without significance (Table 1) . Preliminary data on clinical outcomes indicate hematoma reduction following Tier Platelet implementation (22.7 and 26.3%). (Table 2) . Conclusion: Tier Platelet TATs reduction is limited to blood banking practices. Further investigation is required to determine the factors affecting the transfusion start times of products once they are received by the respective hospital units. The effectiveness of Tier Platelet over trauma protocols is another area for investigation, as trauma protocols also bypass product auditing. Measures of clinical outcomes were limited to notations on CT scans entered in the electronic medical record within a 48 hour period post-ICH. A more standardized measure of clinical benefit using a combination of CT scans and labs following platelet transfusion would provide a clearer insight. . The number and rate of adverse reactions to PAD transfusion were 16 and 0.1%, whereas those of allogeneic blood transfusion were 1,075 and 0.7%, respectively, with the latter being significant (p < 0.01). Among 16 adverse reactions to PAD transfusion, the most common was febrile non-hemolytic transfusion reaction (FNHTR) at 12 (75%), followed by allergic reaction at 4 (25%). The severity of adverse reactions to PAD transfusion was Grade 1 (non-severe) in all cases. With regard to blood component types, 16 adverse reactions involved: 12 cases of whole blood PAD, 2 of frozen PAD, and 2 of autologous fresh-frozen plasma. Adverse reactions caused by autologous blood conservation were not observed in perioperative autologous cell salvage or acute normovolemic hemodilution in this study. Conclusion: Non-severe adverse reactions were observed on PAD transfusion at a rate of 0.1% at our institution. Background/Case Studies: This booklet continues the educational pediatric apheresis series with a third installment tackling the issues surrounding hematopoietic stem cell collection by apheresis. Over 2000 hematopoietic stem cell transplants (HSCT) occur annually in the United States in patients under the age of twenty. As of 2016, over twenty percent of these transplants utilized apheresis-derived autologous or allogeneic products, an increase from recent years. As with any invasive medical procedure, hematopoietic stem cell collection by apheresis can be psychologically upsetting in the pediatric population, causing fear, pain and feelings of helplessness. These feelings can manifest as anger, aggression, and anxiety, which can lead to increased procedure times, treatment delays, and long term psychological trauma. Studies show that educating pediatric patients and their families on what to expect, as well as hospital staff expectations of them, can reduce these feelings of anxiety, help patients feel empowered, and reduce emotional trauma. Previous projects revealed the lack of age appropriate literature on apheresis procedures in general, including the topics covered in the first two booklets of this series, therapeutic plasma exchange and red blood cell exchange. Study Design/Method: An age-specific storyboard was developed in collaboration with a pediatric hematologist-oncologist and apheresis physicians. The accompanying artwork was produced in conjunction with a medical illustrator to enhance the story for our pediatric audience. Results/Finding: The story discusses why the apheresis stem cell collection is being performed, details the steps leading up to the procedure, and reviews what will occur on the day of collection. Included are strategies for coping, as well as a brief mention of what to expect in the future when the child returns for their transplant. While the storyboard directly addresses the procedure from the standpoint of an autologous donation, the booklet may also be helpful for allogenic pediatric donors preparing for their collections. The booklet has been made available on the hospital website for patient use. Conclusion: This installment of our pediatric apheresis series provides educational material at an age appropriate level to help prepare and reduce the stress experienced by both children and their caregivers during stem cell collections. This material serves as anticipatory guidance for a vulnerable and sensitive population. Ultimately, it has been designed to promote well-being, coping strategies, and empowerment by reducing the fear of the unknown as our smallest patients prepare for these complex, invasive procedures. Background/Case Studies: The purpose of this study is to gain evidence as to the effectiveness of microlearning videos on donor collections and operations and if videos are favorably accepted by individuals in the organization. The hypothesis is that people are drawn to and respond to video. Much of the information transmitted to the brain is visual and visual aids have been found to improve learning. Video learning is advantageous as it engages both visual and auditory channels of the brain. The assertion is that microlearning videos can help in knowledge retention as videos spread the cognitive load on the learner between auditory and visual learning channels. Ten microlearning videos have been created in one year and learners are able to access the videos on demand through the organization's internal website. A banner was created on the homepage of the organization's internal website so team members would easily be able to click the banner and access the Quick Tips video library. Study Design/Method: Videos are developed through the partnership of the Marketing and Communications Department and the Training Department. The videos were filmed at the organization's Orlando location in the multimedia studio. Videos were also filmed in the organization's simulation lab. The scripts are developed by the training department and are then reviewed and approved by the Director of Process Improvement. Then a representative from Quality Assurance attends filming to ensure all videos accurately represent current steps in the SOP for the topic. The following videos have been created during this study on the efficacy of microlearning videos: •  physicians based on their knowledge regarding the standards and blood transfusions guidelines and its application as practices in patient care. The present study was aimed at assessment of basic knowledge of clinical residents in our institute regarding blood transfusion guidelines and the bedside transfusion practices in our set up. Accordingly, the intervention strategies were planned, executed and a post-intervention assessment was performed to understand the impact of these interventions. Study Design/Method: The study was divided into three phases. In preintervention phase, blood transfusion practices were assessed in predecided clinical areas by observing transfusion episodes. All steps occurring at patient bedside were assessed including; Informed consent, Physician order, Blood requisition, Bedside checks, Starting transfusion and monitoring and documentation using pre-designed proforma. For assessing the knowledge of clinical residents, they were subjected to questionnaire based on Institute's blood transfusion guidelines. To fill the gaps in knowledge and practices of clinical residents regarding blood transfusion practices, educational strategies including audio-visual interactive seminars in each clinical specialty, regular messages, and e-mail alerts to regularly sensitize them in the intervention phase were implemented. In post-intervention phase, same clinical areas were assessed for blood transfusion practices. Results/Finding: The average score of knowledge regarding bedside transfusion practices in the study was found to be 61%, and this was gained by the residents through word of mouth from senior colleagues and clinical experience during their stay in the hospital. The first year residents had 56% correct response rate to the questionnaire which increased to 60% in 2ndand 63% by 3rd year. However, the actual good bedside transfusion practices were followed in less than 30% observations. Improper bedside storage of blood components was a major concern leading to deterioration of the quality of blood components. Best sample labeling practices were being followed in less than 40% observations, and informed consent record was found in less than 10% of observations despite the fact that > 80% had the knowledge regarding the same in knowledge assessment. After educational interventions, there was a slight improvement in the practices like blood transfusion consent, physician order, documentation of patient identity check in the file, improper storage of components in the ward refrigerator but the improvement was not statistically significant. Multitasking by patient bedside without any help from nursing staff in blood transfusionrelated activities was a major reason for non-compliance. Conclusion: The present study gave us the insight that there is a lot of scope for improvement in the bedside transfusion practices in our hospital which can only be achieved through continuous educational efforts followed by effective assessment and gap analysis. . The objectives of the project were to improve current transfusion practices by training medical staff on HV and establishing a system to monitor and evaluate the safety of blood transfusions, while comparing acute transfusion-related adverse reactions (TRAR) in patients who received transfusions of whole blood (WB) treated using the Mirasol Pathogen Reduction Technology (PRT) System and patients who received conventional WB transfusions. Korle Bu Teaching Hospital (Accra) and Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital (Kumasi) were the selected sites. Study Design/Method: The HV training plan was designed by AABB's consulting services (AABBCS) after assessment of existing practices of NBSG. The aim was to develop practical training materials to create HV awareness and increase transfusion medicine knowledge among the trainees (hospital and NBSG staff ). An 11-day training program incorporating lectures and practice sessions on the wards was developed using Ghanaian and AABB expertise. AABBCS engaged Dovel Technologies, LLC to develop the HV infrastructurea cloud-based data repository (portal) for electronic data capture, management, and analysis of transfusions and TRAR. The HV training included following topics: 1) quality systems (as defined in the Africa Society for Blood Transfusion Standards); 2) TRAR (based on the ISBT definitions for non-infectious transfusion reactions), near misses and follow up; 3) HV form completion and report writing; and 4) database development and use of the cloud-based portal for analysis. TBCT provided training on the operational process, which included manufacture, issue (Mirasol or non-Mirasol) and administration of blood products. Results/Finding: NBSG is currently monitoring the project in collaboration with leads from the two hospitals. Since the launch of the project in early June 2017, more than 1,100 transfusion records have been reported into the cloud-based portal as of mid-March 2018. An audit, conducted five months post-training, demonstrated an increased level of knowledge and enthusiasm for HV and better compliance to the operational processes. In addition, the principle behind the training ("train the trainers") has been realized, as both the HV knowledge and the Mirasol experience is being shared amongst other staff. Conclusion: Establishing an effective HV infrastructure is a multi-stakeholder undertaking. The HV training strengthened quality requirements of transfusion practice through better monitoring and reporting of transfusions and TRAR. Lessons learned will assist in the expansion of similar training programs and HV infrastructure at other sites, with the goal of establishing a national HV system in Ghana. Background/Case Studies: There are over 50 requirements that an individual must achieve to be eligible to donate blood. Students may find it difficult to learn all of these requirements and lecture presentations on this topic may be dry and typically unengaging. The Blood Bank Professors in a Medical Laboratory Science program in the Northeast wanted to find a new method to teach this subject matter. This program generally has 30-40 senior level students and the instruction during senior year is designed in blocks which students spend a certain number of days in each content area. The immunohematology section consists of 14 days that include both lecture and laboratory experiences. Having this compressed schedule, there is only one day dedicated to the donation process. In an effort to create an interactive learning experience that fits into this schedule, while providing students with quality content, a workshop was developed with role playing to aid the students in learning these requirements. Study Design/Method: A pilot workshop was designed having students role play the donor interview process to aid in learning the various reasons for deferral. A lecture was presented prior to the workshop to introduce the students to the interview process and donor eligibility. All students worked in pairs and were given an instructor-designed donor binder to serve as a guide during the workshop. The binder contains information regarding medication deferrals, travel restrictions, and two predetermined scenarios containing donor information. Using this information, one student completed the interview questionnaire. The student as the "interviewer" was given information regarding the hemoglobin, hematocrit, weight of the donor, and platelet count when applicable as the "mini physical". The interviewer then reviewed the questionnaire as well as the mini physical card and asked any follow up questions as applicable. The interviewer then completed a worksheet to answer questions whether the donor was eligible and if not, what was the reason for ineligibility. The roles were then switched so all students had the opportunity to play both roles. Results/Finding: The workshop executed in January 2018 has shown initial success. Students described the workshop as helpful and were engaged during the process. The average exam score for donor eligibility from 2013-17 was 79.3 and the 2018 exam average was 85.8. This anecdotal evidence shows an increase in understanding this content. Conclusion: Although the eligibility criteria for donors is complex and ever changing, this information can be presented in a way that maximizes learner engagement and understanding. There is potential for this workshop to be adapted to train other healthcare professionals in donation facilities or as a competency assessment tool, keeping in mind the time constraints in these facilities. Are Automated Titration Studies Consistent over Time? Leigh Frost*, Jenny Petkova, Michael Healy and Michael Lankiewicz. Background/Case Studies: In August 2015, FDA approved the ORTHO VISION® Blood Bank Analyzer which employs column agglutination gel technology. In June 2016, two transfusion services within a 1,000 + bed community hospital system implemented routine use of the Ortho VISION®. The test menu was fully evaluated, including antibody titration. Validation studies clearly demonstrated increased sensitivity of automated antibody titrations; resulting in a two-fold increase in titer on average over traditional tube technique titer results. However, it was unknown whether the age of 0.8% reagent red blood cells was a factor in the sensitivity of the automated assay. Study Design/Method: A retrospective analysis was conducted comparing automated titration results over time. A minimum of three separate patient sera containing antibodies to each of the following blood group systems were studied: Rh, Kell, Duffy and Kidd. Samples were frozen in multiple aliquots to facilitate study over time. Automated antibody titrations were performed upon receipt of a fresh lot of 0.8% Ortho RESOLVE® Panel A or B. Titration studies were then repeated each week; using the exact same 0.8% reagent red cell reagent until expiration of the panel. Then, one additional titration study was performed on each sample using the next, fresh lot# of 0.8% Ortho panel cells (different reagent red cell donor) in an attempt to fully evaluate automated titration consistency over time. Results/Finding: Of the 12 total sera evaluated in this study, 10/12 (83.3%) resulted in titer results no more than a one-fold difference throughout the entire study period, including across lot numbers of 0.8% Ortho Panels. As for the two outliers, one was anti-K and the other was anti-Fy b . The anti-K sample demonstrated a two-fold increase in titer to 64 (from 16) upon testing with the fresh 0.8% reagent red cell of a different lot. The anti-Fy b sample demonstrated a two-fold increase in titer to 16 (from 2) upon testing with fresh 0.8% reagent red cell of a different lot. NOTE: The serological phenotype (for target antigen/allele) of the 0.8% reagent red cells selected for titration studies was identical across lot numbers. The VISION® provides a standardized methodology to conduct titration studies with a high degree of reproducibility. Automated titer results did not vary more than one-fold difference over time, upon use of a consistent 0.8% reagent red cell antigen source. But even when antigen source was inconsistent, the titer result did not change more than two-fold from the original result. The data suggests the age of in-date 0.8% reagent red cells has no significant impact on automated titration results. However, random differences between individual reagent red cells may affect titer results; up to a two-fold difference. Operational Evaluation of a Hybridization-Based RBC Genotyping System within a Hospital Environment Chelsea Hayes* 1 , Ellen B. Klapper 1 , Jina Seo 1 and Ghislain Noumsi 2 . Background/Case Studies: Our hospital transfusion service uses a US FDA approved DNA genotyping system to predict extended RBC phenotypes of donors and patients. The aim of this study is to evaluate operational characteristics of a research use only genotyping platform (IDCORE XT, Grifols Diagnostic Solutions Inc., CA). Study Design/Method: DNA was extracted from EDTA whole blood samples and tested using IDCORE XT and the current system. Turnaround time (TAT) from DNA extraction to final result receipt, and technologist hands-on time were compared for different batch sizes. At the end of the study a questionnaire was administered to each operator to evaluate the ease of performing key procedural steps for each system, using a scale of 1-5 with 5 being the easiest. Results/Finding: A total of 408 samples were tested on both systems. TAT, method comparison and associated operator survey results are presented in Table 1 . IDCORE XT showed a 24.5% and 51.3% reduction in mean TAT and hands-on time, respectively, as compared to the current system. Each operator performed a mean of 5.5 IDCORE XT runs. The mean overall operator rating of IDCORE XT and the current system's key features was 4.4 and 3.7, respectively. Background/Case Studies: The purpose of this study was to prospectively evaluate the performance of 2 high-throughput gel-based analyzers (IH-1000™ Automated Blood Group: Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc. Hercules, CA) in an academic hospital transfusion service performing approximately 85,000 type and screen tests annually. The analyzers were evaluated for concordance with a high-throughput solid-phase platform (Neo®: Immucor, Inc. Norcross, GA) currently in use, as well as tube testing and blood supplier labeling. Study Design/Method: Tests for ABO/Rh (forward and reverse), antibody screen (ABS); ABO/Rh donor unit confirmations, and crossmatch compatibility (IgG) were performed on 2 IH-1000™s using IH-System Gel Cards, and compared to the Neo® as control method using the same EDTA samples. EDTA cord blood samples were tested with the IH-Newborn Card compared to the Neo®. Additional samples tested with Anti-IgG,-C3d and Anti-IgG were correlated against tube testing for the DAT. Antigen typing for C, c, E, e, and K were compared with tube testing (using commercial reagents) or blood supplier labeling. The concordance rate was calculated for the IH-1000™s together compared to the control method used for each assay. Results/Finding: The IH-1000s had 100% concordance with controls for ABO grouping assays, ABO/ Rh donor confirmations, Rh and Kell antigen typing assays, as well as the Anti-IgG crossmatch and Newborn testing card (Table 1) . Regarding DAT concordance, the increased sensitivity is reflected in the gel methodology over tube testing. Conclusion: High-throughput automated immunohematology systems are essential to support the test volumes in a large hospital transfusion service environment that performs type and screens, ABO/Rh unit confirmations, Rh and Kell antigen typing, and antibody identifications. This study demonstrates the IH-1000™ analyzers with IH-System Gel Cards are equivalent to the Neo® Immunohematology analyzer or tube tests, using the same samples for concordance. Rare method-dependent examples of anti-Jk a were identified in both systems. The acceptable lower concordance in comparisons with DAT tube testing was attributed to known increased sensitivity of gel based antiglobulin testing. Evaluation of Automated Instrumentation for Blood Bank Implementation Gwen Howell*, Melissa R. George, Nancy Hinkle, Sue Kale and Laura Duke. Penn State Health, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center Background/Case Studies: Automated Blood Bank testing platforms allow staff to multitask, reduce turnaround time and improve antibody detection when the automated instrument meets performance expectations. Historical state utilized the Immucor Galileo Echo® instrument to perform Type & Screen testing and antibody identification through solid phase methodology. Staff encountered an increase in positive antibody reactivity that appeared non-specific and was non-repeatable by the gold standard method (PEG). This led to an increase in turnaround time for critical patients and a temporary elimination of automated antibody panel testing from workflows. Study Design/Method: Additional automated instrument platforms (Immucor Echo Lumena™ and Immucor NEO®) were assessed and compared to current instrumentation for ease of use, turnaround time, and method comparison; focusing on non-repeatable antibody positivity rates. Staff were trained to use the new instrumentation and compared day to day operations to existing instrumentation for ease of use and workflow capabilities. Turnaround time was compared between Echo® and NEO® instruments for Type & Screen sample runs of 2, 6, and 10 specimens as well as concurrent loading of 2 and 6 sample sized runs. Method comparison was performed on twenty samples over a one month period on all three instruments. Samples utilized tested antibody screen positive (? to 3+) on the existing Echo® and negative by PEG. Antibody screens were then repeated on Echo Lumena™ and NEO® to assess reactivity. Results/Finding: Staff determined that the Echo Lumena™ and NEO® instruments were similar to use when compared to existing instrumentation and would not be difficult to implement in the lab. Comparing turnaround time between the Echo® and NEO® instruments for Type and Screen testing, it was determined that while the Echo® had a shorter turnaround time for a 2 sample run, the NEO® had a shorter turnaround time for all larger or concurrent runs. Turnaround time was reduced by 2-26 minutes, with the reduction increasing as the run size became larger. The NEO® was able to provide an ABO/RH result 7 minutes faster than the Echo®. Of the samples that initially tested antibody screen positive on the Galileo Echo®, 16 of the (INS3) 20 samples repeated negative on the Echo Lumena™ and 18 or the 20 samples repeated negative on the NEO®. An overall 5-10% non-repeatable antibody positivity rate was found for the NEO® and a 15-20% nonrepeatable antibody positivity rate was found for the Echo Lumena™. Conclusion: At the completion of the instrument assessment, it was determined that the Immucor Echo Lumena™ and Immucor NEO® would be acceptable instrument alternatives to existing instrumentation. Factors that lead to this conclusion included the reduction in turnaround time for both Type & Screen and ABO/RH testing on the NEO®, ease of use of the Echo Lumena™ and NEO® by staff, and the reduction of the non-repeatable antibody positivity rates for both the Echo Lumena™ and NEO® instrumentation. This reduction could lead to a decrease in manual testing required and an ability to again use automated antibody panel testing to complete complex workups without negatively affecting workflow or creating unnecessary reagent utilization. Background/Case Studies: Blood products intended for inventory must be maintained at temperatures defined by Federal regulations. We evaluated the Temp-Check (T-C) thermometer (Digi-Trax, Lincolnshire, IL) as a possible enhancement to our existing blood product return process. The T-C, similar to a scale in appearance, takes the temperature of a blood product by reading the outside of the bag as it sits on the device. Temperature is reported as an integer. We were unsure how measurement of the outside of the bag would compare to our gold standard used in previous temperature validations, a temperature probe inserted into the center of the unit. According to manufacturer materials, T-C's are sold with calibration certificates and are stated to be accurate to within one degree Celsius (°C), but no error range such as the standard deviation or confidence interval is provided. The latter is of particular concern for establishing cut-offs for product return acceptability. Study Design/Method: Two RBC and two plasma units were removed from the refrigerator and allowed to warm toward room temperature. Multiple paired temperature readings were performed with the T-C device and the established gold standard at our institution, a LogTag recorder (TREX-8), (LogTag Recorders, Auckland, New Zealand). A total of sixty (60) pairs of readings were taken (120 total data points). Using linear regression in the software package R (R Foundation for Statistical Computing) we found that mean measurement error and variability were independent of the true temperature and that error was approximately normally distributed around the true temperature. With that information established it was possible to estimate the range of possible true temperatures as a normal (bell-shaped) distribution, with the mean equal to the observed temperature minus the expected error and a standard deviation (SD) equal to the measurement error SD. Results/Finding: The estimated measurement error mean ± SD relative to the true temperature were -0.68 ± 0.70°C. Thus, the T-C had a detectable downward bias, but within the manufacturer's stated accuracy range of ± 1°C. From the observed distribution we calculated the probability that the gold standard ("True") temperature was ≤ 10.0°C given a T-C reading between 7 and 12°C (see table) . Conclusion: With only a 17% probability that a 10°C reading on the T-C was actually 10.0°C or less, this cutoff was unacceptable. Our institution chose a reading of 8°C on the T-C as a reasonably ( > 95%) certain indication that the unit's true temperature was 10.0°C or less. In conclusion, the advertised accuracy of the Temp-Check device was found to be true on average, but the error around that reading was such that an upper limit of 8°C needed to be established in order to have reasonable confidence that the unit was acceptable for return to inventory. In vitro manufactured platelets can overcome the issue of supply by providing a ready source independent of available donors. A closed-loop bioreactor system was designed to recreate key in vivo characteristics native to the hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) niche in a modified 3D cellular environment. cGMP grade reagents and procedures were utilized throughout the entire process with eventual clinical grade manufacturing in mind. Study Design/Method: The closed-loop bioreactor system consists of a peristaltic pump, cell culture bioreactor, fresh media reservoir, waste media container and a platelet collection vessel. Tubing and strategic placement of valves connects the components to create the closed-loop system. All components, excluding the pump, were designed as onetime-use disposables to move the process towards cGMP. The bioreactor consists of a multi-chamber unit separated by a porous membrane capable of allowing size-specific cellular products to move between the chambers. Cord blood mononuclear cell-derived CD34 + HSCs were seeded into the bioreactor and differentiated into mature megakaryocytes (MKs) with serum-free media. Platelet and platelet-like particles were harvested from mature MKs extending proplatelets (proPlts) through the chamberseparating porous membrane by increasing the shear rate in the celladjacent chamber. Within the bioreactor chamber, HSCs were differentiated into mature MKs at a rate of 26 -77%, n = 14, which extended proPlts in response to flow. Platelets were shed in response to shear forces and were analyzed by flow cytometry and using a hematology analyzer. Mature MKs were counted and analyzed by flow cytometry, and proPlt-producing MKs were assessed by counting cells seeded on fibrinogen-coated plates. Conclusion: Using a novel bioreactor system designed to recapitulate the 3D bone marrow microenvironment and physiologically relevant shear forces, improved MK differentiation and platelet production from in vitro derived MKs. This represents a significant step in the road to producing an in vitro-derived transfusable platelet unit. (RBCs) have not yet been sufficiently addressed. Promising new avenues in cell stabilization include biomimetic approaches based on intracellular conditions found in animals with the ability to maintain viable cells and tissues in a frozen or desiccated state (cryptobiosis). Our approach addresses storage limitations by lyophilizing human RBCs into a powder that could theoretically be stored for several years and be rehydrated as needed for transfusion. This process involves the non-reducing sugar trehalose, a compound with well-established cytoprotective properties in cryptobiotic animals. However, trehalose is impermeable to mammalian cells which hampered progress in using this promising biomolecule in RBC preservation. Our approach utilizes sonoporation for sugar loading of RBCs. Sonoporation is a process in which transient pores are induced in the cell membrane by the ultrasound-mediated oscillation of gas microbubbles. The objective of this study is to verify the efficacy of trehalose loading and longterm stability and functionality of preserved blood units. Study Design/Method: Human red blood cells were obtained with informed consent from donors. RBCs were resuspended and diluted in loading buffer containing trehalose immediately prior to treatment. Lipid-coated microbubbles were added to samples and B-mode ultrasound pulses were applied using an ultrasound imaging system. Trehalose uptake into RBC was confirmed enzymatically. RBCs were cooled to -80°C at a rate of -1°C/min followed by freeze-drying. Dried RBCs were stored at ambient temperature and resuspended in deionized water. Cell recovery was measured using automated cell counting and cell viability was assessed by staining with calcein-AM. Results/Finding: Sonoporation-mediated trehalose loading has minimal toxicity as 95-100% of RBCs were recovered after treatment. Trehaloseloaded RBCs showed > 95% recovery and viability after storage at -80°C, whereas a significantly reduced recovery of 20-40% was observed without treatment (n = 12; p<0.05). Recovery of lyophilized RBCs after rehydration was 16-30% and cell viability in this cell population was 70-80% (n = 12). Without trehalose loading, no viable RBCs were recovered after freeze-drying and rehydration. Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that sonoporation enhances delivery of trehalose into RBCs and dramatically increases recovery of intact RBCs following freezing/thawing or drying/rehydration. Although further testing is needed to evaluate RBC function in vivo after dry preservation, our approach offers significant potential to help stabilize the clinical blood supply and to increase the accessibility of blood transfusions in the future. Study Design/Method: Aliquots of plasma suspended PCs were stored in small in-house prepared bags which mimic the storage features of common PLT bags. Six bags were filled on the day of production: five were placed into 22°C storage with continuous agitation as per current practice, and one was placed into 4°C storage without agitation. On each of the following five days, one of the RT stored bags was moved into cold storage. After 14days, all aliquots were analyzed for metabolic activity (pH, glucose, lactate), PLT activation and response to ADP by CD62P binding, phosphatidyl-serine exposure by annexin-V binding, supernatant microvesicle count by CD41 staining, and clot formation evaluation using rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM). Results/Finding: With increasing delay in transfer from 22°C to 4°C storage, pH dropped from 7.4 to 7.0. This trend was mirrored in a 1.5-fold increase in glucose consumption and 1.4-fold increase in lactate production. PLT activation did not change for the first three cold storage delay times, but thereafter increased from about 63% to 79% CD62P-positive PLTs. This effect was also reflected in an altered response to ADP, decreasing from a high of 14% for the two shortest cold storage delay times down to almost no response for the longer delay times. Annexin-V binding increased from 21% to 28%, and the release of microvesicles increased by 20% between the two shortest cold storage delay times and the longer delay times. 270 therapeutic doses were thawed and transfused to patients. 347 PCs were frozen at Vladimir's Regional blood bank from February 2017 to April 2018. More than 200 CPC doses thawed and transfused into patients. Over 160 PCs were frozen at Tyumen's Regional blood bank from August 2017 to April 2018. More than 80 CPC doses thawed and transfused to patients. Freeze-thaw recovery of platelets was 80% or more of the original population in all blood bank. The defrosted CPC showed platelets at 229 ± 71х10 9 cells/dose (Moscow's Sklifosovsky Institute for Emergency Medicine), 170 ± 20х10 9 cells/dose (Vladimir's Regional blood bank), 182 ± 72х10 9 cells/ dose (Tyumen's Regional blood bank). 52 surgical and 40 Post-cardiac surgery patients, 21 neurosurgical patients and 47 patients after organs transplant (Moscow's Sklifosovsky Institute for Emergency Medicine); 6 oncologic and 41 haematology patients, 7 neurosurgical patients and 7 surgical patients (Vladimir's Regional blood bank); 31 haematology patients, 7 surgical patients and 8 post-cardiac surgery patients (Tyumen's Regional blood bank) were received therapeutic CPC transfusions. Hemorrhage stopped in the subjects given CPC transfusions with no complications seen after that in all medical centers. The 1-and 24-h posttransfusion CCI was 11,200 ± 3,800 m 2 /μL and 9,200 ± 4,600 m 2 /μL, respectively (Moscow's Sklifosovsky Institute for Emergency Medicine), 8,500 ± 3,500 m 2 /μL and 10,200 ± 3,500 m 2 /μL respectively (Vladimir's Regional blood bank). The 24-h posttransfusion CCI was 9,600 ± 1,700 m 2 /μL (Tyumen's Regional blood bank). The CCI being high at 24 h would be suggestive of the donor's platelets still circulating in the recipient's blood within 24 hours of the completion of transfusion. Conclusion: CPCs were demonstrated to be highly effective in all blood banks. The marked clinical effect is due to the high performance of CPCs. Michael Gannett* 1 and Richard Gammon 2 . 1 OneBlood, Inc -Orlando Immunohematology Reference Laboratory, 2 OneBlood, Inc Background/Case Studies: Previously the only pathway to volume reduce a source with an antibody of interest was to use expensive and/or laborious traditional methods (e.g. ultrafiltration membranes, dialysis, fractionation, precipitation). Many antibody specificities are not available commercially and must be obtained from plasma of donors and patients. When a source is found, it typically contains additional antibodies since routine screening does not detect antibodies to low prevalence antigens. For antisera, it is ideal to remove these antibodies, including isoagglutinins. Larger volumes of source material can be harder to manipulate and may require multiple freeze thaw cycles to obtain aliquots. This could affect product stability and requires more storage space. A method was sought to volume reduce source material so that additional antibodies could more easily be removed. Study Design/Method: A plastic separation device was made with a 3D printer which created two compartments when inserted in a 14 mL tube and allowed for a 3 mL cavity at the tube base. Source material was added to the tube which was immediately inverted and frozen at -30°C for 90 min or 24 hours. This created an ice column (IC) between the cap and separation device. The tube was removed from the freezer and immediately centrifuged with a swing bucket rotor at 1100g -1600g, for 4-8 minutes. The separation device prevented the IC from entering the tube base, yet allowed solute to separate from the IC and flow into the tube base. The IC was decanted and the concentrated solute (CS) was extracted through the separation device by inserting a syringe with a blunt needle. Total protein was measured via Bradford Assay. Results/Finding: From the 20 samples tested, the IC had a mean mass of 60% of the initial plasma mass, yet only contained a mean of 6% of the total protein (Table) . The CS had a mean mass of 30% of initial plasma mass, while recovering a mean of 70% of the total protein. We describe a new method, ICE. It can be used to reduce the mass of source material and concentrate protein. Development of a Point of Care Aptamer-Based Coagulopathy Sensor Scott Ferguson*. Aptitude Medical Systems Background/Case Studies: Coagulopathy of trauma results in a 4-fold increase in mortality, and since 30% of deaths caused by this condition occur within the first hour, rapid detection and aggressive correction can significantly improve patient outcomes. Fibrinogen plays a crucial role. It is the most vulnerable coagulation factor during hemorrhage, reaching critically low levels earlier than any other factor. Fibrinogen deficit is a strong predictor of TIC and an independent predictor of mortality at 24h. Fibrinogen replacement can improve survival, however, blanket administration is not feasible, due to both the potential transfusion-related complications and the high cost and limited supply of cryoprecipitate and fibrinogen concentrate. In result, prompt measurement and data-driven replacement of fibrinogen is now part of current European guidelines for management of hemorrhage and coagulopathy and is increasingly advocated for in the US. Unfortunately, no rapid point-of-care (POC) test currently exists for fibrinogen. The standard Clauss method typically has a slow turnaround time of t>60 min, missing the "golden hour" and no current fibrinogen tests are sufficiently simple, rapid, and robust to be performed in a prehospital setting. Study Design/Method: To address the need, we are developing the first POC fibrinogen sensor. The sensor exploits a novel high-affinity/specificity aptamer for fibrinogen and a microfluidic electrochemical architecture analogous to a glucose test strip. Aptamers are well-suited for POC given their chemical and thermal stability, ease of synthesis, and high consistency. This aptamer is a self-reporting probe that enables reagentless detection, greatly reducing assay time and complexity. The sensor electrodes are functionalized with the redox-labeled aptamer. Fibrinogen-aptamer binding yields a change in redox current corresponding to concentration. The sensor was characterized in buffer, plasma and whole blood samples using fibrinogen standard to demonstrate proof of concept. Results/Finding: The novel fibrinogen aptamer exhibits a K D = 1.3 nM, and minimal (<2%) cross reactivity with non-target proteins including Fibrinogen Degradation Products. The prototype sensor quantitates fibrinogen accurately and rapidly across the clinical range (0.5 -10 mg/ml), with LOD of <0.1 mg/ml, CV < 15% in < 2 min. We developed a handheld reader that integrates a smartphone and portable potentiostat to interrogate the sensor; data is displayed and analyzed in the smartphone via a custom app. Conclusion: We have demonstrated a prototype sensor that enables measurement of fibrinogen directly from plasma and whole blood in < 2 min. This outcome supports further product development. If successful, this sensor could ultimately be deployed in ambulance, ED and perioperative environments to improve patient outcomes. Protein ( Background/Case Studies: The ABO blood group system and its cognate antibodies are at the foundation of Transfusion and Transplantation medicine. Serologic testing methods have remained essentially unchanged for over 100 years, relying on visual interpretation of agglutination. With increasing rates of ABO incompatible (ABOi) hematopoietic stem cell (HSCT) and solid organ transplants, new testing modalities are necessary. ABOi HSCT patients require extensive monitoring for anti-ABO antibodymediated morbidity including graft rejection and passenger lymphocyte syndrome (PLS). We aim to develop a novel serologic test for anti-ABO antibodies that is useful in the setting of ABOi transplantation. Study Design/Method: Biolayer interferometry (BLI) is an optical assay that measures the interference pattern of light reflected from two surfaces. We developed a BLI-based assay to measure ABO antibodies in human plasma samples. We determined the lower limit of detection by serial dilutions of monoclonal anti-A antibody into AB plasma. We validated this assay on 20 volunteer blood donor plasma samples. Lastly, we assayed plasma samples pre-and post-transplant from patients undergoing ABOi HSCT. Results/Finding: Serial dilutions of monoclonal anti-A antibody into AB plasma determined the lower limit of detection 0.984 ng/uL). The peak absorbance value positively and strongly correlates with antibody concentration (R 2 = 0.97 Background/Case Studies: Alloimmunization is one of the main side effects of blood transfusion that could severely complicate further red blood cell transfusions, especially for patients with diseases requiring multiple transfusions. Conventional blood group phenotyping by hemagglutination assays, carried out pre-transfusion, is unsuitable in certain clinical situations. Molecular typing offers an alternative method, allowing the deduction of blood group phenotype from genotype. However, current methods require a long turnaround time and are not performed on-site, limiting their application in emergency situations. When rapid decision is needed, tests to be performed near or on-site are advantageous. Study Design/Method: In this work, we report the development of a novel, rapid multiplex molecular method for visual identification of seven alleles in three clinically relevant blood group systems (FY*01, FY*02, FY*02N.01, GYPB*03, GYPB*04, JK*01 and JK*02). The assay was designed for carrying out unitary testing, in specific clinical situations such as pre-transfusion testing for patients when serologic methods failed or in emergency situations. Our test, using a dry-reagent allele-specific lateral flow biosensor, is a pre-PCR handling and DNA extraction-free procedure which includes a multiplex linear-after-the-exponential (LATE)-PCR amplification performed directly from whole blood. The single-stranded amplicons migrate on a dryreagent allele-specific nucleic acids lateral-flow dipstick. Gold nanoparticles, used as reporter, permit the detection of blood group SNPs by the generation of red dots visible to naked eye. The assay parameters were optimized and our test was validated on 108 blood donor samples with known phenotype. Results/Finding: Optimization of the assay includes both multiplex LATE-PCR parameters (primer concentration and cycle number) and lateral flow parameters (migration/hybridization temperature and buffer composition). The final protocol enables determination of deduced phenotype with a total processing time of one hour from receiving the blood sample. Validation showed a 100% concordance rate between deduced phenotype and standard serologic phenotype for the 864 alleles investigated. The transfusion service at a 1,000 + bed community hospital system immediately initiated utilization of psoralen treated platelets. Beginning in March 2016, the transfusion service maintained a dual inventory of psoralen treated (with PAS; platelet additive solution) and non-psoralen treated (plasma-based) plateletpheresis products. Clinicians were not provided an option to electronically order psoralen treated products for transfusion. Rather, order fulfillment for platelets was managed exclusively by the transfusion service laboratory staff and based primarily on product expiration date and patient blood type compatibility. Study Design/Method: A retrospective analysis was conducted comparing the incidence of transfusion reactions involving psoralen-treated platelets versus transfusion reactions involving non-psoralen treated platelets from March 2016 through February 2018. Results/Finding: During the two year study period, a total 54,811 transfusions were performed across the system to 15,411 patients; which included exactly 7,000 plateletpheresis transfusions. Of the total plateletpheresis transfusions during the period; 2,833 (40.5%) were psoralen treated plateletpheresis products while 4,167 (59.5%) were non-psoralen treated plateletpheresis products. During the study period, a total of 10 transfusion reactions were associated psoralen treated platelet transfusion; resulting in an incidence rate of 0.35%. During the study period, a total of 11 transfusion reactions were associated with non-psoralen treated platelet transfusion; resulting in an incidence rate of 0.26%. Conclusion: Psoralen treated platelets were successfully introduced into a 1,000 + bed community hospital system as of March 2016. In the subsequent two years, psoralen treated and non-psoralen treated platelets utilization rates were relatively equivalent. There was no clinically significant difference (p = 0.516) in the incidence of transfusion reactions between psoralen treated versus non-psoralen treated platelet products. Further, no patient experienced a severe transfusion reaction to any platelet product nor was there any report of bacterial contamination associated with platelet transfusion during the entire evaluation period. Thus, introduction of psoralen treated platelets within this hospital system had no impact on the overall incidence of transfusion reaction to platelets.  Background/Case Studies: Despite the introduction of leukodepleted blood components, it has been shown that donor leukocyte engraftment (transfusion-associated microchimerism (TAM)) remains a long-term consequence of red blood cell (RBC) transfusion in some patient groups. The mechanism by which donor leukocytes survive following blood transfusion is unclear and it has been speculated that genetic factors may be one possible reason. This study was conducted to determine whether there is any association between an individual's genetic profile and the establishment of TAM in blood transfusion recipients. Study Design/Method: Australian trauma patients (n = 86) transfused with RBC units between 2000 and 2012, with an injury severity score of greater than 15, were recruited. Twelve of these patients were found to have TAM. To date, whole exome sequencing was conducted on four patients with TAM and four patients without TAM. Alignment of the exome data to the human genome reference sequence assembly GRCh37 was conducted and analysis of differential genetic variations was carried out. Variations unique to at least 50% of patients in each group were further investigated, with a primary focus on genes associated with immune regulation. Results/Finding: Preliminary analysis has been performed. Many of the changes found in 2 of the four patients with TAM, were present in highly heterogenous genes including zinc finger protein genes and the human leukocyte antigen genes (HLA-B and HLD-DRB1). Some of the most interesting changes were found in genes with unknown function such as Chr4 70257329 variant ID248066. In addition changes were found in the following genes, BTN3A1 gene (Chr6 26405815 variant ID 340887) which has a role in the regulation and proliferation of T-cells and in the CCL8 gene (chr 17 32647356 variant ID 847320) which is a chemokine that contributes to tumor associated leukocyte removal. Conclusion: Next generation (whole exome) sequencing technologies allow for the exploration of genetic variations across different population groups, which can provide clues for the potential indications of mechanisms by which TAM may establish in certain patients. This preliminary analysis provides potential genetic changes that could involve genes that have a role in T-cell regulation and proliferation. It is expected that further analysis with expanded patient numbers will allow for this genomic data to be explored in more detail. Australian governments fund the Australian Red Cross Blood Service to provide blood, blood products and services to the Australian community. Pamela Lopert* 1 , Bobbi Carlin 1 , Mehraboon S. Irani 2 , Sharon Graminske 2 , Scott Brooks 2 , Neeta Rugg 3 and Jose Cancelas 3 . 1 Terumo BCT, 2 Blood-Center of Wisconsin, 3 Hoxworth Blood Center Background/Case Studies: Apheresis platelets can be stored in either 100% plasma, or a portion of the plasma can be replaced with a platelet additive solution (PAS). Platelets stored in PAS may reduce the risk of several plasma-associated adverse transfusion reactions such as allergic reactions, immune reactions triggered by cellular mediators in the plasma, and potentially transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI). The objective of this study was to quantify the in vivo radiolabeled recovery and survival of apheresis platelets collected on the Trima Accel system (Terumo BCT, Lakewood, CO) and stored for 5 days in 35% plasma/65% InterSol™ Solution (Fresenius Kabi, Bad Homburg, Germany). Study Design/Method: This was a prospective, open-label, multicenter study involving healthy adult participants who donated a single hyperconcentrated platelet product on the Trima Accel system. The product was diluted with PAS immediately after collection via AutoPAS metering to attain 35% plasma carryover and 65% InterSol and stored for 5 days under standard conditions. On Day 5, whole blood (WB) was drawn to prepare fresh Control platelets. Test and Control platelets were labeled with either 51 Cr or 111 In (randomly assigned) and participants were simultaneously infused with the autologous radiolabeled platelets per the Biomedical Excellence for Safer Transfusion (BEST) method. Venous WB samples were collected on the day of infusion and over the following 12 days. Recovery and survival of  ABSTRACT TRANSFUSION Test and Control platelets were calculated using the multiple hit model with the COST software. Results/Finding: Twenty-four (24) evaluable data points were included in the analysis. On Day 0 all evaluable Test products had a platelet concentration ≥ 1.0 × 10 6 /μL and a platelet yield ≥ 3.0 × 10 11 . All evaluable Test products had a negative bacterial test (testing was per the Site's standard practice and confirmed on Day 5) and on Day 5 all products had a pH ≥ 6.9. As shown in Table 1 , the recovery of Test platelets was greater than 66% of Control and the survival was greater than 58% of Control with a onesided 97.5% confidence limit. Conclusion: Hyperconcentrated platelets collected on the Trima Accel system and stored in InterSol for 5 days met the United States FDA acceptance criteria for platelet recovery and survival when compared to fresh controls. Similarly, plasma from type AB donors is a key resource for trauma resuscitation as it does not require ABO-type specificity; however the donor pool is limited. Removal of anti-A/B antibodies would significantly increase supply of "universal plasma" and matching FWB "walking donors", thus greatly simplifying transfusion logistics. The objective of this research program is to develop a cost-efficient filter for specific removal of anti-A and B antibodies from FWB and from plasma sources. Study Design/Method: Human whole blood and plasma units collected in CPD were obtained from regional blood donor centers. Human whole blood was assessed within 5 days of collection. Plasma was obtained frozen and thawed at 37 ºC just prior to use. Whole blood or plasma was passed through porous polymer beads containing novel modifications designed to remove anti-A and anti-B blood group antibodies at a plasma/blood to polymer ratio of 16:1. Samples were collected pre and post-filtration and analyzed for removal of blood group antibodies with blood typing reagent red cells and standard gelcard agglutination assays (Ortho Clinical). Effects on coagulation and hemostatic activity were measured by aPTT and PT assays on a Stat 4 Coagulation Analyzer (Diagnostica Stago) and a TEG 9000 Analyzer (Haemonetics, Inc.), respectively. Complete blood cell counts (CBC) were measured on the Hema-Vet 950FS Hematology Analyzer (Drew Scientific). Antibody removal efficiency was calculated as the lowest dilution with agglutination of the reagent red cells. Starting donor titers ranged from 8 -256 for both anti-A and anti-B. Results/Finding: Treatment of plasma with the functionalized A and B polymers reduced antibody titers by a mean ± SD of 85.2 ± 8.6% and 90.8 ± 9.7%, respectively (N=5). Non-functionalized control polymers displayed 10 ± 22.4% and 0 ± 0% titer reductions for both anti-A and anti-B antibodies, respectively. Treatment of whole blood with the functionalized A and B polymers reduced antibody titers by 81.5 ± 14.7% and 90 ± 9.9%, respectively (N=5 These conditions result in a progressive decline in platelet quality due to ongoing metabolic activity and platelet activation. Current platelet storage bags are composed of either polyvinylchloride (PVC) or polyolefin, and have been optimised to provide adequate gas-permeability. However platelets can adhere to these surfaces, which may promote platelet activation. New materials and coatings that support platelet respiration whilst preventing platelet adhesion or activation may enable platelet storage beyond 5 or 7 days. This study examined the impact of storing platelets in PVC bags coated with recombinant serglycin, an intracellular proteoglycan expressed on hematopoietic and endothelial cells, or human serum albumin. These molecules were chosen for their anti-adhesive properties and differential glycosylation profiles. Study Design/Method: Buffy-coat derived platelets (n=3) in 30% plasma/ 70% SSP + were split into paediatric-sized PVC platelet storage bags (MacoPharma) that were either uncoated or coated with 20 μg/mL serglycin or albumin (Albumex 20 solution). Serglycin was recombinantly expressed in HEK-293 cells and purified from the conditioned medium via anion exchange chromatography. Platelet concentrates were stored for 9 days at 20-24°C with agitation. Platelet metabolism, activation and function were tested on days 1, 2, 5, 7, 9, using in vitro assays. Results/Finding: The platelet concentration, pH, glucose and lactate values were similar between the groups over storage. The expression of platelet glycoproteins GPIbα, GPIIb, GPIIIa were unaffected by the bag coating. Further, the activation profiles in the platelets stored in the coated and uncoated bags were similar, as determined by PAC-1 and CD62P binding. Platelet function, as assessed by viscoelastic testing (TEG), was comparable in all groups over storage. Microscopic examination of inner plastic surface of the bags at day 9 demonstrated significantly reduced platelet adhesion in the serglycin and albumin coated bags compared to the uncoated PVC bag, whilst the morphology of adhered platelets was similar. Conclusion: Storage of platelets in PVC bags coated with serglycin or albumin supported platelet metabolism, and did not adversely affect platelet phenotype or function, during an extended period of 9 days. Although the proteins tested did not reduce platelet activation, these initial findings provide a proof-of-concept for the development of the next generation of platelet storage bags, with a biomimetic focus. (60) evaluable paired platelet products were collected and tested at 2 sites. All Test products had Day 5 and Day 7 pH 22 ºC > 6.2, assuring that > 95% of products will have a pH ≥ 6.2 with 95% confidence (one-sided confidence limit). Test products were non-inferior to Control for their morphology score after 5 and 7 days of storage ( Background/Case Studies: Prophylactic platelets concentrate (PC) transfusion is the first line therapy for patients with hemorrhagic syndrome. Purity and function of transfused PC is the cornerstone of efficient treatment. To obtain PC from whole blood samples, blood banks currently use hard spin centrifugation (5000g)-based methods, leading to poor resting platelets yield. Prolonged storage is also an issue for blood banks because of platelet storage lesions. In order to improve platelet quality and preservation for therapeutic aims, we developed an acoustic-based fractionation device for isolation of human platelets from whole blood bags. We have already shown that acoustic platelet separation is an efficient method to fractionate blood in a low shear stress environment (92.8 % ± 12.8 purity, 58.3% ± 19.3 yield), leading to minimal platelet activation and preservation of platelet responsiveness to agonists and function. We now aim to study the impact of acoustic fractionation on platelet storage by comparing the quality of platelet rich plasmas (PRP) produced by acoustophoresis or by soft spin centrifugation (200g). Study Design/Method: PRP obtained by soft spin centrifugation or acoustic fractionation were stored for 7 days at 20-24°C under constant agitation. Platelets were analyzed under resting conditions and after stimulation with common platelet agonists. We used flow cytometry to monitored the expression of activation markers P-selectin (CD62P), PAC-1 (CD41/CD61) and Annexin V (Phosphatidylserine) and checked morphologic and metabolic characteristics of platelets after 2, 5 and 7 days of storage. Results/Finding: PRP obtained by soft spin or acoustic fractionation showed comparable storage response. Surface expression of P-selectin, PAC-1, and phosphatidylserine increased upon storage in both types of PRP. There was no difference in the surface levels of those platelet activation markers between the two types of PRP. Interestingly, platelets prepared by acoustophoresis retained a slightly increased responsiveness to A23187 and collagen after 7-day storage as compared to platelets prepared by soft spin centrifugation. Table 1 . The average PPM for heme/onc inpatients was lowest during the study period with selective transfusion of platelets with low PMP content. The observed differences in PPM between the study period and the baseline and post-study periods were not statistically significant. This study was limited by the use of average PPM, an overall assessment of platelet usage that may not account for patient factors known to contribute to platelet transfusion requirements. Future studies may benefit from evaluation of the impact of PMP on individual platelet transfusion response and clinical outcomes. Background/Case Studies: The mechanism of onset of VVR during platelet apheresis is difficult to elucidate because withdraw and return flow affect the donor complexly. Therefore, monitoring of indicators that reflect physiological changes in donors should be the most effective means of observing their occurrence. In this study, we used laser Doppler flowmetry, to continuously monitor blood flow and pulse rate (heart rate) during platelet collection, and analyze the process of VVR. Study Design/Method: This retrospective study included 354 high risk donor for VVR, and 30 VVR cases were experienced. The percent decrease in blood flow (DBF) and the percent decrease in heart rate (DHR) were calculate. The physiological position of a certain time during apheresis was plotted by using the value of DBF as x and using the value of DHR as y. Motion of dots in every 10 seconds were observed during platelet apheresis. X-Y field was divided into 5 areas, central changeless area as N, increased flow (IF) and decreased heart rate (DH) area as A, IF and increased heart rate (IH) area as B, decreased flow (DF) and IH area as C, and DF and DH area as D. The position changes were able to be painted by giving a color in each area. Each pixel exhibited 10 seconds stay of the positions. Total occupation rate of each area were calculated on a certain period of apheresis. ABSTRACT double, or triple platelet product on Trima Accel 7. After donation, the products were stored per standard blood banking conditions. The day after collection, platelet products were assessed for residual white blood cell (WBC) content and final platelet yield. Results/Finding: Two hundred and seventy-nine (279) participants donated an evaluable single (n=93), double (n=93), or triple (n=93) platelet product. The mean ± SD for the residual WBC count (×10 6 ) in single, double, and triple platelet products was 0.37 ± 2.599, 0.17 ± 0.175, and 0.32 ± 0.318, respectively. A breakdown by platelet product showed that 92 (out of 93) single platelet units had WBC counts less than 5 million; 93 double platelet units had WBC contents lower than 10 million; and 93 triple platelet units had WBC contents lower than 15 million. It was determined with 95% confidence that ≥ 95% of the single, double, and triple platelet products had acceptable residual WBC levels (1 failure in 93 collections), therefore meeting the United States FDA acceptance criteria. The single, double, and triple platelet products had a mean ± SD platelet yield (×10 11 ) of 4.00 ± 0.556; 7.56 ± 0.655, and 10.60 ± 0.784, respectively. There was 1 single platelet product that had a residual platelet yield < 3.0 × 10 11 and none of the double and triple platelet products had a platelet yields below 6.2 × 10 11 or 9.3 × 10 11 , respectively. Conclusion: Single, double, and triple platelet products collected with Trima Accel 7 and stored in 100% plasma met acceptance criteria for both residual WBC levels and platelet yield. Understanding the Platelet Activation Status of Plateletpheresis Donors to Optimize Platelet Allocation Gerda Leitner* 1 , Michaela Horvath 2 , Vera Kolovratova 2 , Andreas Tanzmann 2 and Elisabeth Maurer-Spurej 3 . 1 Clinic for Blood Group Serology and Transfusion Medicine, 2 Medical University Vienna, 3 University of British Columbia Background/Case Studies: Platelet microparticles are known indicators of platelet activation and early markers of inflammatory and autoimmune conditions. It is not known if certain donor demographics are associated with more platelet activation and whether repeat donors consistently have activated or non-activated platelets. This study aimed to understand the platelet activation status of plateletpheresis donors and quantify any changes in platelet activation status across multiple donations and between two collection technologies. This is important as activated platelets and/or their microparticle fragments could affect the immune and hemostatic properties of platelet transfusions. Background/Case Studies: In Taiwan, quality monitoring of blood products is a key issue because the ratio of leucocyte-reduced (LR) products has been increasing to prevent serious transfusion reactions, such as febrile non-hemolytic transfusion reaction (FNHTR). Currently, we do manual counting with a Nageotte-Chamber for residual WBC (rWBC) enumeration, which is very time consuming and requires technical skill. In 2017 in Taiwan, the blood supply of LR-RCC accounted for 18.04% of red blood cells, with a goal of full LR-RCC. To achieve this, automation will be more important. As we had an opportunity to do a feasibility study of the Sysmex XN-1000's new Blood Bank application (under development) for quality monitoring of blood products, we report the basic performance of this application for the rWBC, using the routinely manufactured LR Red Cell Concentrates (LR-RCC). This study evaluates the feasibility of the Sysmex XN-1000 for analysis of rWBC from LR-RCC samples. Study Design/Method: We evaluated three items: repeatability, stability and correlation with manual count/flow cytometry (FCM) methods. Repeatability: we tested 5-run of rWBC using 10 LR-RCC samples, Stability: we tested stability (after sampling from pack) of rWBC using 3 LR-RCC samples. Each sample was run at 0hr, 3hrs, 5hrs, 24hrs and 48hrs. Correlation: we tested correlation with manual count and FCM (BD Leucocount™), using 30 LR-RCC samples. Results/Finding: Repeatability: When rWBC<1 cell/μL, CV% was 10-48%; when rWBC > 1 cell/μL, CV% was 7-16%. Stability: we confirmed that rWBC showed good stability up to 48 hours. Correlation: The results (r 2 and correlation formula) were 0.9896, y = 0.9635x + 0.00001 for manual count; and 0.9941, y = 0.5859x -0.0001 for FCM, respectively. Conclusion: The XN-1000 showed good consistency with the manual count. The FCM results were higher than the XN-1000/manual count, which 150A ABSTRACT TRANSFUSION may be due to the gating area. The FCM included "rain" dots, which refer to damaged cells, while the XN-1000 gating excluded suspected artefacts, and the damaged cells were excluded by the manual count which we routinely do. It will be possible to perform routine residual WBC testing with a hematology analyzer platform in the near future. We believe this will improve the workflow of quality monitoring for blood products by shortening the TAT (about 1.8 minutes/sample), raising the QC sampling rate for RCC packs, and reducing the total testing cost including labor charges. Evaluation of Operational Efficiencies with Trima Accel 7 Ayda Rodriguez* 1 , Solanyi Forero 1 , Deissy Baquero 1 , Claudia Cruz 2 , Cris Ortegon 2 , Andrew Howell 2 , Logan Fender 2 and Leslee Simon-Blum 2 . 1 Cruz Roja, 2 Terumo BCT Background/Case Studies: The Trima Accel v6 has been used for collecting platelets in PAS with the goal of collecting a minimum of two platelet products per collection. Collection time often dictates selection of which device is used and which products are collected. In January 2018, our center began using the newest version, Trima Accel 7 with the T-Cuff accessory(Terumo BCT, Lakewood CO). Trima Accel 7 is designed to meet the needs of blood centers for access management. AutoFlow is a feature of Trima Accel 7 designed to reduce access related alerts by making automated adjustments to flow rates based on donor access flow or system pressure issues detected by the Trima Accel device. The accessory T-Cuff (pressure cuff ) is designed to encourage donor squeezing and ensures pressure up to 40 mmHg on the donor's arm. In addition, Trima Accel 7 was designed to enhance platelet collection productivity through modifications to the platelet collection algorithms and improved procedural management. Study Design/Method: Trima Accel devices were upgraded to version 7 software on January 30, 2018. Utilizing the Cadence System (TerumoBCT, Lakewood CO) procedure data was captured for 109 donations through March 16, 2018 (Test). Additional procedure data (211 donations) was collected for a control period with Trima Accel v6 between November 1, 2018 and January 30, 2018 for comparison. Platelet product yield, procedure time, venous access alerts and donor information were then analyzed between Test and Control groups. Results/Finding: Following the software installation to Trima Accel 7, an overall platelet collection efficiency increase of 9% platelet yield E11/hour was noted, 4.41 E11 for test procedures versus 4.06E11/hour for control procedures (P < .001). The average procedure time dropped between test and control groups by approximately 6 min (90.6 min vs 96.0 min, p < .001) while improving the reported collected yield by 0.2E11 (6.7E11 vs 6.5E11, p < .001). A statistically significant difference was also shown in the average number of access alerts in a donation between Trima Accel 7 and Trima Accel V6.0. The average number of access alerts dropped from 6.57 per procedure during the Control period, to 0.48 per procedure during the Test period (P value < 0.001). More than twice as many donations completed successfully without an access related alert when comparing the Test period (76%) to the Control period (36%) (P value < 0.001). There were zero donations with greater than 10 alerts in a single donation during the Trima Accel7 period, compared to the Control period with 40/209 frequent access alerts in a single donation (P value < 0.001). The Test and Control groups were comparable for total blood volume (5.0L versus 4.9L) and pre-donation platelet counts (285 × 10 3 /μL versus 277 × 10 3 /μL). Conclusion: Trima Accel 7 increased platelet collection productivity when compared to current Trima Accel V6.0. Trima Accel 7 also dramatically reduced the number of access related operator alerts per donation. Implementation of this software has enabled our center to collect more platelet components per procedure which contributes to improved cost effectiveness and maintenance of an adequate inventory. Loren Fast 1 , Samuel Sowemimo-Coker* 2 and Andrew Dunham 2 . 1 Rhode Island Hospital, 2 Hemanext Background/Case Studies: Hemanext has developed a technology for long term storage of red blood cells (RBCs) in AS3 under oxygen-reduced storage condition. Storage of RBCs under this condition has been shown to improve the quality of the cells for transfusion. White blood cells (WBCs) in RBCs for transfusion may be responsible for causing transfusion associated graft versus host disease (TA-GVHD) in immunocompromised patients. Gamma irradiation and leukocyte-reduction of blood products for transfusion are currently being used to prevent this serious adverse effect of blood transfusion. It is unknown if the effectiveness of gamma irradiation for WBC abrogation will be affected by the reduced oxygen content in Hemanext RBC. Therefore, the present study was designed to determine the effects of Hemanext RBC storage condition on the quality of red blood cells and growth and proliferation of T-lymphocytes following gamma irradiation. Study Design/Method: Two units of fresh leukocyte reduced red cell concentrates (LR-RCC) in AS3 were obtained from Rhode Island blood Center (RIBC). The two units were pooled together to create 600mL of homogenous pool of LR-RCC. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMNC) were isolated from one or two units of ABO matched non-leukocyte red cell concentrates (NLR-RCC) using Ficoll gradient and CD3 antibody coated magnetic beads per manufacturer's instructions for use. The PBMNC isolated from the aliquot of blood were added back to the pooled LR-RCC at a final concentration of 2 × 10 5 /mL. Equal aliquot of 300mL of the pooled unit was added to a conventional PVC red cell storage bag while the other 300mL was de-oxygenated for 3 hours at room temperature with Hemanext Red Cell Processing System, transferred into Hemanext bags for storage at 1-6°C for 42 days. In vitro metrics (ATP, 2, 3DPG, hemolysis etc.) of red cell quality were measured before, after processing and during storage. After storage for 7 days, 100 mL were removed from each of the bags and the RBCs remaining in the bags were then exposed to 25 Gy of gamma irradiation per standard protocol at RIBC. PBMNC were isolated from the pre-and post-irradiation samples and tested for their ability to respond to mitogens in a limiting dilution assay. Results/Finding: The percent oxygen saturation of the hemoglobin (%SO2) in the Hemanext RBC samples were reduced from 57.3 ± 15.2% to 6.9 ± 2.4% (N=4). The hemolysis in the samples 7 days after gamma irradiation were 0.25 ± 0.18% for control and 0.24 ± 0.09% for Hemanext. The results showed significant growth and proliferation of T-lymphocytes at different levels with non-irradiated control and Hemanext RBCs. The growth and proliferation of Tlymphocytes were inhibited with at least a 4.7 × 10 4 -fold reduction in the frequency of responding T cells following gamma irradiation in the PBMNC in RCC stored in normal conventional or Hemanext RBC storage bags. These results indicate that the proliferation of WBCs present in RBCs processed with Hemanext red cell processing system and stored in Hemanext storage bags is susceptible to gamma irradiation in a similar fashion to those stored with current conventional storage condition. prospective, open label, non-randomized, multicenter study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the Trima Accel system's modified postcount algorithm software. Healthy adult volunteer donors consented to donate either a single or a double platelet product on the Trima Accel system with the modified platelet postcount algorithm software. The participant's post-procedure platelet count was measured to confirm it was ≥ 100,000 platelets/μL. The collected product was assessed for residual white blood cell (WBC) content and pH. Results/Finding: One hundred and twenty (120) participants donated an evaluable single (n=60) or double (n=60) platelet product. All single and double platelet collections resulted in a postcount ≥ 100,000 platelets/μL with the lower one-sided 95% confidence interval for both single and double platelet products of 0.951. Calculation of the mean difference between the measured postcount and the Trima Accel predicted postcount for single and double collections was 7.4 × 10 3 /μL ± 14.21 × 10 3 /μL (P-Value < 0.001) and 19.4 × 10 3 /μL ± 20.74 × 10 3 /μL (P-Value < 0.001), respectively. Thus, the Trima predicted platelet postcounts were on average lower than the actual measured postcounts. Regarding the collected platelet quality, all 120 evaluable platelet units had residual WBC < 5.0 × 10 6 . Specifically, single platelet units had a mean residual WBC of 0.1 × 10 6 ± 1.7 × 10 6 and double platelet units had a mean residual WBC of 0.3 × 10 6 ± 0.56 × 10 6 . Platelet pH was assessed 1 or 2 days after collection (depending on the site's standard practice) and all products had pH ≥ 6.2 (single = 7.48 ± 0.13; double = 7.38 ± 0.23). Finally, 7 adverse events (AEs) were reported by 7 (5.5%) participants. This AE rate was consistent with a prospective clinical study on the previous version of the Trima Accel postcount algorithm with a total of 17 AEs in 12 (6.2%) of 195 total participants. Conclusion: Collection of single and double platelet products on the Trima Accel system with the modified platelet postcount algorithm software was safe and maintained the participant's post procedure platelet count ≥ 100,000 platelets/μL. In Background/Case Studies: For decades it has been the notion in transfusion medicine that it would be the "Holy Grail" to find an in vitro assay that could tell what will happen in vivo. Despite great efforts put into developing assays such as flow cytometric assessment of P-selectin (CD62P) expression, morphology score by microscopy, hypotonic shock response (HSR), extent of shape change (ESC) and others, none is being routinely used in hospital blood banks for platelet (PLT) inventory management. Recently, the detection of PLT microparticles (MP) has been introduced to assess PLT activation status but clinical validation of an association between high MP and poor outcome is still in progress. This study compared MP content with morphology score and clinical outcome with the goal to reveal the challenges and inform future studies. Study Design/Method: A clinical study conducted at the Vancouver General Hospital, Canada from 2011 to 2014 enrolled 200 hematology/oncology patients. Patient baseline data including pre-and post-transfusion PLT counts and PLT transfusion characteristics including PLT activation status were prospectively collected. PLT activation status was measured as MP content (MP%) by dynamic light scattering (ThromboLUX, LightIntegra Technology Inc., Canada). Morphology scores were obtained by phase contrast microscopy (Nikon, Japan, 100x objective) on small paraformaldehyde-fixed samples. MP% of single donor PLTs (SDP) suspended in plasma was compared to their morphology score and clinical response measured as 1-hr and 24-hr corrected count increments (CCIs). Results/Finding: All patients received a total of 997 transfusions of which 328 were SDP. Patients were 56% male, 51 ± 13 years of age, diagnosed with ALL/AML (65%), 40% were CMV positive, 10.5% tested positive for anti-HLA antibodies, baseline PLT counts were 57 ± 53 × 10 9 /L and WHO bleeding >1 was rare. Sensitivity analysis revealed that major ABO mismatch, complex cases with multiple transfusions in short succession, patient testing positive for anti-HLA antibodies and patient older than 60 years were confounding factors. Activation status measured by MP% of SDP transfusions not impacted by these confounding factors (N = 54) showed a moderate correlation with 24-hr CCIs in CMV positive patients diagnosed with AML (R 2 = 0.304, P = 0.018). For activated PLTs, MP% and morphology scores of SDP (N=54) showed a moderate inverse correlation (R 2 = 0.315, P = 0.001). There was no correlation for non-activated platelets due to the difficulty to differentiate non-activated platelets accurately by visual inspection. Conclusion: In contrast to relative quality control parameters such as Pselectin expression, MP content and morphology score reflect the entire history of PLTs from the donor to the PLT unit. The data suggest that refining the question might lead to a solution: rather than aiming to predict all outcomes the goal might be to predict the worst outcomes. PLT transfusions with MP% > 15% or a low morphology score have a high probability of insufficient increase in 24hr CCI in CMV + AML patients. Thus, a practical approach to improving overall clinical outcomes may be to avoid activated PLT transfusions for prophylaxis. Evaluating Productivity on Trima Accel 7 Burak Deveci* 1 , Hüsnü Altunay 1 , Haydar Veske 1 , Ercan Nogay 1 , _ Ihsan Karado gan 1 , Alexandra Zelinskaya 2 and Logan Fender 2 . 1 Antalya Medstar Hastanesi, 2 Terumo BCT Background/Case Studies: Improving platelet apheresis productivity enables blood centers to maintain adequate inventory of a short shelf life product and to improve operational cost effectiveness. Trima Accel 7 (Terumo BCT, Lakewood CO) was designed to enhance platelet collection productivity through modifications to the platelet collection algorithms and improved procedural management. Study Design/Method: This was a retrospective study consisting of 1,093 donations from January 01, 2016 through July 01, 2016 on Trima Accel V6.0 (Control) compared to 1,995 donations between July 01, 2017 and March 05, 2018 on Trima Accel 7 (Test). Trima Accel procedural data was captured using the Cadence System (Terumo BCT, Lakewood CO). Platelet product yield, procedure time, and donor information were analyzed between test and control groups for measurable difference. Results/Finding: A statistically significant difference in platelet collection productivity was measured between Trima Accel V6.0 and Trima Accel 7. The average procedure time dropped between test and control groups by approximately 5% (53.2 min vs 56.0 min, p < .001) while improving the reported collected yield by 10% (4.4E11 vs 4.8E11, p < .001). When normalized for donation time, Trima Accel 7 produced a 13% increase in platelet yield / hour, with an average of 5.4E11 versus control procedures at 4.8E11, (p < .001). The test and control groups were comparable for total blood volume and predonation platelet count, despite statistically significant differences in favor of larger TBVs (5.3L versus 5.8L; p < 0.001) and higher pre-donation platelet counts (264 × 10 3 /μL versus 268 × 10 3 /μL; p = 0.031) for the control group. Conclusion: Trima Accel 7 resulted a statistically significant increase in platelet collection productivity when compared to current Trima Accel V6. Trima Accel 7 may enable blood centers to collect more platelet components per procedure which contributes to improved blood center cost effectiveness and maintenance of an adequate inventory. Results/Finding: The average pH at day 5 was 6.9 ± 0.1 (drop of 2% from day 1), at day 7 6.5 ± 0.3 (drop of 7.8% from day 1); the pH of each unit never dropped below 6.2 during the course of 7 d storage. The platelet count per bag did not change significantly during 7d storage, the average volume loss was negligible (1 ± 0.3% at day 5 and 2 ± 0.1% at day 7). Bacterial growth was detected at day 1 before pathogen inactivation in the E. coli and S.aureaus units, but not in the control unit. Background/Case Studies: The review of testing packets at the end of testing adds time to the process. With clients needing results between 10 and 12 hours from sample receipt, every minute is important. Having Quality Control staff separated from the process causes issues to be identified after they occur, resulting in additional delays and rework. In addition, the physical separation of the departments hinders communication. A faster method of providing quality control checks for laboratory testing was needed. This laboratory placed staff within the testing lab to perform quality checks in process and the effect on turn-around time was assessed. Study Design/Method: The first laboratory area selected for study was viral marker testing, which includes antibody testing for HIV 1/2, HTLV I/II, HCV, HBsAg, HBc, and Chagas. A team was assembled to review and identify all critical check points needed within the process. Each critical check point was further assessed to determine if it could be performed inprocess or if computer automation could perform the check. The team identified sample acceptability and external controls as the critical checks to be performed in-process. Work stations were placed within the laboratory testing area for quality staff to perform these in-process checks and procedures and training were developed. In addition, the laboratory information system was configured with algorithms to allow for automatic approval of test results if the critical checks were acceptable. Results/Finding: For each batch of viral marker testing, the in-process checks take 5 minutes, compared to about 30 minutes for end-of-process checks. At end of testing, only exceptions have to be reviewed by quality control staff prior to result release. This process change resulted in an improvement in the average turn-around time as detailed in the table below. Specifically, the average turn-around-time for viral marker testing was decreased 1.35hrs in the Atlanta laboratory and 0.56hrs in the San Antonio laboratory. Conclusion: Implementation of in-process quality control review reduces the time for result release and at the same time maintains the high quality of the review and result release. It is estimated that implementation of additional areas will further reduce turn-around time by up to 2 hours. The reduction in review time will allow the Quality Control staff to perform more detailed quality verifications of areas outside of the testing process, including facility cleanliness, appropriate labeling and storage of materials, training, and safety. (Table 1) was UT19 "Transfusion protocol not followed" (31%). Among adult reports, the most common incident code was UT03 "Product not administered" (43%). Conclusion: The total incident report rate for pediatric vs. adult patients was significantly different, with a higher rate associated with pediatric transfusions. Pediatric patients had a higher number of "protocol not followed" reports while adult patients had a higher number of "not administered" reports. Understanding patient safety events related to blood transfusion will help target hemovigilance education and interventions to the appropriate patient populations.  Background/Case Studies: Software for electronic positive patient identification (ePPID) for blood transfusion was implemented in November 2015 for all inpatient and ambulatory transfusions at our hospital. This technology utilizes a 2D barcode wristband with barcodes printed on blood component labels. This implementation was embraced by nursing and removed the manual process for two licensed independent practitioners to verify patient identification (mPPID) for all blood component transfusions. Intraoperative (intraop) transfusions were excluded from initial scope. Study Design/Method: A multidisciplinary committee was assembled to identify the feasibility to utilize ePPID for intraop transfusions and address 1) removal of mPPID 2) decrease blood component wastage, and 3) improve compliance for blood administration documentation. A pilot was designed for ePPID installation in only Cardiac Surgery operating rooms (ORs). Training included a video and interactive hands-on sessions led by Clinical Informatics and superusers. A total of 44 anesthesiologist providers were trained. The pilot included 50 cases and ran for 3 weeks. An online survey was created to solicit feedback from providers. The pilot was completed in January 2017, and the committee recommended expansion to remaining 45 ORs, and over 200 providers were trained. The expansion was completed in December 2017. The data included in the pilot: number (n) of cases that used ePPID; blood components (n) scanned and returned to the Blood Bank, which is a patient safety risk; post expansion: transfusions (n) using ePPID compared to mPPID and overall compliance at 30, 60, and 90 days. Massive transfusion events were excluded. Results/Finding: For the pilot, 60 cases were completed by 24 providers. 233 transfusions used ePPID with 0 units scanned and returned. Online survey conveyed providers felt ePPID improved patient safety, decreased blood wastage, and desire to use ePPID for all transfusions. Following expansion, 138 transfusions were audited (Table 1) , 8 showed non-compliance, 7 due to user error with ePPID software. Post expansion showed ePPID compliance increased to 94% compared to 71% with mPPID from a previous audit. At 30 days post expansion, use of mPPID was at 27% of transfusions, decreasing in the later audits. Conclusion: This pilot study showed feasibility with provider acceptance of ePPID for intraop transfusions and created momentum for the expansion of ePPID to all ORs. The strong collaboration of all stakeholders combined with a 2 step implementation (pilot followed by expansion) of ePPID bar scanning technology, allowed for increased patient safety and workflow efficiency in the intraoperative suites. Background/Case Studies: Appropriate utilization of blood components is crucial for patient safety and improved outcomes. Based on multiple randomized control trials, hemoglobin (Hgb) threshold for prophylactic RBC transfusion was lowered from 10 to 7 g/dL; however, guidelines emphasize not to use Hgb level as the sole criterion to make a transfusion decision. At our institute, currently the threshold coincides with the Hgb critical value of 7 g/dL. Critical value is defined as a life threatening laboratory value that requires timely provider notification prompting clinicians to take an action to avoid significant morbidity and mortality. Our hypothesis is that critical value notifications are affecting the providers' decision to transfuse when alerted that the hgb level is ≤7 g/dL. Our aim is to determine if having the critical value for low Hgb at the same value as threshold for prophylactic transfusion leads to over-utilization of RBC transfusions. Background/Case Studies: Our hospital-based blood bank is a high volume laboratory that processes approximately 60,000 specimens per year. Blood bank specimens are unacceptable when they are unlabeled, unsigned or missing necessary patient identifiers and documentation. In such cases, a new specimen is requested to be drawn as per protocol. In an attempt to decrease the number of unacceptable specimens, an immediate notification of a Nurse Manager (NM) and a prompt debrief process with staff was initiated in June 2016. To further decrease the number of unacceptable specimens we implemented an additional Quality Improvement process. Study Design/Method: In April 2017, a new patient safety initiative was established and rolled-out facility wide. It was a multidisciplinary effort, including Nursing Education, Hospital Quality and Laboratory Medicine. It included an awareness campaign of "Be Mindful" when drawing patient's specimens. "Be Mindful" and "Accurate Patient ID begins with ME" were two of the slogans used. These were printed on tee-shirts worn by project champions and the blood bank also redesigned its specimen requisition form to reflect this initiative. The new requisition form now includes reminders of important steps in the patient identification (ID) and specimen collection process. A stop sign is used as an anchor on the form, along with the slogans and instructions that include prompts to: bring all labels and requisition form to the patient's bedside, minimize disruptions (i.e. close the curtain), check patient identifiers with documents, label tubes at bedside, two staff remaining in patient room until procedure is complete and two signature-independent patient ID. Results/Finding: The chart below represents the % of unacceptable specimens and the average monthly unacceptable specimens identified by the Blood Bank. The 2016 and 2017-First half (H1) data is prior to and 2017-Second half (H2) and 2018 first quarter (Q1) is post-initiative. Upon reviewing the unacceptable specimens since January 2016, the implementation of this new initiative has led to a 46% decrease in the average number of unacceptable specimens per month since the kick-off in April 2017. Conclusion: The "Be Mindful" initiative and its awareness campaign has led to a significant decrease in the number of unacceptable specimens identified by the blood bank. Having the steps mapped out as reminders of the policies related to specimen collection, patient ID and the heightened awareness of correct patient specimen labeling can only further improve patient safety and the patient experience. The Background/Case Studies: The inventory management department (IMD) of a blood center that distributes roughly 170,000 units annually found that the six distribution hubs were not standardized in their operations. The department's quality error investigations increased by 154 percent in just two years costing the department an estimated $20,000 in labor. In 2015, after identifying this trend, the department began investigating the use of Lean/Six Sigma methodologies to define process based on value added steps with the outcome of decreased errors and quality. Study Design/Method: IMD identified increased process investigations resulting in a high potential for loss of product and revenue. IMD implemented Lean/Six Sigma methodology to reevaluate procedures and find the defects in processes. To begin representatives from the blood center's six distribution hubs mapped out how processes were completed currently. IMD utilized the quality improvement tools published in Tool Time for Healthcare by Langford International, INC. The team began with a System Analysis to identify all processes and how their defects were impacting customers. Upon conclusion of the discovery workshop it was found all six hubs were not operating in the same manner. Slight variances in process were creating opportunities for error. The team used a Process Benchmarking tool to identify where the distribution hubs were operating differently. Upon completion of this activity it was determined that the standard operating procedures needed to be updated to include specific steps and to eliminate over documentation. Results/Finding: Seventeen of the distribution departments standard operating procedures were rewritten to be more inclusive of all hubs and to include more definitive directions for processes the team identified were not being executed the same across the organization. As a result, the department saw a decrease in product quality investigations of almost 45% in just two yearsa total cost savings of nearly $2,700 Conclusion: The Inventory management department is dedicated to a continuous improvement plan and is motivated by the positive results seen over the 2016 and 2017 calendar years. The distribution department plans to continue evaluating procedure based on the Lean/Six Sigma methodology. Frequency and Causes for Standard Operating Procedure Deviationsa 10 Year Review Linda Mamone*, Amna Iftikhar, Edward J. Yoon and Mohamed Alsammak. Background/Case Studies: Standard operating procedures (SOP) are critical in standardizing laboratory testing and results. In the blood bank, per AABB standards, any exceptions to policies, processes or procedures must be warranted by clinical situations and require justification and pre-approval by the medical director. These are generally uncommon events, and individually may not raise concern for systemic and actionable issues. In order to better understand the incidence and context of such deviations, identify potential areas for improvement and education, and as a component of ongoing quality assurance and control (QA/QC), we sought to review our institution's prior occurrences of SOP deviations. Background/Case Studies: On a rare occasion, symptoms of hypotension leading to a transfusion reaction (TR) occur after receiving salvaged autologous blood in the OR. The Autotransfusion (AT) team has a process to investigate possible reasons for these reactions. Due to the infrequency of TR workups, the procedure (SOP) lacked organization and continuous work flow, which hindered the confidence of AT staff. During biennial SOP review, AT recognized the rarely used process had not been revised in five years. In early 2016, AT applied LEAN tools to improve the process and increase efficiency. Study Design/Method: Three trainers applied the LEAN technique 5S over 12 months: Sort, Set in Order, Shine, Standardize and Sustain. The 5S framework eliminated obsolete and excessive documentation in the SOP. AT improved the location and number of supplies needed to complete a workup. An educational tool was created and practiced with the team assisted by trainers. The revised SOP was implemented and competency assessment was performed with 12 employees. Events were monitored before and after changes were implemented. A survey was presented to the same 12 employees to measure satisfaction with the revisions. Results/Finding: The new steps were practiced in a wet lab with employees to garner opinions and comfort levels. During the practice scenarios, the trainers gathered questions from the team and included those in a training module for future employees. The SOP was written in a recipe format with action steps. As a result, three pages of steps were eliminated from the SOP. Time to perform the process dropped from four hours to two hours after several timings were measured. Pre-made TR kits were eliminated which reduced waste. Supplies were kept in an organized location for accessibility. Competency assessment was 100% passing for 12/12 employees. From 2013-2016, five events were related to missed steps in the process. After implementation of the new SOP, zero events were reported. A satisfaction survey showed that prior to implementation on a scale of 1-10 (10 being highest); the average employee's comfort level was four. After the revised process took effect, the employees rated the changes as seven on the same scale. Conclusion: Utilizing 5S techniques reduced waste, decreased time needed to complete the work up of the intraoperative TR and increased staff comfort level with the new process. With zero events reported after implementation, the new SOP was recognized to be more streamlined, resulting in increased competency. Gauging the employees' comfort level was an important factor in determining how to change the process to increase accuracy and confidence levels among staff. Background/Case Studies: Proper storage in vapor phase nitrogen freezers (VPNF) and liquid phase nitrogen freezers (LPNF) is essential for ensuring the quality of cryopreserved hematopoietic stem cell products. While our AABB and FACT accredited Progenitor Cell Processing lab has had no deficiencies or incidents with our cryostorage process, in response to a recent well-publicized cryostorage failure, we wanted to determine if our products are truly as safe as we previously believed. Study Design/Method: Operations, quality, and medical staff critically reviewed equipment, monitoring systems, processes, and procedures by performing a failure mode and effect analysis (FMEA), to determine where and how our cryostorage system could fail. Results/Finding: VPNF and LPNF rely on proper vacuum insulation and lid seals to maintain LN2 levels and temperature. Proper function of the solenoid valve enables the VPNF to automatically fill with LN2. Current process controls to detect insulation, lid, or solenoid malfunctions include temperature, oxygen, and LN2 level monitoring. Redundant alarms and checks will detect freezer integrity failures, but not all manufacturer preventative maintenance recommendations intended to prevent failures e.g. biannual solenoid replacement, were being followed. Manual LN2 level measurement and manual filling is our back-up to assure adequate LN2 levels during automation failures. In LPNF, accumulation of sludge and frost make manual LN2 level measurements difficult and could lead to failure to detect changes in LN2 consumption indicative of compromised freezer integrity. Our procedures did not include standard instructions for LN2 level measurement under these conditions. Our current process controls to ensure ample LN2 supply include standing LN2 orders, manifolds for connecting each freezer to multiple tanks, and monitoring LN2 tank levels. Critical reexamination of our on-site disaster plan LN2 supply revealed that it did not have external access, and therefore was not readily available. Lastly, failure to respond to an alarm is an additional potential failure mode. We use an electronic monitoring system that will contact designated personnel until a response is obtained. In addition, our procedures clearly delineate the parties responsible for responding to the alarms. Only few select staff with enhanced security clearance may inhibit an alarm for longer than 15 minutes, therefore we are confident that alarms would trigger appropriate action. Conclusion: This FMEA allowed us to conclude that our products are safely stored and that our risk of an unrecognized temperature excursion is well managed. Opportunities for improvement that would further enhance the safety of our products and provide additional peace of mind were successfully identified. Background/Case Studies: In healthcare, it is imperative to provide optimal care without wasting resources. A crossmatch that is not followed by an RBC transfusion (Tx) within 72 hours represents a potential area for resource optimization. Concurrently, antibody screens that are unexpectedly converted to a Tx request may result in potentially avoidable delays in patient care. To assess these issues at our own institution, we performed an audit of antibody screen and crossmatch orders, and determined whether they were followed by a Tx within 72 hours. Study Design/Method: All antibody screen and crossmatch orders for which samples were received at our institution's blood bank were reviewed over a one month period. The department (dpt.) of each ordering provider was obtained via the electronic record, and the Tx record for each patient corresponding to an order was referenced to determine if the patient had received a Tx within 72 hours of a screen or crossmatch order. An efficiency ratio (EFR) was calculated by dividing either the number of crossmatch orders by the number of Tx events that resulted from the orders, or the number of antibody screen orders by the number of non-Tx events that followed the orders. A ratio of 1 was considered optimal. Results/Finding: A total of 1139 crossmatch orders and 933 antibody screens were evaluated. 323 (28.4%) crossmatch orders did not result in Tx within 72 hours (EFR: 1.39), and 144 (15.4%) antibody screen orders were followed by a Tx order (EFR: 1.2). Order efficiency differed by department: Emergency Medicine (EM) had the worst EFR for crossmatch orders, while Internal Medicine (IM) had the worst EFR for antibody screen orders ( Table 1) . Conclusion: In our audit, crossmatch orders that did not lead to Tx were more common than antibody screen orders that were followed by an unplanned Tx, suggesting that the former might be a more significant issue for focused quality improvement. Not all departments require intervention, as OB/GYN and Heme/Onc dpt. providers demonstrated highly efficient ordering practices. Future work will include evaluation of non-patient factors in the EM and Surgery dpts., such as protocols or standard order sets, which may be contributing to the relatively inefficient screen and crossmatch ordering practices observed. Terri Coyle*, Kristie Clymer, Erik Scott and James R. Stubbs. Mayo Clinic Background/Case Studies: Our facility recently implemented a new blood donor computer system for collections and manufacturing. Validation of converted data from a donor legacy system (LS) into a new system (NS) is recommended in the FDA Guidance for Industry, Blood Establishment Computer System Validation in the User's Facility (April 2013). Our team developed a conversion and validation plan and these were executed using Dream Coder, Excel Power Query (PQ), and screen print comparisons. Our conversion plan included a risk assessment of software tables and donor data (DD) elements to establish the number of screen prints to verify data from the LS to the NS. Dream Coder was used to populate information that converted the data from the LS to the NS using vendor provided conversion files. Study Design/Method: Sixty-four tables were provided for the table conversion process. Sixteen tables were not used for data conversion; those tables were not used in the LS. Forty-eight tables were loaded into the validation environment, verified, and then copied into the production environment. PQs were developed using the LS and NS databases, taking into account the conversion of data elements from the LS to the NS. PQ was used to ensure that DD coming from the LS matched when migrated into the NS. Forty-seven PQs were used to compare DD in each database. Each PQ consisted of LS, NS and merged queries. Merged queries filtered out matching records, identifying only discrepant data between the two systems. Screen prints were reviewed to confirm that the converted DD populated into the correct fields in the NS. LS data was migrated about once per week into the NS and any rejected files or PQ issues were reviewed with our Information Technology group to resolve data migration issues. These files were reviewed with the vendor when we could not resolve the issues. When determined that a data migration script needed to be changed, the vendor adjusted the import script and DD was migrated again. • Six import scripts needed correction • After the final DD migration there were three rejected files from three different import scripts • PQ identified two additional DD discrepancies Conclusion: With a decade's worth of DD to move, ensuring that data was correctly converted was required when deploying a new computer system. After performing the data extraction and migration multiple times, and reviewing the data with PQ, we were able to identify data elements that had not transferred correctly and correct the import scripts. All discrepancies were resolved prior to go live. In the end, we were confident that our DD was accurately converted and migrated allowing for a high degree of certainty that we will continue to provide the safest blood for our patients and protect our valuable blood donors. to ensure the desired therapeutic dose of platelets. To comply with the quality control requirement, it is necessary to quantify the amount or harvest of platelets obtained during the apheresis procedure. Objectives: Verify compliance between the scheduled platelets-harvest and obtained in AMICUS cell separator. Study Design/Method: Two devices of the AMICUS separation system were evaluated; (SA1) and (SA2). Prior to verification, the technical support service made the adjustment in each separator on Platelet Yield Adjuster (PYA). The effect of this adjustment was assessed verifying the performance of separators AMICUS simple scheduled harvests 3.5 × 10 11 , the correlation between platelet programmed in cell-separator and the platelet-harvest obtained through quality control is verified, based on the criteria established by the manufacturer (expected bias ≤ 10%), which was carried out through the statistical analysis of an established protocol (CLSI Document EP09-A2) The platelet count for quality control was carried out using a cell-counter under analytical control by ISO 15189:2012 accreditation. The regulatory requirement in Mexico to harvest platelets of a single product is 2.0 × 10 11 platelets/ unit in 100% of the units tested, so we decided to make the comparison with the most demanding requirement (AABB, 3.0 × 10 11 Platelets/unit in 90% of the units tested). We evaluated the distribution in SA1 and SA2 of plateletharvests obtained, the average bias and the percentage of non-compliance with the requirement established against the obtained account. Results/Finding: We performed 480 single procedures; 283 of them in SA1 and 197 procedures in SA2. The average values in the harvest from platelets were 3.65 × 10 11 and 4.05 × 10 11 for SA1 and SA2 respectively. The minimum values were 2.13 and 2.55 × 10 11 and maximums of 5.58 and 5.71 × 10 11 . The average bias was 0.15 and 0.55 × 10 11 for each separator; while the kurtosis value was 0.96 and 0.50. The value of the total bias of the process according to the EP09 protocol was 4.24 and 15.83% for SA1 and SA2. The fulfillment of the comparison between the scheduled harvest and the harvest obtained measured in the cell counter was 65.37% and 88.8% of the processes performed for each separator. The fulfillment of the criteria established by AABB for the platelet harvest (3.0 × 10 11 ) occurred in 93.99% and 97.46% of the processes analyzed for each separator. The data showed a wide variability between the programmed platelet harvests and those obtained with the compliance of 65.3 and 88.8%. Although other confusing variables related to the donor are not analyzed, the differences could be related to the platelet collection system itself, as well as the fact that the apheresis systems only estimate the platelets collected, while measuring of platelet obtained is carried out in a cell-counter device under analytical control. This would explain the non-normal distribution data obtained in both separators, which would question the use of the EP09 protocol, employed for quantitative tests. However, both separators meet the requirement established by the AABB at 93.99% and 97.46% respectively, which validates the performance of the device in single platelet harvests. ABO/Rh Testing Events after Gel Testing Methodology Implementation Stacy Coleman*, Janet Dornfeld, Amy Mata and Camille Van Buskirk. Background/Case Studies: In October of 2017, a large, hospital-based transfusion laboratory switched manual testing methodologies. The laboratory had been doing tube testing for the previous 10 years. In preparation to change automated platforms, the decision was made to convert manual testing first to gel. It was thought that with a more standardized and stabile testing platform, testing errors would decrease. However, that was not the case, in particular with manual ABO/Rh testing. Study Design/Method: A control chart is maintained to display events on each of the tests that are performed in the laboratory. These include ABO/Rh, antibody screen, direct antiglobulin test, antibody identification, and antigen typing. The control chart is set up with an upper warning limit of 2 SD and an out of control limit of 3 SD. When the upper warning limit is reached, that indicates that an in-depth review of those events needs to be done. In October of 2017, this limit was reached for the ABO/Rh test and an analysis of events was performed. Results/Finding: Comparison of the number of events that occurred in October 2016 to that of October 2017, doubled from 3.36 to 7.87 per 10,000 ABO/Rh tests. Upon investigation, half of these events were pre gel implementation and half were post. However, looking closer at the post implementation events, they impacted twice the number of patients because each involved two patients. In comparing the pre and post events, the pre implementation events ranged from forgetting to add Anti-D, to missing mixed field, to problems with testing equipment, all of which would be solved with gel technology. The post implementation events occurred when technologists were performing ABO/Rhs on multiple patients and the cards were interchanged when reading and entering reactions in the Laboratory Information System. Labeling cards was left to tech preference, but at minimum, needed two patient identifiers. Techs were trained to verify the specimen label prior to result entry, using the same process as pre implementation, but there was no special emphasis given to techs to verify the gel cards as well. Of the three post implementation events, two were identified by the testing tech after entering the results. The third was caught due to a mismatch on the automated instrument. Conclusion: While switching to gel testing eliminated a range of defects, it created a new one that was rarely seen in tube testing. Because of the uptick of this specific type of event, the lab standardized how techs labelled their gel cards. It is now required that the cards be labeled with at minimum the patient's initials and full medical record number. In addition, techs are required to open the result grids from the card rather than from the sample. If a card is set down for any reason, card must be re-verified prior to resulting. Since this standardization was implemented, no similar events have occurred at the time of this publication. Process Improvement to Ensure Rh Immune Globulin (RhIg) Prophylaxis for Postpartum Rh-Negative Women Jennifer S. Woo*, Rosaline Ma, Elizabet Lomeli, Amy DeCourten, Jennifer Martinez, Ashok Nambiar and Morvarid Moayeri. UCSF Health Background/Case Studies: Processes to ensure the administration of prophylactic Rh immune globulin (RhIg) are important for the management of Rh-negative women and compliance with AABB Standards. Determination of postpartum RhIg prophylaxis can be particularly challenging as this entails testing on both mother and baby, the results of which are evaluated together for clinical decision making, including reflex testing for additional laboratory studies. Any missing tests or deviation from testing procedures can result in failure to provide appropriate and adequate doses of RhIg. Study Design/Method: We examined errors and deviations related to postpartum immunohematology testing and RhIg prophylaxis at our hospital. Errors arising from the provider side included failure to use electronic order sets resulting in omission of fetal bleed screen tests or RhIG orders. Blood Bank errors included failure to perform reflex testing, such as weak D testing on Rh-negative cord blood, or Kleihauer-Betke assay for positive or invalid fetal bleed screens. Other errors included performing weak D when not indicated (Rh-negative baby born to Rh-positive mother), reporting Rhnegative/Weak D-positive baby's type as Rh-positive, or reporting invalid positive weak D results. We initially generated a daily laboratory information system report to retrospectively audit and identify cases in which weak D testing had been missed. Subsequently, in order to prevent missed weak D testing and also address additional failure points in our system, we designed and implemented a "cord blood worksheet". Technologists complete this worksheet for each cord blood test, using an algorithmic checklist approach to perform and complete all required tests on samples from the baby and mother. The worksheet also captures documentation related to the timely ordering (by provider) and issue of RhIg from the blood bank. Results/Finding: Since implementation of the cord blood worksheet, we have not noted any errors related to blood bank testing or appropriate administration of postpartum RhIg prophylaxis. Worksheets have made our workflow safer and helped ensure our facility's compliance with AABB Standards. The cord blood worksheet also serves as a valuable educational tool for trainees in our graduate medical education programs. Conclusion: Utilization of cord blood worksheets is a simple yet effective way to guide accurate immunohematology testing, prompt providers to place appropriate orders for postpartum RhIg prophylaxis, and ensure that RhIg has been issued from the blood bank in a timely manner. Achieving an Operational Excellence Culture: It's All about the People Jason Siebert*, Mark Malone and Rafael A. Portela. Blood Systems, Inc. Background/Case Studies: The Operational Excellence (OE) applications have far reaching benefits for an organization to include reducing significant waste, empowering staff to become problem solvers, and cost savings. Despite the many benefits of OE, the initial struggles and roadblocks with incorporating Operational Excellence (OE) in the existing business culture requires effective strategic planning. In this study, we will explore the strategies used to successfully incorporate Operational Excellence in the business culture. Study Design/Method: An OE Steering Committee was formulated with members from various functional departments. We developed and evaluated metrics to track Gemba Walks and OE Huddle effectiveness to ascertain if OE was successful deployed throughout the organization. These metrics had targets and were tracked weekly to determine what the gaps were and how to overcome them. Results/Finding: After initial training, the participation from management was low as only 71% of the functional departments reported doing any Gemba Walks in a given month. In addition, only 48% of managers were performing the required number of Gemba Walks (4 per month). The OE huddle Pre-Assessment Score for OE huddle effectiveness was 68 % and a post assessment score of 85%. This was contributed by lack of staff participation, roadblocks not discussed and key business metrics not displayed during the huddles. After a year into OE, significant improvements were made. 100% of functional departments reported doing Gemba Walks and 73% of Managers are performing the required 4 Gemba walks per month. In addition, the OE huddle Pre-Assessment score was 92% due to increase staff participation, more effective business metrics and the huddle groups began reviewing their roadblocks and respective countermeasures. Conclusion: Participation was low in the beginning in various critical OE activities. Low participation was due to other business priorities and challenges forcing OE in the background. In addition, managers were not getting out of the office and observing where work was being performed, and some of those managers who were performing Gemba Walks did not understand the principles behind doing them. Finally, Natural Work Teams indicated they were not all trained and did not understand the basic principles on how to conduct OE huddles. Over the course of a year, the business started to incorporate OE in their culture. The successes were contributed to more coaching, workshops and frequent reporting of metrics with encouragement for improvement and recognition for successes. Also, staff had a better understanding on how to apply OE to their workplace, which motivated them to start using problem solving tools such as PDSA. Undesirable Impact of Implementation of Electronic Medical Records Nikolina Dioufa*, Richard Morris, Amna Iftikhar, Edward J. Yoon and Mohamed Alsammak. Temple University Hospital Background/Case Studies: Electronic Medical Records (EMR) and Computerized Physician Order Entry (CPOE) facilitating laboratory testing, medication and imaging orders has revolutionized healthcare across the country in the past decade. Advantages include a significant decrease in drug expenditure, improved efficiency in diagnostics, upgraded recording and reporting of billing services, and decreased billing errors. However, CPOE may also have an unexpected negative impact on laboratories, including the blood bank (BB), affecting test volumes, turn-around time (TAT) and quality metrics. At our institution, ≥ 90% of STAT requests from the Emergency Department (ED) should be completed within 60 minutes. The average was 90%. After implementation of EMR, the average dropped significantly, mandating analysis to identify causes and possible solutions for improvement. Study Design/Method: Retrospective review of 1) the number of STAT requests for type and screen (T/S) received from the ED prior to and after execution of EMR in 08/2016 and 2) a sample of ED patient records with STAT orders from 2 nonconsecutive months in 2017 assessing a) clinical justification of the patient's presenting complaint requiring STAT T/S and b) whether the patient was transfused. Results/Finding: Before EMR, BB received a monthly average of 21.5 hand written STAT T/S orders from the ED. After execution of EMR, the average monthly STAT orders in 2017 increased to 432 with the target TAT met in 75.8 % of orders. We reviewed 186 (30.5%) non-trauma patient records. Presenting complaints with justified STAT T/S account for 73% and include: Acute neurologic and cardiovascular symptoms, GI and OB/GYN bleeding, and anemia. Within this category, the majority (93%) of patients with anemia received transfusion, while 3.5-37% of the others were transfused. The clinically unjustified group (27%) included patients with complaints of urologic pain, dermatologic symptoms, localized infection or intoxicationnone of whom were transfused. Further investigation showed that the T/S orders from the ED are included by default in pre-populated order sets, or are defaulted as STAT. Conclusion: Although implementation of EMR with CPOE facilitates appropriate prioritization and efficient T/S orders, they do not come without pitfalls. Automation and preselected menu options may result in unnecessary requests and exponential increase in workload that could lead to errors, delayed results and issue of blood products, and disrupted quality programs. Close monitoring, education, and communication with clinical and IT teams while developing order sets, judicious use of default settings, and use of evidence-based best practice alerts (BPAs) may help in early identification and mitigation of undesirable impacts of EMR implementation. Smartphone App for Calculating Minimum Blood Volume Needed for Laboratory Testing Ray Zhang*. Washington University School of Medicine Background/Case Studies: Blood draws for laboratory testing can lead to iatrogenic anemia, which is a morbidity risk factor in the pediatric and critically ill populations. Calculating the minimum volume needed for tests requires laboratory assistance and is typically impractical for clinicians. The goal of this project was to develop a smartphone app for performing these calculations at the bedside to reduce the number of tubes and volume of blood drawn on at-risk patients. Study Design/Method: A smartphone app for iOS and Android devices was developed. The user inputs desired tests selected from our large academic medical center testing menu. The app outputs how many and which types of blood collection tubes are needed, as well as the minimum blood volume required within each tube. Instrument dead volume and hematocrit correction are taken into account. Tests which may be optimally performed from the same blood specimen are combined during calculation. A quickselection interface for the most frequently ordered tests is present. Results/Finding: The app incorporates 168 tests and panels, encompassing 13 central laboratory instrument systems, 10 collection tube types and 5 specimen types. House staff and nurses in our pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) are integrating the app into their critical care workflow. Usage, user feedback, specimen collection patterns and patient outcomes are followed, to be reported. Preliminary feedback from both PICU and central laboratory use has been overwhelmingly positive. Conclusion: The app, Tinyblood, greatly simplifies calculation of minimum blood volume needed for laboratory testing and has received overwhelmingly positively feedback. It is available free for iOS and Android. Hitting been widely used to increase the availability of universal RBCs, implementation of these programs has often been prolonged, difficult journeys with variable degrees of success. Effective use of leadership principles can avoid these project pitfalls. This study describes the successful launch of a 2RBC program using strategic phasing, team selection, and multidisciplinary collaborations to exceed productivity and right type mix (RTM) goals. Study Design/Method: The 2RBC project was divided into 3 phases, validation, ramp-up, and steady state growth, each with distinct priorities and approaches. The validation phase focused on quickly accumulating the required # of collections meeting quality parameters; therefore the approach included carefully selecting donors from a known pool of committed WB donors, staff technical training, vendor education and onsite support. The ramp-up phase prioritized WB donor conversion. The approach relied on core team selection and training. Staff performance management, therefore, was based on conversions rather than total WB procedure or RTM goals. To foster collaboration and remove conflict of interest between recruitment and collections staff, both groups received credit for the collection regardless of procedure type. Steady state would prioritize both donor pool management and new donor conversion, with 2RBC procedure, net success, and RTM key performance indicators (KPIs). The core 2RBC collections team was selected from WB and apheresis pools, not only on the basis of technical skill, but also on positive attitude and the ability to communicate with, motivate and influence others, both donors and team members. The training, which included significant vendor support, encompassed technical aspects but also how to approach donors, how to handle a "no" response, and included role-playing scenarios. Prior to the collection date, team members identified good candidates for 2RBC collections based on blood type and size, previewed eligibility, and notified every member of the collection staff. Every staff member making a touchpoint with the donor participated in their onsite conversion. Daily results were celebrated and obstacles were faced collaboratively. Background/Case Studies: Industries including blood donor centers have experienced challenges with disseminating information in a timely, effective manner while maintaining minimal disruption to operations. One solution to mitigate this communication issue is team huddles. Prior to the implementation of weekly huddles, monthly meetings were the primary means of communication. However, meeting attendance was low, blood collections were reduced, and staff survey results indicated that communication within the work unit needed improvement. The intent of the weekly huddle was to positively impact communication by reaching more staff with minimal disruption to the work flow, communicating and discussing updates and issues in a timely manner, and providing a forum for staff to bring forth concerns and ask questions. Study Design/Method: Weekly huddles were implemented in late 2016. Two 5-20 minute huddles are held each week in a central location within the work area, and blood collections are not reduced. Huddles follow a specific agenda template; covering updates to the donor appointment schedule, mobile schedule, training, equipment, procedures, and staff recognition. In addition, general updates and reminders are discussed and staff is encouraged to ask questions and bring forth concerns. In April 2018, a survey was sent to 55 current staff to gain insight into the perceived impacts of the weekly huddle as well as communication preferences. Attendance records from both monthly meetings and weekly huddles were also compared. Results/Finding: The survey had a 45% response rate (n=25/55). Results showed the preferred communication method is e-mail followed closely by the weekly huddle and individual face-to-face which tied as the second most-favored communication method. The less-favored communication methods included monthly meetings, signage/job aids, and Office Communicator. Huddles have improved communication within the work unit according to 84% of survey respondents; with 92% indicating that information shared at the huddles keeps them up-to-date on changes occurring within the work unit. Additionally, 92% agree that the huddles provide a venue to bring forth concerns and ask questions. Overall, 88% of respondents feel that huddles are a worthwhile use of time. Staff attendance at the weekly huddle has shown a 19% increase over monthly meeting attendance. Conclusion: The frequency and effectiveness of the huddle has improved communication as well as negated the need for the traditional monthly staff meeting. The focus of the monthly meetings will shift to educational opportunities. Recently, management staff attended an education event on team huddles and learned new tactics that will be incorporated into the huddle including a huddle board to display information, a dashboard to share relevant statistics, and scheduling more huddles throughout the week to reach more staff and further improve the timeliness of information delivery. Planning and Implementation of a New Transfusion Service Alexandra Budhai*, John T. Fallon and Patricia V. Adem. Westchester Medical Center Background/Case Studies: Our organization has undergone dramatic changes in recent years, evolving from a single-site tertiary-quaternary care center with greater than 650 beds to becoming the headquarters for a 1,700 bed, multi-site system. In keeping with the institutional push for unified processes to achieve better patient outcomes while conserving limited resources, we evaluated existing arrangements within the clinical laboratory. Blood products, pre-transfusion testing, and medical/administrative oversight of transfusion services are currently provided by a regional blood center, a contractual arrangement that began many years ago when the facility was functioning as a small community hospital. The evolution of the medical center and the network necessitated the exploration, development, and implementation of insourced transfusion services, and we describe the processes involved. Study Design/Method: We sought to develop and expand a global vision for insourced centralized transfusion services to serve patient needs at the main hospital and across the network. Gap analysis, project budgets, and Gantt charts were utilized to determine the minimum necessary requirements, associated expenses (one-time and recurring), and timelines for deliverables. Results/Finding: Gap analysis entailed an assessment of existing infrastructure, software systems, personnel, and laboratory equipment for adequacy in tandem with the regulatory, personnel, equipment, and infrastructure requirements necessary to safely support a high volume transfusion service. The items and steps necessary to bridge the gaps were cataloged and budgeted accordingly. The proposal showed favorable return on investment within five years and was approved by hospital administration. We developed Gantt charts to organize deliverables, coordinate task timelines, make an appraisal of appropriate windows for task completion, and to provide aid in formulating and evaluating deadlines for each respective task required. One year prior to go-live, and continuing post go-live we hold weekly meetings with formal minutes to ensure adherence to schedules and prompt attention to problems. Many aspects of the project moved in parallel, while some required a carefully choreographed serial approach, necessitating mapping of events in order to avoid pitfalls. The unforeseen hurdle: all hiring and procurement effort briefly stalled when administration was confronted with the possibility of significantly reduced financial allocations from the state. Conclusion: With careful planning and research, the implementation of a new transfusion service could be achieved on a one year timeline. A timeframe of 18 months would enable adequate buffer to account for unforeseen funding and or regulatory impediments at the state or federal level. Background/Case Studies: Through draft guidance and BPAC, FDA has proposed methods for mitigating the risk of bacterial contamination in platelets. The extent to which these methods will impact platelet availability and production costs must be evaluated. Herein we attempted to categorize the production and financial impact associated with 8mL Bacterial Detection by culture (BD) Study Design/Method: A model was built to assess production and economic impact of bacterial safety methods described in the background at a blood center (BC) and hospital. In this abstract only BC impact is discussed. 2 months of platelet collections data from one BC were analyzed to determine split rate (SR) and total resulting apheresis platelet components through each bacterial safety method. For each method, collections were optimized to ensure maximum platelet component production. The maximum % of units eligible for PR without impacting SR was also calculated. For each permutation, direct and indirect costs incurred through collection, component processing, testing and release were assessed. Static indirect costs (e.g. administration) were not included. Revenue was based on selling price of BD($460) or PR($595) components at BC, with applicable upcharge for CMV($35) or irradiation($40). Average direct costs associated with DLVC($45) and 3.8%($30) BD were added as upcharge. Results/Finding: Conclusion: Implementation of bacterial safety measures will impact platelet availability, days of usable shelf life and production cost. Performing PR on 73-86% of product is feasible at this BC without further impacting availability/ SR. PR may offset financial loss associated with bacterial safety measures. Higher value of PR is generally tied to broad safety profile and replacement of CMV and irradiation. BCs must select production methods in consideration of their hospital customer's needs and willingness/ability to perform POI testing or BD. Using Data to Maximize Staff Utilization Nanette Johnson* 1 , Kathy J. Kaherl 1 , Leane Ziebell 1 and Sandra J. Nance 2 . 1 American Red Cross, 2 American Red Cross and American Rare Donor Program Background/Case Studies: It is well documented that the laboratory workforce is shrinking due to diminished influx of Medical Technology (MT) and Medical Laboratory Technician (MLT) graduates and the imminent retirement of Baby Boomers. Competition for new graduates can be fierce and applications by experienced MT/MLTs for Immunohematology Reference Laboratory (IRL) jobs in large metropolitan areas are rare. Workload for referral labs is increasing as hospitals outsource more and more antibody work. From 2008 to 2015, workload and staffing in our large IRL increased 48% and 68% respectively. A staff retention rate of only 61% since 2010 and multiple compliance risk factors prompted intensive executive leadership scrutiny and oversight. A deep dive into the causes of our compliance risks identified the needs for stratifying our workforce and mapping each task to the most appropriate job position. Study Design/Method: A complex task timing exercise performed in 2008 and then again in 2015 returned staff utilization figures in our IRL of 125% and 117% respectively (optimal staff utilization target 85-95%), indicating that staff were stretched beyond maximum capacity. Data from this exercise and staff tables of organization were reviewed for the three largest IRLs, two of which had a high compliance risk. Individual staff interviews and observations were performed by an independent party familiar with laboratory processes and procedures. Results/Finding: The two IRLs (B, C) with higher compliance risk spent twice as much time on non-testing tasks such as training, competency assessment and equipment qualification than on testing tasks, while these numbers were virtually identical for the IRL in good standing (A). The IRL in good standing had three to four times the staff in support roles than the two IRLs with higher compliance risk. The data analysis and recommendations of the independent reviewer resulted in the addition of two Lab Assistants, two Operation Support Specialists, a Technical Trainer and an Administrative Assistant to assume most non-testing tasks and increase supervisory presence in the lab. A Culture of Quality focused on First Time Right was implemented, allowing the laboratory to quickly reach regulatory compliance which has been sustained for 17 months and counting. Conclusion: Timing studies coupled with mapping of tasks to job description are essential exercises to maximize the productivity of certified technical staff. Adding staff at lower compensation rates effectively increases manpower and productivity without adding expense. The ability of certified technical staff to focus on testing tasks and increased supervisory oversight enhances regulatory compliance and raises the morale of all staff. Joshua Flerchinger*, Roger Godic, Raleigh Krigbaum, Carol Dumont and Suzanne Bakdash. Cleveland Clinic Background/Case Studies: During intraoperative cell salvage, the perioperative autotransfusion service utilizes either on-board machine or wall suction through a vacuum regulator to collect blood from the surgical field. The existing regulators required costly, time-consuming annual preventative maintenance (PM) by an outside vendor, with additional function verification by our techs. Regulators sent out for annual PM were unavailable for several weeks and a few were inoperable when returned, requiring replacement. An alternative vacuum regulator with lower cost and less time and labor-intensive PM was identified and evaluated against the existing regulators. Study Design/Method: A vacuum regulator designed for cell salvage, "New Vacuum Regulator" (NVR) was obtained to trial and compare to the existing general use vacuum regulators, "Current Vacuum Regulator" (CVR). No guidelines were available to perform the comparison, so we attempted to simulate conditions of daily use. One of each of the regulator models was attached to the hospital wall vacuum system and set to 150mmHg to aspirate 1000mL of normal saline from a basin. The initial set up used one Aspiration/Anticoagulation Set (ANA Set) with a Yankauer suction tip, and timed how long it took to entirely aspirate the contents of the basin. Since the surgical teams commonly request two ANA Sets, but utilize (MGT4) only one to aspirate from the field, the process was repeated with two ANA Sets, where one line was used to aspirate the contents of the basin and the other was left open to atmosphere. Results/Finding: Using one ANA Set, both regulator models cleared the saline from the basin in 32 seconds. Using two ANA Sets, with one line in use and the second open to atmosphere, the CVR model aspirated the saline in 62 seconds, while the NVR model cleared the basin in 46 seconds. The findings were reproducible on repeat testing. The acquisition cost of the NVR model was higher than the CVR model. However, a cost analysis proved that replacing the CVRs with NVRs would yield a 6-year return on investment since the NVR model has a 10-year warranty and no annual PM requirement. Given the operational test results, high rating for ease of use by the techs, anticipated time and labor savings and favorable cost analysis, the existing CVR models were replaced by NVRs. After implementing the new NVRs, there was a significant decrease in complaints from surgeons about 'weak' suction, reducing the need for troubleshooting during the case. No changes were noted in cell salvage quality control parameters after the switch. Background/Case Studies: Improving communication is known to positively affect healthcare operations and patient safety. Blood Bank (BB) operations can be significantly impacted by interruptions due to phone calls which negatively impact laboratory workflow and potentially affect patient care. Here we report the experience of a newly formed operation taskforce on improving internal workflow and interdepartmental communication. Study Design/Method: The aim of this study was to improve communication with the nursing personnel from the outpatient Infusion Center at our institution, specifically to reduce the number of phone calls from that unit and the time spent by the BB staff on addressing concerns. An operational taskforce, Blood Bank Ambassadors, was assembled to bridge the communication gap and clarify workflow for nursing personnel. This group was formed by supervisors, specialists and a medical director. Intervention strategies included establishing a platform to safely share ideas, identifying champions of change on both sides, outlining and addressing most significant concerns on both teams, clarifying common goals and ownership, and establishing baseline and follow-up metrics. Initial meetings were held between Blood Bank Ambassadors and nursing team composed of nursing manager, quality improvement personnel, bedside nurses and information technology specialist. This was followed by additional clarifications and regular communication via email. Pre-and post-intervention metrics were the number of calls to BB and estimated time spent by BB staff to clarify issues and concerns raised by nursing personnel. Results/Finding: Baseline data showed an average of 241 calls per month (October 2017) made by nurses from the Infusion Center serving outpatients on the Hematology & Oncology Service at our institution. Approximately 20 hours per month were spent on clarifying issues related to the BB workflow to the nursing unit. The most common issues discussed were transfusion requirements on requisition not agreeing with patient's file or transfusion guidelines, specimen problems, requests for additional specimen testing, turn-around-time, blood product availability and duplicate orders. After the first interdepartmental meeting followed by additional clarifications via email, the call number was reduced to 27 per month, then further decreased to an average of 2.5 calls per month for four consecutive months (January to April 2018). This represents a reduction of more than 98% from baseline call number and estimated time spent on phone calls. Conclusion: Blood Bank Ambassadors significantly improved interdepartmental communication by asserting common leadership and goals. Internal workflow was positively affected by a dramatic reduction in phone calls and time spent on clarifying concerns. Further experience with other teams may reveal key factors for successfully implementing organizational change. Background/Case Studies: Acquired hemophilia A (AHA) due to the spontaneous formation of autoantibodies against factor VIII is an acquired bleeding disorder with significant morbidity and mortality. Therapies include immunosuppression, bleeding control, eradication of the inhibitors, and treatment of the underlying condition. In bleeding patients with hightitered inhibitors, bypassing medications (recombinant activated factor VII (rFVIIa) or activated prothrombin complex concentrate (aPCC)), should be initiated promptly. Both of them are FDA-approved treatments with its own advantages and disadvantages. For example, rFVIIa is a recombinant product and thus, theoretically, there is less risk of transfusion-transmitted infections by both known and unknown agents compared to human plasma-derived products, such as aPCC. However, the cost of rFVIIa is significantly higher. Thus, we developed an economic model to rigorously examine the cost effectiveness of rFVIIa and aPCC in this scenario. Study Design/Method: A Markov decision analytic model was developed to simulate a hypothetical cohort of adult patients with bleeding due to AHA being treated with either rFVIIa or aPCC for 5 days. Regardless of the treatment, the model was developed such that the patients transitioned into 4 different health states: (1) continuous bleeding, (2) thrombosis, (3) stop bleeding, and (4) death. All patients in the model was bleeding initially and thus, they entered the model at stage (1). Depending on the probability of the treatment efficacy and adverse events, on each subsequent day, the patients either remained in state (1) or entered state (2), (3), or (4), which were modeled as absorbing states, which means that the patients did not transition into other states once they entered one of these 3 states. If the patient experienced a thrombotic event, we assumed that the event was severe so that no additional rFVIIa or aPCC was given. We also assumed that there was no re-bleeding event in this cohort. Model parameters, including probabilities, health utility index, and costs, were gathered from the medical literature, except for the costs of aPCC and rFVIIa, which were obtained from our institutional data. Results/Finding: During the 5-day period, the treatment cost of rFVIIa was substantially more than the cost of aPCC ($19,369 vs. $2,724). The average quality adjusted life days (QALDs) gained for rFVIIa was slightly lower compared to aPCC (4.05 vs. 4.08). Overall, aPCC prevailed over rFVIIa as suggested by the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio. Sensitivity analysis also confirmed the robustness of the model across tested ranges of all input variables. Conclusion: In high-titered AHA patients with bleeding, aPCC is more cost-effective when compared to rFVIIa. Thus, aPCC should be used in these patients if available and if there is no other contraindication clinically. Background/Case Studies: Working in a fast paced surgical setting can make it difficult to establish reliable staffing levels. The unpredictable hours can lead to large amounts of overtime and callback time. These extra hours worked can put stress on the employees and also be a source for a high burnout rate. In January 2017 the Autotransfusion (AT) team implemented multiple staffing tools to accommodate the high paced surgical environment while creating an improved work-life balance for twelve AT technicians. Study Design/Method: The AT team collected data from all cases in 2016 where AT performed blood salvage procedures to determine the potential changes to the 2017 staffing model. This data included the average length of time a patient was in the operating room (OR) which was 6.32 hours and average number of surgical cases for a 24-hour period which was 16 cases. This data analysis defended the following additions to the AT schedule: Five 8 hour shifts were converted to 10 hour shifts, a third on-call technician, and two designated late shifts to cover potential overtime. In addition to schedule changes, AT implemented a point-system and communication (SBAR) sheet to assist in determining staffing at shift change in August 2017. Each day, current surgical cases were assigned points which translated to how many staff was needed at the end of a scheduled shift (e.g. one OR = one point). This process withdrew any emotion when determining if staff was required to stay overtime. Results/Finding: There was a slight increase (1%) in AT-staffed cases between 2016 and 2017. Overtime decreased and on-call hours increased, however there was a minimal increase (<1%) in call-back hours per on-call position ( Table 1 ). The point-system data indicated that at the end of first shift (0700-1530), approximately eight points were assigned to the scheduled surgical cases. This number of points specified that on average, four technicians were needed to staff at 1530 each day. Prior to the implementation of this tool, the number of technicians needed to staff varied and was decided by the evening shift technician. Conclusion: By introducing the staffing to workload tools, AT was able to make changes to the staffing model. This improved staffing model resulted in a decrease of overtime, less call-back hours per shift, and a positive work-life balance. Richard Gammon* and Rita A. Reik. OneBlood, Inc Background/Case Studies: This blood center (BC) transitioned from traditional model where all therapeutic phlebotomies (TB) were performed by donor services to creation of medical group operating licensed medical clinic (MC) not associated with hospital. This allowed performance and billing for professional nursing and physician consultative services associated with TB. MC served those whose diagnoses did not allow for crossover of the phlebotomized products to the allogeneic inventory. Summarized are operational, financial and regulatory processes. Study Design/Method: Project was championed by Chief Medical Officer (CMO) and supported by BC Senior Executive Management (SEC). Multidisciplinary working group was established that included from BC: project manager, physicians, training, procedure writers, therapeutic apheresis nursing (TAN), marketing, finance, quality assurance, information technology and facilities; external consultants: billing and credentialing specialists and health-care attorney. Credentialing of MC and physicians with Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and contracts with private carriers needed to be completed for payment. MC needed to be inspected and licensed by Agency for Health Care Administration and procedures written in accordance with appropriate laws and regulations. New electronic medical record (EMR) was created that allowed patient information entered on one tablet to be synced across devices. Method of collecting insurance copayments was createdallowing for credit card processing (cash or checks not accepted). Pilot program was launched using existing BC space with modifications to reconfigure reception area ensuring EMR was not visible to patients. BC physician and TAN staffed MC. Accounts receivable (AR) was reviewed. Results/Finding: Workflow was as follows: 1) prior -patient scheduled appointment (walk-ins not accepted), insurance and prescription verified and co-payments confirmed; 2) day of presentationcheck-in, copayment and health screening including vitals performed by TAN Background/Case Studies: In 2004, the US President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) Program integrated blood safety activities into its key strategies in countries with high prevalence of HIV, or a weak blood safety system, or both. The goal was to strengthen their Blood Transfusion Services through a decrease of HIV and other transfusion-transmitted infections (TTIs), and provide a universal access to safe blood. A standardized screening program implemented in these countries' national and regional blood centers encompassed a questionnaire for screening of HIV-risk behavior to exclude potential high-risk blood donors, and a universal laboratory testing for HIV and other TTIs. There is currently a major gap in quantifying the impact of PEPFAR on HIV transmission risks through blood donations. Study Design/Method: World Health Organization Global Database on Blood Safety data were analyzed from 28 selected PEPFAR-supported countries in sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, and Caribbean from 2004-2015. Statistical analysis was performed using AIM (AIDS Impact Model) and Goals modules of the Spectrum Software version 5.53, and laboratory quality for HIV testing was assumed to have 91.9% sensitivity and 97.7% specificity. Country-specific incidence rate of HIV was calculated from prevalence rate of HIV infection transmitted from blood transfusions through infected blood donations over time. The impact of laboratory testing programs for blood donations on HIV transmission risk through blood transfusions was determined by estimating the number of new HIV infections averted since the implementation of the PEPFAR program. Results/Finding: Results indicated that HIV incidence rates in blood donations showed decreasing trends in 20 sub-Saharan African countries, Cambodia, and Haiti. The following patterns were observed: wide U-shaped trends in Ghana, Lesotho, Guyana; reverse J-shaped in Ethiopia; inverted wide U-shaped in Tajikistan Background/Case Studies: The most detailed information about transfusion of whole blood and blood components in electronic health records (EHR) is recorded with the Information Standard for Blood and Transplant (ISBT)-128 coding system in the United States (U.S.). The ISBT-128 coding system adds sensitivity and granularity to blood surveillance which other coding systems, such as billing and reimbursement codes, may lack. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Center for Biologics Effectiveness and Research (CBER) recently established the Biologics Effectiveness and Safety (BEST) Initiative, a part of the CBER Sentinel Program. The aim of this study is to characterize the prevalence of whole blood and blood components transfusion from 2012 to 2017 using ISBT-128 codes from participating data partners in the BEST Initiative. Study Design/Method: We explored approximately 24 million patient records from three EHR databases (Columbia University, Stanford University, and Regenstrief Institute) along with a library of 14,543 ISBT-128 codes. We assessed transfusion of whole blood or a blood component (red blood cells, plasma, cryoprecipitate and platelets). Results/Finding: Transfusion trends of blood components varied between 2012 and 2017. Of the 624,519 total transfusion events, red blood cells (RBCs) accounted for more than half (51.1%) of events, with platelets (21.8%), plasma (9.4%), cryoprecipitate (2.7%), and whole blood (0.01%) comprising the remaining events. We observed increasing RBC transfusion events up through 2016, a suggestion of increasing administration of cryoprecipitate, and relatively consistent use of plasma. There is overall downward trend in administration of platelets. Whole blood usage was minimal and became obsolete over the study period. Conclusion: We have demonstrated that using the ISBT-128 coding system is feasible and well-captured within the BEST EHR databases. Incorporation of ISBT-128 codes into the CBER blood surveillance system can enhance hemovigilance activities and will afford FDA the ability to actively monitor blood component utilization and transfusion-related adverse events. Comparing Two Methods for Estimating HIV and HCV Incidence in Repeat United States Blood Donors Whitney Steele* 1 , Lauren A. Crowder 1 , James M. Haynes 1 , Ed P. Notari 1 , Roger Y. Dodd 2 and Susan L. Stramer 1 . 1 American Red Cross, 2 American Red Cross Holland Laboratory Background/Case Studies: While the incidence rate (IR) is always the number of cases divided by the total person-time (PT) at risk for the population in question, the incidence method (IM), or the way the cases are determined and PT calculated in repeat blood donors often varies by investigator. A recent paper modeling 8 different IM for HIV using simulated donation and infection data found that the IM used by our investigators since 2002 (ELM -Extended Lookback Method) resulted in biased estimates and that a different IM (CM -Conventional Method) was preferred for IR estimation (Brambilla, Transfusion 2016). To assess how these 2 IM performed with actual donor data, we calculated HIV and HCV IR for five 2-year estimation intervals (EI) at our organization. Table) . For CM, the IR was usually double the IR of ELM, with corresponding PT of 1.2 million and 4.0 million for each method, respectively. The same pattern was generally seen for HCV except in years 2013-2014 and 2015-2016 where the CM and ELM IRs were closer. Conclusion: In contrast to the 2016 analysis using simulated data, CM in our population of actual RPT donors produced consistently higher IR compared to ELM. The advantage to ELM is that more positive donors identified during the EI can be utilized, but the concern is that the corresponding increase in PT of the entire population does not compensate for this. While we did find that ELM identified more incident donors than CM, the ELM PT was usually more than 3x that of PT in CM, while the number of incident donors captured by ELM was no more than 2x greater. The larger denominator, without an equal increase in the numerator, resulted in lower ELM IR. Simulations can attempt to model different conditions such as changes in donation frequency and number of positive donations, but may not match the actual changes in the donor population, as observed here. Given rapid shifts in donor collections in recent years, differences in methods are difficult to model, and thus both incidence methods will likely continue to be used. However, blood product availability is limited for many patients throughout the world. In order to improve access to blood products it is crucial to provide countries with enough detail about transfusion needs to enable targeted investments. To determine the need for transfusion services at the country level, disease prevalence information as well as disease specific transfusion rates are required. Disease prevalence estimates are available from the Global Burden of Disease (GBD) study for 195 countries, by sex, age, and over time. We propose to use administrative data to determine transfusion rates by GBD cause and to apply these rates to the GBD prevalence estimates in order to determine blood product needs by country, and over time. Study Design/Method: As an initial step in our analysis, we used the Truven Analytics 2010 and 2012 Marketscan database and the HCUP Nationwide Inpatient Sample 2000 to 2012 to determine packed red blood (PRBC) and platelet transfusion proportions by disease category and inpatient encounter. Disease categories were defined based on the Global Burden of Disease 2016 cause list. For each inpatient encounter the principal diagnosis was used to determine the most likely indication for transfusion. A transfusion event was defined as at least one packed red blood cell or platelet transfusion procedure code (ICD-9-CM code, 99.04 and 99.05) per inpatient encounter. Results/Finding: The most common inpatient encounters with at least one PRBC or platelet transfusion were cancer related anemia (66% of inpatient encounters), acute blood loss anemia (59%), hereditary, nutritional, hemolytic, and bone marrow failure anemias (52%), gastro-intestinal bleeding events (38%), and chronic liver disease (37%). Among the cancer related anemias, leukemias and multiple myeloma had the highest proportion of admissions with at least one transfusion (23% to 35%). Conclusion: Population level requirements for blood products depend on the location specific epidemiological and disease profile. By using administrative datasets, indications for transfusions can be determined. Next steps in our analysis will be to determine disease specific transfusion rates and to apply these transfusion rates to the disease prevalence estimates from the Global Burden of Disease study for 195 countries. These estimates of the number of needed blood transfusions will be contrasted with current transfusion availability as reported in the WHO Global Database on blood safety. Background/Case Studies: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a common cardiac arrhythmia affecting 1.5% of individuals in the developed world and 5% of those over 65 years of age. AF is likely underdiagnosed, resulting in therapeutic delays and increasing complication risks. A pilot program screening for AF with a mobile electrocardiogram (ECG) application was instituted at a community blood center to benefit donors by alerting those with possible AF to seek further medical evaluation. Study Design/Method: Following blood collection, donors aged 18 or older were invited by a volunteer to be screened for AF. After giving informed consent, they completed anonymous Demographics and Medical History forms. An AF screening ECG application loaded onto a tablet device was used to assess heart rhythms. Results (Normal, Unclassified, Unreadable, Possible AF) were recorded for each subject. Those with Possible AF results recieved a copy of their heart tracings and were advised to consult a health provider. Participants also completed an evaluation incorporating a five-level Likert scale (1=most unfavorable; 5=most favorable). Results/Finding: A total of 1000 donors (average age of 43.0) were screened. The majority were female (61.2%) and Caucasian (76.2%). Most were allogeneic donors (99%) and had a health provider (84.2%). A minority of subjects (39) reported a previous AF evaluation. Most interpretations were Normal. Of these, two (plus one unsure) had a previous AF diagnosis but denied current AF. Thirty (plus one unsure) reported an irregular pulse history. Possible AF results totaled seven, of whom none was previously evaluated for AF (though two reported an irregular pulse history). The average age of those with Possible AF (31.6) was less than those with a Normal screen (43.3). Refer to Table 1 for further cohort characterizations. Most users reported interest in this opportunity (4.3/5 on the Likert scale), found results useful/helpful (4.5), thought the device easy to use (4.9), and were likely to be re-screened (4.7). A majority (97.9%) recommended continuing to offer the screening. Conclusion: This pilot AF screening program at a community blood center was well received by donors, with 0.7% of participants generating a Possible AF result. Further study of an older donor population screened for AF prior to qualifying for blood collection is warranted. Also, correlation of diagnostic outcomes for those with Possible AF screening would be valuable. Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor (G-CSF) in Breastmilk of a Nursing Donor during Hematopoietic Progenitor Cells (HPC) Mobilization Randin C. Nelson*. National Institutes of Health Background/Case Studies: Peripheral blood hematopoietic progenitor cell (HPC) transplants are the most common product for HPC transplantation. Peripheral blood HPC donors receive recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) to stimulate production and release of HPCs into the peripheral blood for apheresis collection. Among concerns for lactating G-CSF-mobilized peripheral blood HPC donors is the unknown potential for harm to their child via ingestion of this potent growth factor during nursing. Only two studies have previously described the excretion of G-CSF in human milk, leaving the transplant community with limited information with which to make appropriate safety recommendations for nursing HPC donors. In this study, G-CSF levels were measured in a lactating G-CSF-mobilized HPC donor. Study Design/Method: Serial plasma and milk samples were collected from a volunteer peripheral blood HPC donor. The G-CSF concentration of each sample was measured using an enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA). Results/Finding: Peak concentration of G-CSF in donor milk was at 592pg/ mL 48 hours after the first dose of G-CSF was given. G-CSF remained detectable in donor milk for 48 hours after the final dose of G-CSF. Conclusion: Compared to previous reports, a higher peak concentration of G-CSF in donor breast milk during mobilization was identified. Additionally, G-CSF was still detectable in breast milk 2 days after the last dose, the time at which even the most conservative guidelines would allow the donor to resume breastfeeding. This underscores the need to cautiously counsel lactating HPC donors regarding the presence of G-CSF in breast milk and the unknown risk this poses to the nursing infant. Where Do the Red Blood Cells Go? A Nationwide Analysis of RBC Use in Taiwan 2015 Ling-I Hsu*, Yun-Yuan Chen and Jen-Wei Chen. Department of Research, Head Office, Taiwan Blood Services Foundation Background/Case Studies: Understanding of usage of red blood cell (RBC) componentscan facilitate demand planning and clinical supply. Periodically review and audit of blood utilization is the first step for patient blood management in the future.In this study, we aimed at a nationwide analysis of red cell transfusion and their clinical indications. Study Design/Method: A National Health Insurance (NHI) program has been in place in Taiwan since 1995.Individualstransfused with RBC were identified and their disease diagnoses and surgical procedures were retrieved from NHI database, which comprised of information of more than 99% of blood transfused in the country. Results/Finding: A total of 306,980 persons were transfused with 1,074,934 red cell units, adjusted to 500 ml whole blood-derived RBC equivalent unit, in 19 medical centers, 76 metropolitan hospitals and 285 community hospitals and 187 clinics in 2015.Overall, 44.06% of RBC were transfused in medical centers, 55.85% were transfused in metropolitan and community hospitals and 0.88% transfused in clinics. A total of 45.6% of RBC units were transfused for medical indications, with 51.4% being transfused for surgical indications and 3.0% for obstetrics and gynecology. When compared to RBC transfusion in 2011, the transfused units for medical and obstetrics/gynecology remains steady over these years. The transfused units for surgical procedures was 4.5% decreased. Breakdown data showed Hematologic and oncologic disorders accounted for 16% and 13% of RBC transfusion, respectively. Gastrointestinal (14%), vascular (11%) and cardiothoracic surgery(10%) were also common indications for RBC transfusion. RBC usage varies between hospitals. Approximately 19% of RBC units were transfused for cancer patients in medical centers, but less than 10% were for cancer patients in metropolitan and community hospitals. On the other hand, a significantly higher percentage of RBC usage for gastrointestinal surgery and respiratory diseases was observed in metropolitan and community hospitals as compared to that in medical centers. For most internal medical procedures, the number of RBC unit transfused per hospitalization was similar between hospitals. However, significant variations were observed for surgical procedures between hospitals. Conclusion: This is the first comprehensive population-based analysis of RBC usage in Taiwan. This study identifies the clinical areas where most of the red cell units were transfused in the country. These data are important for future planning and provide information in realizing patient blood management. When Hr-Units Are Not Available, What Are the Alternatives to Transfuse an Immunized Background/Case Studies: The Hr-rare blood group (RH:-18) is encoded by 4 different alleles which also encode a partial e, called hr S -phenotype. They often segregate with alleles encoding partial D. Thus, Hr-subjects are likely to develop alloantibodies, which have been responsible for hemolytic transfusion reactions or hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn. Hrunits are very scarce because most donor testing reagents and procedures do not accurately screen them, as no antigenic weakening is commonly seen. We report the cases of 4 Hr-pregnant women with different antibody profiles and how the least incompatible units were selected for them. Study Design/Method: Standard hemagglutination and genomic techniques were used. Results/Finding: Patient 1 was at 22 weeks of pregnancy when fetal distress was reported. She was RHD*DAR/RHCE*ceAR homozygous and immunized with anti-Hr (only reactive in IAT-papain) and anti-hr S (titer 4). D--units were proposed for IUT but with a very high risk of anti-D immunization. Ten days later, due to the severe renal failure of the patient, the fetus died. To cover a post-partum hemorrhage, two options were possible: rr units, which would be incompatible in IAT, or R 2 R 2 units, which would only be incompatible in IAT-papain but without any prevention for anti-D immunization. The best scenario would have been r"r" but such units were not available when she delivered. Patient 2 was RHD*DAR/RHCE*ceAR homozygous and immunized with anti-D, anti-Hr, anti-hr S . At delivery their respective titer was 8, 1 and 256. rr and R 2 R 2 units were considered too reactive to be used. r"r" units were barely reactive. Passive antibodies found in the newborn were anti-D and anti-hr S . The baby did not harbor a partial D but was discovered to be HbS/S. R 2 R 2 or CEVF-(RH:-61) units were only reactive in IAT-papain. Even though r"r" units were non-reactive, in order to prevent an anti-E immunization, CEVF-units were considered to be the best option and easier to collect than D--units. Patient 3 had a normal D. At delivery of her 3 rd pregnancy, anti-hr S titrated 512 and anti-Hr was weakly reactive on untreated RBCs. R 2 R 2 units were selected for the mother and D--or the mother's blood were proposed for the newborn. Luckily no transfusion was needed. Two years later, she had a new pregnancy. At 8 th month, an emergency delivery was performed because of fetal distress. The anti-hr S titer was 512. At birth the hemoglobin was 7g/dL. An emergency transfusion was done with a fresh R 2 R 2 unit, followed by an exchange transfusion using the same phenotype. Patient 4 had a normal D. Her antibodies were anti-E, anti-c, anti-hr S and anti-Hr. Titers, performed on rr, R 1 R 1 and R 2 R 2 RBCs were 4096, 2048 and 8192 respectively. She had lost her 2 first newborns at 1 month and 1 week. She could not carry her last pregnancy to term. No other units than Hr-, D-or Rh null were suitable for transfusion. Conclusion: To transfuse Hr-immunized individuals when Hr-units are not available, the following phenotypes should be tested: D--, rr, R 2 R 2 , r"r", CEVF-or Rh null . Depending on the antibodies' strength, the clinical history and the availability of the units, the best alternative can be decided. A close cooperation with the clinical team is essential and has to be set up at the earliest stage of pregnancy. These cases illustrate the urgent need to implement more efficient procedures in donor testing to pick up Hr-units, as well as donor recruitment campaigns to target Hr-individuals. Next Generation Sequencing Based ABO Subtyping for Organ Donors Bharat Thyagarajan* 1 , Claudia S. Cohn 1 , Kayla Hansen 2 , Shelley Williams 1 and Christine Henzler 1 . 1 University of Minnesota, 2 Fairview Hospitals Background/Case Studies: The Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network (OPTN) has recommended routine subtyping of group A kidney donors so that "non-A1" donors who express lower amounts of A1 antigen can be used in recipients with blood types O or B. Despite this guidance, only 1.4% of all kidney transplants since December 2014 were subtyped with over a quarter of Organ Procurement Organizations (OPO) reporting issues with subtyping. Serology based ABO typing and subtyping of the A blood type may not be informative when the patients have received pretransplant transfusions. The advent of next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have allowed the rapid, scalable methods for molecular determination of ABO blood types and A subtyping that may address limitations of serological methods and enable widespread adoption of subtyping in kidney transplantation. Study Design/Method: We developed a NGS based method that specifically amplifies or enriches sequences in exons 6 and 7 of the ABO gene followed by short read sequencing using either HiSeq2500 or MiSeq platform (Illumina Inc.). The raw sequence data was processed using a custom bioinformatics pipeline that allowed inference of the ABO blood types and the A subtype by combining the sequence information with population based frequencies for various alleles. The concordance between observed ABO genotypes and serology was determined using data from 41 individuals with matched ABO genotype/serology information and the concordance of the A subtyping was determined using data from 85 individuals with matched A1 subtype genotype/serology information Results/Finding: Both exons 6 and 7 were completely sequenced using the custom NGS based assay. We observed 100% concordance between ABO genotypes and corresponding serology in 41 individuals. Unambiguous genotypes for A subtyping was available in 89% of cases (76/85). In all these cases, the A1 allele could not be unambiguously distinguished from the A2 allele. Eight of these cases were serotype as "non-A1" while one case was serotyped as A1. Combining sequencing data with information from public databases allowed us to successfully infer genotypes in all 85 cases. The concordance among patients with unambiguous A subtypes was 95% (45/49) with four discrepant cases. In two cases, patients with an A1 allele were identified as "non-A1" by serology while in two cases serology indicated an A1 subtype when no A1 allele was identified by genotyping. Conclusion: This study demonstrates the feasibility of using molecular techniques to routinely subtype donors and patients awaiting renal transplantation. Further understanding the reasons for the observed discrepancy between genotypes and serology and improvements in genotype determination may be needed before routine implementation of ABO genotyping in a clinical laboratory. Background/Case Studies: Deleterious variants affecting the CYBB gene of the Xp21.1 region have been associated with loss of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate-oxidase (NADPH) functionality and chronic granulomatous disease (CGD). Directly upstream from the CYBB gene is the XK gene, which encodes the Kx transmembrane protein on red blood cells. Loss of the Kx protein greatly reduces expression of the Kell system antigens and is referred to as the McLeod (MLD) phenotype. MLD neuroacanthocytosis syndrome includes chronic anemia and late onset neuromuscular complications. MLD syndrome with CGD is rare, but has been described to co-occur in patients with Xp21.1 deletions affecting both CYBB and XK. Two black male half-brothers, ages 9 and18, presented separately. Both brothers had been hospitalized with multifocal lung consolidations. The 18 year old received four granulocyte transfusions for CGD therapy in 2010 after being hospitalized for chronic right lung fungal pneumonia and produced anti-Kx. The 9 year old brother had received three red blood cell units for anemia and not produced any antibodies. We performed serologic and DNA studies in these individuals to illustrate a fuller picture of the red cell phenotype and identify the causative genetic variant(s). Study Design/Method: Anti-k and anti-Kp b were of pooled human sera. A regional tiled genomic PCR strategy was used to detect large regional X chromosome deletions. Published X-chromosome primers (Gassner et al. 2017) were used to amplify 16 genomic PCR targets spanning a 2.8 mbp region of Xp21.1 containing the CYBB and XK genes, followed by finemapping using a step-wise custom primer strategy. Results/Finding: Both brother's red blood cells were found to be weakly reactive with Cellano and Kp b antisera. Contiguous PCR amplicons failed to amplify consistent with a large deletion. Fine mapping stepwise PCR strategy identified an approximately 570kb X-chromosome deletion affecting the genes PRRG1, LANCL3, XK, CYBB, DYNLT3, and SYTL5. Conclusion: We studied 2 half-brothers who have MLD phenotype and CGD. We identified a previously unreported X-chromosome deletion affecting at least 6 functioning genes including XK and CYBB. Evaluation of patients with either CGD or MLD syndrome should consider evaluation for the other syndrome. When these syndromes are suspected, genetic studies should include a method capable of detecting all types of loss of function variations and identifying the extent of X-chromosome deletions. Transfusion exposures should be minimized whenever possible in these cases due the risk of provoking anti-Kx responses. Carolina Bonet Bub* 1 , Maria Giselda Aravechia 1 , Leandro Santos 1 , Eduardo Bastos 1 , Marilia Sirianni 1 , Thiago Costa 1 , Jose M. Kutner 1 and Lilian Castilho 2 . 1 Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, 2 Hemocentro Unicamp Background/Case Studies: Appropriate classification of RhD phenotypes is crucial for correct indication of anti-D immunoglobulin (RhIG) in pregnant women. The serological distinction between weak D and partial D phenotypes is often doubtful and makes genetic analysis of the RHD gene highly recommended in pregnant women. In addition to properly define the RhD phenotype, one of the important aspects in maternal medicine is to predict whether the RhD variants can alloimmunize or not the pregnant woman in order to indicate the appropriate use of anti-D RhIG. Based on this, we analyzed the RHD gene in a cohort of pregnant women from a multi-ethnic population of Southeast Brazil with a serologic weak D phenotype and evaluated the implication of each D variant found with alloimmunization. Study Design/Method: We selected a total of 40 prenatal patients samples from 3916 samples that showed a weak reactivity in D typing routine. The D antigen expression was evaluated by tube and gel hemagglutination with four monoclonal anti-D reagents. Laboratory-developed DNA tests (LDTs), RHD BeadChip (Bioarray Solutions, Immucor) and sequencing were used to identify the RHD alleles. Results/Finding: There was no standard serologic reactivity identified, which could predict what type of D variant would be identified but agglutination varied from 1 + to 3+. Molecular analyses showed that 36 (90%) pregnant women were RHD*weak D type 4.0 and potentially at risk for anti-D and 4 (10%) were RHD*weak D types 1, 2 or 3 and not at risk for anti-D. Most of the patients had previously gestations with no anti-D Ig prophylaxis and all patients showed a negative antibody screening in this follow up. Conclusion: Our results show that weak D type 4.0 is by far the most frequent type (90%) of D variant in this selected prenatal patients of a multiethnic population with serologic weak D phenotype. According to the literature, these obstetric patients are at risk for anti-D and candidates for RhIG. According to our results, using RHD genotyping, we could prevent unnecessary injections of RhIG in only 10% of the pregnant women with a serologic weak D phenotype. However, no anti-D immunization was observed in our cohort of pregnant women with weak D type 4.0, even in those who did not use RhIG in the previous gestation. Challenges in RH Genotype Matching in Brazilian Patients with Sickle Cell Disease (SCD) Tamires Delfino dos Santos, Sheila de Fátima Perecin Menegati, Mayra Dorigan de Macedo, Simone Gilli and Lilian Castilho*. Hemocentro Unicamp Background/Case Studies: Knowledge of the prevalence of RH variants supports development of strategies to match RH to avoid Rh alloimmunization and the risk of hemolytic transfusion reactions and/or poor transfusion outcomes. Molecular Rh typing has been performed to identify the RH altered alleles and is playing an important role in expanding matching of SCD patients and donors in the RH system. In this study, we examined the transfusion requests for RH-matched donor units and compared the RHCE alleles in the SCD patients to the RH allele frequency in our donor population. In addition, the number of potentially compatible donors was assessed per request with an aim to identify the RH genotypes that are lacking or insufficient in our donor cohort. Study Design/Method: Requests for RH genotype matched donors from January 2017 to January 2018 were evaluated. For each patient and donor, their RHD and RHCE alleles were determined. Laboratory developed tests (LDTs), RHD BeadChip™, RHCE BeadChip™ and sequencing were used to determine RHD-CE genotypes among 29 patients and 1798 African Brazilian blood donors. We considered the total of red blood cell units requested for each patient and a number of 2 donations per year to evaluate the number of potentially compatible donors. Results/Finding: We evaluated 61 transfusion requests from 29 patients, 17 had anti-hr B , two anti-hr S and 6 both anti-hr B and anti-Hr B , also, 4 had other Rh alloantibodies. We found different combinations of RHCE variant alleles predicting partial antigens or lack of high prevalence antigens such as hrB-and hrS-in these patients but the most frequent alleles were RHCE*ce48C,733G, RHCE*(C)ce S and RHCE*ceAR. Although these RH alleles were also found in our donors, the number of donors with homozygous RH genotypes were insufficient to fulfil all the transfusion requests. Conclusion: Although the most common hrB-and the (C)ce S alleles associated with RH genotype match requests are not uncommon in our donors, the ability to identify units to fill the transfusion requests is challenging. Filling requests for hrS-units is specially challenging as this phenotype is much less frequent in our donors. The development of a strategy to screen more donors and to optimize the identification of donors with RH variant alleles is critical to support our SCD patients with RH genotype matched units. Novel Soluble CD38 for Efficient Neutralization of High Titer Anti-CD38 Antibodies Matteo Binda 1 , Vincenzo Favaloro 2 , Norbert Piel 2 , Jody D. Berry 2 and Peter Schwind* 1 . 1 Medion Grifols Diagnostics, 2 Grifols Diagnostic Solutions Inc. Background/Case Studies: Novel anti-CD38 drugs used in treatment of multiple myeloma, such as daratumumab (DARA), interfere with diagnostic screening and identification of unexpected antibodies. They cause panreactivity of Reagent Red Blood Cells (RRBC), which complicates the detection of underlying allo-antibodies of potential clinical relevance. At the moment there are few strategies to overcome this problem, however with several drawbacks. The aim of this study was to evaluate the diagnostic use of a novel recombinant CD38 with particular emphasis on dilution effects of this soluble CD38 (sCD38) on detection of unexpected antibodies. Study Design/Method: A fusion protein containing the extracellular domain of CD38 was expressed in mammalian cells and purified as sCD38. For evaluation of diagnostic functionality, anti-CD38 spiked donor plasma (containing allo-antibodies or not) were mixed with varying volumes/concentrations of sCD38 (or PBS as control) and incubated for 15 minutes at 37°C. Antibody detection was then performed by Indirect Antiglobulin Test (IAT) in conventional tube technique or DG Gel technique. Results/Finding: A ratio of 2 μl and 4 μl of recombinant sCD38 at nominal concentration of $30mg/ml per 25 μl of plasma, allowed for complete inhibition of anti-CD38 (respectively 0.5mg/ml and 1mg/ml). After inhibition, spiked allo-antibodies (anti-D, -E, -c, -Cw, -K, -Fya, -Jka, -S, -s, -M, -Lua, -Cob) at barely detectable amounts into DARA-spiked donor plasma could be readily detected in 16/16 samples. In contrast, as demonstrated in DG Gel technique, after incubation with 20 μl and 200 μl of diluted preparations of sCD38, respectively 15/16 and 3/16 of the same simulated DARA plasma spiked with antibodies could still be detected. The presented results show the inhibition of therapeutic plasma concentrations of daratumumab using a novel sCD38 at small volumes without interference in alloantibody detection. Additionally, these data confirm that successful neutralization and subsequent antibody detection requires highly concentrated sCD38. After neutralization, the plasma can be screened with available routine techniques, such as tube and gel technique. Enabling complete anti-CD38 inhibition, while minimally diluting the plasma with sCD38, the highly concentrated sCD38 presented in this work may provide, in combination with IAT, a rapid and accurate screening and identification method of even weakly reacting allo-antibodies masked by anti-CD38. On the other hand, Glycophorin E (GPE) is not expressed on erythrocyte membranes. The glycophorin family genes called GYPA, GYPB, and GYPE are located on chromosome 4 and have a high homology to each other. Normal M antigen is sensitive to protease, but some protease-resistant M antigens (PRM) are identified such as St a (GP.Zan) and En(a-)UK. In 1991, Kikuchi and Uchikawa et al. reported a novel PRM with a low molecular weight. In this study, we performed immunochemical, serologic, and molecular genetic analysis of the novel PRM antigen, and confirmed that PRM was present on GP(E-B) hybrid molecule. Study Design/Method: PRM screening of 193,009 blood donors was performed at Japanese Red Cross Kanto Koshinetsu block blood center from June to November 2015. MNS blood type was determined by automated blood grouping machine (PK7300) with monoclonal anti-M (CBC-1 + CBC-2) and the red blood cells (RBCs) suspended in a 0.02% bromelin solution. When positive reaction was observed, M, N, S and s antigens were examined by the standard tube method. RBC membrane proteins were analyzed by immunoblotting with anti-M (CBC-3). Flow cytometric analysis of S/s antigens on RBCs was performed with polyclonal anti-S and anti-s. To identify the molecular mechanism for the novel PRM antigen, reticulocyte mRNA and genomic DNA from a PRM-positive donor were analyzed by PCR and cloning followed by sequencing. Genomic fragment spanning from M-specific sequence in exon 2 to downstream of exon B5, and upstream of exon B1 to downstream of exon E3 were amplified from gDNA by PCR, and sequence it. Background/Case Studies: ABO typing of recipients and donors is important for optimal transfusion and transplant outcomes. Although, serologic ABO typing is highly reliable, it can be limited by discordant forward and reverse typing. In addition, living solid organ and stem cell donor evaluations often only involve a buccal swab, preventing upfront serologic ABO typing. A combination of DNA based genotyping solutions can be used to help resolve serologic ABO discordances as well as screen transplant donors for ABO, but these methods are labor-intensive and require interpretation by subject matter experts. We sought to develop a targeted ABO next generation sequencing (NGS) assay, along with companion interpretive software, for automated data processing and ABO typing for known ABO alleles. Study Design/Method: Targeted long range PCR based DNA enrichment of the ABO gene was achieved by evaluating a series of PCR primer combinations using both blood and buccal swab isolated DNA. The PCR products were run on agarose gel and Agilent bioanalyzer to determine product size and quality. Promising PCR products then underwent Illumina TruSight NGS library preparation and sequencing using an Illumina MiSeq. Investigators previously created a curated allele database (http://bloodantigens.com) and custom bloodTyper interpretive software to determine blood groups from whole genome sequencing data. These previous efforts were improved upon by further curating the ABO alleles and by adding NGS sequence read based cis/trans phasing to the bloodTyper software to determine full ABO allele haplotypes. Results/Finding: PCR primer evaluation showed reproducible PCR products spanning ABO exons 2-7 in blood samples and 6-7 for buccal swabs, which yielded good quality NGS data. These exons encode the major ABO specificities including ABO subtypes (A2, Ax, B3, weak antigens (Aw, Ael), and hybrid alleles (cisAB, B(A)). To verify the ABO NGS assay, a combination of 100 blood and buccal swab samples were tested and found to be 100% concordant with serologic ABO typing and Sanger sequencing of weak, subtype, and hybrid allele samples. We found that in most cases that targeted ABO NGS results could be fully resolved to a cis/trans phased genotyping allowing for unambiguous allele determination by the interpretative software. Conclusion: A targeted ABO NGS based assay was developed and optimized for blood and buccal swab isolated DNA. Companion interpretive software, which automates NGS ABO analysis, was developed and correctly determined the ABO type when compared with serology and Sanger sequencing. This assay and software interpretation represents a new and improved standard for DNA based ABO testing, allowing for ABO typing when no blood sample is available, and resolution of of weak, subtype, and hybrid ABO alleles. The Background/Case Studies: Recombinant blood group proteins (rBGPs) are soluble proteins derived from eukaryotic expression systems which mimic red cell blood group antigens. This study evaluates rBGPs for their potential use in a Red Cell Immunohaematology (RCI) laboratory, in the elucidation of complex antibodies in pre-transfusion and antenatal testing. Current laboratory methods used to resolve complex cases such as; multiple antibodies, antibodies to high frequency antigens or antibodies that are high titre low avidity (HTLA) in nature can be cumbersome. These investigations require a great deal of operator expertise and may lead to delays in the provision of suitable red cell units for transfusion. Previous studies involving rBGPs have shown their significant potential in reducing turnaround times for antibody investigation and subsequent provision of red cell units for patients with complex antibodies. This study evaluates the usefulness of rBGP in a RCI laboratory. Study Design/Method: 43 samples containing complex antibodies were tested using the appropriate rBGP (imusyn). The inhibition assay was used as per manufacturer's instructions. Plasma was incubated with rBGPs to inhibit specific antibodies to the cognate blood group antigen. This was followed by an indirect antiglobulin test by BIORAD gel card method. Results/Finding: Out of 43 samples tested, 21 contained HTLA type antibodies and 11 of these were successfully inhibited (52.4%) using rBGP. Out of 11 samples containing antibodies to high frequency antigens, 8 were successfully inhibited (72.7%). Other lower frequency antibodies were also tested using rBGP and results are included in table 1. Conclusion: Recombinant blood group proteins are a novel and effective way of managing samples in pre-transfusion and antenatal testing. The inhibition assay is a quick and straightforward method facilitating fast antibody identification. This allows for rapid, effective provision of suitable units to patients requiring transfusion and also in the stratification of risk due to antibodies implicated in HDFN. Two notable cases were observed whereby rBGPs allowed for prompt identification of specificities including an anti-Dob and a CR1-related antibody, thus facilitating provision suitable units expediently. Of note a high percentage of HTLA type antibodies did not inhibit successfully, however, it should be noted that accurate assignment of specificity can be ambiguous with these types of antibodies. Thalassemia Patient Classification: HBB and HFE DNA Profiles by LeanSequencing Asim Qidwai 1 , Kristopher Fernandez 2 and Ghazala Hashmi* 2,3 . 1 Afzal Memorial Thalassemia Foundation, 2 BioMolecular Analytics, 3 SKH Foundation Background/Case Studies: Blood transfusion therapy is the standard of care for managing anemia in thalassemia patients which, in many recipients, leads to accumulation of excess iron. Hemochromatosis is an inherited iron storage disorder that increases the risk of developing iron overload as mutations in the HFE ("high-Fe") gene impair the molecular mechanism for removing excess iron. While thalassemia patients are routinely characterized for mutations in the HBB gene encoding beta-globin, screening for HFE mutations currently is not part of the "work-up". To explore the prevalence of HFE mutations in chronically transfused pediatric and adolescent thalassemia patients in Pakistan, we evaluated DNA profiles for HBB and HFE gene mutations, with the objective of improving thalassemia patient management. Study Design/Method: 155 pediatric and adolescent β-thalassemia patients treated at the Afzal Memorial Thalassemia Foundation (AMTF) hospital were screened, in a single assay, using a novel LeanSequencing process developed at BioMolecular Analytics. Our panel included a set of thalassemia (-619 bp deletion, cd 8/9 + G, IVS1-1 G>T, IVS1-1 G>A, IVS1-5 G>C, 41/42 -TTCT, IVS1-6 T>C, -88 C>T, -29 A>G, and IVS1-110 G>A), sickle cell (Hb S, C and E) and hemochromatosis (HFE C282Y, H63D, S65C) mutations. Duplicate barcoded buccal swab samples were collected and crude extract was prepared without any DNA purification (Patel, et al., 2017) . Crude extract was amplified in a multiplexed PCR reaction for both HBB and HFE genes and analyzed by LeanSequencing. We also analyzed the same group of patients for an extended set of red blood cell antigens, and present those data elsewhere in these proceedings. Results/Finding: 5% of patients were homozygous, and 28% were heterozygous, for HFE mutation H63D; all were normal for C282Y and S65C. As to HBB, IVS1-5 G>C was the most common mutation in this group (33% homozygous, 9.6% compound heterozygous with mostly codon 8/9 + G, IVSI 1 G>T and Hb E); also common was codon 8/9 + G (22.4% homozygous, 12% compound heterozygous with, IVS1-5 G>C, IVS1-1 G>T or 41/42 -TTCT); 3.2% patients identified with -619 bp deletion, and 6% homozygous and 1% heterozygous for 41/42 -TTCT; 2 % of the patients were "compound het" for the Hb E sickle cell mutation; all patients were normal for Hb S and Hb C mutations. Conclusion: HFE gene mutations are not uncommon in Pakistani thalassemia patients. The routine screening for these mutations would provide additional input in designing individualized proactive transfusion therapies, especially for pediatric patients, namely by routinely providing cells selected in accordance with the patients' extended rbc antigen profiles: to minimize the risk of alloimmunization, and by reducing the prevalence of this condition, which has been reported to increase the frequency of transfusion, to likewise reduce the risk of iron overload. The LeanSequencing mutation New York Blood Center Background/Case Studies: Discrepancies between test methods, whether automation versus tube or serology versus DNA, have led to the identification of novel JK alleles. More than thirty alleles coding altered or silenced expression of Jk in multiple ethnicities are known. We investigated JK in a donor with a Jk b serologic discordance between current and historical type and in a patient with Jk(a−) phenotype differed from Jk(a+) prediction by DNA. Study Design/Method: RBC typing was performed by standard tube methods with monoclonal anti-Jk a (clone MS15) and -Jk b (clone MS8). Genomic DNA was isolated from WBCs. HEA PreciseType was performed for the patient. JK coding exons were amplified and sequenced. Results/Finding: Sample 1 was from a South Asian male donor. RBCs on the current donation typed Jk(b+) but historical records indicated Jk(b−). By tube testing, his RBCs were weakly reactive with Immucor anti-Jk b and non-reactive with Bio-Rad Seraclone anti-Jk b . RBCs also were Jk(a+). From sequence results, the sample was heterozygous for c.838G>A (p. Asp280Asn), predicting Jk(a+b+). In addition, a novel change, c.998T>C that encodes p.Val333Ala was identified. The c.998C change by Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAc) is rare with a frequency of 0.003% (rs774982134). Sample 2 was from a 76 year old Caucasian female patient. The RBCs typed Jk(a−) but HEA PreciseType predicted Jk(a+). Additional testing found the RBCs were non-reactive with Immucor and Bio-Rad Seraclone anti-Jk a . RBCs also typed Jk(b+). JK sequencing of exon 9 confirmed JK*A/*B, but also revealed a novel change, c.935C>A (p.Ala312Asp), which was not found in the dbSNP or ExAc databases. Sequencing with SNP-specific primers linked the new change to JK*A. JK*A with c.935C>A was identified in a patient whose RBCs typed Jk(a−) with multiple reagents. The Ala312Asp is predicted to be located in the transmembrane (T4b) [Ramsey et al, 2017 Transfusion 57(3)] and its impact on protein expression is difficult to predict. The sample was insufficient for adsorption/elution studies to determine if the allele encodes a Jk a null phenotype or low level of Jk a antigen. With the number of discordances identified between serology and DNA, these studies show the combined power of serologic and molecular typing when testing patients and donors. A Survey of the ABO Alleles Associated with Weak Anti-A1 Lectin Reactive RBCs Waseem Q. Anani* 1,2 , Kathleen M. Bensing 2 , Michael Schanen 2 , Cindy Piefer 2 , Madeline Knier 2 , Emily Roeger 2 and Gregory A. Denomme 2,3 . Background/Case Studies: The identification of Group A2 solid organs by evaluating red blood cells (RBCs) allows ABO incompatible (ABOi) transplants to Group O and B recipients. The A2 classification is determined using anti-A1 lectin manufactured from an extract of Dolichos bifloris seeds, which is diluted to differentiate human Group A1 RBCs from non-A1 subgroups. Weak reactivity can be observed with RBCs using either of two FDA-licensed reagents. The manufacturers of these reagents state that weak reactions can occur with A2 or A2B RBCs. To understand the implications of weak anti-A1 lectin RBC typing and an A2 subgroup classification, we evaluated the incidence of weak hemagglutination with two licensed anti-A1 lectin reagents, and the associated ABO alleles using genomic DNA sequencing of exons 6 and 7. Study Design/Method: Anti-A1 lectin typing was performed using two licensed reagents in accordance with the manufacturers' protocols and validated using known A1 and A2 reagent RBCs. Weak reactivity was defined as ≤1 + hemagglutination with either anti-A1 lectin reagent. All samples were ABO grouped using standard licensed antisera and A1 and B RBCs. Genomic DNA was extracted and subjected to ABO exons 6 and 7 sequencing using intron flanking primers for exon 6 and two overlapping fragments for exon 7. Standard Sanger dideoxy sequencing was performed using the BigDye Terminator v3. ; 1061delC) could be ruled out given none of the samples were weakly reactive with a licensed anti-A. Thus, three ABO*A2 alleles could be assigned from the sequence data: 15 ABO*A2.01, one ABO*A2.06, and one ABO*A2.09. The ABO*A2 alleles were paired with 10 ABO*O01, one ABO*02 or ABO*O13, one ABO*011, one ABO*026, one ABO*O44, and three unassigned ABO*O alleles. The controls consisted of three Group A donors with RBCs having 4 + hemagglutination, along with two Group A donors and one AB donor with RBCs that were nonreactive when tested using both anti-A1 lectins. Sequencing the control samples revealed a three consensus ABO*A1.01, three ABO*A2.01, and one ABO*B1.01. Conclusion: Weak equivocal results with anti-A1 lectin are relatively common among donors. Analysis of ABO exons 6 and 7 sequencing data revealed that ABO*A2.01 is the most common allele, but did not reveal nucleotide changes associated with weak anti-A1 lectin reactivity. Weak reactivity with anti-A1 lectin is linked to other ABO*A2 alleles; namely ABO*A2.06 and ABO*A2.09 in this small survey. The expression of Group A carbohydrate chains among ABO*A2 alleles has not been systematically evaluated. Acute rejection of an ABO*O2.06 kidney in an ABOi recipient suggests that additional biochemical studies are warranted. 1333G>A and 1813G>A Mutations of ITGB3 Have No Effect on HPA Antigenicity Sudan Tao* 1,2 , Ji He 1,2 , Faming Zhu 1,2 , Wei Hu 1,2 , Xiaofan Zheng 2 , Huaping Zhou 1,2 and Feng Chen 2 . 1 Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Blood Safety Research, 2 Blood Center of Zhejiang Province Background/Case Studies: Human platelet antigens (HPAs) are implicated in fetomaternal alloimmune thrombocytopenia (FMAIT), platelet (PLT) refractoriness, and post transfusion purpura. Untill now, 28 types of HPAs have been identified and approximately half of HPAs were reported caused by ITGB3 gene mutations. Three single-site mutations in ITGB3 genes, 1333G>A, 1476G>A, and 1813G>A were identified in our lab, which caused Val419Met, Trp466-stop, and Gly579Ser substitution, respectively. But all the mutations were heterozygous in three individuals unable to determine the effect of point mutation on HPA antigenicity, directly. In this study, recombinant expression plasmids of wild-type GPIIIa and the three variants were constructed in vitro, the recombinant protein were extracted and coupled to Luminex beads to test platelet antibodies using Luminex xMAP technology to determine whether the three point mutations of ITGB3 have effect on HPA antigenicity. Study Design/Method: Full-length cDNA of wild-type, 1333G>A, 1476G>A, and 1813G>A ITGB3 were amplified and ligated into pcDNA3.1 vector. The ligated ITGB3 plasmids were transfected into Chinese hamster ovary cells (CHO), respectively. Stably expression cells of CHO-ITGB3W, CHO-1333G>A, CHO-1476G>A, and CHO-1813G>A were selected by G418 screening. The proteins were extracted and confirmed by western blot using 6 × His Tag antibodies. Then, all the proteins were coupled to micro beads, respectively. The coupled beads were validated by anti human IgG. 36 serum samples were tested using the coupled beads. The beads reacted with serum samples respectively, and bead-antigen-antibody complexes were then subjected to flow cytometric analysis on a Luminex100. The HPA-1a standard serum was used as positive control; three negative sera without HPA antibodies were prepared from AB type blood donors were used as negative control. Results/Finding: Western blot analysis revealed that the established CHO-1333G>A and CHO-1813G>A cell lines expressed GPIIIa molecules having the same molecular weight as WT, while the similarly protein was not identified in CHO-1476G>A cell because of its premature stop mutation. The Luminex MFIs showed that the three beads coupled with GPIIIa proteins (WT, 1333G>A and 1813G>A), respectively, exhibited similar results when reacting with same sarum, which implied that the new mutation of 1333G>A and 1813G>A did not affect the antigenicity of HPAs. Of the 36 serum samples, one was positive for HPA-1a, which was consistent with the results measured by monoclonal antibody immobilization of platelet antigens (MAIPA) assay. Conclusion: Here we reported the recombinant expression of four GPIIIa molecular, and found that 1476G>A mutation affected the expression of protein. Luminex beads were used to couple recombinant proteins to detect HPA antibody, showing that 1333G>A and 1813G>A mutations have no effect on antigenicity of HPA compared with wild type. The result was consistent with MAIPA assay. This work was sponsored by National Natural Science Foundation of China (81371905), and Science Research Foundation of Zhejiang Healthy Bureau (WKJ-ZJ-1509). Heather Simmons*, Martha R. Combs, Nicholas Bandarenko and Jessica Poisson. Duke University Hospital Background/Case Studies: Inconclusive reactivity in solid phase (SPRCA) antibody screens and identifications led to the development of the following workflow to efficiently manage pretransfusion samples in a large academic tertiary care center. When an automated 3-cell SPRCA screen was panreactive or < 3 + with 1 or 2 of the screening cell samples, the antibody screen (ABSC) was repeated in polyethylene glycol (PEG) tube if the patient had no history of antibodies. If the PEG ABSC was negative, the ABSC was interpreted as negative; the patient may be eligible for computer crossmatch compatible blood. The risk of moving to PEG tube testing is the failure to identify an antibody reactive only in SPRCA. This study quantified how often this workflow was used and antibody detection failures and their consequences. Study Design/Method: Retrospective review of ABSC results was performed from January 2016 through December 2017. SPRCA was performed with the Immucor Ready Screen (Norcross, Ga, USA). Results corrected to a negative PEG ABSC were identified and reviewed for antibody identification (AB ID) in subsequent antibody screens. Clinically insignificant allo-and autoantibodies were excluded. Details of further immunohematology workups were collected, including transfusion reactions. Direct antiglobulin tests (DAT) and acid eluates were tested by tube and PEG tube method, respectively. Results/Finding: Out of 161971 ABSC performed, 857 negative PEG ABSC were identified. New antibodies were found in 130 samples (15.2% of PEG ABSC). Twenty seven patients with 31 new significant alloantibodies (3.2% of PEG ABSC) were identified. Anti-Jk a was the most commonly detected antibody (Table 1) . Twenty-three (74%) of these antibodies were detected within 4 weeks of the initial corrected PEG ABSC. Eleven patients received RBC transfusion between corrected result and new AB ID. At the time of AB ID, 6 had DAT results, 3 of which were positive. Acid eluates were negative for all 3 positive DATs. One delayed transfusion reaction was identified out of the 27 patients; however the transfusion preceded a positive SPRCA screen. Conclusion: The workflow to defer to PEG ABSC missed 3.2% of clinically significant alloantibodies. The serologic and clinical consequences were rare as transfusions were infrequent between initial corrected screen and the detection of alloantibody. The benefit of the workflow was labor and supply savings for the 826 positive SPCRA screens where no significant antibody was identified. To address concerns of missed antibodies, the threshold for moving to PEG ABSC was adjusted to results < 2 + with 1 or 2 cell samples in SPRCA screening. Conclusion: Severe DHTR in a non-SCD pt is unusual. Recognition and treatment in a nearly untransfusable pt requires daily clinical communication. This is the first well-described example of a highly clinically-significant antibody in a pt with the poorly-characterized L300V ART4 variant, likely modifying Hy strength and perhaps responsible for a novel HI antibody. Successful Lung Transplantation into Recipients with Anti-A1 Antibodies Gustaaf de Ridder* 1 , Brandi Bottiger 2 , Lorenzo Zaffiri 3 and Jessica Poisson 1 . 1 Duke Health Pathology, 2 Duke Health Anesthesiology, 3 Duke Health Medicine-Pulmonary Background/Case Studies: Anti-A1 ABO antibodies are detected in blood type A2 or A2B lung transplant patients occasionally. The frequency, timing of detection, persistence, and description of clinical outcomes in the presence of these antibodies has not been reported. Study Design/Method: A single center, retrospective review of all lung transplant recipients with anti-A1 antibodies from January 2015 to December 2017 was performed. All available, relevant clinical, pathologic, transfusion, and serologic data were collected from the electronic medical record. Results/Finding: Four recipients with anti-A1 were identified among 297 total lung transplants. A description of patient and procedural characteristics of the four recipients can be seen in Table 1 . The lung allocation scores ranged from 27-76 d. All recipients were ABO Type A2, RhD+, and one had an additional anti-I cold agglutinin. Lung donor ABO types were A1 (2), A, and O. Anti-A1 was present before transplant in 2/4 and after transplant in 2/4 recipients. The persistence and strength of the anti-A1 in the recipients varied greatly (Table 1) . Intraoperative transfusion support was minimal for three patients (3, 3, and 0 total products); the fourth required massive resuscitation with >100 products Two patients were treated for suspected humoral rejection; one for new donor-specific HLA antibodies and one empirically based on radiologic and spirometric findings. The length of stay ranged from 21-80 d. On transbronchial biopsies, two patients had acute cellular rejection (ACR) on a single biopsy (one A1B1R, one A1B0), one patient had two A1BX biopsies, and one patient had no ACR. With follow-up ranging 6-23 mo., all patients are living and all grafts are viable. Conclusion: Lung transplant across the A1/A2 blood group mismatch occurs on occasion, and the appearance of an anti-A1 antibody prior to or after transplant does not appear correlated with graft dysfunction, cellular, or antibodymediated rejection in this case series. The patient with the strongest, most persistent anti-A1 antibody titers required massive transfusion, but also had a cold agglutinin and active infection. Longer follow-up in larger, multicenter trials is needed to better understand outcomes and anti-A1 titers for confirmation. En ( FIN) ), and the M weak N-UK type, a GP(A-B) hybrid with a very short Nterminus exon-2 GPA segment (En(UK)). En(a-) RBCs have decreased sialic acid and loss of Wr b expression on GPA-band 3. Anti-En a can cause hemolysis of allogeneic RBCs. En(a-) donors are extremely rare worldwide and additional genetic information is highly desirable. Study Design/Method: Serological tests were performed by routine methods. DNA-based blood group phenotyping employed the Precise-Type™ HEA (Immucor, Norcross, GA). GYPA was analyzed by long-range amplification and sequencing of exons 2-7. Results/Finding: A 59-yo woman was evaluated for a history of broad RBC incompatibility at age 14 at cholecystectomy and at age 36 with uterine hemorrhage after miscarriage of her only pregnancy. She was never transfused. She was born in Lahore, Pakistan, but her parents were remote cousins from Allahabad, India. She was group B, D + with plasma pan-reactivity in solidphase (4+), polyethylene glycol (3 + anti-IgG), low-ionic saline solution (1 + 37C, 3 + anti-IgG), and ficin-RBC (2 + 37C, 3 + anti-IgG) methods. Direct antiglobulin test was negative. Her RBCs phenotyped as M−N−S−s+, En(a−), Wr(a−b−) and were reactive with Glycine soja lectin indicating reduced sialic acid. Her plasma was nonreactive to En(a−) RBCs, consistent with anti-En a FR (ficin-resistant). In the En(a-) literature, a Pakistani-born US patient was reported in 1995 (Immunohematol 11:51). Demographics, serology, extended RBC phenotypes, published history and patient discussion confirmed she was the subject of that report. RBC GPA was not detected by human or monoclonal antisera or by immunoblotting at that time, but genetics were not done. In our testing, HEA interrogation of GYPA exon 2 c.59 C>T predicted her phenotype was Background/Case Studies: Most ABO subgroups express A or B antigens weakly on RBCs and are due to inherited alterations in the ABO gene, affecting either the efficacy, specificity or concentration of the A/B glycosyltransferase. Here, we report the investigation of ABO in a patient from Ukraine who showed a suspected mixed-field appearance with dual populations of RBCs upon testing with anti-B in routine serology. Study Design/Method: Flow cytometric analysis and routine ABO genotyping including analysis of the upstream CBF/NF-Y-binding enhancer region (involved in determining transcription rate in certain tissues) was carried out. Further genetic analysis was performed by DNA sequencing of ABO exons 1-7 (including 50 base pairs of the adjacent introns) and the proximal promoter. ABSTRACT Results/Finding: DNA analysis showed that the patient's genotype was ABO*B.01/O.01.10, which is normally consistent with group B. Sequence analysis of all ABO exons did not reveal any unexpected changes in the coding sequence to explain the weak phenotype and PCR analysis of the upstream CBF/NF-Y-binding enhancer region showed homozygosity for the expected four 43-bp repeats consistent with the genotype. However, sequencing of the ABO promoter unravelled a substitution of G to A at position −72. Flow cytometric analysis showed no expression of A and normal H antigen levels but a biphasic, chimera-like pattern was observed with anti-B, although cells with an intermediate level of antigen expression were also present. This type of pattern has previously been reported for the A 3 subgroup caused by mutations in the regulatory region located in intron 1. Investigation of the parents' DNA showed that the mother was ABO (3) extended matching including RHD and RHCE variant alleles. Considering the total of red blood cell units requested for each patient and a number of 2 donations per year for the compatible donors, we are fulfilling the needs of patients in level 1 of matching and for most of patients in level 2 but when we considered RH variants it has been much more difficult to find compatible donors for patients with SCD. Besides of the challenges to fulfill all the requests with multiple negative antigens and RH matching units, the cost effectiveness of those practices to minimize the risk of alloimmunization remains controversial, partly because not all patients develop alloantibodies despite extensive exposure to donor RBC antigens. In order to optimize the use of genotype-matched units to our patients we have genotyped the patients for genetic markers that could potentially help in the classification of responder and non-responder SCD patients. In this study we evaluated the ability of this practice to avoid production of RBC antibodies and the negative consequences of alloimmunization in a follow up of 2 years. Study Design/Method: A total of 27 non-alloimmunized patients with SCD, homozygous for HbS, receiving a range of 15-398 RBC units were enrolled in this study. Nine patients have the cytokine gene polymorphisms (TNFA-308A, IL1B-511T) previously associated with risk of alloimmunization and are being transfused with extended matching RBC units (level 2 of matching), 7 patients with RHAG 808A gene polymorphism previously associated with risk of RH aloimmunization and 8 patients with no genetic risk factors associated with RBC alloimmunization are being transfused with RH and K matching units ( Conclusion: Although some patients developed antibodies against low prevalence antigens and one patient developed anti-Fy-3, this practice has improved the ability to find antigen-matched components for transfusion support in non-alloimmunized patients and has been of benefit to patients, as observed by the lack in the development of common alloantibodies. Transfusion follow up during two years showed that this transfusion strategy was efficient to keep the patient's Hb baseline levels. Fine Specificity of Kidd Antibodies Made by a Patient with a Novel JK*A Allele and Silenced JK*B Allele Suggests a Novel Antigen Christine Lomas-Francis* 1 , Andrew Rossin 2 , Judith Aeschlimann 2 , Kim Hue-Roye 2 , Sunitha Vege 2 and Connie M. Westhoff 2 . 1 New York Blood Center, 2 Immunohematology and Genomics Laboratory, New York Blood Center Background/Case Studies: A 74 year old E. Asian man, not recently transfused, presented with chronic anemia, dyspnea and an antibody that reacted with all panel cells but not with Jk(a-b-) RBCs or the autologous control. His RBCs typed Jk(a-b-) and his plasma contained an apparent anti-Jk3. Testing was done to further investigate the plasma reactivity and to determine his JK genotype. Study Design/Method: Antibody identification and antigen typing were performed by standard methods with licensed and in-house reagents. Eluates were made with Gamma Elu-Kit II (Immucor). Genomic DNA was isolated from WBCs. HEA PreciseType was performed and the JK coding exons were amplified and sequenced. Eluates made from the first set of RBCs used for adsorption reacted with Jk(a+) and Jk(b+) RBCs and thus contained an apparent anti-Jk3. Surprisingly, Jk(a+ W b-) RBCs from 2 donors, 1 homozygous for JK*01W.01 and 1 with JK*01W.01/ 02N.01, were weakly incompatible (1+) with patient's plasma by PEG IAT. Conclusion: We describe a patient with a partial Jk a , detectable only by adsorption/elution, encoded by a novel JK*01(130A,557G) in trans to silenced Jk b encoded by JK*02N.01. The initial plasma reactivity was consistent with anti-Jk3 but by adsorption it was shown to contain separable anti-Jk a and -Jk b and, based on eluate results, a third antibody specificity non-reactive with only Jk(a-b-) Jk3-RBCs. As the patient's RBCs express low levels of Jk a , it suggests the antibody is not anti-Jk3. The incompatibility of the patient's plasma with RBCs from donors that express Jk a encoded by JK*01W.01, c.130A (p.44Lys), shows there is a recognizable difference between the protein encoded by that allele and the new JK*01(130A,577G) encoding both p.44Lys and p.186Arg. We show that the availability of JK genotyped RBCs enables more precise determination of antibody specificity to inform transfusion practice.  Background/Case Studies: ABO is arguably the most important blood group system in transfusion medicine. Laboratories typically use serological methods to perform ABO typing. However, serology has significant limitations including (i) recently transfused patients may exhibit mixed field agglutination wherein both the patient's and recent donor's antigens are detected, and (ii) both forward and reverse typing must be performed, but may yield discordant results. These limitations are most problematic with phenotypes involving weakly expressed antigens. Laboratories can overcome these drawbacks with a combination of genotyping solutions (SSP, sequencing, etc), but these methods are time-and labor-consuming, and require interpretation by subject matter experts. The aim of this study was to evaluate an alternative ABO real-time PCR based genotyping solution recently introduced by Thermo Fisher Scientific. Study Design/Method: The Thermo Fisher Scientific solution is based on its LinkS eq real-time PCR technology, which was developed over 10 years ago for genotyping the complex Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) system. LinkS eq ABO analyzes 19 reactions that identify multiple relevant SNPs located within the ABO gene. We evaluated this solution by analyzing 96 archived DNA samples, including blood blank samples for which serotyping failed or produced discordant results, and samples from deceased solid organ donors. Results/Finding: Genotyping results generated by LinkS eq were 100% concordant with typing obtained by traditional methodologies. In several cases, serology did provide conclusive results including: five discordant serologic and six inderminant A1 lectin reactions. In all of these cases LinkS eq was able to provide conclusive results, in agreement with Sanger sequencing results where available. LinkS eq overcomes the major challenges of molecular typing by providing a robust, automated approach that increases laboratory productivity and reduces turn-around time. With less than 10 minutes of hands-on set-up, no further operator intervention with reagents, and SureTyper™ software fully automating all analysis, LinkS eq delivers genotyping and predicted phenotyping results in approximately 90 minutes. Conclusion: We conclude that LinkS eq can provide a simple, effective and robust method for ABO typing including accurate A2 subgrouping. HU5F9-G4 Monoclonal Anti-CD47 Therapy: A First Experience with Interference in Antibody Identification Christine Howard-Menk* 1 , Jason E. Crane 1 , Laura Doshi 2 and Mona Papari 1 . 1 ITxM/LifeSource, 2 Advocate Lutheran General Hospital Background/Case Studies: Hu5F9 is a human monoclonal IgG4 antibody targeting CD47 for the treatment of B-cell lymphomas and some solid tumors. This marker has been identified as a broadly expressed cell surface protein which regulates phagocytosis. Study Design/Method: Our patient is a 58 year old female with a history of B-cell lymphoma, status post allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplant in October 2017, admitted to the hospital with a 7.0 g/dL hemoglobin. Patient had a previous history of cold and warm autoantibodies. A panagglutinin using gel technology was detected at the hospital and the sample was sent to the immunohematology reference laboratory for a complete workup. Transfusion history and medications were not initially available. Initial testing with gel showed a reverse ABO discrepancy, panagglutinin, and negative DAT. Tube testing using PeG, LISS, and enzymes was selected to continue the identification. Strong agglutination (3-4+) strength was seen at IS and AGT using all reagents. Patient plasma was tested against cells treated with Ficin, DTT, glycine acid-EDTA, cord cells, aged cells, and a battery of rare cells based on patient race and antibody reactivity. All reactions were 3-4 + against all cells tested. Though the DAT was negative, an eluate was performed to identify autoantibody. It demonstrated a panagglutinin. Titration of the plasma versus a phenotypically matched cell showed reactivity greater than 4096. An alloabsorption using human stroma (ficin-treated) was performed and the panagglutinin was removed, resolving the ABO discrepancy. Four cold/ alloabsorptions removed all reactivity at IS. Reactivity remained when tested at 37C/AGT. Additional alloabsorptions performed at 37C (x4) removed the remaining reactivity when tested with IgG Coombs. Results/Finding: The above results suggest a potent antibody to a high frequency antigen. With this in mind, several tests were performed using cells with rare phenotypes. When a complete history was obtained, it was found the patient had been in a clinical trial for a monoclonal antibody therapy targeting CD47. A literature review of the antibody identified a specific IgG Coombs sera clone is required to resolve the reactivity. If a clone lacking anti-IgG4 is used (Gamma clone, monoclonal), the cells which previously reacted 3-4 + with a clone containing IgG4 no longer react. Antibody testing was successfully completed using Gamma clone anti-IgG sera at AGT, omitting the IS and 37C phase. ABO testing was completed with x4 cold alloabsorbed stroma. Conclusion: Additional monoclonal therapies will continue to emerge. This case highlights the need for extensive communication between the Blood Bank and the clinical service regarding the use of these treatments. RBC Antigen Determination for Thalassemia Patients from Pakistan Using LeanSequencing Process Ghazala Hashmi* 1,2 , Asim Qidwai 3 , Anwari Syeda 3 , Neelam Mansoor 3 , Kristopher Fernandez 1 and Michael Seul 1 . 1 BioMolecular Analytics, 2 SKH Foundation, 3 Afzal Memorial Thalassemia Foundation Background/Case Studies: Thalassemia is the most common inherited disorder in Pakistan, with an overall carrier frequency of $ 7%; approximately 4,000 children are diagnosed each year with the disorder. Most patients receive transfusion support to manage their symptoms of anemia, and 8.6% develop antibodies to red blood cell ("rbc") antigens, leading to an increase in transfusion frequency (Zaidi 2015) . The design of a program to manage the transfusion therapy for these patients with the objective of reducing the risk of alloimmunization, and thereby ultimate to lower the utilization of transfusion, will benefit from the routine use of rbc genotyping to determine extended antigen profiles for patients as well as donors. Study Design/Method: 165 thalassemia patients supported at the AMTF hospital, of all major ethnicities (Pathan, Sindhi, Punjabi, Baluchi and Urdu), were screened to determine 40 + RBC antigens in MNS,RHCE, LU,KEL,FY,JK, DI,YT,DO and CO, along with 32 RHCE alleles as described (Hashmi et al., 2017) . Duplicate barcoded buccal swab samples were collected and crude extract was prepared (Patel, et al., 2017) . Samples were analyzed by a novel LeanSequencing process (BioMolecular Analytics) that achieves scalability by simultaneously determining multiple variants for multiple samples, using only PCR and capillary electrophoresis; genotypes were determined, and phenotypes predicted using proprietary software. Results/Finding: 98% of the patients were negative for K; 81% for Ytb; 66% for E; 39% for N; 39% for S; 37% for Fyb (including 2 instances of a GATA silencing mutation); 23% for Jkb; 21% for Doa; 19% for Dob; 12% for Fya; 12% for C; 9% for M; 6% for s; 4 for Jka; < 1% for c, e, k and Yta; None of the patients had variant RHCE alleles encoding partial phenotypes. We also characterized all patients for a set of 12 thalassemia and 3 hemochromatosis mutations and report mutation frequencies in a separate abstracts. Conclusion: This first comprehensive genotype analysis of transfusiondependent Pakistani thalassemia patients shows that allelic diversity, in this group, is limited to a small number of genes encoding the principal rbc antigens. "Antigen-negative" phenotype frequencies for E, C, K, Jkb, and s were similar to those reported for Asians, while those for Fyb, Jka and c were closer to frequencies reported for Africans (Reid2004); frequencies for other antigens including M, N, S, Fyb appear to differ from those reported in other major ethnic groups. The relatively limited allelic diversity (compared to, say, individuals of African heritage) bodes well for a program of proactively providing transfusion support designed to minimize sensitization risk. LeanSequencing, with its streamlined protocol, using only crude extracts from buccal swab samples, will facilitate the rapid characterization of transfusion recipients as well as donors needed to support our objective. Examining the Correlation between Hepatitis C Infection, Interferon Therapy, and Red Blood Cell Alloimmunization in Humans David Gibb 1 , Kevin Pelland 2 , Jeanne Hendrickson 1 and Christopher A. Tormey* 1 . 1 Yale University, 2 Yale School of Medicine Background/Case Studies: Studies of red blood cell (RBC) alloimmunization have revealed an increased risk for alloantibody production in patients with chronic inflammation. There remains, however, little understanding of which inflammatory pathways promote production of alloantibodies in these patients. Recent studies have demonstrated that a specific group of inflammatory cytokines, type 1 interferons (IFNs), promote transfusion-induced Bcell differentiation and RBC alloantibody development in mice. Given that TRANSFUSION 2018 Vol. 58 Supplement S2 ABSTRACT hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a disease managed with IFN therapy, we hypothesized that IFN-treated patients with HCV may have an elevated rate of RBC alloimmunization. Thus, we undertook a retrospective examination of alloimmunization amongst patients with HCV. Study Design/Method: Alloimmunized subjects (n=214) were extracted from a pre-existing database; each subject was queried in the electronic medical record for a history of HCV infection and, if such a history was reported, then the following was subsequently collected: evidence of IFN therapy, RBC antibody specificities, and sex. In parallel, randomlyselected non-alloimmunized RBC transfused patients (n=144) were extracted from a general database to establish rates of HCV infection as well as IFN therapy amongst a non-overlapping control group. The chisquare test with Yates' correction for continuity and the Fisher exact test were used for statistical comparisons; P-values < 0.05 were considered significant. Results/Finding: Of total alloimmunized subjects, 12.1% (26/214) had a history of HCV infection. The majority of these individuals were male (96.2%; 25/26) and most (92.3%, 24/26) formed a single alloantibody with anti-E (n=9) and -K/-C/-Jk a (all n=3) being the most common specificities. By comparison, 7.6% (11/144) of randomly-selected, non-alloimmunized patients transfused with RBCs had a history of HCV. The proportion of alloimmunized subjects with a history of HCV was not significantly higher than the proportion of control, non-immunized transfused patients with HCV (0.12 vs 0.8; p=0.23). In addition, the proportion of alloimmunized subjects who received IFN therapy (0.31; 8/26) was not significantly different than that of transfused controls with HCV (0.27; 3/11; P=1.00). Conclusion: While a substantial portion of alloimmunized and non-alloimmunized patients in this cohort had a history of HCV, neither HCV infection itself nor receipt of type 1 IFN therapy was associated with an increased rate of RBC alloimmunization. Larger scale or multi-site studies may be helpful to more rigorously investigate whether type 1 IFN therapy for HCV infection, or other disease(s), may impact the likelihood of alloimmunization following RBC transfusion. Estimation of the Risk of HPA-1a-Immunization in HPA-1a Negative Women after Giving Birth to an HPA-1a Positive Child Jens Kjeldsen-Kragh* 1 and Klaus J. Olsen 2 . 1 University and Regional Laboratories Region Skåne, 2 Larix A/S Background/Case Studies: Fetal and neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia (FNAIT) is the platelet counterpart of hemolytic disease for the fetus and newborn. The most common, and usually the most severe cases of FNAIT are caused by anti-HPA-1a. HPA-1a negative women who give birth to an HPA-1a positive child are at risk of becoming HPA-1a-immunized. Women who are HLA-DRB3*01:01 positive have a higher risk of HPA-1aimmunization as compared to women lacking this HLA allele. The aim of the study was to estimate the risk of HPA-1a-immunization in both HPA-1a negative/HLA-DRB3*01:01 positive and HPA-1a negative/HLA-DRB3*01:01 negative women after giving birth to an HPA-1a positive child. Study Design/Method: A literature search was conducted which identified 10 prospective FNAIT studies. The risk of becoming HPA-1a-immunised postpartum was calculated by using Bayes' Theorem as no single trial contained all the needed information. Data were also used from the PRE-VFNAIT studya recently completed large prospective FNAIT study in Poland. The results of HLA-DRB3/4/5 typing of 212,472 European Caucasians from the National Marrow Donor Program were used as estimate of the frequency of the HLA-DRB3*01:01 allele in the general population. Results/Finding: In women who are HPA-1a-negative and HLA-DRB3*01:01 positive the risk of HPA-1a-immunisation after delivery of an HPA-1a positive child was estimated to 12.4% (95% confidence interval (CI): 8.4% -16.5%). In contrast, the estimated immunization risk was only 0.6% (95% CI: 0.2% -1.1%) in women who are HPA-1a negative and HLA-DRB3*01:01 negative. Conclusion: In women who are HPA-1a negative and HLA-DRB3*01:01 positive, the risk of HPA-1a-immunization is 12.4% (95% CI: 8.4% -16.5%) after delivery of an HPA-1a positive child, which is 20 times higher than in women who are both HPA-1a and HLA-DRB3*01:01 negative. Thus, the risk of HPA-1a-immunization in HPA-1a negative/HLA-DRB3*01:01 positive women is in the same range as the risk of RhD-immunization in RhD negative women after delivery of an RhD positive child if the mother does not receive RhD prophylaxis. Clinical and Cost Efficacy of Molecular RhD Genotyping Linda Mamone*, Ian L. James, Edward J. Yoon and Mohamed Alsammak. Background/Case Studies: Serologic weak D testing for patients is optional. However, in 2014 a work group between the College of American Pathologists and the AABB recommended that RHD genotyping (RHD-g) be performed when discordant serologic RhD typing results are encountered and/or when a serologic weak D is identified. The goal is identification of true candidates for RhIG injections and/or RhD negative RBCs. In 2015 our institution adopted a testing process by which RhD testing is performed by two methods (gel and tube) to identify serologic discrepancy and hence, candidates for RHD-g. It had been previously concluded that this process had a positive predictive value of 98% in detecting D variants. However, the cost-efficacy of RHD-g is not yet established. We sought to evaluate the cost efficacy of molecular RHD-g at our institution. Study Design/Method: Results of RHD-g performed between 07/2015 -12/2017 were retrospectively reviewed. Patients' age, gender, race, clinical presentation, use of RhIG injection and transfusion were also reviewed. Cost analysis was performed. Results/Finding: During the analyzed period 33,784 types and screens were performed at our blood bank. Only 130 (0.4%) samples, of which 102 were included in our study, were sent for RHD-g due to serologic discrepancy and were initially resulted as RhD negative. The majority of patients (79.4%) typed as partial D and their type was kept as RhD negative. The remaining (20.6%) typed as weak D or no D variant and were changed to RhD positive, of which 4 patients were transfused subsequently. Twenty out of 102 patients were pregnant, of which 13 received RhIG (cost $80/vial). See Table for demographics. Of the 13 patients who received RhIG, 4 were unnecessary (2 weak D, 2 D+), which would have saved approximately $640 assuming at least 2 vials/patient. The cost of molecular sendouts was approximately $450/test, for a total cost of $45,900 for patients included in our study. The cost of RhD negative and positive pRBC units from our supplier was the same ($201/unit). Conclusion: Phasing in RHD-g into daily transfusion medicine practice remains an advancing but challenging topic. In our patient population, the majority of serologic D typing discrepancies identified by our method were attributable to partial D variants, and such patients were treated as RhD negative. Thus, the cost effectiveness of molecular RHD-g is questionable and should probably be reserved for specific clinical situations or patient populations.  ABSTRACT TRANSFUSION neurodegeneration, neuroacanthocytosis, and other central nervous system (CNS) manifestations. It is associated with elevated CPK levels and weak or undetectable Kell system antigens and absence of Kx antigen on RBCs. Approximately 40 different XK gene mutations have been reported, and there appears to be growing awareness of the syndrome. We investigated XK in four male patients, three diagnosed with acanthocythosis and one with fever, infection and presenting with anti-Kx. Study Design/Method: RBC typing was performed by standard tube methods with licensed and unlicensed in-house reagents. Genomic DNA was isolated from WBCs. The XK gene was amplified and sequenced Results/Finding: The probands (P1 to P4) are summarized in Table 1 . The RBCs from all four showed depression of Kell system antigens: K-k+ w , Kp(a-b + w or b−). RBCs from P1, P2, and P3 typed Kx−. P2 RBCs also typed Km− and anti-Kx was identified in the patient's plasma in albumin, papain, and PEG IAT. P4 was being evaluated for involuntary jerking movements with a blood film showing acanthocytes. P4's red cells were negative when tested with anti-KL. XK gene sequencing revealed novel alleles in each proband: P1 has nucleotide deletion of an A at position c.475 that resulted in frameshift and premature stop codon. The sample from P2 had an intron 2 −2a>g splice site mutation predicted to be associated with alternative splicing; P3 had a nonsense mutation at position c.1015 that resulted in a premature stop codon; and P4, a missense mutation at position c.452 that resulted in an amino acid change. Conclusion: We report the molecular genetic basis of McLeod phenotype in four probands resulting from a nucleotide deletion causing a premature stop, a splice site mutation, a nonsense mutation, and a missense mutation. allele-specific amplification and labeling of pooled(x4) amplicons; and readout by capillary sequencing. This protocol was used to analyze genomic DNA from 95 blinded samples previously genotyped for an extended RBC antigen set by a licensed method. Data was analyzed and phenotypes predicted using a novel algorithm for RHCE allele determination. Results/Finding: Thirty-one of the 95 samples were found to express partial c (=c*), partial e (=e*) or both, namely: c* (n=23; 12 with a single c*-encoding allele paired with a Ce allele) and e* (n=19; 8 with a single e*encoding allele paired with a cE allele); further, 4 with predicted weak phenotypes: U (n=3) and V (n=1); 67 with GATA silenced FYB; and uncommon antigen negatives: U (n=1), e (n=1), Yta (n=1), Jsb (n=2), CEAG (n=1) and hrB (n=11; 5 paired with a cE allele); 14 of the RHCE allele pairings had not been previously determined, namely: RHCE*ceAG homozygous (n=1) and RHCE*ceAG paired with: ce (n=5), Ce (n=2), cE (n=3), ceMO (n=1), ceTI (n=1), and RHCE*ceS/ceTI (n=1). Five discrepancies were noted. One predicted V+VS + by comparison assay but V+ w VS-by LeanSequencing which detected RHCE*ceAR that is not detected by a reference assay. Four discrepancies (Lu a , C, M/N, and N) were due to threshold settings in the Lean-Sequencing software that have been adjusted. Background/Case Studies: Human monoclonal antibody to CD47 (Hu5F9-G4) is known to interfere with serologic blood bank testing. Previously reported success with Gamma-clone anti-human globulin (AHG) and adsorption by allogeneic papain-treated rr RBCs is not always reproducible. With increased enrollment of patients in clinical trials of Hu5F9-G4 for solid tumors and lymphoma, a reliable and efficient solution is needed. As human platelet concentrates (HPC) are used to adsorb HLA antibody, and CD47 is present on platelets, we report a novel use of HPC to adsorb anti-CD47. Study Design/Method: Samples were received in November 2017 (Postdrug day 1), March 2018 (Post-drug day 3), and April 2018 (Post-drug day 15) from a 54 year-old female with relapsed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma enrolled in Phase Ib clinical trial of Hu5F9-G4 and rituximab. Historic blood type was A positive with negative antibody screens, 2 pregnancies and transfusions in 2009 and 2010. Samples were screened with commercial reagent cells, at Immediate Spin (IS), 37C, and AHG with LISS, at AHG with PEG and at AHG saline with 60-minute 37C incubation. Except for IS reactions, all components were prewarmed for 30 minutes at 37C before mixing. Following the HPC direction insert procedure, but using the available plasma samples, we performed sequential adsorptions, and evaluated for reactivity at prewarmed PEG AHG. Patient sample spiked with Jk a antiserum was HPC adsorbed to verify expected alloantibody reactivity. Results/Finding: The first sample was forward type A positive consistent with historical data, but reversed as type O (4 + with both A1 and B cells). Autocontrol (AC) and direct anti-globulin test (DAT) were negative. Antibody screen was reactive at IS (2+), negative at AHG using Gamma-clone anti-IgG, and her serologic phenotype was obtained. The second sample showed similar ABO, DAT and AC results, but screening was reactive at IS (4+), LISS 37C (w+), and PEG AHG (m + to 1+) despite use of Gammaclone AHG. Three HPC adsorptions successfully removed reactivity at AHG, but not at IS. The third sample had the same ABO, DAT, and AC results, but AHG-phase testing was diminished (m+) and reactivity was removed after 2 HPC adsorptions. The patient specimen spiked with anti-Jk a showed the expected reactivity. Conclusion: Adsorptions with HPC were more efficient to remove reactivity at AHG than previously reported with RBCs. Reduced reactivity was noted and fewer adsorptions required when blood was drawn further from drug dosing. Use of HPC adsorptions and knowledge of drug-dose timing may offer improved efficiency of testing at AHG phase. Blood type and phenotype prior to initial drug dose, as well as phenotypically-matched blood remain critical as we optimize testing of patients on Hu5F9-G4. Extended Blood Group and Platelet Phenotype Prediction from Whole Genome Sequencing and Its Impact on Alloimmunization in the State of Qatar Celina Montemayor* 1 , Nagarajan Kathiresan 2 , Harvey G. Klein 3 , Zohreh Tatari Calderone 2 and Ena Wang 2 . 1 CC-DTM, NIH, 2 Sidra Medicine, 3 NIH Background/Case Studies: One manifestation of worldwide genetic variation is a diverse ethnic distribution of blood group antigens, leading to unique challenges in transfusion support for each population. Although the 1000 Genomes project yielded important insights about the global red blood cell (RBC) antigen distribution, the Middle East population remains underrepresented in current worldwide large-scale sequencing databases. The genetic structure of the Qatari population, which has been profoundly impacted by the ancestral population (with a high level of consanguinity) and migratory flow, presents a fantastic example of genetic diversity of the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region. Here we describe for the first time the predicted extended RBC and platelet phenotype from whole genome next generation sequencing (WGS) in 1,000 Qatari individuals. Study Design/Method: Paired-end WGS was performed on 1,000 Qatari nationals participating in the larger "Qatar-Genome-Project" study. Aligned data was analyzed using RyLAN (Red Cell and Leukocyte Antigen prediction from NGS) to query 398 known single nucleotide and indel variants in 36 red blood cell (RBC) and platelet antigen genes. Results/Finding: The highest variant nucleotide frequency was observed for the Fy a /Fy b and Do a /Do b loci (69% and 43%, respectively), followed by the ACKR1 promoter silencing variant (35%). Fifteen participants were carrying Hbb s , 82 were predicted as K1+k + and 4 as K1+k-. Kp a and Js a antigens were also present (0.05% and 0.9%). Among others, our analysis also revealed: one LU:-8,14, 10 Yt(ab + ), 4 Co(a + b + ) and 9 Jr(a -); 4 instances of Lu6/Lu9 heterozygosity; and 3 null Kidd alleles. A total of 281 participants carried 4 different weak Kidd antigen variants, including 12 in homozygous state. Select regions of the BCAM, FUT7, CR1 and KLF1 genes failed quality filters in less than 1% of the samples. For platelet-specific antigens, the frequency of HPA-3b allele (34%) was comparable to European countries, while the relatively-high frequency of the HPA-5b variant (19%) was comparable to Africa's. HPA-4b was not identified. The only detected platelet bw antigen was HPA-17bw. Conclusion: WGS data analysis reveals a unique combination of blood group and platelet antigens in the Qatari population, distinct from the continental blood group distributions extracted from the 1000 Genomes Project. The Qatari population possesses the highest frequency of the FY*02N.01 variant outside of Africa, suggestive of natural selection for resistance to malaria. Clinically, the high prevalence of alloimmunization observed in Qatar might be related to the high frequency of K1 polymorphism (4.5%) and weak Kidd antigens (28%), with the latter possibly leading to discordant serologic results. The Qatar population is composed of over 1.5M expatriate and about 300,000 Qatari nationals. Under such circumstances, RBC antigen discrepancy between donors and recipients with different genetic background can lead to alloimmunization against rare blood groups, frequently found in Qatar. Further study of genomic data by stratifying the Qatari population to its ancestry populations: Bedouin, Persian and Arab will help refine the knowledge of blood group diversity in the MENA region in general and in Qatar in particular, and will be an important step toward optimizing precision transfusion strategies in this region. FYX and GATA Variants Found in Cis Jessica Keller 1 , Trina Horn 2 , Shannon C. Jenkins 1 , Jan R. Hamilton 3 and Margaret A. Keller* 2 . 1 American Red Cross, 2 American Red Cross -National Molecular Laboratory, 3 American Red Cross Blood Services Background/Case Studies: Genetic variation in ACKR1, also known as DARC, is associated with the FY blood group system. It is well appreciated that a promoter variant (c.-67) destroys a binding site for erythroid transcription factor GATA-1. Though it has been reported on the FY*01 allele, it is typically inherited on a FY*02 allele where it silences expression of Fy b . There are two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located on exon 2 that are associated with weakened antigen expression. The FY c.265 and c.298 are typically found on FY*02 and weaken Fyb in what is termed FYX. The GATA variant is common in individuals of African descent and the FYX variants are most often found in individuals of Caucasian descent. Though they have been found on both the FY*01 and FY*02 alleles, they have not been found in cis. Here we report a blood donor with the GATA and FYX variants inherited in cis. Study Design/Method: Peripheral blood from a 37-year old African American male blood donor was tested for a panel of blood group antigen variants using PreciseType HEA Molecular BeadChip (Immucor) as part of routine testing. The panel found the donor was homozygous for c.-67C and c.125A and heterozygous for c.265C/T. The BASIS4G software resulted the donor as a possible variant (PV) for Fy a and Fy b . The donor had a history of serologically typing Fy(a-b-). Genomic DNA was reextracted from the peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Sanger sequencing of ACKR1 exons 1 and 2 were performed and the resulting sequence was aligned to consensus and variants compared to the Allele table of the ISBT Working Party for Red Cell Immunogenetics and Blood Group Terminology. Results/Finding: Sanger sequencing confirmed the genotypes at ACKR1 c.-67, c.125 and c.265 and identified heterozygosity for a synonymous SNP at c.36C/G. Conclusion: RBC genotyping panels use algorithms that integrate genotype results at multiple SNPs and population frequencies to predict an antigen phenotype. Since the SNP associated with FYX has not been coinherited with the promoter SNP that destroys the GATA binding site, the BASIS4G (Immucor) software resulted this donor phenotype as PV for Fy a and Fy b . Sanger sequencing confirmed that the donor carries one FY*02N.01 allele along with a novel allele encoding FYX but is silenced by the GATA variant. This case illustrates how high-throughput screening of blood donors followed by serologic confirmation can uncover new blood group alleles of serologic importance. Optimizing Recognition and Management of Weak D and Partial D in Prenatal Patients Using RHD Genotyping: A Community Hospital Experience Cristine F. Clemente Dos Santos* and Zeenath Asma. Elmhurst Memorial Hospital Background/Case Studies: Partial and Weak D antigens can have weak and discrepant reactions on serologic testing despite using FDA approved reagents and technology. Additionally, these tests do not distinguish between Partial and Weak D. Follow up and clinical management practices are currently variable. Generally, prenatal patients with discrepant reactions are categorized and managed as Rh negative. Additionally, those patients who test as Rh positive but are actually a Partial D phenotype are not recognized as possibly being at risk for D allo-immunization and needing RhIG prophylaxis. At Elmhurst Memorial Hospital Blood Bank, all discrepant D typing samples were further evaluated by molecular testing. This has helped the Blood Bank identify patients who, despite typing as Rh positive were eligible for RhIG immunoprophylaxis. Study Design/Method: Over a period of fourteen months, from January 2017 to April, 2018, seven prenatal patient samples with reaction strength discrepancy between the automated gel methodology and manual tube method for D antigen were additionally subjected to RHD genotyping and screened for Weak/Partial D. Automated gel methodology (Erytra analyzer; Grifols Diagnostics) was used for primary typing. Tube testing including immediate spin and AHG phase was performed with commercially available panel of monoclonal anti-D (Seraclone monoclonal anti-D (RH1) blend; BioRad Medical Diagnostics) was used for re-typing. Only forward type was performed during retyping. Genomic DNA was evaluated by Grifols Immunohematology, TX. Results/Finding: Seven prenatal patients were identified with D reaction strength discrepancies between the automated gel testing and manual tube testing. They were subjected to RHD genotyping. Of these 7 patients, 5 (71.4%) were found to have weak D, type 1 or 2. The other 2 patients (28.6%) were found to have Partial D. One patient demonstrated Partial D, type CS. She was previously typed as Rh negative at a different laboratory. The second patient was identified as Partial D type VIII. She was previously typed as Rh positive at different facilities. All these patients delivered Rh positive infants. The patient with partial D, type CS received RhIG at 28 weeks of gestation and post-partum. The patient with partial D, type VIII did not receive RhIG at 28 weeks or post-partum and had negative antibody screen at the time of delivery. Physician was advised of genetic testing findings and recommendation was made for RhIG prophylaxis. No RhIg prophylaxis was indicated for the other Weak D subtypes. Conclusion: RHD has complex serologic profile depending on expression of D antigen on red cell surface and technical conditions during testing. This can result in typing discrepancies between automated technology and manual monoclonal anti-D reagent. The use of serology for D typing in combination with Genotyping resulted in optimal RhIG prophylaxis for this patient population that might otherwise not have received prophylaxis to prevent allo-mmunnization. Suppressed Kidd Antigen Expression: Using Molecular Red Cell Genotyping to Resolve Discrepant Serological Testing Debra L. Moore* 1 , Sandy Wortman 1 and Laurie Sutor 1,2 . 1 Carter Blood-Care, 2 UT Southwestern Medical Center Background/Case Studies: A serological phenotype tests for expression of surface RBC antigens, whereas a molecular genotype tests for inherited DNA alleles. A laboratory may utilize both techniques to help resolve discrepancies and indicate the need for further testing. The Jk(a-b-) phenotype is extremely rare and most common among Polynesians. Study Design/Method: A complex antibody identification workup was performed using patient plasma and RBCs in standard tube (PeG/LISS) and gel methodologies. Further information was obtained by a 2M urea lysis test and comparing serological phenotyping with molecular genotyping results. Results/Finding: A sample of plasma and red cells was received from a 56 year old female diagnosed with ovarian cancer and no reported transfusion history. Direct antiglobulin test (DAT) showed 4 + with polyspecific anti-human globulin (AHG), anti-IgG, and anti-C3b-C3d; including a negative albumin control. The gel antibody screen/panel and eluate were reactive with all cells tested. Tube testing of screening cells, potentiated by PeG and LISS, was also panreactive. Patient RBCs were treated with EDTA/glycine acid (EGA) and IgG-blocked to obtain DAT negative cells. These cells were subsequently tested with the patient's serum and reacted 2 + at PeG IAT, indicating an autoantibody. The serological phenotype Jk(a-b-) was confirmed using multiple manufacturers' antisera. Phenotypically similar Jk null RBCs were nonreactive in both tube (PeG) and eluate, initially suggesting a probable anti-Jk3. Rare frozen unlicensed Jk3 antisera unexpectedly tested 2 + with patient RBCs, which contradicted the Jk null serological phenotype. The serologic phenotype was also contradicted by lysis of patient RBCs in 2M urea, as Jk null RBCs should be resistant to 2M urea lysis. Due to discrepant serology results, molecular genotype testing was performed. The molecular results were JK*A, JK*B with a predicted phenotype of Jk(a+b+). Kidd gene DNA sequencing was performed on JK exons 4 to 11, revealing no known polymorphisms to explain the serologic phenotype or the production of auto-anti-Jk3. The patient was transfused with three units of Jk(a+b-) RBCs without reported incident. Conclusion: This case illustrates how molecular genotyping can benefit patients with discrepant serological testing results. The predicted molecular phenotype alludes to the possibility of suppressed antigen expression. By comparing the molecular genotype results with serological phenotype results, a rare clinical presentation of an auto-anti-JK3 was revealed. Blood utilization was optimized by not wasting rare Jk3 negative blood products. Conclusion: Through NGS analyses on 18 samples, we unexpectedly found two SNVs present in cis that were previously defined as distinct JK*01W alleles. These variants are similarly common in individuals of African ancestry. This NGS approach provided additional genomic information that confirmed phasing of SNVs. We propose determination of phase should be performed when possible to more accurately annotate alleles. , amount of platelet transfusion, G/C polymorphism of the IL-6 gene at position -572 and platelet antibody production were analyzed. Results/Finding: Age, sex, percentage patients with benign diseases, and percentage of patients with homozygotes for the C allele at position -572 of the IL-6 gene were similar between responders and non-responders; and they were also similar between patients with hematologic diseases and patients with non-hematologic diseases. Percentage of patients with hematologic diseases in responders was lower than that in non-responders (36.7% vs. 75%, P = 0.01). Although the amounts of platelets pheresis transfused to patients with hematologic diseases were higher than those of non-hematologic diseases (47.2 ± 54.2 vs. 17.4 ± 13.8, P = 0.019), detection rate of platelet antibodies was lower in patients with hematologic diseases than that in patients with non-hematologic diseases (42.3% vs. 79.2%, P = 0.01). Compared to patients with hematologic diseases, patients with nonhematologic diseases had 1.871 (95% C.I.: 1.142 -3.065) fold relative risk of platelet antibody production. Conclusion: In our study, we found that there was no association between IL-6 C-572G gene polymorphism and platelet antibody production. Patients with hematologic diseases had lower risk of platelet antibody production than patients with non-hematologic diseases. The ACKR1 Background/Case Studies: The human ACKR1 gene encodes a glycoprotein expressing the Duffy blood group antigens (Fy). The Duffy protein acts as a receptor for distinct pro-inflammatory cytokines and malaria parasites P. vivax and P. knowlesi. We aimed to identify long range alleles of the ACKR1 gene, possibly including regulatory elements, without ambiguity in an autochthonous population in a malaria endemic area. Study Design/Method: We collected blood samples from 60 healthy volunteers in Ethiopia's southwestern low altitude tropical region. An assay was devised to amplify the ACKR1 gene as a single amplicon and determine its genomic sequence. All haplotypes were resolved at 5,178 nucleotides each, covering the coding sequence (CDS) of the ACKR1 gene including the 5' and 3' untranslated region (UTR), intron 1 and the 5' and 3' flanking region. For computational phasing, genotype data from the 60 Ethiopian individuals and the 2,504 individuals from the 1000 Genomes Project was used as input in the Markov chain-based haplotyper, MaCH. Results/Finding: In the 60 Ethiopians analyzed, 18 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 20 distinct genotype patterns were observed. Except for the GATA box mutation, no other SNP encoding a non-sense mutation was found. Physical evidence by allele-specific amplification, sequencing and fragment analysis allowed us to discern 18 ACKR1 alleles in the 120 chromosomes analyzed. All 18 alleles detected carried the SNP found in the common Fy(b+) phenotype. The clinically relevant FY*02N.01 allele in Africans was consistent with 16 of the 18 alleles. The other 2 alleles represented a FY*02 allele of the Fy(b+) and a FY*02W.01 allele of the Fy(b+ w ) phenotypes, respectively. Only 4 non-synonymous SNPs were found, and computational modeling indicated, that all 4 changes were neutral. Out of the 18 physically confirmed ACKR1 alleles, only 13 alleles were correctly predicted by the MaCH software while 5 alleles were missed. Another 4 haplotypes (23.5%), which did actually not occur among our Ethiopian cohort, were predicted by MaCH as single occurrences. In the 1000GP dataset with only 13 SNPs listed for the ACKR1 gene, MaCH predicted 20 haplotypes out of which only 2 were present in the Ethiopian cohort. Conclusion: We described 18 distinct ACKR1 alleles in an autochthonous East-African population. The high frequency of FY*02N.01 allele (95%) in this study is similar to other studies conducted in African regions (95% -100%). As an adjunct to the human reference genome assembly, which is the gold standard reference, our comprehensive population specific data and alleles are useful as template sequences for allele calling in highthroughput next-generation sequencing and precision medicine approaches. Null Phenotype Associated with RHCE*ce486 + Background/Case Studies: ABO typing is the most important component of pretransfusion testing. The amino acid substitutions caused by ABO gene mutations are usually predicted to impact the glycosyltransferase function, which may cause ABO blood grouping discrepancy. Here, we have identified two novel mutations in exon 7 of the B glycosyltransferase gene which are responsible for the weak B variants. However, the influences of these two mutations are unclear. In this study, the effects of the amino-acid substitution in the catalytic active region of the B glycosyltransferase caused by the novel mutations on GTB expression were explored in vitro system,which is important for further recognizing the ABO subtypes by molecular methods. Study Design/Method: The ABO antigen and serum antibody of probands were detected by the serology method. The exon5-7 sequences of the ABO gene were amplified by PCR and sequenced bidirectionally. The full-length cDNA of wild-type ABO*B.01 or the mutant B alleles were obtained by gene synthesis, and then cloned into vector pcDNA3.4 TOPO TA eukaryotic expression to construct the recombinant plasmids. The recombinant plasmids were transfected into Hela cells by Lipofectamine 3000 and the stable expression cells were harvested using G418 selection. The stable expression cells were stimulated with sodium butyrate to induce erythroid differentiation. Flow cytometry was performed using the phycoerythrin (PE)conjugated murine IgG1 anti-B antibody on these HeLa cells after transfection, and the agglutination tests of stable expression cells were also examined. Results/Finding: One of the proband was identified as Bw phenotype, and the other proband was identified as B(A) phenotype. The heterozygous sites in exon5-7 of the coding region of the ABO gene were identified by directly sequencing analysis. Further haplotype analysis showed that the proband with B(A) phenotype was carried a novel B allele with c.701 C>T (p. P234L). And the other proband with Bw phenotype was carried an another novel B allele c.737A>G (p.Y246C). Both the Aminoacid substitution positions of these two novel mutations were located in the catalytic active region of blood group B-glycosyltransferase enzyme. The eukaryotic expression vector of wild-type ABO*B.01 and the two mutations were successful constructed and confirmed by cloning and sequencing. The stable expression Hela cells were also obtained after recombination plasmid transfection and selection by G418. Background/Case Studies: SLC14A1 encodes a multipass transmembrane protein that expresses the Kidd blood group antigens. There is significant genetic variation in SLC14A1, also known as JK, including multiple variant JK*01 and JK*02 alleles that result in weak or null Jk a and Jk b antigen expression, respectively. We report here a JK*01 allele that includes a SNP in exon 8 that appears to silence expression of Jk a . Study Design/Method: Peripheral blood from a 31-year old African American female blood donor was tested for a panel of blood group antigen variants using Agena HemoID DQS (Agena Bioscience) as part of routine testing. The panel found the donor was heterozygous for c.838G/A and thus predicted the donor to type Jk(a+b+). The donor has a history of serologically typing Jk(a-b+). Genomic DNA was reextracted from the peripheral blood mononuclear cells and total RNA was extracted from RBCs. Sequence-specific primer (SSP)-PCR for c.130G>A was performed. SLC14A1 exons 4, 6 and 8 were sequenced based on known null mutations in those gene regions. SLC14A1 exon and cDNA PCR products were subjected to Sanger sequence analysis and the resulting sequences were aligned to the consensus sequence. Variants were compared to the Allele Background/Case Studies: The RH locus is composed of two highly homologous genes, RHD and RHCE, each of which are composed of 10 exons. They are distributed in an opposite orientation, which facilitates macro or micro gene conversions that can lead to the absence of high frequency antigens, create hybrid proteins encoding low frequency antigens, and create partial antigens. Currently, the Rh blood group system comprises 55 antigens. Gene conversions encode variant proteins, some of which are the so-called partial D phenotypes. Numerous partial D phenotypes, which are usually identified when a D positive person makes an alloanti-D, have been described. Partial D are more common in people of African descent. We report here the case of a Caucasian pregnant woman harboring the RHD*DIIIb variant allele with a complex antibody mixture. Study Design/Method: Standard hemagglutination techniques (including allogeneic and autologous adsorptions) and RHD/RHCE genomic DNA sequencing of the 10 exons with "in house" techniques were performed. Antibody titration was done in LISS-IAT-IgG column-agglutination technique. RhD typing was performed with the DiaClon ABO/Rh (Biorad™), using the IH1000 instrument. Results/Finding: The patient was from Chechnya. She was admitted in hospital to deliver her third child. No proper follow-up was done during her pregnancy, and no information was available about her previous pregnancies. She was typed as group AB, D+C-E+c+e-, K-, Fy(a+b+), Jk(a+b+), S-s+. No RhD weakening was noticed (reaction 4+). The antibody screen showed a complex mixture of alloantibodies: anti-D, anti-C, anti-e, anti-S, and anti-K. Their titers were 64, 128, 128, 32, and 4 respectively. An autoantibody against a high frequency antigen on papain-treated RBCs was also identified. Molecular work was undertaken to confirm the suspicion of a partial D. Genomic testing found this patient to harbor a variant allele RHD*DIIIb (RHD*03.02) in the homozygous or more likely hemizygous state. The sequencing of the RHCE gene showed no alteration and confirmed this patient to be RHCE*cE in the homozygous state. She was typed as G (RH12) negative. Then anti-G was individualized from anti-D and anti-C. Group O, r"r", K-, S-units were cross-matched and found to be compatible. An urgent call was made to collect fresh units. The newborn was typed as group AB, D+C+E+C+e+, K+. At birth his DAT was 3+. Elution showed a panagglutination, which was not investigated due to the small amount of the sample received. His level of hemoglobin was 17.4 g/dL, and the total bilirubin was 45 μmol/L. At day 2 the hemoglobin dropped to 14.4 g/dL and bilirubin was 124 μmol/L. He was treated with phototherapy. At day 5, he was discharged from the hospital. The outpatient follow up was stopped after 2 months when the baby's hemoglobin was 10.4 g/dL. Background/Case Studies: The Go a antigen [RH30] is a low frequency antigen in the Rh system, associated with the partial D antigen category DIVa. It is reported to be found in approximately 2% of black individuals. Our Immunohematology Reference Lab has encountered a number of patients with an alloantibody directed against this antigen and an unexpected number of donors either confirmed or suspected of being Go a positive. It was decided to screen donors of the Ro phenotype (positive for the D antigen; negative for C and E) to determine if this group has a higher prevalence of the Go a antigen. Study Design/Method: Over a period of 9 weeks segments were removed from 785 D + red blood cell (RBC) units previously found to be negative for the C and E antigens. Initially, all Ro donors were tested without considering ethnicity; later it was decided to check each donor's record to identify those who self-reported as having African American (AA) ethnicity. Each group O + donor was tested by a gel technique using unlicensed antisera shown to be reactive with 3 different reagent cells positive for Go a and nonreactive with cells positive for the Js a , He, V, VS, RH32 and STEM antigens. Group A + and B + donors were tested by a gel technique with an eluate prepared from cells used to adsorb plasma containing anti-Go a . This eluate was also shown to be reactive with 3 cells positive for Go a and nonreactive with the same cells as the antisera as well as cells positive for A1 and B antigens. Go a positive donors were confirmed to have a negative direct antiglobulin test (DAT) in gel. Results/Finding: Please refer to the following table. Conclusion: These results show that AA donors of the Ro phenotype have a higher than expected prevalence of the Go a antigen and statistical analysis indicates that there is sufficient evidence to support this hypothesis (with a significance level of α = 0.05). As expected, the Go a antigen was only found in AA donors. An unexpected finding was the large number of Caucasian Ro donors. While 2-3% of Caucasians are expected to have the Ro phenotype, 17.3% of the Ro donors we tested were Caucasian. This likely reflects the predominance of Caucasian blood donors and the continued underrepresentation of minorities in our donor base. As efforts to recruit more black Ro donors for transfusion to patients with sickle cell disease become more successful we may see an increase in patients developing antibodies to low frequency antigens found only in the black population. Further study may be warranted to establish the prevalence of such low frequency antigens in Ro RBCs, as they are preferentially transfused to this patient population. The . Even though some but not all of these subgroups may produce unexpected ABO antibodies, the risk of natural-or allo-immunization in different ABO alleles has not been reported. This study summarized the data collected over a span of ten years on the correlation between ABO alleles and antibodies formation from a Chinese blood center. Study Design/Method: Samples with discrepancy between red cells and serum grouping were categorized as specific subgroups by standard serological methods. Unexpected anti-A1 or anti-B in propositas¡¯serum was identified using A1 or B red cells. Platelet activation status was measured as microparticle (MP) content (ThromboLUX, LightIntegra Technology Inc., Canada). The optimal threshold to predict PLT activation in single donor platelets (SDP) suspended in plasma was previously determined as 15% (specificity = 89% and sensitivity = 55%). The clinical response to activated and non-activated SDP was compared for all HLA-positive and HLA-negative study patients. Results/Finding: Twenty one of 200 patients (10.5%) tested positive for anti-HLA antibodies (HLA-positive), 8 became refractory with insufficient 1hr and 24-hr CCIs following two consecutive random PLT transfusions and 5 patients showed only insufficient 24-hr CCIs. Baseline data for HLA-positive and HLA-negative patients were comparable. HLA-positive patients were 33% male, 51.5 ± 13 years of age, diagnosed with AML (81%), CML (14%) and MDS (5%), baseline platelet counts were 81 ± 71 × 10 9 /L and WHO bleeding >1 was rare. However, the average length of stay was 30 ± 7 for HLA-positive patients compared to 19 ± 9 days for HLA-negative patients. HLA-positive patients responded to non-activated PLT transfusions with significantly lower platelet recovery (1-hr CCI) than HLA-negative patients: 8.3 ± 8.8 vs. 14.3 ± 8.1 (p=0.002 at 95% significance level). Only one patient, a 65 yr old male with AML, received HLA-matched PLTs that were characterized for PLT activation status. On the first 9 treatment days the patient received 12 PLT transfusions with increasingly insufficient CCIs. Two HLA matched transfusions were unsuccessful but 3 non-activated PLTs successfully increased the CCIs (see Table) . Conclusion: Selecting non-activated random PLTs for transfusion to HLApositive patients did not achieve sufficiently high 1-hr CCIs in HLA-positive patients. However, only non-activated HLA matched PLTs restored both 1hr and 24-hr CCIs in one alloimmunized patient. Additional studies are needed to determine whether non-activated platelets could improve the success rate of HLA-matched transfusions. Background/Case Studies: The Rh system is the most polymorphic blood group system in humans. It is the second most immunogenic next to the ABO system. RHD polymorphism shows substantial ethnic variability. The partial D alleles are diverse which includes the DAU alleles evident at the molecular level. The RHD*DAU2 allele is a rare partial D variant. We report a D typing discrepancy in a female blood donor who initially typed as Rh negative on a previous donation 10 years ago. Study Design/Method: D typing was performed using three different FDA licensed reagents and FDA 510(k) cleared devices from three different manufacturers. Methods include microplate hemagglutination, column agglutination technique (gel) and test tube. DNA-sequencing of RHD exon 1 to 10 was performed using Sanger bi-directional DNA sequence analysis. Results/Finding: Previous D typing using microplate hemagglutination and weak D testing using tube method were both negative. On subsequent donation, microplate hemagglutination gave a positive result and weak D testing was 1+. Additional testing using column agglutination method was negative. DNA-sequencing results revealed the presence of a c.1136C>T (Thr379Met) in RHD exon 8, characteristic of the DAU cluster. Two other modifications c.209G>A (Arg70Gln) and c.998G>A (Ser333Asn) were found respectively in RHD exon 2 and exon 7. The presence of these mutations were characteristic of the presence of RHD*DAU2, with a predicted partial weak D phenotype. Conclusion: The 70Gln and 333Asn amino acid changes are located in the inner boundary of the red blood cell (RBC) membrane. These changes affect D antigen integration and proper expression, with drastic decrease of D antigen density. Such individuals react differently when tested with various anti-D monoclonal antibodies. The accessibility to a referral laboratory for genomic testing is important for timely identification of these variants. Background/Case Studies: Demand for red blood cell (RBC) antigen negative products continues to rise. This has been triggered by studies suggesting that RBC more closely matched to the patient may decrease the likelihood of alloimmunization. This creates the need for blood centers to employ high-volume screening methods. In addition, the demand for highincidence antigen negative RBCs must match the need. There are several methods that can be applied such as standard tube, automated serology, microplate (MCP), and molecular HEA BeadChip (HBC). HBC strength is its ability to test many antigens simultaneously. Its shortcomings include cost and its limitation to detect many null phenotypes, especially in RH, K, and JK systems (detectable by serology). Our immunohematology reference lab relies on screening by serology and MCP was initially chosen for its highvolume capability with the focus on screening common antigens: CEce, K, Fy a Fy b ; Jk a Jk b ; Ss. The algorithm was expanded to include directed testing based on ethnicity and broad testing for high-and or low-incidence antigens based on antisera availability. Newly encountered high-incidence antigen negative donors were sent for testing with HBC. Study Design/Method: RBC units were sorted based on three ethnicities: African American, Hispanic, and Caucasian. Units were tested for CEce, K, and Kp b to detect any K 0 donors. Units that were negative for two of four Rh and K antigens were further tested for Fy a Fy b ; Jk a Jk b ; Ss. Units that were K+, regardless of RhCE types were tested for k by MCP. Units that did not meet the above criteria were not tested further. For the African American and Hispanic ethnicities Js a and Di a were also tested. Units that typed Js (a+) or Di (a +) were tested for Js b or Di b respectively. Those found to be Js (b-) or Di (b-) had HBC requested. In addition units that typed S-s-were submitted for HBC. In total 222,212 antigens were tested by MCP screening method. Several units negative for high-incidence antigen (k, Js b , and U) were discovered. We did not find any units with null phenotpyes from the RH, K, or JK systems. Conclusion: The use of combined serology (MCP) and molecular HBC algorithm allowed us to nimbly adapt to specific needs based on changing patient population. The MCP method was instrumental to support of the ever-increasing antigen negative unit requirements. While low resolution molecular screening methods have their strength and are increasingly commonplace, serologic screening permitted for detection of rare donors that could be missed by molecular methods and provided for inexpensive screening of a large number of donor units. Numbers like these proved that MCP is a true stalwart method. Relationship of Antibody Reactivity Strength to Reactivity in the Monocyte Monolayer Assay (MMA) Joan L. Maurer* 1 , Sandra J. Nance 2 and Pamela Nickle 3 . 1 ARDP, 2 American Red Cross and American Rare Donor Program, 3 American Red Cross Background/Case Studies: The MMA is used to predict the clinical significance of alloantibodies. Antibody binding of sensitized RBCs is determined by the performance of an Indirect Antiglobulin Test. It might be expected that a strong antibody would more likely to result in a positive MMA and a weakly reactive antibody would be more likely to result in a negative MMA. Study Design/Method: The MMA is performed by using antigen positive and antigen negative red blood cells in cases of a known antibody specificity. The selected RBCs are incubated with the patient's serum, with and without a source of fresh complement present. Each red blood cell tested is also incubated with saline (saline controls) to control for any increased reactivity that might be present with the RBCs alone. The RBC sensitization is performed by incubating tubes in a water bath at 37C for one hour, with intermittent mixing. Antiglobulin tests are performed on all red cell samples using anti-IgG and anti-C3, including the saline controls. This study is focused on comparing the reactivity of the antibody coated RBCs and the Background/Case Studies: SLC14A1 gene on chromosome 18 encodes for the KIDD(JK) glycoprotein which carries the blood group system antigens: Jk a (Jk1), Jk b (Jk2) and Jk3. The protein encoded by this gene is a membrane transporter that mediates urea transport in erythrocytes. The JK glycoprotein consists of 10 intramembrane domains and 5 extracellular loops. Jk a and Jk b antigens expression results from a single nucleotide polymorphism 838G>A in exon 9, Asn280Asp. The antigens are located on the 4 th extracellular loop. Several mutations identified in exon 7 and intron 9 are responsible for weakened expression of the JK antigens. We are reporting a novel silencing mutation discovered due to discordance between the serological and predicted molecular Jk a phenotype of a red cell donor who self-identified as White, not Hispanic. Study Design/Method: Genomic DNA was extracted from EDTA whole blood samples using automated magnetic particle nucleic acid purification method. The DNA was tested by multiplex PreciseType™ HEA Molecular BeadChip Test (Immucor, BioArray Solutions, NJ, USA). Both nucleotides associated with JKA and JKB polymorphisms were present, which predicted the Jk(a+b+) phenotype. Historical serological phenotypes on two separate donations showed the phenotype as Jk(a-b+). A third serological typing on a new sample using monoclonal Anti-Jk a (Bio-Rad) confirmed the previous Jk(a-b+) phenotype. Subsequently, a bi-directional sequencing study was performed with Applied Biosystems 3730xl DNA analyzer using BigDye® Terminator v.3.1 sequencing kit (Life Technologies Co., CA, USA) and DNA was analyzed using Geneious Pro 5.1.7 (Biomatters, Auckland, NZ) bioinformatics software platform. The obtained nucleotide base sequence was compared against NCBI Reference Sequence NG_011775.3. Results/Finding: The sequencing analysis revealed a 15-nucleotide deletion at c.522_536del (p.VAL_Pro179del) in exon 7 that does not impact the downstream nucleotide sequence. Mutations in JK exon 7 at the 511 or 548 nb locations have been implicated with the presence of an aberrant weak Jk a antigen which may or may not be detected by serological methods. This novel in-frame mutation can produce abnormalities in the JK 3 rd extracellular loop that results in the lack of expression of the Jk a antigen on the final protein. Conclusion: A novel mutation ensuing from 15-nucleotide deletion was discovered when investigating a Jk a antigen typing discrepancy between the predicted molecular phenotype and the serological expressed phenotype. This mutation has been shown to silence the Jk a antigen expression. More testing is needed to better understand the mechanism underlying the aberrant effect of this in-frame mutation on the antigen expression and its significance. We identify the alloantibody in 76%: 240 (88%) had one RBCa, 27 (10%) had two and 6 (2%) had three. The frequency of identified alloantibodies: antiM 109 (40%), antiE 39 (14.3%), antiK 19 (7%), antiD 16 (5.9%), antiLea 13 (4.8%), antiJka 11 (4%), antiLua 10 (3.7%), antiLeb 6 (2.2%), antiP1 4 (1.5%), antie 4 (1.5%), antiKpa 3 (1.1%), antic, antiS and antiJkb 2 (0.7%) each. Conclusion: We showed that the overall prevalence of antibodies in our pediatric population was 1.77%, with 1.4% alloantibodies. The clinically important irregular antibodies identified were against Rh, Kell, Duffy, Kidd and Ss systems. The high frequency of anti-M can be correlated with the age of presentation of this antibody mainly in children and mostly natural. Extensive RBC antigen matching including the Rh and Kell systems should be considered in politransfused patients regardless their basal disease, in order to avoid alloimmunization and hemolytic transfusion reactions. Background/Case Studies: Children with transfusion dependent anemia, such as sickle cell disease (SCD) and thalassemia, are at an increased risk for developing red blood cell (RBC) alloantibodies due to their lifelong need for transfusion therapy. With the advent of genotyping, an extended RBC antigen panel can successfully be incorporated into chronic transfusion therapy programs (CTTP) to more precisely match blood for this population of patients. Study Design/Method: Key members of the transfusion service (TS), immunohematology reference laboratory (IRL), and hematology clinic (HC) caring for children with sickle cell disease, thalassemia, and other hemoglobinopathies met to develop a chronic transfusion therapy program to benefit these patients to help minimize the risk of red cell alloimmunization. The children enrolled had baseline genotyping performed, including 37 RBC antigens, as well as detection of the FY*B_GATA mutation and other possible significant mutations in the Rh system. Forms were developed to assist with communication between the HC, TS, and IRL. Transfusion intervals and volumes for each patient were estimated to obtain the freshest (less than 2 weeks) blood available and matched in the Rh and Kell systems for those with negative antibody screens. Double RBC units were collected when possible for patients requiring more than 1 unit in a single transfusion episode. Patients who developed RBC alloantibodies were switched to phenotypically matched RBCs to prevent the development of additional antibodies based on their profile. Results/Finding: Since the inception of the program in June 2016, 29 patients with the following disorders were enrolled: 10 with SCD, 17 with thalassemia, and 2 with other disorders. At enrollment, 6 (21%) had RBC alloantibodies, including 2 SCD patients with anti-e, who previously received C-E-K-phenotypically matched blood, but were found to have variant e antigen by genotyping. Of those children without alloantibodies at enrollment, 1 (4%) developed antibody (anti-S) following the provision of RBCs matched for the Rh and Kell systems. Of those with antibodies who received extended-match units, none developed additional alloantibodies. Conclusion: Genotyping was successfully incorporated into this CTTP to provide more precisely matched blood, reducing the risk of RBC alloantibody development. Much more information is provided with a genotype compared to traditional serologic phenotyping and without the expense of cell separation techniques in recently transfused patients. Prevention of RBC antigen sensitization helps to avoid costly serologic work-ups, prevent delayed hemolytic transfusion reactions, and improves blood management. An additional benefit includes improved availability of blood for patients with otherwise rare blood types, particularly when the GATA mutation is present. Background/Case Studies: The gold standard for compatibility testing has historically been based upon serologic testing by tube, gel and solid phase methodologies to detect red cell agglutination. There are several conditions, however, when serology cannot be relied upon for determining the safest blood for transfusion. Molecular testing for human blood group antigens has provided a reliable method to accurately predict the phenotype of a transfusion recipient without extensive serologic testing. In addition to adding insight to variant blood group antigens, this has created a new arena for matching blood donors for patient transfusion. This abstract describes how molecular testing has been incorporated into the blood collection facility, and how this has influenced changes in our Immunohematology Laboratory Practices. Study Design/Method: Sixty donors with a record of multiple donations but without a full phenotype or molecular genotype are selected each week for testing by an outside contracted laboratory. The molecular results are electronically transferred to the Blood Establishment Computer System (BECS). Staff in the immunohematology reference laboratory (IRL) validate the results transmitted. Rare units with unique antigens are then added to the frozen blood inventory and reported to the American Rare Donor Program (ARDP). Results/Finding: By the end of 3 years, our fully phenotyped donor database has expanded to include 9000 fully tested donors. In addition, we have identified 123 rare donors that we are recruiting to add to our rare frozen units and to report to the ARDP. (See Table 1 ) Discussion: In addition to donors, we have performed molecular testing on patients to improve medical care. The majority of the patients with Sickle Cell Disease (SCD) in our area have had molecular genotyping performed. This enables the IRL to provide phenotypically similar RBC units in efforts to prevent alloimmunization. The IRL also selects patients for molecular genotyping who have autoimmune hemolytic anemia, drug interferences (i.e. daratumumab), and multiple transfusions to phenotype match, not only to prevent alloimmunization, but to simplify the process of providing the best matched blood available for those patients. The IRL has also provided blood collected from rare donors identified by molecular genotyping to other blood centers that have a patient with a need for rare blood. Conclusion: It is unlikely that genotyping will fully replace serologic testing, but it is proving to be a complementary adjunct for our immunohematology service. Hemovigilence is the focus of many associations that manage the care of patients who are being transfused. Molecular genotyping aids in providing blood for SCD patients, for those with significant autoimmune disease, and for other medical conditions. Molecular genotyping has enormous potential to revolutionize practice in blood centers to establish large donor pools of fully typed donors as well as identify many donors with rare blood groups. Background/Case Studies: The incidence of HDFN caused by Rh'D' antigen has reduced to markedly low levels in developed countries but it still poses a challenge to the health care system in the developing countries. At Present, the Conventional Test Tube (CTT) method is recommended for performing the titration of antibodies in antenatal cases but CTT is increasingly being replaced by Gel Microcolumn Agglutination (GMA) systems as it offers many advantages to the transfusion laboratory. There have been few studies on this topic but no clear guidelines have been established about the precise method of titration in antenatal cases by GMA. Study Design/Method: Samples from 510 Rh negative antenatal females were evaluated over a period of 2 years.These were initially subjected to Indirect Agglutination Test(IAT) by CTT (using polyspecific AHG) well as GMA (3 Cell Antibody Screening Panel). Positive samples were subjected to identification of antibodies by using 11 cell antibody identification panel. Presence of anti-G antibody was ruled out using double adsorption method. They were further subjected to titration by CTT and GMA(IgG only, Rabbit). In-house prepared R 1 r 1 RBCs from a single donor were used for titration. Titration by CTT was carried out using LISS( Incubation time 15 mins) as well as Normal Saline(Incubation time 60 mins) for making RBC suspension. Similarly, titration by GMA was carried out using LISS( Incubation time 15 mins) as well as Normal Saline( Incubation time 60 mins, as recommended in earlier studies) for a better correlation of these two methods. The titers were further correlated in the clinical context and recent history of Anti-D administration, intervention like IUT if performed and outcome of pregnancy. Results/Finding: Out of the 510 antenatal cases tested, 56 were positive for ICT by GMA. Out of these, 20 cases also tested positive by tube method. 36 tested positive only by GMA( 33 had history of Anti-D).The antibody identified was Anti-D in 54 cases and a combination of Anti-C+Anti-D in 2 cases. Titration by tube method using LISS gave very few positive results and titration by GMA using Normal Saline(NS) resulted in mixed field reactions, so these two methods were not included for further analysis. Only the titers obtained by CTT using NS and GMA using LISS were included for further analysis. Titration was performed on a total of 61 different samples obtained from 20 antenatal cases and the values were further evaluated for Karl Pearson Coefficient of correlation. It was evaluated to be 0.756 with pvalue = .001 when all these samples were included, which suggested moderate correlation but for cases involving single antibody(Anti-D), it was evaluated to be 0.893 with p value=.001, which suggested a strong correlation. 12 out of the 20 cases had undergone IUT and 4 cases were reported to have IUFD. The titer values for these patients were noted to be at least 16 by CTT and 512 by GMA. Conclusion: GMA is a highly sensitive and precise method for titration in antenatal cases and the prospect of reporting titer by GMA along with CTT should be evaluated so that the treating clinician can be made aware about the results of these two methods. CTT and GMA had a better correlation when a single antibody was present. year old man with extensive cardiac past medical history presented with acute appendicitis. He refused surgery and was treated with antibiotics (3 days of piperacillin/tazobactam followed by ten days of ampicillin/clavulanic acid). He returned to the ER 3 days after discharge with a ruptured appendix and underwent urgent surgery. He was treated empirically with piperacillin/tazobactam on admission. After 48 hours, his Hb fell from 10.7 g/dL to 4 g/dl, accompanied by markers for acute hemolysis (LDH: 1379 U/L; haptoglobin: < 10 g/dl; indirect bilirubin: 5 mg/dl). His indirect coombs test revealed a panagglutinin. His DAT was positive for IgG but not C3. The eluate was negative. There was strong suspicion for DIIHA and the piperacillin/tazobactam was held. A sample of his blood was sent to New York Blood Center which revealed antibody to piperacillin detected by the "immune complex" method. In addition, anti-e-like specificity was observed that was very weakly reactive by PEG IAT and IgG gel test with papain-treated panel RBC's. Interestingly, patient was positive for e antigen by phenotype. The patient developed acute renal failure and oliguria requiring dialysis. He subsequently went into acute respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation. Repeat DAT was negative 7 days after initial DAT checked. His clinical condition improved over 10 days. His hematocrit improved back to his baseline, however the patient was dialysis dependent for 3 months prior to improvement in renal function. Conclusion: Unlike other penicillins and cephalosporins, piperacillin induced hemolytic anemia is typically complement mediated and induces a brisk and severe hemolysis. DAT tests are usually positive due to RBCbound complement and IgG. This case demonstrates that piperacillin can induce a brisk and severe hemolytic anemia in the absence of detectable complement. Rapid withdrawal of piperacillin is essential for recovery, but end organ damage may have a delayed recovery. investigations were conducted upon detection of antigen typing discrepancies between current and previous donations. Process improvements were implemented over time and the impact on the frequency of typing discrepancies was evaluated. Study Design/Method: The Blood Establishment Computer System (BECS) provides correlation between current testing results and previous results. A retrospective review of donor antigen typing discrepancies flagged by BECS was completed. Discrepancies flagged in house prior to labeling were classified as internal discrepancies; antigen typing repeated by the hospital customer and reported to be discrepant were classified as external discrepancies. Each discrepancy was investigated to determine the cause. Identified discrepancies post-implementation of process changes were evaluated. Results/Finding: During a 9-year period, 396 discrepancies were detected. More than 80% of these involved genetic Rh variation or FYX associated with weak blood group antigen typing not detected by some commercial FDA licensed reagents. Investigations revealed process failures in multiple departments can also contribute to donor antigen typing discrepancies, including: collections, data entry, technical procedures, and information systems. Key process improvements include the implementation of a selfadministered donor health history with 7 electronically-captured identification points and development of a job aid for the investigation of duplicate donors. Testing procedure revisions included process for obtaining segments from units for testing, incubation for the maximum time recommended by manufacturer, and requirement of confirmation by a second manufacturer's reagent for e negative antigen typing. Genotyping performed on samples with typing discrepancies was key to identify genetic variation in levels of antigen expression. As a result of process changes, non-ABO/D antigen typing discrepancies decreased from approximately 1 in 5,300 collections to 1 in 10,000 collections over a 9 year period. Conclusion: Donor typing discrepancies frequencies were reduced through the implementation of process improvements across multiple departments and systems. An information system with the functionality to compare current and previous testing is a critical feature for labeling with historical non-ABO/D antigens. Genetic variants are a frequent cause of testing discrepancies and warrant investigation. Investigating all discrepancies, recognizing sources of error, and responding with process improvements are crucial to implement a robust system for labeling with historical non-ABO/D blood group antigens. Background/Case Studies: Antigens in Pr series are associated with sialic acid residues on glycophorins that are protease/sialidase-sentive. Anti-Pr M was also reported to have specificity to determinants reside in side chains attached to MN sialoglycoproteins. Majority of the Pr specific antibodies are generally cold agglutinins that react optimally at lower temperature but can rarely be IgG, IgA or have biphasic property. Cases of autoanti-Pr that can cause severe hemolytic anemia has been reported. In this case, we report a patient with gammaglobulinemia and a high titer/thermal amplitude anti-Pr M who did not show obvious evidence of hemolysis. Study Design/Method: All tests were performed by routine tube method using PEG, LISS, saline, untreated, ficin and neuraminidase-treated cells. Acid eluate was prepared and tested with reagent red cells by IAT method. A heat eluate was prepared from cold adsorbed plasma using M-adsorbing cells. Heat eluate was tested against neuraminidase-treated red cells and also tested with M + and M-untreated cells. Autologous cells tested with the patient's plasma by 2 hour saline settled method at 37C,30C,20C and 4C to obtain the thermal capacity. Plasma treated with 0.01M DTT was also tested with reagent red cells to differentiate between IgM and IgG. Results/Finding: The patient had a hemoglobin of 11.0 g/dL and hematocrit of 31.9%, and total bilirubin of 0.4 mg/dL (within normal range). Other laboratory tests such as LDH, haptoglobin and retic counts were not performed; as hemolysis was not suspected clinically. No transfusion was needed during the admission. IgM was detected by serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP). Please see table below for the reaction of plasma and eluates with different cells. DAT was weakly positive (1+) with anti-IgG. Autocontrol was strongly positive (3-4+) at room temperature (RT) and 37C but non-reactive at IAT. The antibody titers were as follows: Conclusion: In keeping with the rarity of JK variants, the yield of clinically significant variants in our series of highly selected cases was relatively low (4 of 13, 30%). All 4 patients were Jk(a+b+). In patients who have antibodies associated with suspected variant JK, the Jk phenotype can guide the selection of units for RBC transfusion. For a patient with heterozygous phenotype, antigen-negative units matched for the antibody may be given, as there is no concern for alloimmunization against the antithetical Jk antigen. For a patient with homozygous phenotype [Jk(a+b-) or Jk(a-b+)], antigen-negative transfusions should be deferred because of the likely presence of at least one conventional allele, and the risk of exposure to the antithetical foreign antigen. We conclude that the real value of molecular testing lies in identifying patients without clinically significant variants, as unnecessary restrictions on RBC unit selection can be lifted, especially in patients with multiple alloantibodies. and tube agglutination methods using commercial monoclonal (BioRad, Germany) and polyclonal reagents. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood using the QIAamp DNA Blood Kit (QIAGEN, Germany) and red cell genotyping was performed with HEA and RHCE BeadChip™ kits (Immucor-BioArray Solution, Warren NJ, USA). Since the phenotype and genotype results were discordant, the sample was further characterized by sequencing all ten RHCE exons and flanking intron regions using Sanger sequencing. Results/Finding: The patient had a D-phenotype and was referred for suspicion of an anti-Hr o (anti-RH17) alloantibody. The HEA kit predicted a C-e-phenotype and the RHCE kit did not identify any altered alleles. In addition, the patient's RBCs were non-reactive with multiple commercial anti-C (MS24), anti-E (including C2, MS258 and MS906), anti-c (including MS33 and MS42), and anti-e (including MS16, MS21, MS6, MS62, MS69 and BS260) monoclonal reagents. Sequence analysis of the RHCE gene indicated that the individual was C-E+c+e-. However, the patient was also apparently homozygous for a mutation at position c.659G>A in exon 5, predicted to encode a premature stop codon p. Trp220Ter. This molecular mechanism is consistent with an aberrant RHCE*cE sequence abolishing the c and E expression. The RHCE*cE659A allele is not reported in the ISBT and other genomic databases. Conclusion: This case describes a novel polymorphism in exon 5 of the RHCE gene causing the silencing of c and E expression in a woman with a D-phenotype. Although DNA genotyping for the prediction of blood groups has great value, the genotype is not always consistent with the phenotype. Many genetic events may cause apparent discrepant results between hemagglutination and DNA genotyping. Sequencing remains the "gold standard" for the study of complex RH molecular variants. One case of abnormal type B blood group was identified through using the microcolumn gel card and test tube methods to determine blood group respectively, and detecting blood group substance in saliva, using the anticoagulant whole blood to extract DNA (QIAamp Blood Kit) and sequence (Invitrogen Corporation). Two generations of pedigrees were investigated, and activity of glycosyltransferase in erythrocyte membranes and serum was measured in blood donor samples. Blood samples were transformed in vitro using UDP-galactose and the serum of normal type B. Results/Finding: Bm subtype was confirmed by blood group serology test, genotyping and sequencing results. The new mutational sites were 43G/T and 45C/G mutations in exon 1. Family survey results showed that both father and sister were normal type O blood group, while the mother was type Bm-mutant, which similarly weakly expressing B antigen and including 43G/T and 45C/G mutations in exon 1(GAC>TAG), suggesting that the mutation was heritable. This mutation led to premature termination of protein coding in exon 1 and a significant decrease of activity of glycosyltransferase in the serum. Treatment with UDP-galactose could convert the Bm subtype blood group into the normal type B blood group in vitro. Conclusion: Bm subtype blood group resulted by a new heritable mutation site (exon1, 43G/T and 45C/G) is found during the blood group examination. UDP-galactose combined with normal type B serum has a corrective effect on the Bm subtype blood group, suggesting that abnormal blood group can be corrected by changing the activity of glycosyltransferase to improve the safety of blood transfusion. Clinically Significant Naturally Occurring Anti-N and Anti-S Alloantibodies in a Blood Donor Sheetal Malhotra* 1 , Gita Negi 1 and Aseem Tiwari 2 . 1 Department of Transfusion Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 2 Department of Transfusion Medicine Medanta-The Medicity Background/Case Studies: Alloimmunization is triggered when an individual lacking a particular antigen is exposed to these antigens through transfusion or pregnancy, causing the formation of immune antibodies. In addition to these exogenous exposures, underlying inflammatory or auto immune conditions may lead to formation of unexpected antibodies. Study Design/Method: Herein, a case of naturally occurring anti-N and anti-S alloantibodies in a healthy blood donor with Rh positive blood group is reported. This case signifies the importance of incorporating indirect antiglobulin testing (IAT) for all blood units as a routine protocol. Alloadsorptions were performed with select cells, which confirmed the presence of the alloantibodies. DTT (dithiothretiol) testing demonstrated IgM and IgG nature of the antibodies. Antibodies showed dosage phenomena and the reactivity decreased after enzyme (papain) treatment. Donor red cell phenotyping for MNS system was M+N-S-s+. IgM and IgG antibody titers of anti-N were 16 and 8; for anti-S antibodies were 4 respectively by gel card technique. Post DTT treatment, IgG antibody titers for both anti-N and anti-S were 2. Conclusion: In the present case, clinically significant, naturally occurring anti-N and anti-S antibodies, reacting at wide thermal amplitude, were detected in the donor's serum. There are a few published reports of naturally occurring anti-N and anti-S antibodies in healthy donor population. In MNS system, anti-M is known to be the commonest naturally occurring antibody, IgM in nature reacting at saline phase, below 37°C. Anti-N is relatively less common; anti-S is mostly immune in nature, IgG type reactive at 37°C. In many small centers especially in developing countries, IAT is done only for Rh negative blood group donors in order to rule out the presence of anti-D alloantibodies, primarily due to financial constraints. Through this case, the authors want to emphasize that the protocol of IAT testing for blood donors, irrespective of the Rh status, should be incorporated in all the blood banks as it will improve the safety of blood transfusion services for patients. Alternatively, IAT testing with pooled O cells can be done for all the donors as an initial screening procedure. Antibody screening with the three cell panel can be put only for IAT positive cases, thus paving the way for better transfusion practices and reducing the risk of adverse reactions. The Background/Case Studies: To explore the feasibility of Rh blood group 5 antigen detection in precision transfusion by the application of Rh antigen detection technology, and the computer information identification technologies such as laboratory blood group autoanalysis software system and blood transfusion information management software system. Study Design/Method: Red blood cells (RBCs) from patients and donors were detected for ABO and Rh antigens (D, C, c, E and e) by using a laboratory blood type automatic analysis system. The results were uploaded to transfusion information management system (TIMS). The computer recognition technology automatically chose the appropriate blood compatible with ABO and Rh antigens. The blood cross-matching was done with Polybrene and Microcylinder Gel Card Antiglobulin method (MGC-AGH) to reduce the incidence of anti-E, anti-c and other anti-Rh antibodies, avoid repeated cross-matching incompatibility due to unknown Rh system antigens in clinical practice and realize the precise blood transfusion. Results/Finding: After the blood transfusion precision program was implemented, more than 90% of the recipients could achieve complete or compatible transfusion of ABO and 5 types of Rh antigens. No transfusion reactions occurred within the first 15 minutes during infusion and 24 hours after infusion. Blood routine examination and blood biochemistry were measured before and 24 hours after infusion. Hb was increased 5g/L on average and serum bilirubin was no significant change than before in patients receiving 1 unit of red cell suspension. After repeated (>5) infusions, the ineffective rate of red blood cell transfusion was 0, and the rate of delayed hemolytic reaction was 0. No adverse reactions to transfusion occurred. The occurrence rate of blood group irregularity antibodies was significantly reduced in patients with multiple blood transfusions, compared with patients before the implementation of the precision blood transfusion program, from 0.85% to 0.19%. In the case of irregular antibody positive, the proportion of antibodies in the Rh system decreased significantly from the previous period, from 85.19% prior to the implementation of the precision blood transfusion protocol to 33.33%. Conclusion: The implementation of Rh blood group antigen detection technology to achieve clinically precision blood transfusion can not only avoid the production of Rh system antibody, but also reduce the occurrence of adverse reactions of blood transfusion, improve the ability to solve difficult blood cross-matching and the safety of blood transfusion therapy. Performance Evaluation of a . Differences in the description of predicted phenotype were found in 64 instances, related to categorization of weak or partial Rh blood group antigens or reporting the presence of the FYB GATA allele. A true discrepancy was found for one M antigen typing (0.007%) that was predicted to be M(-) by IDCORE XT and M(+) by the current system. DNA sequencing of an amplicon including GYPA exon 2 identified two SNPs in the intron region that prevented binding of the IDCORE XT forward primer to its target site (Table 1) . Conclusion: Predicted RBC antigen expression obtained from IDCORE XT and the genotyping system currently in use showed a high degree of concordance, with a single false negative M antigen reported by IDCORE XT; this is unlikely to be clinically important. The weak or partial antigen expression specified in the predicted phenotype report for some Rh blood group antigens in IDCORE XT may have clinical applications for selected patient populations. While the GATA mutation in the promoter region of the FYB allele is identified in the genotype report of both systems, its presence is not reported in the predicted phenotype of IDCORE XT, which may lead to unnecessary transfusion of Fyb-negative RBCs for patients with this mutation if only using the predicted phenotype report. Red Cell Alloimmunization of Pregnant Women and Impact of Systematic Injection of RhIg: 10-Year Study Laurine Laget* 1 , Caroline Izard 1 , Elisabeth Durieux-Roussel 1 , Isabelle Dettori 1 , Julia Gouvitsos 1 , Jacques Chiaroni 2 and Virginie Ferrera-Tourenc 1 . Background/Case Studies: Red blood cell (RBC) alloimmunization during pregnancy is rare but is still a major problem. Depending on the specificity, antibodies can be implicated in hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn mild to severe. These alloimmunizations may require a need for phototherapy or transfusion in the neonate, in the rarest cases a need for in utero transfusion. Study Design/Method: The objective of this study is to present the results of the global red blood cell alloimmunization in pregnant women over a period of 10 years (2006) (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) (2015) (2016) in a french region (Provence Alpes Cote d'Azur Corse). This number of allo-immunizations is related to the number of births in this same region to determine the prevalence of alloimmunization during pregnancy. We also evaluate the impact of the recommendation of the National College of Obstetricians implemented since 2005, about the systematic injection of RhIg at the 28 week of amennorhea, by studying the incidence of anti-D alloimmunization in this cohort. Results/Finding: For these 10 years we analysed 6688 pregnancies with allo-immunization (ie 1.05% of pregnant women). 19.5% had antibodies that can be implicated in hemolytic disease of the fetus (anti-D, anti-c, anti-Kell). 54.1% had antibodies that can be implicated in hemolytic disease of the newborn (anti-C, anti-E, anti-e, anti-Fya ..) and 39.1% had antibodies with no incidence during pregnancy (anti-Le, anti-P1..). We also evaluated the effectiveness of the systematic injection of RhIg to the D-pregnant women at the 28 week of amennorhea. We have studied the incidence (number of new cases) of allo-immunizations anti-D during this 10 years period. We observer a significative decrease in incidence Since 2012 and the integration of these recommendations in the follow-up practices, the incidence of anti-D allo-immunization has stabilized at 0.05%. These results are comparable to those of other countries that also practice routine injection at the beginning of the 3rd quarter. Conclusion: All these results over a broad period of 10 years show differences in the prevalence of antibodies in pregnant women compared to other countries. Indeed, in France, the respect of the RHK phenotype for any transfusion in a young woman decreases the number of allo-immunized women in these systems. In addition, since 2005 and the recommendations of the National College of Obstetricians (routine injection of RhIg at 28 weeks of amenorrhea), the incidence of anti-D alloimmunization has significantly decreased to stabilize at 0.05%. Testing  Background/Case Studies: Hema-Quebec provides blood products to the Province of Quebec and serves a population of 8.4 millions. It also plays the role of the Immunohematology Reference Laboratory (IRL) to resolve complex antibody identification cases for referring hospitals. Annually, it receives roughly 1500 requests from hospitals' blood banks to investigate antibody identification cases, pregnancy follow-ups, transfusion reactions and various discrepancies. Among the services provided within the IRL, antibody identification investigation excluding pregnancy follow-ups represents two third of the activities. In 2014, EdgeLab™ software (Haemonetics) was implemented to manage all clinical cases from receiving samples to report results and to serve as an electronic database. The present study was to survey for red blood cells (RBCs) antibodies and to provide valuable information on antibody combinations and work up frequency. Study Design/Method: The data was extracted from the database using the aggregate serological investigation specific code from June 2, 2014 (implementation) until March 12, 2018. The resulting Excel file was manually analysed. Results/Finding: During the 3.75 year-period, data excluding pregnancy follow ups were compiled. 3263 cases were received, with an average of 1.2 requests/case. Up to 42% (1374/3263) were considered uneventful regarding blood unit selection: 417 cases lack antibody, 519 cases were considered as having non-specific reactions (cold agglutinin, antibodies to RBC media, non-specific antibody without clinically significant underlying antibodies, antibody against Daratumumab) and 438 cases showed antibodies against blood group antigen specificity without clinical significance such as RhIg and Knops. Data regarding the two types of unexpected RBCs antibodies (alloantibodies and autoantibodies) was calculated from a sample so that inferences could be make to the evaluated cases. In addition, solely antibody with Rh specificity against D and e specificity were evaluated and were classified in the uneventful category whenever they were autoantibodies or considered clinically significant if they were alloantibodies. In total, 1889 cases showed blood group antigen specificity with clinical significance. Among the 1889 cases, 762 showed a unique antibody of which 381 were against an Rh specificity (50%), 2 antibodies were found in 621 cases (541 cases with at least one anti-Rh; 87.1%) and 506 cases had more than 2 antibodies (491 cases with at least one anti-Rh; 97%). Overall 1413/1889 presented with an anti-Rh (74.8%). Anti-E was the most frequent (756 cases) followed by anti-C (484 cases) and anti-K (330 cases). Anti-C combined to anti-e was observed in 99 cases and represent the more frequent Rh antibody combination. Conclusion: This study summarized the last 3.75 years in antibody identification work-up in the IRL excluding pregnancy work ups. It clearly showed that anti-Rh remain the major burdens in patient management. Rare cases were also unrevealed through this work. For example, 5 cases of anti-U, 3 cases of anti-PEL and 1 anti-Ge3 were identified. It was intended to produce a comprehensive portrait of the investigated cases, the whole picture being lost through the workload and the urgency behind some requests. It also serves to demonstrate the relevance of antibody work ups in order to prevent transfusion reaction and favor patient outcome. Background/Case Studies: The introduction of immunoprophylaxis for RhD negative pregnant women has drastically reduced the incidence of hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn. However, immunoglobin administration is not risk free, and has high costs. The discovery of circulant free fetal DNA (cffDNA) prompted the introduction of non-invasive fetal RHD genotyping in maternal plasma. This approach is increasingly being adopted in several countries, since it avoids treatment in the substantial proportion of RhD negative woman who will give birth to a RhD negative child (about 40%). The purpose of this study was to validate a method for the antenatal, non-invasive determination of fetal RHD status using cffDNA from maternal plasma. We present preliminary data about our ongoing validation. Study Design/Method: We consequently analyzed the samples from 33 RhD negative pregnant women between 19 and 29 weeks of gestation, with an unknown or positive RhD partner. The genomic DNA was extracted from maternal plasma, separated by QIAamp Circulating Nucleic Acid Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, US) or using automatic extraction with QIASymphony. In order to determine the fetal RHD genotype, we used Taqman primers and probes to detect exons 5, 7, and 10 of RHD gene by Real-Time PCR (Free DNA Fetal Kit RhD, Institut de Biotechnologies Jacques Boy, Bio-Rad, Foster City, CA). As internal controls, we added Maize DNA (Bio-Rad) before extraction and used primers/probes sets specific to Maize DNA. The results of antenatal fetal genotyping were compared to those obtained on postnatal cord blood Rh phenotyping. Results/Finding: Out of 33 samples, 21 were RHD positive and 12 RHD negative. Out of 33 samples processed, 30 were available for the genotype-phenotype comparison, and the agreement was 100%. Three samples were inconclusive due to missing data at birth. Conclusion: Fetal RHD genotyping from maternal plasma is a promising tool for the management of RhD negative pregnant women. If these data will be confirmed on a larger series, the non invasive approach will reduce the risk for mothers and their babies and reduce unnecessary anti-RhDIg immunoprophylaxis. The Design and Establishment of the Platelet Donor Database with Known HLA, HPA Genotype in Nanning Area of China Lilan Li* 1 , Mei Yu 2 , HengCong Li 1 , Xianggeng Su 2 , Fang Lu 1 and Guoguang Wu 1 . 1 Nanning Institute of Transfusion Medicine, 2 Nanning Blood Center Background/Case Studies: For the platelet transfusion therapy of the patients with immune platelet transfusion refractoiness (PTR) and immune thrombocytopenia, transfusion with antigen-negative matched-platelets are the key to obtain effective treatment for the patients. The establishment of known antigen platelet donor database could provide a fast and convenient way to find antigen-negative matched-platelet donors for the relative immune patients. HLA and HPA were the important antigens that cause platelet alloimmunization diseases, populations at different areas have their own polymorphic characters of HLA and HPA. Nanning is an important comprehensive transportation hub city located in southwestern China with more than 7 million people. The aim of this study was to design and establish the platelet donor database with known HLA, HPA genotype that could be suitable for the population in Nanning area of China, and to provide a guarantee for the treatment of the patients with immune PTR and immune thrombocytopenia as well. Study Design/Method: Total of 4243 unrelated and random healthy individuals were used to the population study of HPA -1 to-17w polymorphism in Nanning area of China. and 7001 individuals from the China Marrow Donor Program were used to the population study of HLA-A, -B polymorphism at Nanning area. Based on the data of population studied above, the optimal size of platelet donor database was predicted, and which was to be set as the goal to design and establish the Platelet Donor Database with Known HLA, HPA Genotype in Nanning Area (Named with Nanning Area Platelet Donor Database with Known HLA, HPA Genotype). The HPA-1$17w and HLA-A,-B genotype of the donors in the database were detected by PCR-SSP, PCR-SSO respectively. Results/Finding: According to the population study of HPA -1 to -17w polymorphism (n=4243) and HLA-A,-B polymorphism (n=7001) in Nanning area, the following was calculated and derived: When the platelet donor database size was 283 donors, it was approximated 95% patients could find a HPA- Background/Case Studies: 2-mercaptoethanol (2ME) is a reducing reagent that can be used to treat plasma in order to distinguish IgM from IgG antibodies. To remove 2ME from treated plasma prior to antibody testing, it is common to dialyze plasma overnight (Method A). Ultrafiltration devices used for drug analysis can also be used for 2ME removal and same day testing (Method B). This study evaluates the two methods for statistical differences. Study Design/Method: Eleven blood samples with alloantibodies were selected for 2 methods of 2ME removal. Method A used 12kDA NMWL cellulose dialysis tubing and Method B used 30 kDA NMWL ultrafiltration devices (Centrifree Ultrafiltration Device with Ultracel YM-T, MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA) for 2ME removal. Specimens from both methods were titrated and tested for IgM and IgG ABO isohemaglutinin levels by manual tube testing. Confirmation of a previously identified alloantibody after treatment was also performed to ensure clinically significant antibodies were still detectable. Method A, 2mL treated plasma was dialyzed overnight in 1L phosphate buffered saline and then recovered from the tubing. Method B, 2ml treated plasma was added to 2 device sample chambers then spun in a fixed angle centrifuge for 30 minutes at 1,000g. In the ultrafiltration device, free plasma solutes were filtered across a cellulose membrane and filtered plasma was recovered from the sample chamber above the filter. Doubling dilutions were performed for each analyte and tested in parallel by tube method. Determination of IgM ABO isohemagglutinin levels was achieved after a 15-minute room temperature incubation, and IgG levels after a 15minute 37-degree C incubation, four times automated wash, and anti-human globulin. The endpoint for titration was determined by the last tube with a 1 + reaction. For statistical analysis, the titration concentrations were normalized to the last tube dilution with a 1 + reaction. The differences between dialyzed and filtered plasma endpoints were used in a paired t-test for determination of significant difference. Results/Finding: There was no significant difference between methods for IgM (p=0.51) or IgG (p=0.78) ABO isohemaglutinin titers. The hypothesized mean difference = 0 has not been rejected at p=0.05. Previously identified alloantibodies were still detectable after 2ME treatment. Conclusion: Plasma samples treated with 2ME did not show a statistical difference between dialyzed or filtered plasma. The use of ultrafiltration devices allows same day testing with acceptable 2ME removal while maintaining immunoglobulins. Background/Case Studies: High titer antibodies coating cognate antigen are a rare cause of false-negatives in red blood cell (RBC) antigen phenotyping; an event referred to as "blocking phenomenon" or "blocked antigen phenomenon (BAP)."In hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn (HDFN), BAP can complicate the laboratory work-up as fetal phenotype helps confirm the cause of hemolysis. Treating cord RBCs with ethylene glycine arginine (EGA) will remove BAP and maintain expression of most antigens, except K. Only 2 cases of HDFN with BAP by K antibody have been published, despite 10% of reported HDFN involving anti-K. In both cases, chloroquine diphosphate (CDP) was used to resolve BAP, but was effective in only one. In a published comparison of elution methods, CDP failed to remove RBC coating antibodies 6 times more frequently than heat elution. Further, given the efficacy and greater applicability of EGA, our laboratory no longer maintains an inventory of CDP. We report a case of severe HDFN with BAP due to anti-K where we used modified gentle heat elution to remove BAP. Case Report: A 36-year-old multiparous female presented at 33 weeks with a pregnancy complicated by high-titer K antibodies and ultrasound evidence of fetal anemia. A cesarean section was performed with emergent postdelivery neonatal exchange transfusion for severe HDFN. Test results on the pre-exchange neonatal blood specimens were typical of those found in HDFN. However, initial neonatal RBC phenotyping for K antigen was negative. Study Design/Method: Serologic tests were done using standard procedures. A modified gentle heat elution method with equal parts packed RBCs and 6% albumin heated at 45°C for 30 minutes was used to dissociate suspected blocking K antibodies from RBCs. Repeat K phenotyping was performed after 5-minute room temperature incubation. Confirmatory genotyping was performed by a reference laboratory using the BioArray platform (Immucor Inc., Norcross GA). Results/Finding: The modified gentle heat elution procedure resulted in successful removal of BAP by anti-K while preserving RBC K antigen for typing (Table 1) . Genotyping confirmed neonatal RBCs to be K antigen positive. Conclusion: Although infrequently considered, heat elution is useful for BAP in rare situations. It is simple, more frequently effective than CDP at removing RBC coating antibodies and involves readily available supplies. Our modified gentle heat elution mitigated decrease of antigen expression and effectively removed BAP to allow for accurate K phenotyping. Providing Personalized Red Cell Units Using Next-Generation Sequencing: A Case Study Hongzhi Xu* 1 , Antonia Moore 2 and Menchu Ong 1 . 1 LSU Health Sciences Center, 2 University Hospital System Background/Case Studies: Molecular technologies are being increasingly used in transfusion medicine to predict phenotypes based on blood group genetics, especially when traditional serology assays have failed to accurately identify rare or complex antigens. In this report, we present a case with identification of antigen in Dombrock system using Next-generation sequencing (NGS). Study Design/Method: The patient's clinical symptoms and laboratory findings including blood bank laboratory workup were studied. Results/Finding: The patient was a 44 years old male with past medical history of sickle cell anemia (Hemoglobin SC disease) complicated by bilateral hip avascular necrosis and acute chest syndrome requiring full red blood cell (RBC) exchange transfusion. He has history of multiple transfusions. Besides several historical anti-E, anti-Fy a antibodies, the patient was found to have an antibody to a high prevalence antigen in the Dombrock system, resembling anti-Holley antibody. However, samples submitted for red cell genotyping using microarray-based ID Core XT(Grifols) indicated that the patient had genotype of Holley antigen. Since anti-Holley antibodies may be induced by partial Holley antigen on RBC surface, NGS was performed to further characterize this particular antigen. No mutations were detected in the NGS study, which suggested that the antibody initially identified was less likely an anti-Holley antibody. The clinical significance of this unknown antibody was later assessed using a monocyte monolayer assay (MMA). The result indicated the antibody was clinically insignificant. RBC units were then issued accordingly. Conclusion: In the present study, a possible anti-Holley antibody suggested by traditional antibody panel study could not be confirmed or rule out by traditional microarray-based RBC genotyping methods. By using NGS technology, the molecular profile of the antigen-in-question was determined and a clinical decision was able to make based on the result. This case highlights the value of NGS in transfusion service by offering a more comprehensive evaluation of genetic variations, thus providing "personalized" RBC units for the recipient. Research on Correlation between the Irregular Antibody Screening Positive and the Ineffective Transfusion Yanhua Jin*, Huili Chai, Ying Yu, Xin Tong and Zhao Liu. The First Hospital of Harbin Background/Case Studies: Repeated blood transfusion, due to the differences in allogeneic antigen system, can stimulate the body to produce the same type of immune response, and antibodies to exogenous erythrocytes, resulting in ineffective red blood cell transfusion. It is an important reason for the inefficacy of red blood cell transfusion that some irregular antibodies cannot be detected in the application of routine pretransfusion detection methods. The detection rate of irregular antibodies in the normal population was 0.3% $ 2%, and the positive rate was 38% when the method was sensitive. Study Design/Method: 1500 cases of blood transfusion were collected. There were 816 males and 684 females, aged 0-82 years. There were ABO and Rh(D) homologous blood transfusions, in accordance with blood transfusion indications, and cross matching with blood in all medical records. Compared with the value of the hemoglobin before blood transfusion, it didn't rise to the expected value, which was re-examined within 24 hours after infusion of red blood cell preparations, and eliminating blood loss, blood dilution and other reasons, and no clinical signs of hemolytic transfusion reaction, namely as the ineffective blood transfusion. Using enhanced detection methods to carry out irregular antibody identification for patients with the ineffective blood transfusion: Background/Case Studies: Blood group chimerism is a rare phenomenon occurring either congenital or acquired, and few cases are described by literature. Since these cases do not present major clinical manifestations and are usually recognized at the time of blood group typing by mixed-field agglutination or discrepancies of cell typing /serum typing, it requires further evaluation to differentiate between ABO subgroups, cis-AB and blood group chimerism. Study Design/Method: We describe a case of female twins with ABO and Rh antigens chimerism detected during routine donor ABO typing and resolved through serologic and molecular studies. Results/Finding: Red blood cells (RBCs) mixed-field reaction was detected in a 21-year-old female donor typing routine. Double populations in gel column with anti-A and anti-B antibodies, while serum typing did not identify antibodies. She was asked for a new blood collection, together with her relatives. Father, mother and twins had new blood, serum and salive samples collected. Father typed B positive and mother A positive and none discrepancies detected. The twins blood typing reproduced the same results initially detected, salive studies showed presence of A and B substances secretion. Cis-AB and ABO subgroups hypothesis were excluded. Mother and father Rh fenotyping showed R 1 r typing. Twins fenotyping also demonstrated R 1 r, however double population for c antigen was detected. Twenty one short tandem repeat (STR) loci were evaluated on extracted DNA from twins´peripheral blood to confirm the blood group chimerism using Power-Plex Fusion PCR Amplification Kit (Promega Corporation, USA) and Chi-merMarker software (SoftGenetics). Of them, at least six loci (D16S539, D18S51, D2S1338, vWA, TPOX, D8S1179) showed one or two additional peaks besides, the main tall STR peaks, which were consistent with presence of chimerism. Conclusion: This is a rare case of permanent chimerism involving two blood systems with the presence of separate group O, AB, c + and c -RBCs. Further characterization of the discrepancy RBCs typing was achieved by STR molecular testing. Despite being a rare phenomenon, diagnostic suspicion is necessary in order to resolve typing discrepancies and to provide compatible blood for transfusion. Severe Results/Finding: Five therapeutic plasmapheresis sessions were performed with 5% albumin replacement, with improvement of the picture and hospital discharge. After 3 months, the patient had paresthesia in the lower limbs and additional treatment with 6 doses of IVIG was indicated. After the first dose of the blood product, the patient presented severe intravascular hemolysis, with marked anemia and reticulocytosis. In total, she received three doses of IVIG, however, in the following two doses the patient had mild anemia. Immunohematological studies showed that the patient was C-E-K-and had an anti-C in her serum. After the second and third doses of IVIG an anti-C, anti-E and auto anti-e were identified by gel test in LISS and Enzyme. Before administering the fourth dose of the immunoglobulin serological tests in the immunoglobulin were performed and showed the presence of an anti-E and an auto-IgG. Background/Case Studies: The MASPAT is a solid-phase based assay for platelet cross-matching to find the compatible donor platelets for transfusion, where patient serum is tested against several donor platelets. It's a rapid and simple way for this purpose and has been widely used in hospitals as well as in some blood service institutions. Flow cytometry has been used for screening of platelet antibodies in patient serum for a long time. Each of these two methods has respective advantages.We compare crossmatching results from flow cytometry assay and MASPAT to elucidate the pattern of difference between the two. Study Design/Method: 20 patients for compatible platelet transfusion are chosen randomly. Serum from each patient is tested against platelets from 6 ABO-compatible donors respectively (i.e., 120 patient-donor pairs in total) using flow cytometry assay, and the results are compared with those from MASPAT which is routinely used for cross-matching in Shanghai Blood Center. In flow cytometry assay, washed platelets are incubated with serum at room temperature and washed 3 times, following by incubation with FITC-labeled anti-human antibody. Platelets are washed again and subjected to flow cytometry, where samples with FITC median fluorescence intensity (MFI) in platelet gate greater than twice of that for negative control (healthy AB donor serum) are determined as positive. The MASPAT as well as the result elucidation is performed according to manufacturer's manual. Results/Finding: Among the 20 patient samples, only 7 have identical results for all 6 donors from both methods. In terms of patient-donor pairs, 30 out of 120 are inconsistent between the two methods (i.e., coincidence rate is 75%), where 20 is negative in flow cytometry but positive in MASPAT (Situation 1), while the rest 10 is just the contrary, that is, positive in flow cytometry but negative in MASPAT (Situation 2). In the 30 results with discrepancy, there are 8 with minor difference and 22 with significant difference, where 80% of Situation 2 have very remarkable difference. Despite the high inconsistency between the two methods, the final choice of compatible units is inconsistent for only 2 patients (10% of total). Conclusion: The comparison of two methods for platelet cross-matching demonstrates that MASPAT results in more positive predictions, some of which are probably due to non-specific adheresion. In fact, one patient treated with drugs in Situation 1 is proved to have no platelet antibodies using other tests. However, as sensitivity is more demanded than specificity in choosing compatible units, MASPAT is popular due to it's simplicity and rapidity. For all the discrepancies, further investigation should be carried out to elucidate which method is more accurate and useful both theoretically and clinically. -INTER- CEPT), Control units sampled D1-3 c The amustaline/GSH PR system for RBCs is not approved for commercial use. d Post shipment testing on D36-42 post-donation + and lactate were lower. Hct, Na + and glucose were similar between T and C on D35-38. T and C ATP was >2 mol/g Hb indicative of effective RBC viability, throughout storage. D35-38 hemolysis was comparable between T and C and after shipment (D36-42) the hemolysis was lower in T compared to C (Table 1) . Conclusion: Amustaline-GSH PR for RBC was successfully qualified at a regional blood center to support a large Phase 3 trial. All PR RBC components met the US criterion for hemolysis at end of storage and after shipment. All measured in vitro parameters of Amustaline-GSH RBCs indicated suitability for transfusion. Background/Case Studies: Human anelloviruses are the smallest in particle size, smallest in genome size, and least complex in genetic organization of all human pathogens. They establish a chronic persistent infection in infancy or early childhood and produce a constantly detectable load in plasma thereafter. Some studies suggest they are ubiquitous, present in >90% of the human population, and that immune surveillance is required to control the level of the virus load. Study Design/Method: Using a quantitative DNA PCR assay we recently developed that targets the most conserved region of the Anellovirus genome we examined viral loads in the plasma of HIV-negative blood donors and HIV carriers in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Results/Finding: For 53 blood donors, 51 were positive with an average load of 1.49 × 10 2 copies/mL of plasma, a median value of 80.5 copies/mL plasma, ranging from 0 to 1.87 × 10 3 copies/mL. For 376 HIV carriers, all were positive with an average of 6.4 × 10 4 copies/mL of plasma, a median value of 2.8 × 10 3 copies/mL of plasma, ranging from 4 to 1.8 × 10 7 copies/mL. Conclusion: These results validate the PCR assay that was developed and confirm that detectable viral loads of around 100-200 copies were present in >90% of blood donors surveyed. In addition, HIV infection appears to reset the Anellovirus load of the average carrier approximately 2 orders of magnitude higher. The broad range of loads (approx. 10 6 copies/mL) in HIV carriers is being investigated for correlates of immune and health status. Background/Case Studies: CD34 + cell dose is an extended predictor of post-transplant hematopoietic recovery. Delayed recoveries despite a sufficient number of CD34 + are common suggesting other factors play a role in the kinetics of this process. The effect of total nucleated cells (TNC) on the engraftment remains unclear and several studies have shown conflicting results. The objective of this study was to analyze the impact of TNC on the engraftment and on survival. Study Design/Method: A single-center analysis from January 2016 to December 2017 included 93 hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) procedures (53 autologous and 40 allogeneic) in 91 patients (Pts) (56% male and 44% female). The main reasons for HSCT were acute leukemia for allogeneic HSCT (n=30) and multiple myeloma for autologous HSCT (n=31). Haploidentical and cord-blood transplantation were excluded. The conditioning regimen prior to allogeneic HSCT was myeloablative (MA) in 19 Pts (48%) and non-myeloablative (NMA) in 21 (52%). The main source of stem cells was peripheral blood (97%). Results/Finding: The median TNC and CD34 + infused was 8.07 × 10 8 /Kg and 4.02 × 10 6 /Kg, respectively. In autologous HSCT, we found that higher TNC dose was correlated with faster neutrophil engraftment (p<0.001, Spearman correlation coefficient (ρ)=-0.524) but higher CD34 + cell doses did not have such effect. In allogeneic HSCT group, higher TNC dose was correlated with faster platelet engraftment (p<0.001, ρ=-0.754), either for MA (p=0.001, ρ=-0.737) and NMA group (p=0.001, ρ=-0.742), but CD34 + cell dose was not predictive of faster engraftment. In Pts receiving > 8x10 8 / Kg TNC we observed a shorter median time of neutrophil engraftment in the autologous group and a shorter time of platelet recovery in the allogeneic group (Table 1) . No statistical differences in survival outcomes were observed in any group regarding TNC dose and number of CD34+. Conclusion: In our series, a strong association between higher TNC cell dose and a shorter time of engraftment was observed. We could not demonstrate this effect with CD34 + cell dose. No impact on survival was observed with regards to the TNC and CD34 + cell dose. Background/Case Studies: West Nile virus (WNV) is a transfusion-transmissible virus. Northern hemisphere WNV lineages 1 and 2, primarily responsible for human disease, are not endemic in Australia although the less virulent WNV Kunjin strain is endemic in tropical northern regions. As Australia does not perform WNV donor screening there is a potential transfusion-transmission (TT) risk associated with donors returning from endemic/outbreak countries. To estimate this risk we have developed a probabilistic model with Monte Carlo simulation and applied it to EU and neighbouring countries for the 2017 WNV transmission season. Study Design/Method: The input parameters for each country were the probability of: 1) acquiring an asymptomatic WNV infection during the period of observation, derived from the number of reported WN fever (WNF) cases in that country and the ratio of symptomatic to asymptomatic infections (0.206, 95% CI:0.147-0.265); 2) a donor visiting each outbreak country during the period of observation, derived from the proportion of the Australian donor population visiting that country during the period of observation; 3) a returning donor donating while viraemic, based on the number of returning donors who donated within 2 weeks of leaving the outbreak country (0.172, 95% CI:0.0.095-0.249); 4) a donation being used for clinical Background/Case Studies: Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) is a potentially fatal complication of transfusion. In pre-clinical studies and several clinical studies, TRALI has been related to loss of product quality during red blood cell storage, called the "storage lesion". Donor characteristics, as for example age, genetics and sex influence this "storage lesion". We investigated the relation between donor characteristics and onset of TRALI. We hypothesized that donor sex, age and blood type is related to TRALI incidence. Study Design/Method: We performed a secondary analysis on the donor data from two cohort studies, which combine to one of the largest cohorts of TRALI patients to date. The first cohort consisted of a retrospective nested case control study in ICU patients, the second cohort consisted of a prospective case control study in cardiac surgery patients. Suspected TRALI was defined by using the consensus definition of ALI. We obtained donor sex, age and blood type from the national blood bank. We used kruskal-wallis testing to compare the number of transfused products and chisquare testing to compare proportions of TRALI patients and transfused control. To validate the external standard approach, three different external standard solutions were prepared (A, B and C) and tested using nine different chips in an experiment designed to evaluate the reproducibility of output results. The chip's left-hand side inlets were filled with standard A, while right-hand side inlets were filled with either standard A, B or C. The right/left flow rate ratios were used as the analytical output signal. RCC samples of different storage ages were analyzed using the external standard approach and compared with respect to their deformability. Results/Finding: Flow rates recorded for the left and right inlets were compared for each chip. The between-channels coefficient of variation (% C.V.) within the same chip was lower than 2 %, which demonstrates a high homogeneity in the channel mask used to fabricate PDMS chips. To evaluate the chip-to-chip manufacturing reproducibility, left inlets on each chip were filled standard A, and flow rates were compared. The % C.V. was < 5 %, and was deemed within the acceptable range. Finally, there were no significant differences in recorded flow rates for standards A, B or C, and the overall flow rate for the external standard solution was determined at 0.270 ± 0.011 nL/s (% C.V. = 4%), which was similar to flow rates observed for RCC samples in a previous study. Conclusion: Microfluidic methods are believed to be suitable for precise and sensitive RBC deformability analysis. The development of an appropriate external standard approach can be used to address chip-to-chip variability, and the use of dye-doped carboxyl polystyrene microspheres has been found to be a reproducible method. Dexamethasone 8 mg (4 mg tablets x2) was also prescribed 12 hours prior to collection to donors without a history of eye disease. Complete blood counts were performed prior to mobilization, post-mobilization, post apheresis and of the granulocyte concentrate. The allogeneic blood donor criteria was used to qualify granulocyte donors. Statistical Analysis: Wilcoxson rank-sum tests were used to compare the distribution of the following parameters (age, weight, pre G-CSF wbc/granulocyte %/platelet count, post G-CSF wbc/platelet count, post-apheresis wbc/platelet count, donor TBV, TBV processed, run time, collection preference, granulocyte concentrate volume/total wbc/hematocrit/ANC, collection efficiency 2, % increase of wbc/ granulocyte post G-CSF, and % decrease of wbc/platelet post -apheresis) between the BMI groups. All statistical analysis were performed using R version 3.4.3. All statistical tests used a significance of 5% and no adjustments were made for multiple testing. Results/Finding: Of the 96 first time female donors, 37 (38.5%) had a normal BMI, 37(38.5%) were overweight and 22 (23%) were obese. There were only four parameters found to be of statistical significance: weight (p < 0.0001), donor's total blood volume (p<0.0001), granulocyte concentrate volume ( p<0.0001) and wbc content of the granulocyte concentrate (p=0.03). The hematocrit of the majority (95.8%) of the granulocytes concentrates collected from all three BMI groups were <5%. All of the other parameters listed above were not statistically significant. Conclusion: It is concluded that increased BMI does not correlate with a greater increase in WBC after mobilization with G-CSF + /-dexamethasone in first time female donors. The increased BMI does correlate with a larger volume of granulocyte concentrate collected with an increased total white cell content. We found that the fully automated apheresis machine allowed us to minimize red cell contamination while optimizing granulocyte collection. The data analyses is to be extended to male donors as well as repeat female/male donors to confirm our findings. HIV donors based on antibody specificity and donor age or gender, and recommend a donor management strategy. Study Design/Method: This study was a retrospective cohort study of 1133 repeat adult volunteer allogeneic blood donors with electronic donation histories at a large community blood center. Donor birthdate, gender, donation dates, antibody screen result, and antibody specificities were obtained via electronic query of donations occurring between January 1, 2000 and June 30, 2017. Antibodies were categorized as persistent, recurrent, or evanescent based on antibody screen result history. Mean time to antibody evanescence was calculated and group means were compared using a t-test or ANOVA. A p-value of less than 0.05 was considered a significant difference. Results/Finding: There was no significant difference between the mean time to antibody evanescence when comparing donor gender, age, or number of antibody specificities. Donors over age 45 were significantly less likely to have evanescent antibodies compared to younger donors (p=0.023). Mean time to antibody evanescence was significantly longer for antibodies specific for Kell blood group system antigens compared to those directed against Rh, Kidd, Duffy and MNS blood group system antigens (p<0.01). Among donors with antibody evanescence, the mean time to evanescence was 748 days with a mean persistence of 322 days, suggesting the average donor antibody in the evanescent group became undetectable between 11 and 25 months following the initial positive donation. However, twenty percent of donors with positive antibody screens did not have a repeat positive donation. Donors with at least two positive donations had a mean time to evanescence of 1393 days. The results of this study suggest younger donors are more likely to result a negative antibody screen on a subsequent donation compared to donors over 45 years old. The data suggest a possible initial deferral of 3 years for donors with two consecutive positive antibody screens, with a more aggressive deferral period for older donors or those with antibodies directed against antigens in the Kell system. Six of the platelets crossmatched had HLA types and were positive for an antigen to which the patient had an HLA antibody. Therefore, the platelets should have been incompatible. Given the high PRA MFI, the platelet crossmatch results were repeated using plasma diluted 1:2 and 1:3 to explore if prozone phenomena could be observed. Results/Finding: Platelet crossmatch results using plasma diluted 1:2 yielded reactivity with 3 of 10 platelets. One of the incompatible platelets was positive for B58 and B62 and the patient MFI for those antigens was approximately 2,500 and 11,000 respectively. A second incompatible platelet was positive for B27 and B50 and the MFI was approximately 6,000 and 16,000 respectively. Platelet crossmatch results using plasma diluted 1:3 yielded reactivity with one more platelet (4 of 10). The incompatible platelet resulting from the additional dilution was positive for the B49 antigen. The patient B49 antibody MFI was approximately 17,500. Three of the compatible platelets using the plasma diluted 1:3 diluted were positive for the A2 antigen, two were positive for the B44 antigen and one was positive for the B60 antigen. The antibody MFI results to these antibodies were approximately 2000, 10,000 and 11,000 respectively showing that some antibodies were not detected with normal or diluted plasma regardless of the MFI. Conclusion: In this example, platelet crossmatch using solid phase methodology showed both low sensitivity and prozone effect. Background/Case Studies: The Panther system is a fully automated platform for nucleic acid amplification testing, used in blood screening (Grifols) and diagnostics (Hologic). The assays (e.g. for HIV, HCV, HBV, ZIKV) are typically performed on plasma, with a 0.5 mL volume assayed, and 95% limit of detection (LOD) is as low as 4 IU/mL. In cases where viral load in plasma and blood compartments is expected to be very low and adequate sample volume is available, we sought to determine whether testing of multiple 0.5 mL replicates (reps), which the system can be programmed to perform automatically using 5 mL input samples, could further enhance sensitivity of detection. Study Design/Method: As a proof of concept that replicate testing could detect very low viral loads, we used 1) the Aptima HIV-1 Quant Assay to test plasma from elite controller (antibody-positive, NAT-negative) blood donors and ART-suppressed HIV-infected individuals, and 2) the Aptima or Procleix Zika Virus assay to test EDTA plasma and lysed whole blood (WB) from ZIKV-infected blood donors followed longitudinally up to 1 year after index donation. HIV samples (10 or 25 mL each) were tested in 18 or 45 reps, and ZIKV plasma (5 mL each) or lysed WB (4 mL each) samples were tested in 8 or 2 reps, respectively. A total of 64 platelet crossmatches were performed using an SDP sample taken prior to PI treatment, inclusive of all patient samples, and all crossmatches were repeated using a post-PI treatment sample. Reaction strength at crossmatch (graded as "+" strong positive, "w+" weak positive and "0" negative) was compared between the original, non-PI treated sample and a post PI treatment sample of the same donor unit. ABO of SDP was not a consideration as only reaction strength at crossmatch was being compared. Platelet antibody screen testing had previously been done on the 14 patient samples; 2 were positive for HLA antibody only, 8 were positive for both HLA and platelet antibody and 4 were negative. Both serum and plasma patient samples were included in the 14 used for testing. Results/Finding: 6 of the 14 patient samples had a change in their crossmatch reactivity. Of the 6 samples showing a change, 3 had HLA/Platelet antibody, 2 had HLA antibody only and 1 sample was antibody negative. A decrease in reactivity strength was seen in 9 out of 64 (14.1%) of the pathogen reduced sample crossmatches, with 5 of the reactions becoming negative (7.8%). 1 crossmatch reaction (1.5%) increased in strength. (AABB, 2017 ). In the current study, the TBS was tested for room temperature shipping of WB donations, apheresis products and blood sample tubes. Study Design/Method: To mimic freshly collected products, WB collection bags (Reveos LR, TerumoBCT) were filled with 523 ml 0.9% saline at T=30°C. Additionally, apheresis platelet concentrates (PC), plasma bags (TRIMA collection set, TerumoBCT), and blood sample tubes were filled with 170 ml, 250 ml and 3 ml of 0.9% saline at 20-24°C, respectively. Monitoring probes were inserted inside the saline-filled bags to record temperature profiles. Either one or eight Reveos WB units were packed in TBS with solid-phase T=22°C PCM (Cryopak). For apheresis products, one single-(1 PC + 1 plasma) and four double-platelet donations (8 PC + 4 plasmas) were used as minimal and maximal loads, and were both tested for maximal shipping delays. A single blood sample tube was packed in TBS to represent a limiting condition. All TBS configurations were exposed to extreme winter (T=-35°C) and summer (T=40°C) conditions for up to 24h (n=3) in designed experiments. Results/Finding: The TBS uses T=22°C PCM to allow rapid cooling of blood products (Δt = 30 to 48 min) and to maintain internal temperature of one to eight Reveos WB donations between 18-24°C for 8.2h ± 0.5h and >24h under extreme external temperatures. The use of PCM allows both minimal and maximal apheresis donation products to stay within their acceptable holding temperature range (20-24°C) for 3h and 19h when exposed to extreme winter and summer conditions, respectively. Finally, blood tubes exposed to the same external temperature conditions maintain internal temperatures between 18°C and 25°C for 6.5h and 18.5h, respectively. Conclusion: The VIP box and PCM allow the thermoregulation box system to be used for extended shipping periods under extreme temperature conditions. Because of its increased internal volume, the box can accept more products, at the expense of additional PCM and an increased total weight. In conclusion, this thermoregulation box system was designed to use combinations of PCM to meet specific requirements regarding packaging and transport of blood products, especially in winter conditions. Determination of %SO 2 in More Than 1300 Fresh Erythrocyte Concentrates by Resonance Raman Spectroscopy Herbert G. Korsten 1 , Tatsuro Yoshida 2 and Dirk de Korte* 1,3 . 1 Department of Product and Process Development, Sanquin Blood Bank, 2 New Health Sciences Inc., 3 Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory Background/Case Studies: In support of research on improving erythrocyte storage under low oxygen tension (pO 2 ), haemoglobin oxygen saturation (%SO 2 ) in fresh erythrocyte concentrates (RCCs) was measured non-invasively Study Design/Method: A blinded frozen 32-member bacterial test panel was prepared. The panel comprised three levels of each bacterial species so that, after reconstitution in platelet samples, one member was below the limit of detection (LOD) of the PGD assay ("low"), one member was at or slightly above the LOD of the assay ("mid"), and one was above the LOD of the PGD assay ("high" Background/Case Studies: Platelet apheresis using Platelet-Additive Solution (PAS) allows for collection of platelets with reduced plasma content and diversion of the plasma to create a plasma component for transfusion. In addition to the benefit of collecting a "free" plasma component, the reduced incidence of plasma-associated reactions has been reported in the Background/Case Studies: The present study was conducted to find out the prevalence of viral hepatitis markers among blood donors deferred on the basis of a history of hepatitis related risk factors, compare it with the prevalence in accepted blood donors and assess the impact of such a deferral on blood safety. Knowing the natural history of HBV and HCV asymptomatic window period, chronic carrier stage, genetic diversity, mutants and cryptic/occult infection and that during this the potential of transmission through blood transfusion remains. Therefore need to garner data as evidence to support for deferral for elicitable history of presence risk factors related to development of hepatitis in the interest of blood safety was realized. Study Design/Method: Observational study recruiting 1000 deferred blood donors deferred on the basis of a history of hepatitis related risk factors and carried out serology and ID-NAT for hepatitis B and hepatitis C after obtaining written informed consent. History of jaundice, tattooing/ body piercings, surgery/dental extraction, contact with persons having hepatitis, high risk behavior, blood transfusions/transplantations or immunoglobulin administration. The study participation was voluntary non-random. The study protocol was approved by the ethics committee of the institute. Results/Finding: 18 (1.8%) out of 100 deferred blood donors were reactive on ELISA, 8 were reactive for HBsAg; whereas 10 for anti-HCV antibodies. 17 (1.7%) were initial reactive on ID-NAT, 15 discriminated on further testing; 8 for HBV, 7 for HCV. 9 were reactive for hepatitis B, out of which 7 were concordant positive for HBsAg ELISA and NAT, whereas one was NAT yield and one was sero-yield. Out of 9 hepatitis B reactive, 7 (77.8%) had history of jaundice, one (11.1%) had history of tattooing and one (11.1%) had history of high risk behavior. 12 were hepatitis C reactive, out of which 5 were concordant anti-HCV ELISA and NAT reactive, while 5 were sero yield and two were NAT yield. Out of the 12 deferred donors reactive for hepatitis C majority had history of jaundice (83.3%) followed by high risk behavior (16.3%). Total 23 donors had viral markers for either hepatitis B or hepatitis C in the present study. Therefore the potential of deferral on a history of hepatitis related risk factors could interdict about 2-3 HBV and/or HCV reactive blood donors from entering the quarantine blood supply per 100 donors. Correlations between ATP and DPG were poor for all additives except for PAG3M, suggesting a rewiring of the Rapoport-Luebering shunt specific to this additive. In addition, deaminated purines such as hypoxanthine were predictive of hemolysis and morphological alterations. Guanosine supplementation in PAGGSM and PAG3M fueled ATP generation by feeding into non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathway via phosphoribolysis. Decreased urate to hypoxanthine ratios were observed in alkaline additives, suggetive of decreased generation of urate from purine degradation, and as a consequence less formation of hydrogen peroxide by xanthine oxidase activity. Despite the many benefits observed in purine and redox metabolism, alkaline additives did not prevent accumulation of free fatty acids and oxidized byproducts, opening a window for future alkaline formulations including (lipophilic) antioxidants. Conclusion: Alkalinization via different strategies (replacement of chloride anions with either high bicarbonate, high citrate/phosphate or membrane impermeant gluconate) results in different metabolic outcomes, in all cases superior to current canonical additives. The results from our metabolic analyses indicate superior preserving of RBC in PAG3M over the other alkaline additives and, in general, of alkaline additives over non-alkaline SAGM and PAGGSM. In particular, DPG and ATP generation and maintenance, as well as purine metabolism and redox homeostasis (especially the PPP and its non-oxidative phase byproducts) were favorable in PAG3M and other alkaline additives in comparison to SAGM and PAGGSM. However, the observed metabolic benefits do not extend to the prevention of storageinduced fatty acid release and lipid oxidation. Results from the present study provide additional insights in the metabolic benefits of alkaline storage additives and will likely guide the formulation of novel additives in the near future. In Positive  ID  Positive  ID  Positive  ID  Positive  ID  Positive   Andean-north  5  22  9  8  45  8  6  10  1  2  Andean-orient  10  46  11  10  53  13  3  10  1  5  Caribbean  1  5  0  2  11  2  0  2  0  2  Andean-north  7  32  4  4  48  5  4  6  0  4  Pacific  2  35  6  5  55  9  0  6  2  5  Andean-south  0  11  1  3  10  4  1  3  1  1  National  25  151  31  32  222  41  14  37  5  19 * ID = indeterminated Background/Case Studies: Transmission of bacteria by transfusion remains a significant problem in transfusion medicine. Disinfection and cleaning of venipuncture site, hand, and surface were the key components to successful control the hygiene of blood bank, including cord blood bank. Besides bacterial enumeration, monitoring of bacterial pathogens should be performed to reduce the risk of transfusion-associated septic, referring to Hygienic Standard for Disinfection in Hospitals of China (GB15982-2012). Conventional methods, such as culture and biochemical methods were inconvenient because of the time and experience they require to identify the presence of pathogenic bacteria.The aim of this study was to develop an isothermal real-time Recombinase-Aided Amplification (RT-RAA) assay to improving the efficiency of bacterial pathogen identification. Study Design/Method: In this study, we designed specific primers and fluorescence probes in conserved region of four pathogenic bacteria (Staphylococcus aureus, Salmonella spp., hemolytic streptococcus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa) for RT-RAA assay. DNA of the four baceria was isolated from aliquots of culture mediums with an efficient extraction method. The RAA reaction was conducted at a constant temperature of 37-39°C by simulating in vivo DNA recombination for 15 min. To evaluate the sensitivity of this method, each of the four pathogenic bacteria cultures of various concentrations from 1 × 10 6 to 10 CFU/mL in inoculated surface samples was amplified and detected by RT-RAA. Assay specificity was validated by using other 10 bacteria and 5 fungi. The performance of the RT-RAA assay was further evaluated with skin and surface samples taken by sterile swabs during blood collection and production to obtain a microbiological profile of the manufacturing condition. All results were compared with culture and biochemical method as standard. Results/Finding: Combined with fluorescent probes for real-time detection, the RAA assay could reliably detect as few as 100 CFU/mL in pure culture of the four pathogenic bacteria at a constant temperature (37-39°C) within 15 min, up to 10-fold more sensitive than that of conventional method. The assay was successfully used to amplify and detect DNA of samples taken from skin and surface, and was no cross-reaction with other tested bacteria and fungi. Sixty samples (thirty skin samples and 30 surface samples) were respectively analyzed with conventional culture method and RT-RAA assay. In 30 skin samples, two samples taken from hands of staff were detected for Staphylococcus aureus with RT-RAA assay, which were consistent with the conventional method. Conclusion: The data presented in our study indicated that RT-RAA can provide rapid, sensitive and specific detection of pathogen in skin and surface samples without prior isolation and characterization of the bacteria by conventional methods. The RT-RAA assay can serve as an alternative tool to culture and biochemical method for the screening of pathogenic bacteria. The results obtained by the RT-RAA and plate counts based on culture method showed that environment and skin surface in areas of blood collection and production is potentially contaminated with pathogen and could be a potential risk for the blood products. Background/Case Studies: Syphilis is a bacterial infection caused by Treponema pallidum which could be transmitted by sexual contact, blood transfusion or during pregnancy from a mother to her fetus. Since 1985 in Colombia is mandatory the screening for T. pallidum in all blood donations. Several studies demonstrated that active syphilis infections potentiate transmission of HIV and is related to a higher probability of coinfection with other pathogens potentially transmitted by blood. The aim of this study was to identify syphilis coinfection with virus associated to sexual transmission in Colombian blood donations Study Design/Method: A retrospective analysis of blood donations reactive for syphilis, HIV, HCV, HBV and HTLV collected from January 2015 to December 2016 by the 82 certified blood banks at the national level was made. The confirmatory test for HIV, HCV, and HTLV was immunoblot.  Background/Case Studies: The hemolysis rate at the end of storage represents an important quality marker for red cell concentrates (RCC). Most regulatory agencies have established clear standards for RCC hemolysis at the end of storage; however, there is no recommendation for a specific methodology regarding supernatant hemoglobin (Hb) measurements. 1 In a recent study, significant differences were observed for RCC hemolysis rates depending on the analytical approach that was used. The aim of this study was to compare RCC hemolysis results obtained with different methods. Study Design/Method: In the first part of the study, SAGM-RCC (n=42) were stored for 42 days before proceeding to supernatant Hb measurement under three conditions. For Series 1, a CBC was performed with a hematology analyzer (Beckman Coulter Ac-T™5diff ) on RCC samples prior to centrifugation (1430xg, 25 min). Sample tubes from Series 2 were centrifuged as for Series 1, but CBC measurements were omitted. For Series 3, samples were subjected to hard spin conditions for a shorter time (5000xg, 7 min). For each Series, supernatants were filtered (0.22 μm) and Hb was measured using the HemoCue Plasma/Low Hb system, following the manufacturer's recommendations. In the second part of the study, supernatants were obtained from RCC (n=16) and blood samples (n=5), as mentioned for Series 2. Then, the Harboe method (UV-vis wavelengths were 415, 380 and 450 nm, 1-cm optical path length) and the HemoCue system were both used to measure free Hb and calculate hemolysis rates. Results/Finding: The average Hb value calculated for Series 1 (0.24 ± 0.16 g/dL) was slightly higher than Series 2 (0.18 ± 0.12 g/dL) and Series 3 (0.18 ± 0.13 g/dL). As a result, average hemolysis for Series 1 was 0.58 ± 0.39%, compared to 0.43 ± 0.29% and 0.45 ± 0.31% for Series 2 and 3, respectively. More importantly, only 81% of Series 1 RCC would have met Canadian standards for end-storage hemolysis ( < 0.8%), compared to 93% for Series 2 and Series 3. For the Harboe vs. HemoCue study, Hb average values were 0.17 ± 0.15 g/dL and 0.22 ± 0.18 g/dL, respectively. From these measurements, the average hemolysis with HemoCue was 27% higher than Harboe for the same samples. The results suggest that the use of two separate tubes would be recommended to avoid an unfavorable bias in hemolysis calculations. The Harboe -Hemocue PLHb comparative study suggests that there is no significant evidence that the user-friendly Hemocue system, calibrated using the International Council for the Standardization in Hematology reference method, would not be an appropriate measurement method for free hemoglobin. Alexandra Tejada-Strop 1 , Mohammad Zafrullah 1 , Saleem Kamili 1 , Susan L. Stramer 2 and Michael Purdy* 1 . 1 CDC, 2 American Red Cross Background/Case Studies: Recently, there has been an increase in the number of hepatitis A outbreaks in the United States. Although the presence of HAV RNA in blood donors is known to be very low, HAV antibody prevalence in this population is unknown. Study Design/Method: Samples from 5001 US blood donors collected primarily in the Midwestern US in 2015 were tested for the presence of HAV IgG and IgM antibodies using chemiluminescent microparticles immunoassays on the Architect platform (Abbott Laboratories). Results/Finding: The overall prevalence of anti-HAV IgG was 60%. Previous studies using samples collected as part of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) showed a decrease in prevalence from 33% to 24% (1988 to 2012); however, NHANES includes individuals ≥5 years of age and older. Only one specimen was anti-HAV IgM positive (and confirmed) for a prevalence of 0.02%. This specimen was HAV RNA negative. Anti-HAV IgG prevalence among donors 16 to 19 years was 67%, dropped to 54% among donors aged 40 to 49 years and increased to 70% among donors aged 80 to 93 years. The high prevalence among 16 to 19 year olds is likely due to infant vaccination recommendations initiated in 1999. No difference was seen by sex with overall anti-HAV IgG prevalence of 61% and 60% for males and females, respectively. Among the five states with the highest number of donors only anti-HAV IgG prevalence in Missouri (65%) was significantly higher than the prevalence in Illinois (52%) and Kentucky (59%) (P < 0.01). No difference was seen in anti-HAV IgG prevalence among individuals who previously tested positive for either anti-HEV IgM or IgG, indicating no correlation between anti-HAV IgG status and anti-HEV antibody status. Conclusion: This study demonstrates the overall high rates of anti-HAV IgG in US blood donors and the low risk of HAV transfusion transmission. The low risk is further supported by the HAV vaccination policies developed since 1999. Defining Background/Case Studies: It is a goal for the staff of the American Rare Donor Program (ARDP) to ensure that all requests for rare blood from the 90 ARDP members are filled. It is important to know about requests for rare blood that were not filled. Each unfilled request for rare blood may delay a patient's treatment or may result in continued low hemoglobin which may put the patient at risk. The process is that the ARDP members request rare units. ARDP staff sends two faxes to ARDP members with registered rare donors of the type requested. If not completely successful in finding units, an email requesting recruitment is sent to domestic ARDP members with registered donors. If the request is still unfilled, the next step would be a consultation with the facility and the ARDP's Medical Directors. Finally, after meeting the FDA IND requirements for an international request (patient and physician permissions, autologous donation not possible, no or insufficient eligible siblings, and MMA results), a request is made to the WHO International Rare Donor Panel. Study Design/Method: A review of the unfilled requests from 2017 was performed. Evaluation criteria included phenotype, ABO/Rh, number of units requested and the patient's diagnosis. Results/Finding: In researching both the requests and responses, there were 24 unfilled requests of 787 total requests 2017 (3%). The diagnosis in 11 of the patients was sickle cell disease (SCD), 14 were for phenotypes more prevalent in donors of African descent. The number of units requested ranged from 1-6 units with an average of 2 per order. Of the 24 unfilled requests, 2 were cancelled within an average of 2 days. Fourteen of 24 requests (57%) were for O positive units. Five of the requests were for RH allele-matched units and 2 were for IgA-deficient plasma. Five (20.8%) of the 24 unfilled orders were for units negative for multiple antigens and thirteen (54%) for antigens of very high prevalence. Conclusion: The ARDP members collaborate very effectively in filling request for rare blood with a 97% fill rate, but 3% (24 requests) were not filled in 2017. Monitoring unfilled requests is important to determine the reasons these requests remained unfilled and the patient population that is impacted. The data collected indicated that 41.7 % of unfilled requests were for patients with SCD. The majority (87.5 %) of these requests were associated with cancelled orders or patients being discharged without transfusion. The impact of the lack of transfusion to the patients' lives are unknown. These findings prompted the ARDP to take action to develop and implement an outcome form to collect information regarding the impact of unfilled orders. Should Blood Banks Return to Nontreponemal Testing (NT)? David Binks 1 and Louis M. Katz* 2 . 1 Arlington Scientific, Inc., 2 Americas Blood Centers Background/Case Studies: Treponemal tests (T) remain positive for life after treatment of syphilis (S) and during late S that is not transfusion transmissible. NT revert to negative with successful treatment and in many late infections. With the need for approximately 32,000 units of blood each day in the USA and less than 10% of the population donating, unnecessary deferral of donors due to persisting reactivity from remote S who are noninfectious, identified by T followed by NT (the "reverse algorithm") needs to be reassessed. This reverse algorithm replaced the traditional diagnostic algorithm (NT testing confirmed by T) in transfusion medicine after automation of only T. With the introduction of an automated NT method, the use of the traditional algorithm can be evaluated as the preferred method of screening blood donors to reduce deferrals from individuals that have had S in the past but are no longer infectious. Study Design/Method: 3757 serum and plasma specimens with concordant T and NT results were tested with the ASI Evolution Automated RPR Analyzer using ASI RPR Carbon Antigen. Samples were sourced from blood banks and plasma centers. Samples also included 250 nonreactive S specimens and 30 reactive S specimens from pregnant women, and 143 clinically diagnosed reactive specimens, both treated and untreated, from public health departments and tested by RPR and T to establish expected results. The reactive samples ranged in reactivity from minimal 1:1 titers to 1:64 titers by RPR. The ages of the patients ranged in age from 15 to 72 years old and included both male and female. Results/Finding: Of the 3757 specimens, 1629 were reactive and 2128 specimens were nonreactive by RPR. The ASI Evolution identified 1629 of the 1629 reactive specimens as reactive and 2128 of the 2128 nonreactive specimens as nonreactive. There was a 100% positive agreement with a 95%CI of 98.77 -100% and 100% negative agreement with a 95% CI of 99.83 -100%. Conclusion: For years NT was the standard for screening blood donors. NT was displaced by automated T. With the availability of an automated NT analyzer and the data presented, NT testing should be reevaluated as the primary donor screening test to decrease deferral rates due to noninfectious S with persistently reactive T. Use of CD34 + Cell Count in a Reference Blood Bank as External Quality Assessment of a Regional Flow Cytometry Unit Marc Sorigué* 1 , Cristian Morales-Indiano 2 , Eva Alonso 3 , Marta Peña 4 , Sara Vergara 5 , Minerva Raya 5 , Rosa Linio 3 , Laura Medina 6 , Carme Azqueta 6 , Jordi Juncà 1 , Sergi Querol 6 and Joan Ramon Grifols 3 . Background/Case Studies: Our flow cytometry unit determines peripheral blood CD34 + cell count before hematopoietic progenitor cell-apheresis (HPC-A). When pre-apheresis CD34 + cell count is > 5 cells/μL the procedure is started. This same pre-apheresis sample is analyzed afterwards in the stem cell processing laboratory. Although we have used the UKNEQAS CD34 + stem cell enumeration programme as external quality assessment in the past, we set out to assess the correlation between the CD34 + cell count obtained in our flow cytometry unit and that obtained in the processing laboratory in order to replace the current external quality assessment as a costsaving measure, particularly given that the processing laboratory also subscribes to the UKNEQAS CD34 + stem cell enumeration programme. Study Design/Method: We retrospectively analyzed the correlation between the CD34 + cell count obtained in our unit and the stem cell processing laboratory from January 2017 until April 2018. The flow cytometer, antibodies and erythrocyte lysis solution used in our unit are: FC500 with CXP software, anti-CD45-FITC (clone J33) / anti-CD34 PE (clone 581), all from Beckman Coulter, and PharmLyse (Becton-Dickinson). The flow cytometer, antibodies and erythrocyte lysis solution used in the stem cell processing laboratory are: FACSCalibur with Cellquest software (Becton-Dickinson), anti-CD45-FITC (clone J33) / anti-CD34 PE (clone 8G12), from Beckman-Coulter / 7-AADD (Becton-Dikinson) and QuicklysisTM. For absolute cell count, out unit uses Flow Count Fluorospheres (Beckman-Coulter) and the processing laboratory Perfect Count Microspheres (Cytognos). The passing-bablok regression was used to compare the two laboratories and a Bland-Altman plot was used to assess the agreement between them. Finally, Spearman's rank correlation coefficient was used to determine the correlation between the results obtained in our flow cytometry unit and in the stem cell processing laboratory. Results/Finding: The Passing-Bablok regression did not show a deviation from linearity between the two laboratories (y=-1,05 + 0,86x; p=0,44) and the Bland-Altman analysis did not show a bias in CD34 + cell count. Spearman's correlation coefficient was 0.951 (95% confidence interval: 0.916 -components. Diversion of the first 10-40 mL of whole blood post-venipuncture is now an established practice and an effective strategy in mitigating the incidence of skin flora related blood product contamination. Previous data suggest that additional sample diversion beyond current measures would further reduce bacterial load to the blood collection/separation system but this has not been extensively studied. This study sought to evaluate the bacterial content of blood fractions collected from a contaminated source (injection site) up to an additional 100 mL beyond today's practice (diversion volume of $30 mL) through use of a simple in vitro model system. Study Design/Method: Model System Preparation -A model diversion line, similar to that of Wagner et al (Transfusion 2000) , was constructed using the inlet line from a double needle apheresis platelet collection kit (4R2355, Fresenius Kabi). Luer locks were added in place of the sample diversion pouch and at approx.10 cm past the second Y-site. Test Article Preparation and Evaluation -The injection site of a sterile bag containing whole blood (ACD-A anticoagulant) was inoculated with a minimum of 5E7 CFU from an overnight S. epidermis culture. Upon drying, the needle from the model diversion line was inserted through the inoculated area. Aliquots of blood were taken via syringes from the luer positioned in place of the diversion pouch (3, 10 mL aliquots). After the 3 rd sample, the line was sealed at the first Y-site and aliquots were then drawn through the second luer (20, 5 mL aliquots). Bacteria concentration in each fraction was determined using the pour plate method, and the total CFU in each fraction calculated. Results/Finding: Overall results for total CFU in each fraction show continued reduction of bacterial load with increasing volume collected/diverted (n=5). Data for the first 30 mL collected from the diversion line are consistent with those published by Wagner et al, showing that most bacteria are removed in the first fractions collected. Subsequent fractions show continued reduction of bacterial load resulting in an additional 1-3 log decrease from the initial 30 mL diversion. Conclusion: This study illustrates that bacterial load reduction continues to occur past the standard diversion volume of 30 mL in our in vitro model diversion system. Further studies are required to evaluate the potential benefits of an extended diversion model in an online collection system, and its practical application and impact. Bacterial Growth in Leukoreduced Red Cells during and Following a 3 Hour Temperature Excursion Towards Room Temperature Stephen Wagner*, Cheryl Hapip and Lenora A. Abel. American Red Cross Holland Lab Background/Case Studies: It is not uncommon that power interruptions occur at blood centers and hospitals during extreme weather events. When backup generators fail, refrigerated blood warms beyond 6˚C. This study evaluates the levels of several bacteria in refrigerated leukodepleted RBCs during and following a 3-hour temperature excursion towards room temperature. Study Design/Method: Two ABO, Rh identical leukoreduced RBCs were prepared from whole blood collected from consenting donors (Fenwal, Round Lake). The units were pooled, mixed and inoculated on Day 7 with 10-100 CFU/mL (for quantitative plate assay) of P. fluorescens, Y. enterocolita, S. marcescens, S. liquefaciens, E. coli and S. aureus. The pool was divided equally into two units and stored at 1-6˚C. On Day 14 one of the two units (TEST) was placed on the laboratory bench (20-24˚C) for 3 hours, surface temperature recorded, and then returned to 1-6˚C storage. The other unit was maintained in refrigerated storage (control detect the presence of anti-HIV-1 and anti-HIV-2 antibodies along with HIV-1 p24 antigen, and in blood screening, this reduces the risk of transfusion related HIV infection. This increased sensitivity coupled with high specificity minimizes donor deferrals and provides the public with a safer blood supply. In addition, continued pressures on laboratory operations demand that assays perform on platforms capable of increased walk away time and enhanced automation in areas of reagent management, retest options, and commodity/waste management. To address the need for such screening assays, an improved automated assay for the detection of anti-HIV-1/2 antibodies and HIV-1 p24 antigen has been developed. Study Design/Method: The performance of an immunoassay for the detection of anti-HIV-1/2 antibodies and HIV-1 p24 antigen was evaluated on a next generation automated platform, Abbott Alinity s. Reproducibility was assessed over 5 days using positive samples. Specificity was evaluated on samples obtained from random blood and plasmapheresis donors. Sensitivity was evaluated using presumed positive samples for HIV-1, HIV-2 and HIV-1 p24 antigen and HIV-1 viral isolates. Seroconversion sensitivity was evaluated with 20 commercial seroconversion panels. Analytical sensitivity was evaluated using the WHO 1 st International Standard for HIV-1 p24 Antigen, 90/636. Results/Finding: Within-Laboratory imprecision was less than 4.5% CV for positive samples over 5 days. The specificity was 99.92% (16,981/16,994) . Sensitivity was 100% for anti-HIV-1 (1,016/1,016), 100% for anti-HIV-2 (232/232) and 100% for HIV-1 antigen positive samples (35/35). Sensitivity was 100% for 53 antigen positive viral isolate samples. Seroconversion sensitivity was better than the licensed comparator assay with 42 reactive samples detected with the Alinity s assay and 24 reactive samples detected by the comparator assay. Analytical sensitivity ranged from 0.80 IU/ml to 0.83 IU/ml. These results indicate that the new automated Alinity s HIV Ag/Ab Combo assay provided acceptable performance in specificity, sensitivity and precision. Also, the assay provided better seroconversion sensitivity than the licensed comparator assay. Background/Case Studies: In order to provide plasma for component therapy, whole blood goes through a series of manufacturing steps and is visually inspected for acceptability. A standard guide for performing visual inspection would be beneficial to improve consistency. There is no regulatory standard for plasma color or red blood cell (RBC) concentration in plasma, so it was necessary to first determine an acceptable cut-off which could then be used to develop a visual inspection aid. Study Design/Method: To determine the best cut-off between acceptable vs unacceptable plasma, a visual representation was created. Plasma units of similar size and color were injected with RBCs in incremental volumes ranging from 0.05mL -0.50mL. The plasma units were laid out in increasing RBC concentration. Techs and management inspected the plasma units to determine a common visual cut-off. The RBC concentration in the plasma was calculated based on whole blood with an average hematocrit of 45% (5 × 10 9 RBCs/mL),then doubled for a unit of packed RBCs to determine the number of RBCs injected into the units. Once the cut-off was determined, photos were taken of the plasma units and used to create a visual inspection aid. Results/Finding: The visual cut-off determined by techs and management fell between the 0.10mL and 0.15mL injected plasma units. Only one source was found that mentions a limitation of RBCs in plasma. It is a specification of <4 × 10 6 RBCs/mL in the package insert for our pathogen reduction technology for platelets, so it was used as a guideline. The 0.1mL unit was determined to have a concentration of 3.3 × 10 6 RBCs/mL. A visual inspection aid was produced and implemented in the component laboratory. During the initial use, 650 plasma units were inspected with 98% of plasma passing the visual inspection. The aid was then made available to the two hospital blood banks. Since the initial implementation, a flaw in our calculation was discovered and our visual cut-off has now been determined to have a concentration of 2.2 × 10 6 RBCs/mL. A survey indicated that 84% of respondents use the inspection aid, 87% believe that it is helpful in determining plasma acceptability and 92% expressed opinions on how the aid improved plasma inspection. It was found useful in training and gives new techs confidence to make inspection decisions. Conclusion: Development and implementation of a plasma visual inspection aid provided consistency in visual inspection across multiple areas that handle plasma prior to transfusion. The aid is accepted as a simple and useful tool by techs and management. results. An additional 7 requests were for RBC units lacking other high prevalence antigens including Co a , Lu b , Di b , Jo a , Jr a , PPIP K and Ko. Even a request for RBCs for an AB + recipient, universal recipient based on ABO/Rh, was unable to be filled due to the rarity of the type (e-U-). One request was for a C-E-K-Fy(a-) RHCE allele match (RHCE*ce733G/RHCE*ce733G). Conclusion: Some requests for RBC units of rare type are submitted specifically for liquid units only. Of these, 92% were filled with liquid units. Of those unable to be filled with liquid units, 6 out of the 15 involved the U antigen and an additional 7 involved other high prevalence antigens. For these requests, frozen rare units were utilized to fill the gap when liquid units were not available. Without those frozen units, patients would not have received their transfusion in a timely manner. Because of potential delays associated with recruiting and collecting a rare donor, ARDP advises centers who request liquid units only to review the patients clinical course to determine if transfusion is eminently required and to reconsider if frozen units should be requested. Using Automation to Solve Challenges in a High-Throughput Production Laboratory Steve Beeler* 1 , Scott Jones 1 , Rachel Beddard 2 , Diane Hoover 3 and K.S. Bailey 4 . 1 QualTex Laboratories, 2 BioBridge Global, 3 Abbott, 4 Abbott Transfusion Medicine Background/Case Studies: Blood screening laboratories face many challenges in today's changing healthcare environment including inefficient manual processes, shortening turn-around time requirements, staffing shortages, and budget constraints. Advances in automation technology can help alleviate these challenges. The aim of this study was to implement an automated laboratory track system in our production laboratory for the testing of whole blood and source plasma donor samples. Metrics were collected to determine the effects of implementing an automated track laboratory system on the number of samples processed per shift, the time to perform pre-analytical processing, turn-around time for sample testing, quality related issues, and the number of employees required to perform testing. Study Design/Method: Implementation of automation in the production laboratory occurred in two phases. Phase one was the integration of middleware across all primary testing platforms. Phase two involved fully automating the pre-analytical part of our testing process by installing a Track Automation System. This system included automation of the input of samples into the system, centrifugation, decapping, resealing and storage of sample tubes. Some analytical work was also automated by placing chemistry and immunoassay analyzers directly on the track system. Results/Finding: The table below shows data pre-and post-implementation of the track automation system. Comparing metrics collected both pre-and post-implementation of the track automation system showed a 76% increase in the number of samples processed per shift post-implementation. There was also a 40% decrease in the average time for the pre-analytical processing of samples and the average turn-around time (time from when samples were received to when results were sent to the client) decreased by two hours. The number of corrected reports generated decreased by 17% and the number of full-time employees required to perform pre-analytical processing of samples decreased by 22%. Conclusion: Automation of donor testing in the production laboratory enabled us to test more samples (76% increase) with less people (22% decrease) and we were able to report the results in a shorter period of time (2 hours faster on average). Removal of manual error prone processes allowed for a 17% reduction in corrected reports. Now we can test more samples more efficiently and in a timelier manner without additional staff. Stability of Factor I and VIII in Pathogen Inactivated (PI) Plasma over Two Years in Comparison to Untreated Plasma Marco Amato* 1 and Walter Nussbaumer 2 . 1 University Hospital, 2 Univ Hospital Innsbruck Background/Case Studies: Due to the long possible storage time of frozen plasma (one to two years) additional safety steps have been implemented in the production process before release for transfusion is approved. Quarantine storage including retesting the donor for HIV, HBV and HCV after 4 month is one routinely used method with an at least 4 month delay in a possible release process. Opposite, pathogen inactivation (PI) techniques allow an immediate use of the treated units after two to three days. However, PI means additional manipulation of the plasma with possible loss of coagulation factors during production and subsequent storage. Therefore, we studied influence of PI (Methylene Blue and Intercept) on factor I and VIII, the most common used quality parameters for frozen plasma, and compared the results with untreated stored plasma in a paired system. Study Design/Method: We produced 6 pools of 5 plasma units each and split each pool into three arms: Intercept treated plasma (IN), Methylene Blue (MB) treated plasma and untreated plasma (UP). Plasma was frozen immediately after inactivation and Fibrinogen and factor VIII was analyzed after 2 month, 1 year and 2 years. We report here our findings for factor loss, differences between both PI methods and between PI treated units However, difference was also not significant, but IN levels were significantly lower than UP (p < 0.05). Stability of both factors within the groups, defined as changes of values between 2 month and 2 years of freezing was given for Fibrinogen (p = 0.729) and factor VIII (p = 0.279) between the three arms. Conclusion: Manipulation of plasma, as caused by pathogen inactivation technique, leads to significant loss of factor I and VIII compared with not manipulated plasma. However, additional loss during the frozen state over 2 years is similar in all three arms and therefore not increased by PI techniques. Taking into account, that mean volume of an MB treated plasma is 250 mL whereas IN treated plasma is about 200 mL, the total content of both factors in the transfused unit is significantly higher in the MB group which can influence the total number of transfused units per patient. A Method for Cryopreserving Reagent Red Blood Cells Using −80°C Storage Conditions Tracey R. Turner* 1 and Jason P. Acker 1,2 . 1 Centre for Innovation, Canadian Blood Services, 2 Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta Background/Case Studies: Rare red cell concentrates (RCCs) are frequently cryopreserved and stored at ≤-65°C using the high glycerol method with slow freezing rates. Prior to transfusion, thawed units must have the glycerol removed. This methodology can also be applied to reagent red blood cells (RBCs) to provide cells for testing purposes, avoiding liquid nitrogen storage. However, the deglycerolization process for RCCs requires extensive washing steps which when translated to a small 1 mL model are very labour intensive. The purpose of this study is to evaluate a simplified wash process to provide a more practical deglycerolization method for reagent or small volume RBC cryopreservation. Study Design/Method: A RCC was glycerolized to a final concentration of 40% with supernatant reduction pre and post glycerolization. Glycerolized RBCs were aliquoted in 1 mL volumes into cryovials that were placed into a -80°C freezer for a minimum of 48 hours. Prior to deglycerolization the samples were thawed in a 37°C water bath. Two deglycerolization processes were performed (n=9/process). Process 1 involved four wash steps (12% and 1.6% Saline, 1.6% Saline, and two washes in 0.9% Saline/0.2% Dextrose). Process 2 involved three wash steps achieved by increasing the volume of the wash solutions, eliminating the fourth wash step. All RBC samples were suspended in AS-3 post processing. Hemoglobin loss, hemoglobin recovery and glycerol concentration were determined. Additional samples were deglycerolized and tested for RBC hemolysis after 24, 48, and 72 hours of hypothermic storage (n=6/test point/process). Results/Finding: Both processes yielded approximately 1 mL of deglycerolized RBCs with hematocrits of 47 ± 2% with < 1% glycerol concentrations in all samples. Hemoglobin recovery for Process 2 was 96 ± 3% which was comparable to Process 1 at 97 ± 3% (p=0.5). RBCs, post deglycerolization, stored at 1 to 6˚C for 24, 48 and 72 hours prepared using Process 1 had hemolysis of 0.47 ± 0.13%, 0.47 ± 0.04%, and 0.62 ± 0.18%, respectively. Process 2 RBCs had hemolysis of 0.32 ± 0.04%, 0.43 ± 0.06%, and 0.38 ± 0.05% at the same time points. When comparing Process 1 and 2 samples stored at corresponding time points there was a significant difference observed at 24 and 72 hours (p<0.05). Conclusion: A simplified 3-step deglycerolization method can successfully deglycerolize small volumes of RBCs. When RBCs are suspended in AS-3 post processing these samples can be stored hypothermically for 3 days increasing their utility as reagent cells or for small volume transfusions. .001 (4 cases were confirmed by neutralization, one case was identified as non-confirmable); HCV (EIA and NAT) = 0.001; HIV (EIA and NAT)=0.002 (one case was confirmed and two cases were identified as indeterminate); HTLV=0.0008; Serologic test for Syphilis=0.001 (two cases were confirmed as positive); and WNV=0.001. The U.S. Army Rangers account for 3,479 screening events, or roughly 46% of all U.S. Army prescreening events. The 75th Ranger Regiment has elected to screen only the blood type O donors for eligibility into this program. This program has identified a 97% accuracy in the selfreported blood type O of the U.S. Army Rangers. 3% of U.S. Army Rangers presenting for this program as blood type O were non-blood group O. Conclusion: The screening of "Walking Blood Bank" donors before deployment can mitigate the risk of transfusion-transmitted diseases, as well as provide identification of any non-blood group O donors. Screening Walking blood bank donors informs Military medical leaders on the front lines and assists in decisions regarding donor eligibility for providing fresh whole blood (FWB) in far-forward and austere environments. Use of FWB at the Point of Injury (POI) can decrease the mortality of "potentially survivable" casualties. The screening of potential donors extends the availability of whole blood on the battlefield. Background/Case Studies: Project focused on improvements to whole blood component manufacturing, including process standardization to increase plasma yield, reduce waste, and streamline workflow by introducing the CompoMat G5 into production. Study Design/Method: A comprehensive G5 evaluation was conducted by the Biologics Manufacturing team. Process included completion of SOPs, training, qualifications, validations, implementation and optimization of equipment. Data was collected using OneBlood's proprietary BECS, RSA, and reviewed after evaluation and 4 months post implementation. Plasma volumes were compared between manual and G5 processing. Throughput was measured by timing operators to unload a completed unit and reload a new spun WB unit on the same G5. Multiple G5s were unloaded/reloaded for one hour. To allow for a realistic, full day labor load; throughput calculation was reduced to 75% of the measured data. Data evaluated 4 months post implementation was collected from two sites. Results/Finding: G5 was customized to use select detectors and tested with 3 bag systems from two vendors and seven component processes (hard/soft spins, source leukocytes, pediatric RBCs, AS5 RBCs, secondary process for single Cryo, single RDPs/FSC). Plasma yields increased overall with G5 compared to manual process. Yields varied by process type, centrifugation speed, and site. Using HAE RCPL bag system, initial soft spin and secondary hard spin for RDPs, a 4.8% increase in plasma yield was achieved. Using HAE RC2D bag system, initial hard spin and secondary hard spin (after freeze/thaw) for Cryo, plasma initially increased by 1.6% during the evaluation and by 6% after 4 month post implementation at both sites. Average throughput depended on average time an operator unloaded and reloaded a unit on a G5. Time variance observed depended on bag system complexity, practice, and number of G5s used. Two operators at 75% workload on 3 G5s produced highest throughput (81/hour) for secondary processes (single Cryo and single RDP). 69 units were produced per hour on hard spin process (RC2D bag type). Two operators and six G5s produced Background/Case Studies: Plateletpheresis units must be stored 20-24 C to maintain viability during storage making the units susceptible to bacterial growth that could be life-threatening or fatal for a patient. Since 2003 all units collected at our center were cultured before release to identify a unit possibly dangerous for the transfusion recipient. This review of that process illustrates its effectiveness and gives insight into the risk of the culture and release process. Study Design/Method: Product records were reviewed from June, 2003 when the culturing process was initiated, through March of 2018. Plateletpheresis units were held for 24 hours, then sampled and cultured using a rapid microbiological test system for aerobic culture. Cultures were held throughout the 5 day life of the products. Units were available to the inventory after culture. An immediate notification system by FAX was in place to every customer for notification of unit recalls as needed. A notice was sent immediately when a sample became positive. The culture bottles giving a positive report were sent to a nearby university microbiology laboratory for Gram stain, subculture and identification. Positives were evaluated as to probable source. If Gram stain and subculture were negative or no growth, the culture was classified as false positive. Notification of the culture outcome was then sent to customers if the shipped unit was reported as transfused. False positives were 0.11% of the units cultured, while true positives were 0.011% of the total. Waived cultures were exceptional release units that were required for immediate transfusion for a designated patient. Not Tested units were a failure in the process and were discarded. All positive culture products triggered actions that included discard from blood center inventory and 14 of the true positive collections were discarded by this process, or notifications to the facilities receiving the positive culture products instructing them to return or discard the units. These facilities were notified again regarding the outcome of further testing on units that were reported as transfused. Of the 24 collections found to be true culture positive, 10 were already shipped. Five of the collections were returned and discarded. Five of the positive culture units were transfused. No notifications of transfusion reactions were received for any of the units. Conclusion: Notifications to the 10 receiving facilities of true positives were successful and acknowledged. Of the 24 true positives, 19 were likely skin or environmental contaminants, and this group contained the transfused units. The more significant donor-associated positive cultures (5 collections) were all intercepted prior to shipment and removed from inventory. Culturing of plateletpheresis units after a 24 hour hold in conjunction with a robust communication system connecting to facilities receiving shipped blood components was an effective deterrent to bacterial contamination adverse events for the last 15 years. Enhanced culture techniques may add additional assurance to prevention of adverse events from contaminated platelets. Water and Salt Intake before Blood Donation Reduces Vasovagal Reactions in Both Genders, All Age Groups for Whole Blood Donors Pierre Robillard* and Yves Grégoire. Héma-Québec Background/Case Studies: A new donor hemovigilance system was implemented on October 2015 capturing all severities of vasovagal reactions (VVR). A program to have donors drink water and eat salted snacks before donating was implemented on June 11 th 2017. The aim of this study is to measure the effect of the water/salted snack distribution on rates of VVR with and without loss of consciousness (LOC). Study Design/Method: Pre-implementation (PRE) was the 9-month period prior to implementation (11 Sep 2016 -10 Jun 2017) and post-implementation (POST) as the 9-month period following implementation (11 Jun 2017-10 Mar 2018). In PRE, donors were informed at registration to drink water before donating. Amount was not mentioned and supply varied from an empty glass the donor had to fill at a water tank, a 200-ml juice box, a 500ml water bottle or nothing at all. Snacks were offered after donation and were mostly sugary. On June 11 th 2017 a program was introduced at all collection sites with leaflets, posters and pictograms to inform donors on importance of drinking water and eating salted snacks. They were given a 500-ml water bottle and a bag of salted pretzels at arrival, were told to drink the whole bottle before donating and to eat the pretzels. Check points monitored consumption at registration, interview and venipuncture. Reinforcement was made at all check points if the bottle was not empty. All severities of VVR were reported on a standardized form. Rates of all VVR and VVR-LOC were calculated per 100 donations. PRE-POST rates were compared using chi-square tests. Results/Finding: There was a significant reduction in the number (PRE:11,609; POST:9873) and rates of all VVRs (see table) . Risk reduction was 13.8% (95%CI:11.5-16.0) for VVR and 11.4% (95%CI:1.5-20.3) for VVR-LOC. Conclusion: Capturing all severities of VVRs allows for quick evaluation of prevention program. For whole blood donors having a structured program for water and salted snacks delivery at blood collection sites significantly reduces the incidence of VVRs for both sexes and all age groups. It improves donor safety, making donation experience better and more likely for donors to return. this reactivity may mask clinically significant underlying alloantibodies. DTT treatment is a well-documented remedy for this interference; however, some blood banks have struggled to bring this protocol in-house and instead, send the test out to a reference lab at a great expense in terms of cost and turn-around time (TAT). The purpose of this study was to compare the inhouse DTT protocol versus the reference lab protocol in terms of cost and turn-around time. Study Design/Method: We retrospectively reviewed all blood bank patients on daratumumab therapy from February 2016 to April 2018. We included all patients on which a type and screen was performed during the study period. We collected the following data: age, sex, date daratumumab started, total number of type and screens, location of testing and TAT of testing. Patients that had no type and screens performed were excluded from the analysis. From February 2016 to December 2017, all type and screen samples were sent to our reference laboratory for testing, at a cost of approximately $325 per test. From January 2018 to current, we use our validated DTT in-house protocol for testing, at a cost of approximately $28 dollars per test (including tech time and reagent cost). Results/Finding: During the study-period, we were notified about 72 daratumumab patients that might require transfusion. We excluded 17 patients from the analysis due to lack of a type and screen ordered, leaving 55 patients for analysis. Samples were sent to the reference lab 124 times and were tested in house 28 times. The average TAT for the reference lab was 19 hours and 25 minutes compared to our in-house TAT of 5 hours and 9 minutes. This equates to a time savings of 14 hours and 16 minutes on average. In total, we spent approximately $38,350 for 117 samples tested at the reference lab versus $785 for in-house testing of 27 samples. Conclusion: After validating our in-house DTT protocol, we significantly decreased our TAT for type and screens on our daratumumab patient population. Additionally, we experienced significant cost savings by bringing the DTT testing in-house as compared to sending samples out to a reference laboratory. By bringing this testing in-house, we also significantly reduced the time to blood availability for this patient population. Significant Injuries Associated with Vasovagal Reactions Mary J. Townsend*, Hany Kamel and Marjorie D. Bravo. Blood Systems, Inc. Background/Case Studies: While blood donation is relatively safe, adverse events occur due to the insertion of a large bore needle, the physiologic response to the loss of roughly 500 ml of blood and/or the underlying condition of the donor. The most common adverse event (AE), vasovagal reactions (VVR), usually resolves spontaneously or with minimal medical intervention. When loss of consciousness (LOC) accompanies VVR, the donor may fall risking injury. While most falls do not result in significant injury (SI), some injuries require further medical intervention. Study Design/Method: We analyzed allogeneic apheresis and WB needlein collections between 6/1/2016 to 12/31/2017 (19 months). Vasovagal events were identified and any cases reported to have significant injuries based on classification by Medical Director consistent with AABB definitions were reported. Significant injury categories include closed head injuries/ concussions, dental injuries, fractures, lacerations and motor vehicle accidents (MVA). Record review was performed on reported cases of closed head injury to include those diagnosed as having concussion. Rates of significant injuries were calculated per 10,000 needle-in (NI) allogeneic donations overall and as a proportion of LOC events. Results/Finding: There were 1,319,625 allogeneic needle-in donations with 14,970 VVR (rate 113.4/10,000 NI), including 2834 LOC (rate 21.5/10,000 NI) reactions. There were 50 SI events from 45 donations with rate of 0.34/10,000 NI donations or 1.6/10,000 LOC reactions. The highest rates were for laceration (0.15/10,000 NI) and concussion (0.10/10,000 NI) and the lowest was MVA (0.02/10,000 NI). Females suffered more injuries than males (0.5/10,000 and 0.2,10,000 respectively, p=0.0093; young donors (<23 yo) had more injuries than older donors (>23 yo) (0.9/10,000 and 0.2/10,000, respectively, p<0.0001); and first time donors had more injuries than repeat donors (0.7/10,000 and 0.3/10,000 respectively, p<0.001). There were no significant differences in injuries between young male and young female donors or between older male and older female donors. Forty-three of 45 donors sought further medical intervention for their injury; exceptions were a donor with a small laceration and a donor with a broken tooth who was lost to follow-up. Conclusion: Significant injuries are very rare events and were associated with LOC in the cases recorded. Significant injuries almost always require further medical intervention with resulting incurred costs. Continued donor vigilance and safety measures to prevent LOC will help mitigate these potentially avoidable events. A Specificity Study of the Verax PGDprime® Test for Bacteria in Platelets Lisa Shinefeld*, Nancy Best, Miranda Williams, Erica Boudreau, Adam Lousararian, Mark Lamkin and Remo Vallejo. Verax Biomedical Inc. Background/Case Studies: The PGDprime rapid test for bacteria in platelets was developed as an improvement of the PGD® test currently used as a Safety Measure for platelet transfusion. It was designed to provide a simpler test procedure compared to the current product. The current PGD test employs intact IgG capture and detector antibodies and as such is vulnerable to a very low rate of false positive results with samples containing high levels of heterophile antibodies and rheumatoid factor. The new PGDprime test incorporates intact IgG for capture and F(ab') 2 fragments for detector antibodies for 5 out of 6 test lines, as well as a more stringent sample preparation regime, to further reduce the already low false positive (FP) rate. Study Design/Method: The specificity of the new test was evaluated in a limited study testing 624 culture-negative individual platelet units or pools of various types. Sample types included leukocyte-reduced apheresis platelets in plasma, leukocyte-reduced whole blood derived platelets (LR-WBDP), leukocyte-reduced whole blood derived platelet pools (LR Pools, pre-storage or post-storage), non-leukocyte-reduced whole blood derived platelets (NLR-WBDP), post-storage pools of non-leukocyte-reduced whole blood derived platelets (NLR Pools) and leukocytereduced apheresis platelets in platelet additive solution (PAS). In addition, 51 frozen plasma samples accumulated over >6 years from platelet units that had been identified as false positive by users of the current PGD test were run on the new test to determine its susceptibility to such samples. Results Background/Case Studies: Blood transfusion in many parts of the world relies on serologic screening for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) to prevent transfusion transmitted HBV infection. Sensitive HBsAg assays must be capable of coping with a wide range of mutants without compromising specificity. In addition, continued pressures on laboratory operations demand that assays perform on platforms capable of increased walk away time and enhanced automation in areas of reagent management, retest options, and commodity/waste management. To address the need for such screening assays, an improved automated assay for the detection of HBsAg has been developed. Study Design/Method: The performance of a new automated chemiluminescence immunoassay for the detection and confirmation of HBsAg was evaluated on a next generation automated platform, Abbott Alinity s. Reproducibility was assessed over 5 days. Sensitivity was evaluated using 432 known positive samples, 20 commercially available seroconversion panels, the 3 rd WHO International HBsAg standard 12/226, 52 HBsAg mutants, and 16 HBsAg genotyped specimens (A through H). Specificity was evaluated on samples obtained from random blood and plasmapheresis donors. Results/Finding: Within Laboratory imprecision was less than 5% CV for positive samples over 5 days of testing. The overall specificity was 99.96% (16,985/16,991) . Sensitivity was 100% for presumed HBsAg positive samples (432/432) and all genotypes (16/16). 100% of the mutants were detected vs 79% for the licensed comparator assay. Seroconversion detection was comparable to the licensed comparator assay with 100 reactive samples detected with the Alinity s assay and 99 reactive samples detected by the comparator assay. Analytical sensitivity ranged from 0.07 to 0.08 ng/ml. The Alinity s HBsAg Confirmatory Assay confirmed all positive HBsAg specimens, including 3 HBsAg mutant samples that were not confirmed by the licensed comparator HBsAg Confirmatory Assay. The new automated Alinity s HBsAg assay provided acceptable performance in precision, specificity, and sensitivity. The Alinity s assay demonstrated a gain in sensitivity over the licensed comparator assay by detection and confirmation of a wider range of mutants. Vasovagal Reaction to Blood Donation That Requires Medical Attention: Retrospective Study on the Possible Risk Factors Noorhayati Rahamat*, Avelina Ho and Reuben Vamadevan. Health Sciences Authority Background/Case Studies: Vasovagal severe reaction is classified as donors having severe symptoms, for example, prolonged recovery and fainting, convulsions and incontinence that require medical attention. Mild and moderate reactions accompanied by injuries are also included in this category. These donors are then referred to hospitals for further observation. In recent years, the number of severe reactions have been noticed to be on the rise. This unpleasant and undesirable trend can be alarming, especially when the adverse reaction causes a blood donor to be injured during falls. Fish Bone Diagram was used to identify the factors with the number of severe reaction. Age, gender, donation history and ethnicity were highlighted. This study aims to analyze the prevalence of severe reaction over the past 5 years and to find out the difference in severe reaction between the demographic variables-age (16-25/>25), donation history (first-time/repeat donors), gender (male/female) and ethnicity (Chinese/Malay/Indian/Others), with the number of severe reaction. Study Design/Method: Retrospective data were gathered from hemovigilance reports for all Whole Blood donation from January 2013 to October 2017. Out of a total number of 545,323 donations performed during that period, there were 14,725 reactions, of which, 73 cases were severe reactions that required medical attention. Descriptive analysis and inferential statistic using Chi square were used to find out the difference in the number of reaction in each demographic. The significance threshold was set at 0.05. Results/Finding: Incidence of total reaction stood at 14,725 (2.7%), of which the number of severe reactions requiring medical attention was 73 (0.5%). From hemovilgilance reports, there had been an increase in the percentage of severe reaction in 2017 as compared to 2013 (0.79% vs 0.22% respectively). The rate of severe reaction was higher among 16-25 age group when compared to the >25 age group (0.032% vs 0.016%, P < 0.001). More females experienced severe reaction than males (0.04% vs 0.009%, P = 0.45), while repeat donors had lesser severe reaction than first-time donors (0.016% vs 0.03%, P < 0.001). Indians had the highest number of severe reaction when compared against the Chinese, the Malays and other ethnic groups (0.051% vs 0.014% vs 0.027% vs 0.019% respectively, P=0.002). Despite the rising trend, all demographic variables were not found to be statistically significant to the number of severe reaction. Even so, there is still a need for good communication on the importance of proper rest and hydration before and after blood donation. Reinforcement of proper donor care from staff to donor needs to be addressed as well. Conclusion: Donors who had experienced severe reactions as a result of blood donation may have been on a rise. However, it showed no difference between the demographic variables and the number severe reaction. Nevertheless, donor safety is the quintessential factor of blood donation, and optimally targeted to minimize the rate of reaction. By recognizing these vulnerable cohorts of donors, donation staff can take extra measures to communicate pre, during and post donation advice to these groups. Staff would also be able to anticipate a reaction, hence by monitoring them closely. Background/Case Studies: Forming partnerships is an important strategy to promote blood donations and support a donor center's entire community. Donor centers should strive to engage meaningfully with the lesbian, gay, bi-sexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ) community while also complying with federal regulation deferring males whom have had sex with males (MSM) in the last 12 months. Our university LGBTQ group approached our campus-based donor center with the idea of hosting a blood drive to highlight current MSM donor regulations and provide others the opportunity to voice their opinion to the FDA. We worked with the group to organize a blood drive while also maintaining federal regulations for blood donation. To our knowledge, there have been no published reports of a donor center supporting an LGBTQ sponsored blood drive. Herein, we describe the development of our partnership and evaluation of its merits. Study Design/Method: The collaboration was initiated by the university LGBTQ group through email communication followed by in-person meetings to plan a blood drive. Prior to drive recruitment, donor center medical staff and the LGBTQ group leadership reviewed criteria on donor eligibility and the importance of product safety. Also, diversity and sensitivity education on donor self-identification guidelines were provided for donor collection staff. The LGBTQ group used fliers and social media to publicize the drive to its members. Members subsequently pledged to donate themselves (if eligible) or recruited others to donate (if personally ineligible). The group provided regulatory material on MSM donation to its members and recruitments prior to donation. On the day of the drive, the alliance set up their own table outside the donor center, where they provided information to interested participants about MSM regulations and the opportunity to sign a petition to the FDA. Results/Finding: The partnership resulted in successful implementation of a collaborative blood drive with the LGBTQ group which was repeated for a second year. In the first LGBTQ blood drive, 31 donations were collected the first day of the drive and 30 donations the second day. The second year LGBTQ blood drive was held on one day and 23 donations were collected. These values were comparable to average daily collections for 24 donations per month. Results/Finding: A total of 600 students were surveyed (males 43.5%, females 56.5%). Only 27% donated blood previously, with 48% of the donors donated only once. Half of the surveyed students thought they have enough knowledge on blood donation, with 93% and 85% reported social media and the university as the main sources for knowledge respectively. Education at school was reported by 60% of surveyed students, while influence of parents and peers was reported by 59% and 72% respectively. Personal morals such as altruism was reported by 80%. Awareness of blood bank location and blood drives was reported by 81% and 88% of SQU students and 36% and 49% of non-SQU students. There was a statistically significant difference in the motivating and discouraging factors toward blood donation between SQU and non-SQU students (table) . Conclusion: SQU students reported higher rates of motivating and lower rates of discouraging factors factors toward blood donation compared to non-SQU students. This reflects the influence of the increasing efforts to improve the knowledge on blood donation and recruitment among the students at SQU, through running a yearly competition between the colleges in blood donation. There is a need to extend these efforts to the society to improve awareness of blood donation. Distinct promotion strategies should be adopted to increased first time and repeated blood donation among the youth. Alternatives Background/Case Studies: The PGDprime test for bacteria in platelets is a lateral flow assay developed as an improvement of the PGD® test currently used as a Safety Measure for platelet transfusion. It simplifies the test procedure of the current product. Its robustness to sample matrix variations was challenged by testing negative and positive samples with various matrix conditions and components at levels higher and lower than the expected normal range for platelet samples. Study Design/Method: Platelet samples were produced with potential interferents at levels listed in the table below. These were tested using a Results/Finding: Within-Laboratory imprecision was less than 4.0% for positive samples over 5 days of testing. Clinical sensitivity was 100.00% (706/706). The specificity was 99.99% (15,864/15,866) on a blood donor population. The new automated Alinity s HTLV I/II assay provided specificity and sensitivity comparable to the licensed comparator assay. These results indicate that the new Alinity s automated HTLV I/II assay provided acceptable performance in specificity, sensitivity, and precision. Detection of Malaria DNA in a Malaria Antibody Non-Reactive Blood Donor: A Case Report Ramir Alcantara* and Hwee Huang Tan. Health Sciences Authority Blood Services Group Background/Case Studies: Transfusion Transmitted Malaria remains a rare but serious complication associated with blood transfusion in nonmalaria endemic countries like Singapore. Recent evidence suggests that the main risk of introducing malaria into the blood supply in most nonendemic countries are from donors who are previous residents of malaria endemic areas. These donors are considered "semi-immune" with low level parasitemia but are asymptomatic. Malaria antibody testing has been used in several non-endemic countries to identify these "semi-immune" blood donors to prevent transfusion transmitted malaria. Reported here is the detection of Malaria DNA by PCR in a Malaria antibody non-reactive donor who is a previous resident of a malaria endemic area. Study Design/Method: The donor is a 35 year old male from India who donated for the 1 st time in Singapore. He denied any history of malaria infection and informed the blood bank that his last visit to India was 9 months ago. The donor was allowed to donate and malaria antibody testing and PCR were performed in parallel to assess the malaria risk in the donor. Results/Finding: Results showed the malaria antibody test to be non-reactive but Plasmodium DNA using PCR was detected in the donor's sample. The sample was sent to the reference laboratory and Plasmodium vivax was identified. The donor's donation was discarded and was immediately contacted by a senior medical staff to inform him of the results. A new sample was collected one week after for repeat testing and showed the same results. Both donation and follow up samples were sent to another laboratory performing malaria antibody testing and showed the same non-reactive result using a different test kit. Results of the investigation are summarized in Table 1 . The donor was permanently deferred and referred to an infectious disease clinic for further evaluation and management. Conclusion: The case presented demonstrates that transfusion transmitted malaria can still occur in countries which only perform antibody testing to screen blood donors. If malaria PCR was not performed in parallel to the antibody testing, the donation from the donor would have been issued for use and may have transmitted malaria to patients requiring blood transfusion. Further studies are required to determine the incidence and significance of antibody non-reactive but PCR positive cases especially in nonendemic countries wherein a significant number of donors are previous residents of a malaria endemic area. Optimizing the Deglycerolization of Manually Glycerolized Red Blood Cells Using an Automated Cell Processor Audrey Laforce-Lavoie, Jessica Costanzo-Yanez, Marie-Joëlle De Grandmont, Marie-Claire Chevrier and Marc Cloutier*. Héma-Québec Background/Case Studies: Our inventory contains rare red blood cells (RBC) that were glycerolized using Meryman's manual method. Currently, these units are deglycerolized using the COBE 2991, which is outdated and will need to be replaced shortly. Although an automated cell processor was integrated into our activities for the glycerolization and deglycerolization of RBC, it has not yet been validated for the deglycerolization of manually glycerolized RBC units. This study aims at optimizing the deglycerolization of manually glycerolized units using an automated cell processor system. Since some units are still manually glycerolized in our current operations, the optimization also includes determination of the optimal age of the RBC units at the moment of freezing. Study Design/Method: Twenty manually glycerolized RBC units from our inventory, which had been frozen for approximately ten years, were thawed in a 37˚C water bath and deglycerolized using an automated cell processor system (ACP 215, Haemonetics) and suspended in AS-3. In a separate experiment, 30 additional RBC units were manually glycerolized 4, 7, 14, 21 or 28 days post-collection (n=6 per group). Units were frozen at −80˚C for 14 days. Units were then thawed and deglycerolized with the ACP 215. Finally, to improve recovery, deglycerolization after a centrifugation step was tested and compared to a deglycerolization process without centrifugation in a pool and-split experiment (n=10). For all tested conditions, RBC in vitro quality was assessed 24 hours after deglycerolization. Results/Finding: All 20 deglycerolized units tested met the criteria for hematocrit and sterility after 24 hours of storage. While hemolysis was still lower than what is typically obtained when units are deglycerolized with the COBE 2991, only 85% of the units met the criteria for hemolysis (<0.8 %) and hemoglobin ( ≥ 35g / unit). However, with the addition of a centrifugation step recovery could be improved by 9.25 % ± 2.22 %, while lowering the average hemolysis from 0.55 % ± 0.12 % to 0.35 % ± 0.06 %. The age of the units at the time of glycerolization had an influence on hemolysis upon deglycerolization. Indeed, hemolysis was significantly higher for units that were frozen 25 days after collection when compared to those frozen before 25 days. These results justified the need to evaluate the optimal post-collection timing for the units that are still being manually glycerolized at our institution. In this set of experiments, deglycerolized units complied with the standards for hematocrit, hemoglobin, hemolysis and sterility, as long as they were glycerolized and frozen no later than seven days postcollection. Conclusion: RBC units that were manually glycerolized, deglycerolized with the ACP 215 automated cell processor, suspended in AS-3 and stored for 24 hours, met in vitro quality standards for sterility and hematocrit. While standards for hemolysis were not met for every unit, it was vastly improved when compared to what is routinely obtained with the COBE 2991. The difficulty in reaching the standards for hemoglobin might be related to centrifuge volume limitations. Indeed, a centrifugation step to remove an excess of supernatant prior to deglycerolization with the ACP 215 seems to improve blood quality and red blood cell yield. Thus, the ACP-215 automated cell processor can be used to deglycerolize RBC units that were manually glycerolized. provides improved sensitivity and detection of HCV in the pre-seroconversion window, serological testing provides continued detection of HCV in infected individuals and individuals with resolved infections with no detectable HCV RNA. Blood and plasma centers require high throughput anti-HCV assays with high specificity and sensitivity to prevent unnecessary donor deferrals while maintaining the safety of the blood and plasma supply. Continued pressures on laboratory operations demand that assays perform on platforms capable of increased walk away time and enhanced automation in areas of reagent management, retest options, and commodity/waste management. To address the need for such screening assays, an improved automated assay for the detection of antibodies against HCV has been developed. Study Design/Method: The performance of an immunoassay for the detection of antibodies to HCV was evaluated on a next generation automated platform, Abbott Alinity s. Reproducibility was assessed over 5 days using anti-HCV positive samples. Specificity was evaluated on samples obtained from volunteer blood donors and plasmapheresis donors from the United States. Sensitivity was evaluated using 402 preselected anti-HCV positive and anti-HCV positive chronic infection samples and 22 seroconversion panels. Confirmation of repeatedly reactive samples was done using a testing algorithm consisting of the INNO-LIA™ HCV Score and a HCV Quantitative RNA assay. Results/Finding: Within-Laboratory imprecision was less than 5.0% CV for positive samples over 5 testing days. Clinical sensitivity was 100% (402/402) for the preselected specimens. Seroconversion sensitivity was better than the licensed comparator as evidenced by the new Anti-HCV assay identifying 4 earlier bleeds in the seroconversion panels. The specificity was 99.92% (16,975/16,989) for blood donor and plasmapheresis samples. These results indicate that the new automated Alinity s Anti-HCV assay provided acceptable performance in precision, specificity and sensitivity. Seroconversion sensitivity was improved in relation to the licensed comparator assay. Although there are currently no confirmed reports of the transmission of SARS-CoV from asymptomatic individuals, recent research data indicate that transfusiontransmitted SARS-CoV is at least theoretically possible. This study aimed to investigate the efficacy of the THERAFLEX MB-Plasma system to inactivate SARS-CoV in human plasma. The THERAFLEX MB-Plasma system (Macopharma) uses methylene blue (MB) in combination with visible light for reduction of pathogen infectivity in plasma. Study Design/Method: Leukodepleted plasma was prepared from whole blood using standard blood banking technology. Plasma units (n=2) were spiked with virus suspension (10% v/v). MB/light treatment was done according to the manufacturer's instructions using the Macotronic B2 illumination device. Samples were taken after spiking (load and hold sample) and after illumination with different light doses (30, 60, 90 and 120 (standard) J/cm2)). The titer of SARS-CoV (strain Frankfurt 1) was determined as tissue culture infective dose (TCID50) by endpoint titration on Vero E6 cells (ATCC CCL-22). Results/Finding: After spiking a SARS-CoV titer of 5.43 (bag no.1) and 5.55 (bag no. 2) log10 TCID50/mL was received in the plasma units. Already with the lowest tested light dose of 30 J/cm2 MERS-CoV was inactivated down to the detection limit of the system (2.37 log10 TCID50/mL), resulting in log10 reduction factors of ≥ 3.1 (bag no. 1) and ≥3.2 (bag no. 2). Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that the THERAFLEX MB-Plasma procedure is an effective technology to inactivate SARS-CoV in contaminated plasma units. Haemovigilance in Taicang District of Jiangsu Province of China Wenbiao Liang* 1 , Xiaofan Ye 1 , Jun Xu 2 , Weibin Tan 2 and Zhichao Chen 3 . 1 Jiangsu Province Blood Center, 2 Suzhou Blood Center, 3 Pass Medical Technology Company Ltd. (Guangdong) Background/Case Studies: Establishing a haemovigilance system that covers the entire transfusion chain is of importance to ensure the safety and supply of blood. In September 2017, such a pilot haemovigilance network based on cloud technics was built and operated in Jiangsu Province of China, this is the first wide area haemovigilance network(HWAN) of China. Study Design/Method: The HWAN software and a standardized transfusion database were developed under the unified standards to collect, control, share, exchange and analyze the data of transfusion chain by means of the application of the Middleware Technology combined with manual way. A mechanism of reporting, analyzing and interventing transfusion adverse events was established and operated. The warning information and disposal advice was issued and an efficient emergency response system was built through the SaaS services portal which connected the relevant participants within the scope of HWAN. Results/Finding: From September 1, 2017 and ends on March 31, 2018, Taicang Blood Transfusion Service issued 9486.5 units of blood components, in which were 5499.5 units of red cells, 235 units of platelets, 3248.5 units of total FFP and 503.5 units of cryoprecipitate; 3774 patients were transfused with 9162 units of blood components, thus 96.58% of blood components at pilot site have been traced from donor to recipient or vice versa. There were 11 donor complications among 6489 blood donations, 4 patients suffered allergic reactions and 138 adverse incidents of transfusion chain were reported or captured. Conclusion: An exemplary HWAN that covers the entire transfusion chain have been explored and works perfectly in Taicang district. This HV cloud is China's first regional HV network, which can realize bidirectional vein-to-vein monitoring and intervention of all activities in the whole blood transfusion chain, it's meaningful to practice this HWAN in China. Can Survey Responses to Online Motivational Interview Questions Enhance Blood Donation Intention? Christopher R. France* and Janis L. France. Ohio University Background/Case Studies: Motivational interviewing can be effective in enhancing blood donor retention but implementation may be costly. To address this economic challenge, we conducted two studies to examine the impact of motivational interview content on donation intention when delivered as an online survey. Study Design/Method: In study one, 3,883 respondents (52.2% female; mean age 35.69 years, SD 11.3 years) completed a donation commitment measure and were randomly assigned to one of seven motivational interview-based questions or a no-question control group. In study two, 2,246 respondents (58.4% female; mean age 35.5 years, SD 11.4 years) with a moderate level of donation commitment were randomly assigned to receive zero-to-four motivational interview-based questions. In both studies, future donation intention was measured immediately following the intervention. Results/Finding: The first study revealed a significant effect of interview question on donation intention among participants with moderate blood donation commitment, F (7,1299) = 3.699, p = 0.001, but not among those with low commitment, F (7,1233) = 1.411, p = 0.20, or high commitment, F (7,1327) = 0.964, p = 0.46. Study two replicated the significant effect of interview questions on donation intention, F(1, 2230) = 2.168, p = 0.006. Relative to the no-question control condition, follow-up analyses revealed significantly higher donation intentions with 14 of the 15 question combinations (p < 0.05). Conclusion: These findings provide initial support that computer-administered survey questions modelled on motivational interview content may elicit personal reflection that positively impacts donation intention, particularly among individuals with a moderate level of donation commitment. Jennifer Lider*. United Blood Services Background/Case Studies: The blood center was seeing an increase in the amount of apheresis platelet products being rejected for high platelet concentration. The increase had been occurring steadily over a period of two years. During that two year timeframe, the blood center had discontinued running pre-donation platelet counts (pre-counts) prior to or during a platelet pheresis procedure. This process had been discontinued in order to streamline the process, eliminate paper, and reduce laboratory staff interruptions. The pre-count was collected on the day of donation, was tested the following day, and an average of the previous three platelet counts was used to program the instrument for the current donation. The increase in platelet rejections caused a decrease in the amount of available products and a loss of revenue for the blood center. Study Design/Method: A team led by quality staff was developed and implemented a plan to begin obtaining day of donation pre-counts on donors. Pros and cons for both collection and lab staff were evaluated, as it significantly changed the process for both departments, and re-introduced paper records into the process. It was determined that it would be implemented for a trial period of three months and then evaluated to determine product and cost savings. Results/Finding: A significant reduction in high platelet concentration rejections was demonstrated. The blood center was rejecting approximately 4.9 products per month before this project. After implementation, the center realized a reduction to 0.8 products rejected per month. This resulted in saving the blood center approximately $2,889 per month or $34, 671 annualized. Conclusion: Implementation of obtaining day of donation donor platelet counts resulted in decreased rejections of platelet pheresis products and significant cost savings. Mobile Platelet Collections for a Hospital-Based Donor Center David Anthony, Amber Lazareff, Deborah Alter, Alyssa Ziman and Dawn C. Ward*. Division of Transfusion Medicine, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA Background/Case Studies: Apheresis platelet (AP) collection for our hospital-based donor center was limited to our two fixed collection sites and community blood drives were limited to whole blood (WB) donations. During the planning for a community WB drive our blood center evaluated the opportunity to hold a concurrent WB and AP mobile drive. Here we discuss our hospital based-donor center's first combined WB and AP mobile drive and our steps to maximize efficiency and reduce cost in a mobile platelet drive setting. Study Design/Method: Blood donor field recruiter requested a new WB mobile drive in a desirable region of the county where there is high interest in AP donations. On the day of the request, operational staff visited the desired mobile collection site to assess the space for donor registration, donor history, segregated WB and AP collections, donor recovery, and electrical outlet location and support for our apheresis machines. Donor center leadership set up weekly meetings to examine the feasibility of hosting a concurrent WB and AP blood drive where all aspects of platelet collection requirements and mobile blood drive prerequisites were evaluated. Standard Operating Procedures were reviewed and revised to include the allowance of AP collections at mobile drives. All AP supplies and equipment were reviewed for ease of transport. The field recruiter educated and recruited 12 adults from an area high school WB drive, of which 10 were prescreened for their ability to donate multiple products, HLA test results (multiparous female donors only) and donation history/red blood cell loss. Staffing for the mobile drive included WB collections staff, 3 apheresis operators, and 2 additional operational staff to mitigate unforeseeable issues. Results/Finding: From the prescreened donors, 4 were scheduled to donate; each time slot had two back up donors. One backup donor ultimately donated. Of the 4 AP donors, 3 were first-time AP donors. Total products collected includes seven platelet units (3 double products and 1 single product) and 57 WB donations over four and six hours, respectively. The 7 platelet units resulted in a $3,010 cost savings had the units been purchased from an outside blood supplier. The platelet collections bolstered our inventory on a normally low collection day. Post-drive review with our leadership team identified the need for specialized mobile AP collection chairs. Conclusion: Our hospital-based donor center successfully held a combined WB and AP mobile drive for the first time. The time from initiation of the plan to implementation was 2 ½ weeks. Our approach to AP donor selection resulted in an increase of 7 AP products in a cost efficient manner. A Tale of Three Automated Grouping Instruments Ranee M. Wannarka-Farlinger*, Scott A. Hammel, Jennifer Vrieze, James R. Stubbs and Manish Gandhi. Mayo Clinic Background/Case Studies: Obtaining fast and accurate test results are essential for a hospital based donor center to have blood products labeled and available for patient use. With several different automated methodologies available for testing our facility wanted to compare our current methodology of solid phase, to an automated gel system. Study Design/Method: Compare the test results and run times of three instruments. Timings include: putting samples in racks, loading samples on instrument, ordering tests, run time of tests, review of results, and unloading of samples. ABO/Rh testing included both the front and back typing, including weak Du testing when applicable. Confirmation testing was forward Background/Case Studies: A consistent blood supply to support life-saving transfusions relies on regular and repeat volunteer blood donations. In this study, we focused on donors previously deferred for low-hemoglobin (Hb) levels to better understand the value of supplying post-deferral educational information, and the actions donors took based on their deferral. Study Design/Method: An anonymous national survey of active and inactive (no donation in past 12 months) donor groups who had been deferred for low hemoglobin levels (10,000 each) was conducted. The survey questions assessed post-deferral donor actions, preferences regarding post deferral education, understanding of their deferral, and demographic information. Chi-square analysis was performed to compare categorical survey results between donor groups with p < 0.05 denoting statistical significance. Results/Finding: The survey resulted in 722 and 103 active and inactive donor responses, respectively. Active donors were more likely to recall receiving educational materials post-deferral (52% vs. 35%, p=003), take iron and vitamin supplements (54% vs. 39%, p=0.009), lived within 30 min of a donor site (94% vs. 84%, p=0.006), and more likely to be older than 45 yr (62% vs. 42%, p=0.002) than their inactive donor counterparts. Active and inactive donors were similar (p>0.05) with anemia history frequency, female-gender predominance, low-prevalence of vegans, and mixed interest in receiving information about raising hemoglobin levels. Conclusion: While active donors more frequently recalled receiving educational materials for their low hemoglobin deferral, and were more likely to take action to improve their hemoglobin, an alternative method of postdeferral recruitment should be considered given the uncertain value of postdeferral information when comparing active vs. inactive donors. Donor Pregnancy Question -It's All in the Wording Laurie Sutor* and Jeff Centilli. Carter BloodCare Background/Case Studies: Our large community blood center has asked allogeneic blood donors about a history of pregnancy to screen for a risk of transfusion-related acute lung injury. We do our health history questionnaire almost exclusively by computer, only rarely resorting to a manual paper donor card. We made a change to the wording of the question about pregnancy when we adopted the most recent version of the Uniform Donor History Questionnaire in late 2016. Study Design/Method: Answers to the donor pregnancy questions from January 2014 through Sept 2017 were reviewed. We compared the percent of women ages 25 or over answering yes to whether they have ever been pregnant before and after the question (Q) regarding pregnancy was reworded. Donors screened manually were excluded from this study. From 2014 to September 2016 the donors were asked two questions, "Have you ever been pregnant?" and "In the last six weeks, have you been pregnant, or are you pregnant now?" After September 23, 2016 female donors were asked one, combined question: "Have you ever been pregnant or are you pregnant now?". We further looked at two subperiods after September 23, 2016 when we separated the single Q into two parts: "Have you ever been pregnant? Or Are you pregnant now?" which occurred on January 23, 2017. Results/Finding: In the first study period 76.04% of female donors over 25 years of age said yes to having ever been pregnant. In the second study period, after the change in Q, the number dropped to 65.96%. A month by month analysis of donor responses showed approximately a 10% decrease in donors answering "yes" to the question for ever having been pregnant following the changing of the format of the question from two separate questions to one combined question with "are you pregnant now?" Even after emphasizing the two part nature of the new Q, minimal improvement was observed. In the last 100 days of the study period, 236 of females 25 years or older changed their answer for the Q from no to yes. On the other hand, 1,217 changed their answer from yes to no. As a precaution, the blood center has systems in place that prevent collection of apheresis platelet and plasma procedures, and that prevent the release of any transfusable plasma product, from returning female donors who have previously reported being pregnant, even if they now answer no. Conclusion: We are concerned that some female donors are either confused by the new format of the question or not taking the time to read the new question. Further study could reveal more effective communication strategies related to the donor questionnaire. Blood Shortages in 2017: Holiday vs Non-Holiday Time Periods Virginia Hughes*. University of Delaware Background/Case Studies: Blood shortages during the holidays are especially challenging for donor centers and transfusion services. Cogent efforts are made to minimize elective surgeries during the holidays due to decreased blood donations. This study was done to analyze the differences among four regions of the United States for the month of September and December in 2017 regarding blood supply levels of seventy-four blood centers. Study Design/Method: Data was accessed from Americas Blood Centers database for the months indicated. The number of blood centers in each region were as follows: West 23, Midwest 22, South 18, and East 11. Blood supply data was categorized as 0-1 day, 1-2 days, and 3 + days. The N number of days was 21. A repeated measures analysis of variance, Dunnett's t-test, and Paired t-test was conducted using SPSS to ascertain differences among the four regions studied. For the repeated measures analysis the independent variable was region and dependent variable was days of blood supply. Results/Finding: For the month of September a Dunnett's t test (two-sided) revealed significance among all four regions (P<.05) when analyzing days of blood supply. For the month of December the Dunnett's t-test also revealed significance among the four regions (P<.05). The means for the 0-1 day blood supply by region were 1.3% (East), 7.0% (Midwest), 1.2% (South), and 0.38% (West). The means for the 1-2 day blood supply by region were 32.7% (East), 14.5% (Midwest), 7.2% (South), and 18.3% (West). The means for the 3 + day blood supply by region were 51.7% (East), 67.9% (Midwest), 55.8% (South), and 56.5% (West). The Blood Centers in the Midwest region were the most affected by short blood supply levels in December compared to the other three regions. Eighteen percent of their centers had a 0-1 day blood supply on three occasions and 11% on five occasions. Blood Centers in the West region had the highest blood supply levels reporting only 2 days of a 0-1 day supply. For Christmas day only the East region reported a 0-1 day supply of blood in 2% of blood centers; the remaining three regions all reported a 3+day blood supply. A Paired ttest (two-tailed) was performed for each blood shortage category (0-1 day, 1-2 days, 3 + days) comparing the month of December to a non-holiday month (September). Significance was found for the Midwest and South region for all three blood supply categories. The East region revealed significance for the 0-1 day category only. The West region revealed no significant differences for any of the blood supply categories. Conclusion: This study compared blood supply levels between a holiday month and non-holiday month across four regions of the United States in 2017.The Dunnett's t-test determined that the differences in region and days of blood supply were significant. The paired t-tests revealed significant differences between September and December blood supply levels for the Midwest, South, and East but not the West region. The Midwest, on average, had more blood centers with a 0-1 day of blood supply in the month of December and September than other regions studied. It is prudent to continue to track blood supply levels in Donation and transfusion services across the country and identify regions that are most vulnerable to blood shortages. ABSTRACT TRANSFUSION BBC140 Based on the New Hypertension Guideline Jeremy Housekeeper, Emily Chen, Ling Li and YanYun Wu*. Bloodworks Background/Case Studies: In general, blood donors are considered as a healthy population, or healthier population. As part of blood donor screen, blood pressures are checked for most qualified donors and there are blood donation criterion for blood pressures. In 2017, American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force has issued a new blood pressure guideline. In this new guideline, normal blood pressure is defined as below 120/80 mm Hg. In this work, we are trying to assess the rate of blood donors with an abnormal blood pressure based on this new hypertension guideline. Study Design/Method: Donor information was obtained from our blood center's donation database for the period of January 1 to March 30 of 2018. Only the first donation during this time was used for each donor. Results/Finding: Please see table below for information on blood pressure for blood donors during the study period. More variations are observed for different age groups and ethnic background. Conclusion: Based on this snap shot study, there is significant number of blood donors with an abnormal blood pressure based on the new hypertension guideline. More studies and investigation are needed to confirm the finding and to assess the needed action. The Influence of Psychological Care on Anxiety of Blood Donors Among College Students Ya Gao*. Wuhan Blood Center Background/Case Studies: Nowadays, psychological care plays an important role in our society. College students are the most major blood donation population. But still many of them are easy to be anxious or have adverse reaction at the time of or after blood donation because of the deficiency of medical knowledge. According to the research before, mental stress is the main cause of the adverse reaction. How to alleviate the anxiety of the blood donors among college students has become an important problem. The research is aimed at investigating the influence of psychological care on anxiety of medical students and non-medical students, exploring the most appropriate mode of promotion and education for voluntary blood donation, enhancing the proportion of fixed blood donors from college blood donors, and ensuring blood supply to meet clinical use demand. Study Design/Method: 200 students from a comprehensive university in a regional city, aged between 18 and 22, who volunteer to donate blood were randomly divided into observation group and control group, 100 students each group. In observation group, there are 58 medical students and 42 non-medical students. In control group, there are 52 medical major students and 48 non-medical major students. Control group was given routine blood donation nursing and observation group was given psychological care. Before and after the treatments on control group and observation group, the scores of Self-rating Anxiety Scale (SAS) were collected and the cases of adverse reaction were recorded respectively. Results/Finding: In observation group, the SAS scores collected from medical students and non-medical students were significantly decreased after donations (P<0.05), respectively. In control group, the SAS scores had no obvious change before and after donations (P>0.05), whether of medical students and non-medical students. The incidence of adverse reaction of control group is higher than that of observation group (P<0.05). The incidence of adverse reaction of non-medical major volunteers is higher than that of medical major volunteers in observation group and control group, respectively (P<0.05). The incidence of adverse reaction of medical students in control group is higher than that of medical students in observation group (P>0.05). Conclusion: Psychological care can effectively alleviate the anxiety emotion of volunteers from universities, especially non-medical major students, so that most of the adverse reactions can be preventable. During donations, different methods of nursing including conventional care and psychological care should be chosen according to the actual situation. Timely, effective and holistic psychological care deserved the promotion to alleviate the anxiety emotion and the incidence of reverse reaction of volunteers. It is necessary to establish a scientific and effective mode of promotion,education and psychological counseling for voluntary blood donation. Background/Case Studies: Timing of platelet administration can drive blood bank inventory. A stable platelet inventory ensures timely delivery of life-saving blood products but can be challenging to maintain at a tertiary care center, where there is a hospital-wide demand for both emergent and prophylactic platelet transfusions (PPTs) in active surgical and oncologic units, respectively. A high volume of overnight PPTs can lead to early morning inventory shortages that last for hours, particularly when inventory shipments occur during regular business hours, which can delay transfusions for emergent situations. In addition, overnight PPTs increase patient sleep interruptions for non-urgent reasons. Study Design/Method: A single inpatient oncology unit was found to be the highest contributor to the number of overnight (12:00-7:00 am) platelet transfusions with > 98% of these being prophylactic. Transfusion medicine and oncology physicians/nursing partnered with leaders of a patient wellness initiative to explore patient-centric reasons for delaying overnight PPTs. Analysis demonstrated that daily labs were being drawn overnight which led to PPT orders for abnormal CBC results a few hours later. A solution, postponing lab draws from 2:00 am to 5:00 am, was implemented. Statistical analysis for significance, using the chi-squared test, was performed on percentage values. Results/Finding: Postponing lab draws on the inpatient oncology unit led to a significant reduction in the proportion of overnight platelet transfusions and PPTs. There was also a decrease in the frequency of platelet inventory shortages. Conclusion: The partnership between laboratory and clinical staff identified a simple yet impactful solution to reduce overnight PPTs: postponing laboratory collection times. Changing the timing of lab draws shifted the timing of platelet administration and stabilized platelet inventory. Collaborating with clinical staff on the oncology unit as well as those leading a patient wellness initiative helped frame the project's goals in a greater patient-centered Table 1 shows the negative antigen frequencies from our donor population, most of which are comparable to the published frequencies in the general population. The exceptions are: C-(40%), S-(69%), Fy(b-) (26%), Do(a-) (39%) and Vel-(0.1%) which are higher than the published antigen frequencies. When we sort the donor population into Caucasian and African Americans, the following antigen negative frequencies were higher in the Caucasian population: C-(37%), S-(57%) and Vel-(0.1%). More importantly, our African American donors have several antigens with higher than published negative antigen frequencies including the following: C-(70%), E-(84%), V-(64%), VS-(62%), Fy(a-) (84%), Do(a-) (52%), Co(b-) (99%) and Yt(b-) (97%). (See Table 2 ) We also identified 128 rare donors. Conclusion: This donor-screening program utilizing an automated molecular assay has enabled us to better identify phenotype-matched donors for our SCD patient population, and the rare donors identified reported after serologic phenotype confirmation to the American Rare Donor Program (ARDP). We plan to continue this screening process for the next several years until the majority of our donor base has been molecularly genotyped. Understanding autologous units. 45% of member facilities extend expiration dates beyond 10 years for rare products. Conclusion: Practices vary greatly throughout the membership, however, there appears to be a consensus that high prevalence antigen negative units are frozen when possible. Donor recruitment is specifically targeted by 80% of the members. Just under half of the members extend the expiration date of rare units to retain the very rare types in inventory beyond the generally used 10-year storage time. Wesley Rubenstein*, Aaron J. Harding, Patricia Kopko and Elizabeth S. Allen. University of California San Diego Background/Case Studies: During hemorrhagic events, clinicians often stockpile blood products at the bedside. Abrupt ending of the massive transfusion protocol (MTP) and return of those products can result in temperaturerelated waste. RBCs are wasted if not maintained at refrigerated temperatures; plasma, because it is brought to 37 C for thawing, is inevitably wasted if not cooled to the required 1-6 C. We implemented the Hemoroam 15XL mobile blood storage refrigerators (MBRs) (Roemer Industries, Santee, CA) for high-volume transfusion events at our university health system, which includes 2 hospitals, a Level I trauma center, an obstetrics service and a liver transplant service (750 inpatient beds, transfusion volume: 23,000 RBC units annually). We evaluated the impact on blood product wastage. Study Design/Method: Approval and funding were obtained from the hospital administration, and 10 MBRs were purchased and validated. A new standard operating procedure (SOP) for the MBR was implemented, and our blood issuing SOP was updated. The MBRs were piloted with the liver transplant program, and usage was subsequently expanded to the entire health system, including MTPs and other highvolume transfusion events upon request. Stakeholders including the liver transplant team and operating room staff received training on using the MBRs. Usage trends and temperature-related waste of RBC and plasma units for 8 months before ( Background/Case Studies: While publications have addressed sustainability of red blood cell supply, there are sufficient differences in the dynamics of red blood cell and apheresis platelet usage to consider separate review of experience with meeting inventory demands for these products. Although there are challenges to meeting Group O red blood cell inventories, overall red blood cell demands have been reduced significantly by the effects of patient blood management. For apheresis platelets, however, demand has been more sustained, reflecting the fact that indications are more often prophylactic. Since the effects, over time, of an aging red blood cell donor base on collections have been demonstrated, we decided to see if similar considerations applied to the apheresis donor base. We also decided to find out the extent to which recent restrictions on donation by women with a history of pregnancy had an effect on their participation as apheresis platelet donors. Study Design/Method: We reviewed apheresis platelet donor and apheresis platelet distribution records for 2001 through 2017. Donors were classified by age and gender. The numbers of donors in different age brackets were expressed as a percentage of the annual total number of donors for each year. We also expressed, as a percentage, the contributions that each age bracket made to the annual total apheresis platelet inventories. Results/Finding: The age bracket that included most of the apheresis platelet donors increased progressively from the 41 to 45 years bracket in 2001, to 51 to 55 years in 2009, and to 56 to 60 years in 2017. In 2001, 14.3% of apheresis platelet donors were 56 years of age or older. In 2009 and 2017, these percentages rose to 26.4% and 33.6%, respectively. While there was an increasing reliance (see Table) on older donors, percent contributions to annual inventories from 31 to 50 year old donors decreased by more than half between 2001 and 2017. When 2016 and 2017, the first full year of restrictions on female donors with a history of pregnancy were compared, male donor apheresis platelet contributions to annual inventory increased by 6.9% and female contributions decreased by 22%. Conclusion: Significant aging of the apheresis donor base is such that reliance on older donors will be thwarted when, in the near future, they are more likely to be patients than they are likely to continue as apheresis donors. Restrictions on female donors have had significant effects on their participation as apheresis donors. To ensure sustainability in apheresis platelet inventories, programs will have to understand why donors aged between 31 and 50, who were dominant contributors previously, are now relatively inaccessible as donors. Effect of Temperature Probe Placement on Blood Shipper Validation Saravan Kumar*, Arif Rahman, Balaji Jayakumar and Tyler Rapp. MaxQ Research LLC Background/Case Studies: Most industry standard insulated shippers that are designed to maintain Red Blood Cell (RBC) units between 1 to 10 C during transport uses wet ice as the cooling source. In such pack-outs where RBC bags ("the payload") are in direct contact with the wet icethere is a detrimental effect on the integrity of the red blood cells. The maximum allowable transport duration for the RBC shippers vary based on the pack-out (amount, type and location of cooling material) developed and How do you determine which units to freeze? Is the ACP215 in use? Which rare products are frozen at your facility? What tools are used for recruitment? How long are units stored as liquid before freezing? What Codabar units are in inventory? Is there a concern about unlicensed frozen units? Extended expiration dates? validated by the blood center. In any case, shipper validation requires measuring the temperature of the payload over a required period of time while exposing the fully packed shipper to different ambient profiles. However, the placement of temperature probes is not standardized and therefore varies across blood centers. This study aims to understand and demonstrate the effects of payload volume, temperature probe placement, on shipper validation. Study Design/Method: A series of experiments were performed, for a cardboard/Styrofoam shipper packed with 10 to 20 lbs. of wet ice. Representative volume and dimensions of water bags were used as substitute for RBC units. Number of payload units was varied to determine the effect of payload volume on measured payload temperature. Payload units were placed vertically inside a payload holder. A bag of wet ice was placed on top of the payload holder inside the shipper. NIST calibrated temperature-measuring devices were used to record temperature every 2 minutes, at different locations inside the shipper. The shipper was placed inside a programmable environmental chamber, and exposed to transient temperature profiles representative of summer and winter conditions for 24 hours to simulate ambient temperatures during transit. Temperature of the payload at different locations of the shipper as a function of time was recorded for each of the configurations. Numerical thermal simulations using finite volume method (FVM) software were also performed to visualize temperature distributions, in key configurations. For comparison, an insulated shipper specifically designed with phase change materials was tested under similar ambient conditions. Results/Finding: The temperature recorded for the cardboard/Styrofoam shipper tested with wet ice showed a variation of 5C and 3C between payloads at different locations inside the shipper during summer and winter ambient tests, respectively. The test results are presented in Table 1 . This identifies the importance of temperature probe placement during shipper validation. Conclusion: The placement of the temperature probe has a significant effect on the shipper validation duration. This data, corroborated with FVM simulations, demonstrates the importance of choosing the most appropriate point of temperature measurement, while also considering the payload volume and measurement methods. Applying Background/Case Studies: In developing nations and remote areas, the transportation of blood was often inconvenient owing to poor infrastructure and geographical barrier. Once issued, the blood units cannot be taken back by blood bank with the concern of short shelf life and cold chain. Thus, there is a dilemma of blood storage in hospitals in remote areas: if the blood storage is too little, there will be a blood supply shortage; if the blood storage is too much, there will be a much higher blood expiration and waste. As the result, it causes a bottleneck of blood supply and decreases blood availability. To promote blood supply management efficiency and ensure blood availability in remote areas, an Internet of Things (IoT) -based blood cold chain monitoring system was developed. Study Design/Method: RFID cards were attached to red blood cells unit bags to monitor cold chain. Red blood cells units stored in remote hospitals that are due to expire in 15 days are taken back and redistributed to nearby hospitals after necessary tests. The study collected the data before and after using the new monitoring system in four island hospitals during 2009 to 2016, and analyzed the data of blood expiration with statistical methods. Results/Finding: Since the new monitoring system was deployed in 2013 among four hospitals in remote islands (inhabitants more than 70,000), the red blood cells unit storage has increased. The incident of emergency blood collection and supply was decreased from eight (year 2009-2012, prior to the use of new monitoring system) to one (year 2013-2016, since the use of new monitoring system), thus blood availability was increased significantly. Also with the comparison of the same time span, the number of expired red blood cells units was decreased from 1819 to 430, and the expiry rate declined from 27% to 6%. The difference of expiry rates in each hospital between before and after the use of new monitoring system is significant (P<0.05). There has been no adverse report of the reuse of the take-back blood units. The application of Internet of Things can promote blood availability and blood supply management efficiency in remote areas. Blood Inventory Management at King Hussein Cancer Center Blood Bank Salah Bohisi*, Maher Sughayer, Tamara Dabbagh, Esraa Al-Khateeb, Aya Ataallah and Mohammad Nour Ghanem. King Hussein Cancer Center Background/Case Studies: Blood inventory management is a tricky and challenging process, considering the absence of real constraints to control blood issuing upon its need. Therefore, maintaining the balance between guaranteeing blood availability and minimizing wastage is a continuous demand to make sure that the product is used effectively and efficiently. At King Hussein Cancer Center (KHCC) blood bank, over 12,000 blood units are donated each year to cover KHCC patient demands. Minimum stock limits for each blood type govern the amount of donations accepted on daily basis, in accordance with Jordanian ABO distribution figures. Daily total minimum stock limit is established based on the current patient need and is reviewed at least annually (189 blood unit in 2015, and was adjusted twice since: 210 in 2016 and 252 in 2017) based on increased demand. The aim of this study, is to examine KHCC inventory management performance in order to consider appropriate guidelines for best practice and to improve efficiency of blood bank services. For unused FFP we identified 26 providers: 23 with one (1) unused unit, one with two (2) unused units, one with three (3) unused units, and one with seven (7) unused units. Five (5) patients expired before transfusion, and three (3) FFP bags broke. For unused platelets there were sixteen providers, fourteen with one (1) unused unit each, one provider with two (2) unused units, and one provider with three (3) unused units. Blood Bank technologist(s) were involved with three (3) additional unused platelet units. Conclusion: There was a significant reduction in RBC discards in 2017 compared to the two prior years, due to a new real time on-line blood product ordering system real time on-line blood product ordering system with the blood supplier; and a lesser, sustained reduction in Platelet wastage in 2016. For FFP and platelets, the major reasons for discard were that the units were ordered and not used. Background/Case Studies: Although blood programs have a number of different approaches to providing apheresis platelet inventories at hospitals, including prohibiting returns, our large blood center elects to rotate and restock apheresis platelets maintained on site at approximately 30 healthcare facilities. While there is no charge for this service, it relies on many hospitals, which typically experience a relatively high daily transfusion demand for apheresis platelets, accepting shorter dated units that have been returned to the blood center through the daily rotation schedule. Recently, however, there has been an increasing number of requests from facilities to keep onsite inventories of apheresis platelets. This is to comply with anticipated maternal levels of care designation requirements, massive transfusion protocols, and trauma level designations. Against the background of continuing challenges to maintaining adequate inventories at hospitals, made more acute by increasing demand for product and aging of the apheresis platelet donor base, we decided to investigate our rotate and restock policy more closely. We wanted to pay special attention to the proportion of our overall apheresis platelet supply under rotate and restock management and also the proportion of this inventory eventually lost to outdate when short dated product, returned from rotation and restocking hospitals, was not transfused at busier transfusion services. Study Design/Method: We reviewed our annual apheresis platelet supply to rotation and non-rotation hospitals for 2015 through 2017 and selected for special attention those rotation hospitals returning more than 50% of their apheresis platelet stocks. A daily average was determined for the number of hours before outdate remaining on apheresis platelets at issue and at return. Further evaluation was carried out on the returned platelets for their eventual percentage outdate. Results/Finding: During 2015 through 2017, 131,882 apheresis platelets were distributed to all hospitals. Of this distribution 75,193 (57%) were provided to the rotation restock hospitals. Of the 30 hospitals on this platelet rotation restock program, 18 utilized less than 50% of the platelets shipped to them from 2015 to 2017. There was an average of 76 hours remaining on the platelets shipped and 44 hours remaining before outdate when these platelets were returned. The total number of platelets distributed to the 18 hospitals was 45,882, of which 18,332 (40%) were used. Of the remaining 27,550 returned, 4,794 (17.4%) were ultimately outdated. Conclusion: There is opportunity to improve the efficiency of rotate and restock policies. This will depend on the approval of extended outdate for apheresis platelets beyond the currently permissible 7 days. In this regard, cold stored platelets with a much longer shelf life would significantly reduce transport and delivery costs associated with an inventory rotation schedule and also decrease the numbers of short dated products that risk outdate when they are redistributed, with only a few hours of shelf life remaining, to hospitals with busy transfusion services.  
