9d019cdca15a4163766a5faad83b9c662a016d21
THURSDAY 1 Pre-Treatment with a Toll-Like Receptor 4 Antagonist Inhibits Lipopolysaccharide-Induced Preterm Uterine Activity, Cytokines, and Prostaglandins in a Non-Human Primate Model
Kristina  Adams David  Persing Drew  Sadowsky Miles  Novy David  Soergel Michael  Gravett   Bondarenko David W Burleigh Maureen  Durning Thaddeus G Golos Ronald R Magness )   Matthew L Anderson Russell  Broaddus Colin  Bishop Jan  Rohozinski 

University of Washington Cepheid, Inc Oregon National Primate Research Center Oregon National Primate Research Center GlaxoSmithKline, Inc University of Washington University of Washington University of Washington University of Washington University of Washington University of Washington Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center University of Washington University of Washington 
Objective: The majority of early preterm births are complicated by intrauterine infection and associated with activation of innate immune responses resulting in production of cytokines and prostaglandins. We hypothesized that blockade of the innate immune response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) by intra-amniotic infusion of a Toll-like receptor 4 antagonist (TLR4A) would prevent LPSinduced preterm uterine activity and elevations in amniotic fl uid (AF) cytokines and prostaglandins. Methods: Fourteen chronically catheterized pregnant rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) at 128-147 days gestation (term=167 days) received one of three intra-amniotic infusions: 1) saline (n=6), 2) 1-10 μg LPS (n=4), or 3) TLR4A pre-treatment followed by 10 μg LPS (+1 hour; n=4). Uterine activity (hourly contraction area) and AF leukocytes (WBC), cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, TNFα), and prostaglandins (PGE 2 , PGF 2α ) were serially measured before and after inoculations. Stastistical analysis compared peak post infusion uterine activity or AF cytokine, PG or WBC levels between groups and was performed on log transformed data using oneway ANOVA followed by pairwise comparisons adjusted using the Bonferroni method. Results: Intra-amniotic infusion of LPS alone induced signifi cant elevations in uterine activity and AF WBC, IL-8, TNF-α, PGE 2 , and PGF 2α compared to saline controls (all p<0.05). In contrast, pre-treatment with a TLR4A was associated with no signifi cant increases in uterine activity, cytokines, or prostaglandins when compared to saline controls. Treatment with a TLR4A was also associated with signifi cantly lower AF WBC, IL-8, TNF-α, PGE 2 , and PGF 2α compared to LPS infusion alone (all p<0.05). Conclusions: Pre-treatment with a TLR4A inhibited LPS-induced uterine activity, leukocytes, cytokines and prostaglandins in non-human primates. These data indicate that treatment with toll-like receptor antagonists, together with antibiotics, may delay or prevent infection-associated preterm birth. Objective: The rhesus monkey placenta expresses the nonclassical MHC class I molecule, Mamu-AG, which has HLA-G-like characteristics. These molecules primarily are expressing in the placenta and thought to play a role in maternalfetal immune interaction. The aim of this study was to determine how anti-Mamu-AG passive immunization affects placental growth and development in the nonhuman primate. Methods: We conducted histological, morphometric and immunohistochemical (cytokeratin, SMA, Von Willebrand factor, VEGF, Flk-1, Ki-67 expression) analysis of placentas on day 24 of gestation of 12 rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) with normal pregnancy (Untreated control), treated by 4 mg nonspecifi c purifi ed F(ab')2 fragments (Non-specifi c treated) or with 4 mg anti-Mamu-AG (clone 25D3) mAb (25D3-treated) intravenous per day from day 18 through day 24 of gestation. Results: On day 24 in 25D3-treated placentas vs Untreated and Non-specifi c treated groups we found a delay in gestational changes of histological features of implantation (degeneration of epithelial plaque, decline of edema, decidualization, lacunae organization). On the same day small arteries directly beneath the implantation site were completely occluded by extravillous cytotrophoblasts in all animals. The arterial endothelial layer in all groups and the tunica media in Untreated and Non-specifi c treated groups breached, but in 25D3-treated placentas the tunica media remained intact. The number of villous cross sections per mm2 of paraffi n section, length of stem villi and diameter of all villi were signifi cantly less in 25D3-treated placentas. The proliferative index (Ki-67-positive cells) dramatically decreased in anti-Mamu-AG passive immunized monkeys compared to Untreated and Non-specifi c-treated groups. The number of vessels per villi, diameter of villous vessels and Flk-1 expression in chorionic villi were less in 25D3-treated placentas. Conclusions: We propose that the anti-Mamu-AG-passive immunization in early gestation down-regulates trophoblastic modifi cation of decidual vessels, placental vascularization, growth and development. This data suggest an important interaction between placental MHC class I expression and an appropriate enviroment for placental and vascular development in primate pregnancy. BACKGROUND: During spermatogenesis, activation of a family of retrogenes with X-linked progenitors compensates for transcriptional inactivation of the X chromosome at meiosis. We recently found that one such retrogene, UTP14C, is expressed in ovarian cancers at high frequency. We have extended this work to determine if other spermatogenesis-related retrogenes are also transcriptionally active in ovarian cancers. METHODS: Total RNA was extracted from ovarian cancers using TRIzol (Invitrogen, Inc). After treating each specimen with DNAase, cDNA was synthesized with reverse transcriptase. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used to assess the expression of specifi c gene products from BIRC8, RPL10L and TAFIL. Expression of the corresponding X-linked progenitors (BIRC4, RPL10, TAFI) was also tested. RESULTS: We observed robust expression of each X-linked progenitor (BIRC4, RPL10, TAF1) in all somatic tissues, normal human testis, pre and post-menopausal ovaries and most ovarian cancers tested. In contrast, expression of the complementary retrogenes was observed in testis and, in one case, premenopausal ovary, but was notably absent in the 17 different somatic tissues tested. These retrogenes were also frequently expressed in ovarian cancers of different histologies. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the expression of functionally distinct members of the spermatogenesis-related retrogene family occurs at high frequency in epithelial ovarian cancers. Given the near-uniform absence of their expression in somatic tissues, these retrogenes offer potentially ideal diagnostic and/or therapeutic targets for ovarian cancer. Their expression may also indicate specifi c sites of X chromosome inactivation that may be important in the pathogenesis of this disease. Hypothesis:IGF-1 exposed blastocysts show decreased insulin-stimulated glucose uptake and increased apoptosis. Metformin activates AMPK, reversing IGF-1's effects and improving pregnancy outcome. Methods:2-cell embryos collected from superovulated mice were cultured for 72° to blasocysts in 1 of 4 treatments: control human tubal fl uid (HTF), 25ug/mL metformin, 200nM IGF-1, or metformin+IGF-1. Enzymatic assays for non-radioactive deoxyglucose uptake were performed on insulin(500nM)stimulated blastocysts. Apoptosis was detected by confocal microscopy using a TUNEL assay and Topro-3 nuclear dye. Embryos were scored for %TUNEL positive/total nuclei. Fetal resorption rates and crown rump lengths(CRL) were determined at embryonic day 14.5 after transfer of blastocysts from each treatment group into uterine horns of recipient mice. AMPK activation by metformin was analyzed by western blot with anti-phospho-AMPK using 2-cell embryos cultured for 72° in HTF or metformin+HTF. Results:Metformin exposed blastocysts showed a 2.3X increase in AMPK phosphorylation(n=3 experiments). Insulin-stimulated glucose uptake was lower in blastocysts cultured in IGF-1(-0.16+0.11mmol/kg wet weight/15minutes;n=55) vs HTF(0.29+0.13;n=47;p<0.05) and vs metformin+IGF-1(0.25+0.11;n=55;p<0.01). No difference was seen among metformin+IGF-1 vs HTF or metformin only groups(0.068+0.03;n=45). Metformin reversed apoptosis in IGF-1 exposed blastocysts(11.0+1.6 IGF-1 vs. 5.8+0.9 metformin+IGF-1; n=28; p<0.001). Apoptosis in IGF-1+metformin treated embryos was not different than HTF(n=21;7.6+1.2) or metformin only(n=21;4.0+0.8)). Exposure to excess IGF-1 showed lower implantation rates at embryonic day 14.5(34.7+2;n=8 experiments;p<0.003) vs culture in Scientifi c Abstracts HTF(73.3+3.9;n=8). Implantation rates were higher with IGF-1+metformin co-culture(63.0+9.8;n=8;p<0.05). Addition of metformin decreased resorption rates from 46.3+11 in the IGF-1 group to 24.7+4.3. CRL was shorter for the fetuses in the IGF-1 group(n=53) than the HTF group(n=71)(81.5+16mm vs 110.0+15;p<0.05), and the metformin+IGF-1 group(100.1+11;p<0.05). Conclusions:Women with PCOS are at higher risk for miscarrying. The mechanisms responsible are not clear, but increased IGF-1 levels may play a part by leading to decreased AMPK activity. The AMPK activator metformin is widely used to improve ovulation in women with PCOS. These data provide evidence for metformin use beyond ovulation induction to improve pregnancy outcome. Objectives. Periodontal disease could play a role during pregnancy as a source of chronic infection having so the potential to be the direct cause of an adverse effect, both on the mother, the placenta and the fetus. The aim of this study was to determine whether oral health conditions and attitudes correlate with adverse fetal and/or maternal outcomes. Methods. A multi-centric crosssectional study was designed. 304 women were recruited and examined within 5 days postpartum through a standardised questionnaire and a full oral and periodontal examination. Case subjects (n=62) had premature delivery (n=25) and/or delivered SGA/IUGR (n=25) and/or experienced Preeclampsia /PIH (n=18) or PROM (n=6) during their pregnancies whereas control subjects (n=242) had normal pregnancies, delivered at or around term and had newborns with normal weights. Results. Cases and controls were similar in mean age, birthplace, ethnicity, educational level, smoking habits and in oral hygiene habits. The analyses of the periodontal health and disease variables (bleeding on probing, tooth attachment loss and probing depth score) showed no relevant differences between the two groups. There was no differences in proportion of smoking women in cases and controls (chi square = 0.3, p=0.60). No signifi cant association was observed regarding cases and the level of periodontal disease (chi square for trend =1.19, p=0.27). The mean proportion of periodontal sites probing more than 4 mm observed in the case subjects compared to the controls failed to reach statistical signifi cance. Conclusions. Our preliminary report failed to demonstrate a positive association between periodontal disease and adverse pregnancy outcomes. However, our study population is different from previously reported case-control populations in both demographic factors and the level of periodontal disease. More data need to be collected in order to exclude the proposed potential link between periodontitis and the risk of pregnancy complications. (Supported by the MUR-PRIN 2005 grant). Objective: Thrombin has been demonstrated to stimulate contractions and increase intracellular calcium in myometrium in vitro. Its ability to increase the expression of contraction associated proteins (CAPs) in myometrium remains unexplored. The hypothesis of this study is that myometrial cells incubated with thrombin will increase their expression of oxytocin receptor (OTR), COX-II and Connexin-43. Methods: Samples of myometrial tissue were collected from pregnant patients at term undergoing cesarean sections. After tissue cultures were established, the cells were incubated with varying concentrations of thrombin for 16 hours. The relative protein concentrations of OTR, Cox-II and Connexin-43 were then determined through Western blot analysis. The results were normalized to control. The results from samples which had been exposed or not exposed to thrombin were analyzed with Mann-Whitney two sample rank sum tests when the results were non-parametrically distributed and the t-test when the distributions were normal. Results: Table 1 contains the relative concentrations of the CAPs in response to different thrombin concentrations, normalized to control. A statistically signifi cant increase in expression was found between the control samples and the cells exposed to thrombin for OTR (p=0.009) and Connexin-43 (p=0.001). COX-II demonstrated an inverse U concentration relationship. Conclusion: Thrombin increases the expression of CAPs in cultured myometrial cells. This response may play a role in the development of labor following intrauterine bleeding. Involved in the Up-Regulation of Interleukin-8 in Endometrial Cells: Implications for Endometrial Immune System. Toru Arase, 1 Tetsuo Maruyama, 1 Hiroshi Uchida, 1 Takashi Kajitani, 1 Masanori Ono, 1 Takashi Nagashima, 1 Kuniaki Ohta, 2 Maki Kagami, 1 Hirotaka Masuda, 1 Hironori Asada, 1 Yasunori Yoshimura. *1 1 Obstetrics and Gynecology, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan; 2 Obstetrics and Gynecology, Toho University, Tokyo, Japan. BACKGROUND : To prevent invasion of pathogens, female genital tract has immunological defense systems, including the acidity of the vagina and immunoglobulin production from the cervix. Also, endometrial epithelial cells function as a barrier against pathogens in assistance with endometrial cytokines and immune cells. Recently, it has been reported that the stimulation of P2Y14/GPR105 (P2Y14) by UDP-glucose (UDP-G) enhances a neutrophil chemoattractant, interleukin-8 (IL-8) production in human immune cells and airway epithelial cells. The purpose of this study is to investigate whether UDP-G regulates the expression of IL-8 via P2Y14 in human endometrium. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We obtained endometrial tissues from the surgical specimens of consenting reproductive-aged patients without any endometrial disorders or with endometritis. The spatiotemporal expression of endometrial P2Y14 was analyzed by RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. For in vitro experiments, Ishikawa cells, a human endometrial epithelial cell line, were treated with UDP-G and then subjected to RT-PCR analysis on the expression of IL-8 mRNA. RESULTS: P2Y14 was exclusively and constantly expressed in the glandular and luminal epithelium of normal endometrium throughout the menstrual cycle, while endometrial tissues with endometritis prominently expressed P2Y14 mRNA as compared to the normal endometrium. Treatment with UDP-G induced the expression of IL-8 mRNA in Ishikawa cells in a dose-and time-dependent fashion. CONCLUSIONS: UDP-G is an endogeneous molecule and released into the extracellular environment in a lytic manner after cell damage caused by bacterial infection. We here demonstrated that P2Y14 was exclusively and constantly expressed in endometrial epithelium throughout the menstrual cycle but up-regulated by endometritis and it mediated IL-8 induction upon UDP-G stimulation. Taken together, these results support a possible mechanism by which UDP-G released from endometrial cells damaged by infection stimulates IL-8 production via up-regulated P2Y14 in endometrial glandular epithelium, which, in turn, may recruit neutrophils and macrophages thereby preventing the progression of infection. Objective: To test the hypothesis that leukocytes are activated in labour, and that leukocytes from labouring women will show greater chemotaxis and intracellular reactive oxygen species production. Methods: Human neutrophils were separated from heparinized maternal peripheral blood samples obtained from the following groups of women: 28-34 week gestation preterm not in labour (PTNL), n=10; 37-42 week gestation term not in labour (TNL), n=10; and 37-42 week gestation term in labour (TL), n=10 using dextran and Ficoll-hypaque. Chemotaxis was studied in response to fMLP in a 96-well chemotaxis chamber. Intracellular reactive oxygen species production (ROS) in whole peripheral blood was quantifi ed by measurement of the fl uorescent DCF generated from the ROS probe DCFH-DA (dichlorofl uorescein diacetate) by fl ow cytometry. Student's t-test was used for statistical analysis. Results: Chemotaxis of neutrophils (Table I) and basal ROS values (granulocytes and monocytes) (Table II) were signifi cantly greater in labouring versus non labouring women. Conclusions: This study confi rmed our initial hypothesis that leukocytes are activated in labouring women. The mechanism of leukocyte activation in the process of parturition remains to be further elucidated. Introduction We have previously shown that labour is associated with increased Nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB) activity in amnion which plays an important role in the regulation of pro-labour genes such as COX-2 and Interleukin-8. Labour is associated with increased cytokine synthesis which activates NFκB. Mechanisms leading to the activation of NFκB in amnion seen after labour may be different to those acting before labour. It is the mechanism of NFκB activation in amnion prior to labour that may be a therapeutic target, to prevent preterm labour. Primary amnion cells cultivated from tissue collected prior to the onset of labour show varying degrees of NFκB activation which probably refl ects 'closeness to labour'. The activation of NFκB requires its translocation into the nucleus as well as undergoing post-translational modifi cations such as phosphorylation. To study how amnion NFκB is activated, samples were classifi ed into three groups-low, medium and high according to the level of total nuclear p65 or nuclear p65 phosphorylation at serine (ser) 536. The expression or activation of various proteins involved in NFκB signaling pathways were then correlated to the activation status of NFκB. We collected amnion from 12 women undergoing elective caesarean section and established primary cell cultures. Activation of NFκB was defi ned as (i) total nuclear p65 or (ii) nuclear phosphorylated p65 (pp65) at ser 536. Immunoblots were probed for nuclear p65, pp65 at ser 536, p52, Rel B, IKBb1 and 2, p50, phosphorylated p50 (pp50) and for cytosolic phosphorylated IKK 1 and 2, IKBalpha (IKBa), IKBepsilon (IKBe), pp65 at ser 536, p50 and pp50. In the samples classifi ed according to total nuclear p65 levels, there was a strong positive correlation with nuclear pp65 at ser 536 and nuclear Rel B and a weaker correlation with cytosolic pp50. When classifi ed using pp65 at ser 536, there were strong correlations with nuclear p65 and cytosolic pp50, IKBa and IKBe expression. Conclusions Activation of NFκB in amnion cells prior to labour involves p65, p50 and possibly Rel B but does not involve p52. Activation of NFκB is not mediated by IKBa degradation or IkBb 1 or 2 synthesis and appears to be independent of IKK activity. The increased expression of IKBa and IKBe in cells with increased pp65 at ser 536 suggest that phosphorylation at ser 536 may be important for IKBa/e expression and that they act as reporters of NFκB activity rather than as inhibitory molecules. Background: Elevated leptin levels have been observed in the peritoneal fl uid of women with mild endometriosis, suggesting a role in the early stages of disease establishment. Furthermore treatment with leptin can increase vascular epithelial growth factor (VEGF) and its receptor (VEGF-R2) expression in endometrial cells. Objective: Determine whether leptin is involved in the early angiogenic events that promote endometriosis, by investigating the effect of leptin signaling disruption on microvascular density (MVD) in a syngeneic mouse model of endometriosis. Methods: Uterine tissue isolated from 6 wk old congenic C57BL6 mice primed with 10 U PMSG IP and euthanized 41 hr later, was placed in the peritoneal cavity of ovariectomized sister recipients with a SC E 2 implant. Treatment groups received pegylated leptin peptide receptor antagonist (LPRA) and controls scrambled nonfunctional pegylated leptin receptor peptide (scLPRA), IP (both at 66mM). Treatments included: daily IP administration starting 1 day prior to uterine tissue transfer and continuing for 7 days (continuous) or beginning 5 days after uterine tissue transfer and continuing for 48 hr (acute). Endometriosis-like lesions were removed from control and treated mice at day 7 post tissue transfer. MVD was determined on anti CD-31 stained frozen sections and counterstained with Hoerscht (1ug/ml). Utilizing fl uorescent microscopy 3 random HPF (20X)/sample were selected, and the mean MVD (% of HPF) was calculated using IP Lab software (Scanalytics Inc.) . Results: MVD (%) was markedly decreased (>20 fold; p<0.05) in endometriosis-like samples from mice treated with LPRA (continuous; 0.225 +/-0.09) compared to those receiving scLPRA (4.55 +/-1.9). MVD was also decreased (4.5 fold; p<0.05) in the samples from LPRA group (acute treatment; 0.80 +/-0.29) compared to scLPRA (3.63 +/-1.2). A greater proportion of endometrial glands were observed in scLPRA versus LPRA in the continuous treatment arm. Conclusions: In vivo disruption of leptin signaling signifi cantly decreased MVD in endometriosis-like lesions. These fi ndings strongly suggest a role for leptin involvement in small vessel recruitment during endometriosis lesion development. Modifi ed Viruses. Essameldine R Othman, 1 David T Curiel, 2 Ayman A Al-Hendy. University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA; 2 Gene Therapy Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. Background: Current medical treatment options for endometriosis are used only for short duration because of serious side effects. Gene therapy is a promising treatment alternative that has recently expanded in scope from malignant to benign diseases including leiomyoma and endometriosis. Adenovirus, a commonly used gene transfer vector, shows superior in vivo gene transfer but has a promiscuous tropism infecting many non-targeted tissues. In this study we examine the transduction of endometriosis cells by a panel of fi ber modifi ed and promoter modifi ed adenoviruses that exhibit a liver-off profi le to identify the specifi c modifi cations that sustain highest targeting to endometriosis cells. Human endometriosis and normal endometrial cells were grown in 12 well plates at a density of 50,000 cells per well. After 24 hour, cells were transfected with adenovirus serotype 5 (Ad-5), adenovirus under survivin promoter (Ad-Surv), adenovirus sigma (Ad-sigma) or adenovirus RGD (Ad-RGD) at MOI of 100 PFU/ cell. All adenoviruses used expressed luciferase as a reporter gene. 72 hours later, luciferase activity was measured in endometriotic and normal endometrial cells. The luciferase activity in cells transfected with each type of adenovirus was expressed as a percentage of the luciferase activity of the wild type virus (Ad-5) Results: In endometriosis cells, Ad-sigma showed luciferase tranactivation representing 133% of the of that induced by the wild type adenovirus whereas Ad-surv and Ad-RGD showed 11% and 22% of the luciferase activity of the wild type adenovirus respectively. In normal endometrial cells, Ad-sigma-mediated luciferase transactivation was 211% of that of the wild type virus whereas Ad-surv and Ad-RGD showed 11% and 42% of luciferase activity of the wild type virus respectively. Comparing the luciferase activity induced by Ad-sigma in endometriosis and endometrial cells, the luciferase activity of Ad-sigma in endometriosis cells was 4.5 fold higher than in endometrial cells. The fi ber modifi ed adenovirus sigma is more active in endometriosis and endometrial cells than the wild type adenovirus. Ad-sigma shows more selectivity to endometriosis cells than normal endometrial cells. Ad-sigma provides a promising vector for gene therapy of endometriosis. Introduction Endometriosis is a gynecological condition associated with infertility. We have identifi ed alterations in the endometrial expression of numerous genes and proteins following experimental induction of endometriosis in baboons. In particular, we have previously demonstrated that the reduced level of endometrial HOXA10 mRNA and protein in baboons with disease is associated with hypermethylation of the 5-UTR of the HOXA10 gene. We hypothesize that the development of endometriosis, and the resulting reduced fecundity, is associated with epigenetic modifi cation of the endometrium. Endometriosis was induced in 4 cycling baboons by inoculation of menstrual endometrium into the peritoneal cavity. Eutopic endometrium was consecutively harvested by laparotomy at day 10 Post Ovulation (window of receptivity) from baboons at 6 and 12 months post-inoculation. Control endometrium was similarly collected from disease-free animals. Aberrant DNA methylation patterns were identifi ed by methylation sensitive restriction fragmentation (MSRF). MSRF revealed 14 hypo-and 2 hyper-methylated DNA fragments in baboons with endometriosis. BLAST analysis revealed sequence alignment of all 16 fragments to human and/or non-human primate DNA. Five of the 14 hypoand 1 of the 2 hyper-methylated fragments displayed homology to known genes (Table 1) . Hypomethylation and subsequent increased levels of genes involved in cell growth and differentiation may dysregulate differentiation of the secretory endometrium of baboons with disease. Hypermethylation and subsequent decreased levels of galectin 9 (LGALS9) may result in reduced immunotolerance and subsequent embryo rejection. The development of endometriosis induces epigenetic modifi cation of several genes within the eutopic endometrium; these alterations may contribute to the pathology of the disease and the pathophysiology of the resulting infertility. (U54 HD40093 to ATF; NIH ES013071 to S-MH) LGALS9 Apoptosis of immune cells Introduction Endometriosis correlates with increasing migration and proliferation of cells isolated from patients eutopic endometrium (PEE) as well as with enhanced transcription of aromatase (Aro) and subsequent activation of ezrin (E) through ROCK II. Here, we aim to investigate whether the action of Aro upstream of ROCK II requires the activation of PI3K. with increased levels of OGP protein; in the luteal phase increasing P levels antagonize the actions of E. Furthermore, increased levels of oviductal ER and PR are present during the estrogenic follicular phase while P decreases both ER and PR during the luteal phase. We now hypothesize that the P resistance associated with endometriosis occurs in the oviduct. Methods: Oviducts were harvested during the window of uterine receptivity (d 10 PO) from baboons 12-16 months following induction of experimental endometriosis (n=3) and from 2 animals with spontaneous disease. Oviducts were also obtained from control animals treated with the anti-P (ZK 137.299; n=3) and from animals during the follicular (n=8) and luteal (n=6) phases of the cycle. The tissue was processed for ICC localization using specifi c antibodies against ERα, PR and OGP. The epithelial cell height and the percentage of ciliated epithelial cells were also quantifi ed on Gomori stained slides. Results: OGP was signifi cantly higher in animals with endometriosis compared to day 10 PO controls and were similar to that seen in late follicular phase and ZK treated animals. Baboons with spontaneous endometriosis showed a similar persistence of OGP (Table 1) , which was correlated with the maintenance of ERα in animals with endometriosis. However epithelial cell height and the percentage of ciliation were not affected by endometriosis. Summary: In the mid-luteal phase the presence of OGP in baboons with endometriosis indicates that P resistance occurs in the oviduct. These data suggest that the inhibition of P action may alter the oviductal environment and may be an additional factor that contributes to endometriosis-associated infertility. (U54 HD40093) 38.3 ±15.0 207.3±63.3 Introduction Endometriosis is frequently associated with serious pelvic pain such as dysmenorrhoea and dyspareunia. L1 (CD171) is known as a regulator of cell migration, proliferation, invasion and adhesion of several tumor cell types, but also as a stimulator of neurite outgrowth. We demonstrate the distribution and expression of L1 in patients with and without endometriosis. L1 might be an important mediator of the invasion, but could also be associated with increased nerve growth and pain in endometriosis. Endometrial and endometriosis biopsies were obtained from patients undergoing laparoscopy after providing written informed consent under a study protocol approved by the Luebeck Ethics committee. Immunohistochemistry and westernblot were performed on endometriotic lesions and endometrium using mAb L1-11A (subclone of UJ127.11). Stromal and epithelial cell cultures of endometriosis and endometrium were prepared for extraction of total RNA. Quantitative real-time PCR was performed with specifi c oligonucleotide primers for human L1. In a neuronal growth assay with chicken embryo ganglions, we tested conditioned media from endometrium epithelial cultures with and without L1 antibodies. Immunohistochemistry showed most intense L1 staining in atypical endometriosis, strong staining in normal endometriosis, weaker in endometrium from patients with endometriosis and the weakest L1 staining in endometrium from control patients. L1 staining was always prominent in epithelial cells and weak in the stromal compartment. Quantitative real-time PCR and westernblot confi rmed these results. In chicken embryo ganglion assays, incubation with conditioned medium from endometriosis epithelial cells induced neurite outgrowth, which was inhibited by anti-L1-antibodies. Conclusion L1 could be involved in the adhesion and invasion of endometriosis tissue during the disease development and progress. Endometriosis associated pain might be mediated by increased nerve outgrowth. Future studies are needed to demonstrate, if L1 antibodies can be helpful for the treatment of endometriosis. Objective: Endometriosis and adenomyosis cause not only infertility but also acute-and chronic severe pelvic pain, compromising the quality of life in the patients. Molecular mechanism(s) underlying the endometriosis-and/or adenomyosis-related pain, however, remains elusive. Nerve growth factor (NGF) has been recently proposed as one of the key factors responsible for the onset and maintenance of chronic pain in a variety of tissues and diseases. In this study, to obtain a clue for the possible involvement of NGF in the generation of pain, we investigated the expression and localization of NGF in the lesions of ovarian endometriotic cysts, adenomyosis, and peritoneal endometriosis. Aims/Objectives: We aimed to assess the importance of endometrial Nucleolin expression, telomerase and telomere length (TL) in endometriosis, and to immuno-localise nucleolin in the endometrium. Materials and methods: In this prospective pilot study, endometrial biopsies were collected from 27 healthy, fertile, symptoms free women without endometriosis (Group 1, confi rmed by laparoscopy) and 27 women with symptomatic, surgically diagnosed endometriosis (Group 2). 15 women in group 1 and 15 women in group 2 had biopsies taken during the cycle day 21+/-2 (implantation window). Further 12 women in group 1 and 12 women in group 2 were biopsied in the peri-menstrual period (day 26 +/-2). Endometria were dated according to recent modifi cations of Noyes criteria by two experienced pathologists 1 . Commercially available monoclonal anti-nucleolin antibody (NovaCatra, New Castle, UK) , and rabbit poly clonal anti-telomerase antibody (Abcam, UK) were used in our immuno-histochemistry protocol. The mean TL was determined by qPCR. The endometria of fertile healthy women showed either weak or no telomerase or nucleolin immuno-reactivity throughout the luteal phase. Immuno-staining for both nucleolin and telomerase were signifi cantly increased during the implantation window and the premenstrual endometria of women with endometriosis (nucleolin p =<0.001 for glands, epithelium and stroma, p=0.05 for endothelium; telomerase p =<0.0001 for all tissue compartments except perivascular region). The mean TL were signifi cantly longer in endometrial cells of women with endometriosis during the implantation window (p<0.002). Aberrant endometrial nucleolin and telomerase expression may affect endometrial receptivity and contribute to pathogenesis of endometriosis. To our knowledge this is the fi rst report of immuno-localising nucleolin and hTERT in benign endometrium. Objective: In the fetus, estrogens have permanent developmental effects, and our lab is investigating the potential for xenoestrogens to program endometriosis-related genes during development. Women exposed in utero to the synthetic estrogen diethylstilbestrol (DES) had an 80% increased incidence of endometriosis, an estrogen dependent disease characterized by the growth of endometrial tissue outside of the uterus. While women no longer take DES during pregnancy, human fetuses are exposed to many xenoestrogens, e.g. bisphenol A, during development. We hypothesize that developmental DES exposure permanently programs expression of endometriosis related genes and exacerbates endometriosis in adulthood. Methods: Mice were developmentally exposed to a daily oral dose of 0.1 μg/kg DES or vehicle control. In adulthood endometriosis was surgically induced by auto-transplantation of uterine squares to the intestinal mesentery. After 4 weeks mice were euthanized and endometriotic lesions and eutopic endometrium were collected. Results: In mice developmentally exposed to DES, the total endometriotic lesion mass was 60% larger than the endometriotic lesions from control mice. Also, expression of tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) was programmed by developmental DES exposure. TIMP-1 gene expression was reduced 50% in endometriotic lesions of DES treated mice relative to controls. Conclusion: TIMP-1 and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) have previously been shown to be aberrantly expressed in women with endometriosis. Our fi nding that developmental DES exposure decreased TIMP-1 expression in endometriotic lesions offers a potential mechanism for the increased lesion size as TIMP-1 inhibits MMPs that are necessary for the tissue remodeling associated with the establishment and growth of endometriotic lesions. This is an important and novel fi nding that developmental xenoestrogen exposure programs the fetus to exacerbate endometriosis in adulthood. Studies are underway to assess environmentally relevant xenoestrogens to which human fetuses are exposed. ( Background: Postmenopausal women are more likely to develop cardiovascular disease (CVD) than premenopausal women due to protective effects of estrogen on the vasculature. Aging is associated with arterial dysfunction including impaired responses to increased intraluminal pressure (myogenic tone). Moreover, ovariectomy in young adult rodents results in increased myogenic tone that is normalized with estrogen replacement. However, the combined effects of aging and ovarian status on myogenic tone have not been studied. 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (20-HETE), a potent vasoconstrictor formed in vascular smooth muscle by cytochrome P450 4A (CYP4A) enzymes, mediates myogenic tone in mesenteric arteries from male rats; however, its role in females is unknown. We hypothesized that ovariectomy would result in increased myogenic tone in aged female rats that could be normalized by estrogen replacement. We further hypothesized that 20-HETE would mediate these myogenic responses. Methods: Aged (16-17 months) female Sprague-Dawley rats were assigned to intact, ovariectomized (OVX) or ovariectomized and estrogen replaced (OVX-E) groups. After 4 weeks, resistance-sized mesenteric arteries were isolated and responses to intraluminal pressure (0-140mmHg) in the presence or absence of the CYP4A inhibitor DDMS (10μM) were assessed with a pressure myograph. Results: In agreement with our hypothesis, myogenic tone was increased in arteries from OVX rats relative to intact rats (% constriction: 18.0±5.6 vs. 1.8±0.9, p<0.001) . Surprisingly, however, myogenic tone was not reduced by estrogen replacement in arteries from OVX-E rats (% constriction: 23.4±1.3, p<0.001). Furthermore, inhibition of CYP4A-dependent 20-HETE production had no effect on myogenic tone development in arteries from any group indicating that 20-HETE does not play a role in myogenic tone in arteries from female rats. Conclusions: Ovarian hormone defi ciency increases myogenic tone in aged rats. In contrast to studies involving young rats, estrogen replacement did not reduce this reactivity. These data suggest that in aging females, defi ciency of an ovarian hormone, but not estrogen, results in increased myogenic constriction. This may partially explain the increased risk of CVD in aging women even in the presence of estrogen replacement therapy. Methods: Early menopausal women participating in the KEEPS trial were prospectively offered inclusion. At baseline, 12 healthy participants underwent a 75g oral glucose tolerance test (GTT) followed by MMTT. Fasting blood sugar (FBS) and HbA1c were obtained and blood glucose levels (BS) following MMTT and GTT were evaluated at 60 & 120 minutes for comparison. MMTT is a 600kcal shake containing 50% carbohydrates (75g glucose), 30% fat (vegetable oil) and 20% whey, followed by postprandial BS assessments among other metabolic measures (not reported in this abstract). Pair wise correlation analyses were performed to relate the screening tests to each other and to HbA1c levels. Multivariate linear regression modeling was used to determine independent predictors of outcomes. P-value <0.05 was considered statistically signifi cant. GYN, Malmo University Hospital, Lund University, Malmo, Sweden. Objectives: To describe changes in uterine artery diameter and uterine vascularization during the period from 24 months before to 24 months after the menopause (MP). Methods: 20 50 year-old women still menstruating underwent transvaginal gray scale/color and spectral Doppler ultrasound examination every 3 months until 12 months had elapsed since their last vaginal bleeding (MP); then every 6 months until 24 months after MP. Women were considered to be postmenopausal after 12 months of amenorrhea, provided that serum FSH was ≥ 17 IU/L (lowest reference value for postmenopausal women in our laboratory) in blood samples taken 3 and 6 months after the last vaginal bleeding. The examinations included measurements of uterine artery diameter, blood fl ow velocity and pulsatility index (PI) in both uterine arteries. The diameter of each uterine artery was measured three times from a longitudinal color Doppler image of the artery, the mean of the three measurements being used for analysis. The pattern of change over time for each variable was identifi ed and noted for each woman. Statistical analysis was carried out using Wilcoxon Test. Results: Three patterns of change over time were discerned: 1 -decrease, 2 -increase, 3 -no clear change. Pattern 1 was the most common for all variables except PI. Because observations for the right and left uterine artery were similar, only results for the right uterine artery are presented. Uterine artery diameter decreased during the 24 months preceding MP (P= 0.026) and continued to decrease after MP (P=0.044). Uterine artery peak systolic velocity and time average maximum velocity decreased over time with statistically signifi cant changes occurring between MP and 24 months after MP (P=0.006 and P=0.008, respectively). Uterine artery PI did not change during study period (P=0.49). In all women FSH levels at 3 and 6 months after the last menses confi rmed that the last bleeding was indeed the menopause; FSH levels ranging from 38 to 148 IU/L. Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the fi rst prospective longitudinal study reporting perimenopausal changes of uterine blood fl ow. Decline of the uterine artery diameter occurred during the last two years prior to menopause and preceded decrease of fl ow velocity. We hypothesize that late premenopausal decrease of uterine artery diameter may be related to declining ovarian estrogen output. localized to cytoplasm of M, F and vascular SMC by IHC. In addition, ALDH1 exhibited intense cytoplasmic staining in fi broblast-type cells within connective tissue. Treatment of M and F SMC with ATRA increased CRABP2, CRBP1 and ALDH1 expression in a dose-and time-dependant manner, but did not affect ADH1 or RARRES2 expression. Fibroid SMC response to ATRA was similar to myometrial SMC for the 6 genes under investigation with the exception of ALDH1 at 72 hours, which was signifi cantly reduced in F. We have shown that a number of genes in the retinoid pathway show altered expression in fi broids compared to myometrium at both the mRNA and protein level. We have also demonstrated that there are limited but signifi cant differences between the M and F SMC response to ATRA at a transcriptional level. Alterations in the retinoid pathway may potentially infl uence a large number of different downstream genes, however, it remains to be determined if aberrations in this gene pathway are a signifi cant causative factor in the etiology of fi broids. Testing of the Wound Healing Hypothesis for Leiomyomas: Evaluation of Versican Variants. John M Norian, 1,2 Minnie Malik, 1 Doina Joseph, 1 James H Segars, *1,2 William H Catherino. 1, 2 1 Obstetrics & Gynecology, Uniformed Services University, Bethesda, MD, USA; 2 RBMB, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. Objectives: Leiomyomas exhibit a large degree of extracellular matrix (ECM) disorganization and aberrant extracellular signaling. Versican, a hyaluronanchondroitin sulphate binding proteoglycan, forms an integral part of the ECM that organizes the uterine cells in linear arrays between collagen fi brils and also serves as a repository for cytokines and growth factors important for leiomyoma proliferation. Different levels of versican variant (V0, V1, V2, and V3) expression have been noted with tissues which have undergone repetitive wound healing. We have previously hypothesized that leiomyoma development is related to disorganized wound healing. We therefore suspected that versican variants are altered in leiomyomas. Methods: After IRB approval, we obtained spontaneous uterine leiomyoma and matched myometrium from patients undergoing hysterectomy. Primary cell cultures were generated and immortalized using recombinant retrovirus containing the E6/E7 open reading frames of human papillomavirus type-16. Expression of versican variants was analyzed by end point RT-PCR, quantitative RT-PCR, western blot and cytoimmunofl uoresecence in both tissue and immortalized cell cultures. Results: All four variants (V0, V1, V2, and V3) were expressed in leiomyoma and myometrial tissue. Variant V0 mRNA was upregulated 4.9 fold (±0.66, p<0.05) in leiomyoma tissue and 8.31 fold (±2.11, p<0.05) in cell cultures compared with patient matched myometrium. V0 and V1 were expressed at higher levels compared with V2 and V3 as observed by end-point multiplex RT-PCR. Differential expression of versican was also shown by western blot analysis. Localization of the variants by cytoimmunofl uorescence in cell culture indicated that V3 was predominately localized in the nucleus. Conclusions: Versican variants were differentially upregulated in leiomyoma. V0 and V1 were expressed at higher levels in both leiomyoma and myometrium. It has been suggested that differing levels of proteoglycan composition and amount in leiomyomas compared with matched myometrium contribute to the disorganized ECM by fi lling in the wider spaced and irregularly shaped collagen fi brils. Our data suggest that larger versican variants differentially affect ECM composition and thus, participate in disorganized wound healing and leiomyogenesis. Matched Normal Myometrial Cells. Memy H Hassan, 1 Salama A Salama, 1 David T Curial, 2 Ayman Al-Hendy. *1 1 Obestetric and Gynecology, UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA; 2 University of Alabama, Birmingham, USA. Introduction: The development of novel therapeutic strategies is imperative for uterine leiomyoma. In this regard, adenoviral (Ad) gene therapy is a promising approach. Aim: screening of several modifi ed adenoviruses to identify the most effi cient and selective virus towards human leiomyoma cells to be used as candidate for delivering therapeutic genes. Methods: As experimental models we used primary cultures of human leiomyoma cells derived from tumors samples collected at time of hysterectomy as well as telomerase-immortalized human liomyoma cell line. We also used a telomerase-immortalized human myometrial cell line as a control. Wild type adenovirus serotype 5 (Ad5-Luc) as well as some modifi ed viruses, Ad5 RGDluc and Ad5 Sigma -luc (fi ber-modifi ed viruses) as well as Ad survivin-luc, that carry liciferase reporter under survivin promoter, were propagated on 293 cells and purifi ed by double CsCL density centrifugation. Various cell types were transfected with 10 and 50 PFU/cell of these viruses using transfection medium for 4 h then media were replaced with complete normal media, incubation was continued for 48 h, and luciferase activities were determined using luciferase enzyme assay systems, according to the supplier's protocol. The luciferase activities were normalized against the amount of protein. Results: Our data demonstrated that both Ad5 RGD and Ad5 Sigma had high expression levels of luciferase activities in both primary and immortalized human leiomyoma cells at 10 and 50 pfu/cell when compared to wild type Ad-Luc. Additionally, these modifi ed viruses demonstrated selectivity towards leiomyoma cells compared to myometrium at 10 pfu/cell. Collectively, Ad5sigma-luc was the most selective agent towards human leiomyoma cells. Ad-survivin promoter exhibited minimal activity in all tested cell models. Conclusion: Signifi cant infectivity enhancement could be achieved in primary and immortalized human leiomyoma cells by utilizing the Ad5 vector in which the Ad5 knob is switched for that of reovirus(Ad5 Sigma) or short poly peptide is attached to H I loop (Ad5 RGD). These modifi ed adenoviruses are more selective towards human leiomyoma cells than myometrium cells. These data establish the foundation for rational development of infectivity enhanced Adenovirus-based gene therapy for uterine lieomyoma. Obstetric & Gaenecology, S. Paolo Hospital, Milan, Italy. Objective: To compare laparoscopic and laparotomic myomectomy, focusing on short and long term intra and post-operative parameters. Methods: A prospective, randomized, controlled analysis of 60 consecutive patients with a uterine volume ≤ 300 cc and number of myomas ≤ 5 submitted to laparoscopic (1) and laparotomic (2) myomectomy with 12 months of follow up. Results: Patients' mean age, body mass index, number of myomata and maximum diameter were comparable in the two groups. Operative time was camparable in the two groups (79 ±43mins in (1) and 78 ±19mins in (2)). There was a statistically signifi cant difference for blood loss (98 ±87cc in (1) vs. 189 ±134cc in (2)p=0.003). For the post operatory hospital stay (2.3 days (1) and 3.6 days (2)p=0.001). 1 month follow up showed a statistically signifi cant difference for pelvic pain and urinary disorders (53.3% in (1) Vs. 26.7% in (2)p=0.04), further painful symptoms (30% in (1) Vs. 6.7% in (2)p=0.007), mean days off of work (20 ±9.7days in (1) Vs. 25 ±15 in (2)p=0.03). 6 and 12 months follow up revealed comparable data for clinical evaluation and a pregnancy rate of 58.3 and 44.4 % in (1) and (2) respectively. The US evaluation revealed a persistence of 4.7% (1) and a 0% in (2) after single myomectomy; 22.4% in (1) and 21.4% in (2) after multiple myomectomy. After 12 months, there was 13% of relapses in (1) and 10% in (2). Discussion: In uteri with a volumen <300 cc and myomatas number <5, laparoscopic myomectomy is better than laparotomic approach. In (1) , lower blood loss, shorter hospitalization and convalescence and reduced postoperative adhesions risk were noticed. Persistence and relapse rate is more infl uenced by myomatas' number (single or multiple myomectomy) than surgical technique. Uterine Leiomyoma Compared to Myometrial Tissue. Tonia L Hermon, 1, 3 Alicia B Moore, 1 Grace E Kissling, 2 Frank J Castora, 3 Silvina Bocca, *4 Darlene Dixon. 1 OBJECTIVE: Uterine leiomyomas (fi broids) are the most common tumors found in the reproductive tract of premenopausal women and are the leading cause of hysterectomy in the United States. It has been suggested that their growth may be mediated by the interaction of hormone and growth factor pathways and that phosphorylation of the estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) at serine 118 may be important in this interaction. METHODS: Immunohistochemical, western blot and immunofl uorescence procedures were used to determine the expression of phosphorylated ERα Serine 118 (ERα-phospho-Ser118), phosphorylated p44/42 Map Kinase (phospho-p44/42) and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) in human leiomyoma and patient-matched myometrial tissues (n=10) during the proliferative and secretory phases of the menstrual cycle. RESULTS: We found that fi broids, overall, expressed more ERα-phospho-Ser118 (p ≤ 0.01) and PCNA (p ≤ 0.05) than myometrial tissue, and tumors from the proliferative phase had signifi cantly increased expression of ERα-phospho-Ser118 (p ≤ 0.05) than those from the secretory phase. Immunoexpression of both phospho-p44/42 (p ≤ 0.05) and ERα-phospho-Ser118 (p ≤ 0.05) was increased in the nuclei of tumor cells from the proliferative phase of the cycle compared to myometrial cells. There was also increased colocalization of phospho-p44/42 and ERα-phospho-Ser118 in the nuclei of tumor versus normal cells from the proliferative phase of the menstrual cycle. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that phosphorylation of ERα at serine 118 may be important in leiomyoma growth and that this phosphorylation may be regulated by estrogen and progesterone. These data also imply that phospho-p44/42 may phosphorylate ERα at Ser118 due to the increased coexpression of both proteins in the nuclei of tumors versus myometrial cells. Understanding the interaction between ERα and growth factor pathways and how they regulate leiomyoma growth will help develop noninvasive therapeutic strategies for treatment of these tumors. Background: Uterine leiomyoma are benign smooth muscle tumors that originate from myometrium. Leiomyoma are sex steroid hormone-dependent neoplasms Like many other estrogen-responsive tumors, the effects of estrogens in leiomyomas cells are mediated by the estrogen receptor (ER), of which both subtypes, ERα and ERβ, were found in fi broids. Dominant negative ERs (DN-ER) are ER mutants that are unable to activate transcription and have the additional property of being able to suppress the transcriptional activity of the wild-type ER when they are co expressed in the same cells. Aim: Assessment of the effi cacy of in vivo gene therapy of uterine leiomyoma in the immune-competent Eker rat model using adenovirus mediated delivery of DN-ER (Ad-DN-ER). Method: Ten Female Eker rats 11-14 months old with MRI-confirmed uterine leiomyoma lesions were randomized to a single treatment with direct intratumor injection of Ad-DN-ER versus Ad-Lac Z as negative control. The tumor volume was determined by serial MRI scanning and confi rmed with caliper measurement. Animals were observed daily for any post-treatment complications. Sample rats were selected randomly and killed at the following time points 0, 8 and 15 day and experiments completed at 30 days. Tissue samples were collected from tumors for further evaluation as well as samples from other organs eg. uterus, ovary,spleen, etc. to assess the safety of the adenovirus treatment. Results: Ad-DN-ER treatment produced dramatic shrinkage of the total uterine fi broid volume by -45%, -80% and -78% of pretreatment volume at days 8, 15and 30 respectively while the tumor size in negative control animals receiving Ad-LacZ continued to grow by +26%,, +66%, +102% at same time points. All animals well tolerated the virus inoculation and survived the experiment without any apparent sign of toxicity. The PCR detection assay of E4 region of the adenovirus revealed that the adenovirus transfection is localized to the fi broid tissues and did not disseminated to other organs Conclusion: Adenovirus-mediated deliveries of dominant negative gene by direct intra-tumor inoculation shrink uterine leiomyoma lesions in Eker rats. The delivered virus particles do not disseminate to adjacent or distant organs. These studies provide essential preclinical data for the development of gene therapy as an alternative non-surgical treatment option for uterine leiomyoma. measured using radio labeled microspheres in 33 ewes comparing BBF of Luteal (low estrogen), to Follicular (Preovulatory high estrogen) phase and Pregnant (high estrogen and progesterone). In oophorectomized (Ovx; 10-15 days post surgical menopause) ewes, we compared effects of acute (5ug/kg bolus @ 120 min) and prolonged (6ug/kg/day for 10 days) exogenous estradiol-17b to vehicle infusions. Bladders from 40 additional ewes matched to the above groups, ERα and ERβ levels were measured using western blot analysis. Results: BBF in intact sheep during the Luteal phase averaged 251+ 90 (ml/min normalized per kg bladder weight) and was unaltered during the Follicular phase (185+ 39), it was somewhat reduced in Pregnancy 120 + 30 (P=0.055). Compared to Luteal phase sheep, Ovx raised bladder vascular resistance 2.9 fold from 567+201 to 1647+155 mmHg* min/ml and lowered BBF 72% from 251+ 90 to 70 ml/min*kg (P<0.001). In Ovx animals, acute and chronic ERT lowered bladder vascular resistance (313+46 and 746+93 mmHg* min/ml) restoring BBF (350+ 60 and 140+ 20 ml/min*kg) to levels seen in ovary intact sheep (P>0.05). ERα predominated and ERβ was not detectable. In intact sheep, the phase of the cycle did not alter ERα levels, Pregnancy was associated with a 73% increase. When compared to the Luteal, Ovx, which lowered BBF, in contrast raised ERα concentrations 19%. ERT in Ovx sheep did not alter ERα levels. Conclusion: With Pregnancy and Ovx there were lower BBFs and elevated ERα levels, suggesting an inverse relationship between them in the bladder. The fall in BBF in pregnancy may be due to shunting of blood to reproductive tissues. Although ERT in Ovx sheep restored BBF it did not lower the elevated ERα levels back to Luteal controls. The rise in ERα levels in Pregnancy cannot merely be a response to reduced perfusion, but is likely due to the prolonged exposure to progesterone that occurs in pregnancy. Support NIH HL49210, HD38843. Kathleen A Connell, Heidi Chen, Vaagn Andikyan, Marsha K Guess, Hugh S Taylor. * Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. Objective: We have previously shown that the presence of HOXA11 is essential for the development of the murine uterosacral ligament and demonstrated decreased HOXA11 gene expression in women with pelvic organ prolapse (POP). MMP-2 and 9 infl uence extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling by their ability to degrade the denatured fi brillar collagens I and III, which are two of the primary constituents of the uterosacral ligament. Previous studies have shown alterations in these enzymes in women with POP. The purpose of these experiments was to determine if overexpression of HOXA11 affects collagen I and III and/or matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9. Methods: NIH 3T3 mouse fi broblasts were cultured in DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum. After reaching 70% confl uence, cells were transfected with a PTriX vector constitutively expressing HOXA11 or with the empty vector. After 24 hours, RNA was extracted and the expression of collagen Types I and III and MMP-2 and MMP 9 were evaluated using quantitative real time RT-PCR. Beta actin was used for normalization. All experiments were conducted in duplicate. Data was analyzed using Students t test. Results: MMP-2 gene expression was signifi cantly decreased in fi broblasts overexpressing the HOXA11 gene. After HOXA11 transfection MMP-2 expression decreased by 26% compared to controls treated with vector alone. (p<0.03) No signifi cant differences were seen in collagen types I and III, or MMP-9 gene expression. Conclusion: We have identified a novel pathway regulating collagen metabolism. HOXA11 regulation of MMP-2 expression contributes to the control of the ECM metabolism. Overexpression of the HOXA11 gene resulted in downregulation of MMP-2 gene expression in murine fi broblasts. Decreased expression of MMP-2 results in decreased collagen catabolism. Our fi ndings suggest that altered ECM metabolism in women with POP may be due to downregualtion of the HOXA11/MMP-2 pathway. Targeted therapy using HOXA11 could potentially aid in the prevention or treatment of pelvic organ prolapse. Lacerations? Bela Kudish, Michael Kruger, Robert J Sokol. * Obstetrics and Gynecology Dept, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA. Objective: Confl icting opinions exist in both the literature and clinical care regarding the future role of elective cesarean section to avoid severe perineal lacerations. Presently, the key decisions that affect the rate of anal sphincter tears are made in the second stage of labor by implementing operative vaginal delivery and/or episiotomy. The purpose of this study is to develop an obstetric model of main antepartum pre-labor factors that allow for prediction of the development of anal sphincter trauma in the delivering patient. Study design: Using a prospectively collected computerized perinatal database of a tertiary care institution, we examined antepartum maternal and obstetric factors, including maternal age (MA), ethnicity, nulliparity status (NS), parity, gestational age (GA), and estimated birth weight (EFW) for all singleton, vertex vaginal live births between 1996 and 2003. Based on β coeffi cients obtained from stepwise logistic regression (LR) of pre-labor risk determinants of severe perineal laceration, a model was developed for prediction of probability of developing anal sphincter tear. Robustness versus shrinkage of performance of the rule was examined by comparing receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve for the predicted versus observed rates of severe perineal laceration. Results: Over the 7-year study period, there were 33,564 vaginal deliveries meeting inclusion criteria. 3.65% of subjects experienced severe perineal trauma. LR yielded a rule in which MA (OR 1.04, 95%CI 1.03-1.05), African American ethnicity (OR 0.55, 95% CI 0.48-0.62), NS (OR 3.37, 95% CI 2.6-4.37), parity (OR 0.59, 95% CI 0.51-0.68), GA (OR 1.19, 95% CI 1.15-1.23), and EFW ≥4000 gm (OR 2.77, 95% CI 1.58-4.86) were signifi cant pre-labor determinants of severe perineal laceration. The ROC curve for the predicted versus observed rates of severe perineal tear revealed predictive validity of the rule at a sensitivity of 80%, specifi city of 66%, PPV of 8.2%, and NPV of 99%. Conclusion: Even though the developed obstetric model allows to accurately predict women that would not develop severe perineal laceration, its ability to identify individuals that can potentially benefi t from undergoing elective cesarean delivery to avoid severe perineal trauma is poor. More research is needed to identify additional pre-labor factors that can be included in this obstetric model before elective cesarean section can be offered as a solution. Assessing Cervical Remodelling Prior To Induction of Labour by Electrical Impedance Spectroscopy: Correlation with Labour Characteristics and Outcomes. Dilly O Anumba, *1 Soma Mukherjee, 1 Saurabh V Gandhi, 1 Brian H Brown. 2 1 Reproductive and Developmental Medicine, The University of Sheffi eld, Sheffi eld, South Yorkshire, United Kingdom; 2 Biomedical Engineering, The University of Sheffi eld, Sheffi eld, South Yorkshire, United Kingdom. Objectives: Prelabour cervical ripening results from molecular events that include leucocyte infi ltration, collagen metabolism, and altered hydration. Digital assessment of ripening has a high observer variation, and the value of cervical sonography is unclear. We sought to determine whether the electrical resistivity of the cervix prior to induction of labour may summarise cervical remodelling processes more accurately than clinical assessment, thus correlating better with labour outcomes. Materials and Methods: Cervical electrical impedance (CI) and Bishop Score (BS) were determined in 83 women prior to induction of labour. CI was determined using a 9mm probe attached to the Sheffi eld v3.5 Impedance Meter. Data at 30 electrical frequencies were used to generate impedance spectra that conformed to the Cole Equation. We compared CI and BS for labour onset, duration, need for syntocinon augmentation and mode of delivery, employing parametric/nonparametric tests, as well as tests of correlation (Spearman's and Pearson's, cc) and prediction (area under the ROC curves, AUC). Results: Cervical impedance at all frequencies showed a negative correlation with BS (P < 0.05). Low CI and high BS were highly predictive of multiparity (AUC P < 0.01 and < 0.05 respectively). Compared to BS, CI showed a better correlation with labour duration (cc: -0.17, P < 0.2 vs. cc 0.3, P < 0.01 respectively), and improved prediction of the need for syntocinon augmentation of labour [AUC (95% CI) 0.55 (0.42, 0.67) vs. 0.64 (0.52, 0.76) respectively]. Artifi cial Neural Network: Control of Ultrasound Operator Measurement Errors. Filiberto Maria Severi, *1 Caterina Bocchi, 1 G Cevenini, 2 F Filosomi, 1 F Calonaci, 1 P Barbini, 2 Felice Petraglia. *1 1 Dpt of Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Reproductive Medicine; 2 Dpt of Surgery and Bioengineering, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. Objective The fetal biometry used for sonographic estimation of fetal weight (EFW) is affected by human errors. We evaluated the performance of an Artifi cial Neural Network (ANN), we previously designed and tested, in enhancing the accuracy of fetal biometry detection by pointing out measurement errors and suggesting the operator to re-measure suspected wrong data. Methods 61 fetuses were evaluated within 5 days of delivery by US parameters [BPD, HC, AC, FL, AF, ultrasound-delivery interval (US-D) ]. Data were introduced into ANN to evaluate the probability of their correctness, the agreement among each fetal biometric parameter measured and a defi nitive EFW. The ANN performance was assessed both in its initial estimates and in those obtained after the re-measurement of suspected wrong data. For comparison we used the EFW derived by 182 formulas (from 59 published papers). Mean absolute error percent (MAE%) was calculated: differences were determined by using paired t-test. In 16 out of 61 cases biometry was measured once and in 45 cases it was repeated 2 or more times. US-D was 0.9±1.2 days, mean GA at delivery was 39±1.7 wks and mean fetal weight 3399±588 g. 18 formulas (from 7 papers) showed the same performance of ANN (p>0.05). The correction of detected errors yielded statistically signifi cant improvements (table) not only in ANN EFW (MAE% from 6.5 to 2.6) but also when the new biometry was tested by the 7 best models (i.e. Hadlock formula MAE% from 6.7 to 3.5). We suggest a role of ANN as quality/control system for fetal biometry detection. Its use allows the biometric errors detection, analyzing in real time the congruity of each fetal parameter in respect to others, forcing the operator to repeat suspected wrong measurements till the percentage of congruity is high. Reducing human errors ANN enhances EFW and it can represent also an effective self-training tool for operators. MAE% ± SD before (T1) and after (T2) BACKGROUND: Maternal cigarette smoking during pregnancy is associated with reduced fetal growth and an increase in preterm birth. We sought to determine the effect of a contingent voucher based incentive program designed to reduce maternal smoking in pregnancy on fetal growth patterns. METHODS: Fifty six women were studied who had been randomized in a prospective study to receive redeemable vouchers either contingent on evidence of smoking abstinence (Intervention group-IG, n=28) or independent of evidence of smoking abstinence (Control group CG, n=28). We performed ultrasound examinations at 30 and 34 weeks gestation for all subjects measuring BPD, HC, AC, FL and estimating fetal weight. We also recorded newborn birth weight and sex, maternal age, prepregnancy BMI, 1 hour glucose screening results, illicit drug exposure and parity. Statistical analyses were performed based on t-tests, Fisher's Exact test and stepwise regression with P<0.05 accepted for signifi cance RESULTS: We found no signifi cant differences between groups with respect to maternal age, parity, 1 hour glucola, newborn sex or prepregnancy cigarette consumption. There was a tendency for the IG to have a lower prepregnancy BMI than the CG (IG 23.1 + 5.3, CG 26.1 + 6.7, p=0.07 and to have less frequent use of narcotics (IG = 0/28, CG = 5/28 (18 %), p=0.05). At the fi nal antepartum assessment, there was signifi cantly more smoking abstinence in the IG (11/28, 39%) compared to the CG (3/28, 11%) p=.03. Stepwise regression analysis, which controlled for signifi cant covariates demonstrated that subjects assignment to contingent based vouchers had signifi cantly greater growth in both fetal femur length (p=0.04) and in estimated fetal weight (p=0.02) between the two ultrasound examinations. CONCLUSIONS: Fetal growth, represented by changes in femur length and estimated fetal weight is signifi cantly greater in women randomized to a contingent based voucher than in those randomized to non-contingent vouchers as part of a program to promote smoking cessation in pregnancy. Supported by NIH RO1 DA 14028. Objective: Oligohydramnios is related to adverse perinatal outcomes particularly when associated with fetal growth restriction (FGR) . The purpose of this study was to delineate predictors of adverse perinatal outcomes in cases of preterm oligohydramnios associated with appropriate for gestational age (AGA) fetal biometry. Study Design: A database of preterm AGA fetuses (<37 weeks) presenting for evaluation of oligohydramnios (defi ned as AFI <10 th centile) in the third trimester with delivery information and uterine artery Doppler indices (average resistance index (RI) and bilateral notching) available was prospectively collected (n=90). Amniotic fl uid index (AFI) and birth weight (BW) centiles were calculated using standard tables. Chi square and Student T-test were used to evaluate for predictors of adverse perinatal outcomes including BW ≤ 10 th centile, stillbirth, NICU admission, 5 minute Apgar score < 7, placental abruption, preterm delivery (<35wks), and pre-eclampsia. Results: Patients destined to experience poor perinatal outcomes (22%) were demographically similar to those experiencing normal outcomes in terms of maternal age (P=0.5), ethnicity (P=0.9), body mass index (P=0.3) and parity (P=0.9). However, at risk patients were more likely to present with oligohydramnios at an earlier GA than those not at risk (33.0 ± 3.0 vs. 34.4 ± 2.0 weeks; P = 0.02). There were no differences in perinatal outcomes associated with AFI centile (P=0.9), increased average uterine artery RI (P=0.5), bilateral notching (P=0.4) or a combination of increased uterine artery RI and bilateral notching (P=0.2). Conclusion: Patients with preterm AGA fetuses who present with oligohydramnios at an earlier GA are at risk for adverse perinatal outcomes compared to those presenting later in gestation. Sonographic indices, particularly average uterine artery RI and bilateral notching, were not useful predictors of adverse outcomes. Evaluation. Simcha Yagel, * Sarah M Cohen, Baruch Messing, Dan V Valsky. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Centers, Jerusalem, Israel. Background: Late advances in the technology of 3D/4D ultrasound systems allow almost real-time 3D/4D fetal heart scans. It appears that 3D/4D ultrasound in fetal echocardiography can make a significant contribution to interdisciplinary management team consultation, health delivery systems, parental counseling, and professional training. We aimed to evaluate the application of 3D/4D ultrasound in the diagnosis and management of fetal anatomic and functional heart disease. We have applied 3D/4D ultrasound to the fetal echocardiography portion of our 13-16 and 21-24 gestational weeks fetal anomaly screening ultrasound scans since 2003. In addition to the standard 2D gray-scale and color Doppler scan, 3D/4D technologies were applied including 3D power Doppler (3DPD), spatio-temporal image correlation (STIC) acquisition, and B-fl ow, as well as 3D rendering and inversion mode (IM) applied during postprocessing of stored volumes. Results: We accrued >400 normal fetal echo exams including 3D/4D to establish a learning curve of these emerging technologies. We applied 3D rendering of STIC volumes to 136 normal fetuses and 35 cases of cardiac anomalies, evaluating the interventricular, interatrial, and coronal atrioventricular valves planes. B-fl ow was used to evaluate 199 normal fetuses and 11 cases of venous anomalies and 25 cases of great vessels malalignment. STIC acquisition was combined with IM to evaluate 100 fetuses to establish nomograms of right and left end-systolic and end-diastolic ventricular volumes; 100 additional cases of diagnosed congenital heart disease were evaluated with this modality; in 10 it was found to have added value in the overall evaluation of disordered cardiac function. Conclusions: 3D/4D ultrasound in fetal echocardiography has added value in the diagnosis and evaluation of congenital heart defects and cardiac dysfunction. Objective: Management of patients suspected of increased risk of shoulder dystocia (SD) is hindered by poor predictability and the undesired increase in unnecessary cesarean deliveries (CD). We previously reported on the potential utility of the SHOuLDER score in reducing the prevalence of SD, including birth weight (BW) as a factor. Our objective is to compare the effi cacy of the score using estimated fetal weight (EFW) instead. Materials and Methods: Using ICD-9 codes and the hospital perinatal database all SD cases were identifi ed between 1/96-1/01. Charts were reviewed and maternal demographic and labor data were collected. Controls consisted of those patients that delivered before and after each SD case, as identifi ed by the database. Logistic regression was used as a guide to identifying those factors that were associated with SD outcome as well as the weight of each factor. These statistical analyses were used to assign points to each risk factor. The points were summed, and cutoff points were assessed capturing the highest number of SD cases with the lowest rate of false positives (controls with an elevated score). Results: 207 SD cases occurred during the 5-year study period, to which 414 controls were assigned. Following statistical analysis, point assignments for risk factors were as follows: age >35 =1, diabetes = 3, maternal weight > 200 lbs = 1, maternal height < 5'2" = 2, history of prior SD = 2, estimated fetal weight >4000 g = 4, and 2 nd stage of labor > 120 min =1. A cut-off of 5 points or greater was used to predict SD. Objective: Leptin, adiponectin are adipokines derived from adipose tissue which play a role in the modulation of glucose and lipid metabolism in insulinsensitive tissues in both human and animals. In adult life, leptin is inversely related to adiponectin concentrations. Leptin and adiponectin are known to be produced within the intrauterine environment and have been suggested to be implicated in the regulation of placental growth, development and function and in fetal growth.Glucocorticoids were found to affect signifi cantly adiponectin and leptin gene expression and secretion both in vitro and in animal models. In the present study we evaluated the effect of maternal administration of betamethasone on the correlation between adiponectin and leptin levels in maternal circulation. Material and methods: betamethasone (12mg x 2 24hours apart) was administered to 21 pregnant women at risk of preterm delivery between 24 and 34 weeks of gestation, with blood samples taken at -10min, 3, 6, 12, 24 hours after the fi rst dose and 12, 24 hours and 1 week after the second dose. Adiponectin and leptin concentrations were assayed by ELISA. Results: Adiponectin was inversely correlated to leptin in basal samples (correlation coeffi cient = -0.646; p<0.01). Neither adiponectin nor leptin correlate with gestational age, maternal age or maternal BMI. After betamethasone administration the correlation between adiponectin and leptin was progressively reduced because of the progressive increase in leptin (p<0.05) levels up to 24 hours after administration. In samples collected at 12h after betamethasone this correlation was completely lost and was not restored after 1 week. Conclusion: Glucorticoids in human pregnancy induce a perturbation in the relationship between leptin and adiponectin levels that is maintained after betamethasone administration is discontinued. This effect may be exerted on adipokines release by the placenta and may induce a permanent change in the intrauterine metabolic environment. Conclusion: LMWH prevents SB in women at high risk for recurrent SB, irrespective of thrombophilia status. Patients with KT are at higher risk for pregnancy complications, in women with antecedent SB, despite prophylactic anticoagulation. A randomized trial is needed to assess utility and safety of prophylactic antecoagulation in women with antecedent SB and placental pathology suggestive of MVD. Pregnancies Complicated by Fetal Congenital Heart Defect: Are the Obstetrical Outcomes Different? Jennifer Merriman, 1 Michal Elovitz, *1 Samuel Parry, *1 Stephanie Sober, 1 Jack Rychik, 2 Emmanuelle Pare. 1 Philadelphia, PA, USA. OBJECTIVE: Elective induction of labor (IOL) has been proposed to prevent unplanned deliveries in women carrying fetuses with congenital heart defects (CHD). However, elective IOL has been associated with higher cesarean section (CS) rates. We sought to determine if IOL increased the CS rate in women carrying fetuses with CHD. METHODS: Women carrying a fetus with CHD confirmed by fetal echocardiogram who delivered in a single referral center in the past 5 years were identifi ed using a perinatal database and ICD codes. Medical records were abstracted for demographics, medical/obstetrical history, and delivery outcomes. Women who had an elective IOL due to CHD were compared to those who had spontaneous labor. Bivariate and stratifi ed analyses were performed using chi-square, Student t test and Mantel-Haenszel. RESULTS: Of the 285 women identifi ed, 207 (73%) women were eligible for and attempted vaginal delivery: 32 (15%) had IOL for other indications, 119 (57%) had IOL only due to CHD and 56 (27%) had spontaneous labor. Baseline characteristics and CS rate of the 2 study groups are shown in Table 1 . The CS rate was similar in both groups (14% vs 13%), Primiparas were less likely to have elective IOL (NS), but had higher CS rate than multiparas. IOL did not increase the risk of CS for primiparas (RR=0.86; 95%CI 0.34-2.16). CONCLUSION: In this population of women carrying fetuses with CHD, the rate of elective IOL was high, but contrary to what has been observed in different populations, elective IOL did not seem to increase the risk of CS, even for primiparas. Further analyses are planned to explore our results and determine if there is something intrinsically different about these women. for a fall, with a KB of 0.00%. The composite outcome occurred in 49 cases (19.4%), and could not be predicted by the mechanism of trauma, a positive KB, fi brinogen <200, abdominal pain, uterine contractions, placental location or a combination of factors (Table 1) . Conclusions: The risk of placental abruption and adverse pregnancy outcome attributable to minor trauma is small and cannot be predicted with the clinical and laboratory factors commonly used. These data suggest that minor abdominal trauma in pregnancy does not require admission or laboratory evaluation. The extensive and time-consuming evaluations that occur after such events should be reconsidered. Our objective was to compare neonatal outcomes of normotensive pregnancies (NT) with those of pregnancies with preeclampsia or gestational hypertension (PE/GH) delivered at 38, 39 and 40 weeks(wks). Study design: Secondary analysis of neonatal outcomes of infants born between 38 0/7 and 40 6/7 wks to healthy nulliparous women enrolled in a multicenter NICHD study. Neonatal outcomes were rate of NICU admission, duration of neonatal hospitalization and neonatal complications. We compared neonatal outcomes separately in infants from pregnancies with PE/GH and NT pregnancies delivered at 38, 39, and 40 wks. For each gestational age at delivery we compared neonatal outcomes from PE/GH and NT pregnancies stratifi ed by spontaneous labor vs induced labor or section. Data were analyzed using t-test and chi square with P-value < 0.05 considered signifi cant. Results: Neonatal outcomes were examined from a total of 2061 normotensive and 631 hypertensive pregnancies. Rates of NICU admission and respiratory support (oxygen treatment, CPAP, mechanical ventilation) were greater for the infants of women with PE/GH than the infants of NT pregnancies (table) . Total neonatal stay was longer for infants of PE/GH pregnancies born at 39 wks and 40 wks. There were no differences in rates of SGA or RDS within each gestational age week of delivery. At 38 and 39 wks rates of respiratory support were greater for spontaneously delivered infants of women with PE/GH than in the NT pregnancies (data not shown). Conclusion: Rates of NICU admission and respiratory support were greater among infants born to hypertensive women at 38, 39, and 40 wks. This suggests the need for revision of the conservative management of preeclampsia beyond 37 wks. Objective: To examine maternal and infant outcomes after a vaginal delivery of twin A and a cesarean delivery of twin B. Methods: Between January 1, 1999 and December 31, 2000, a prospective cohort study of all cesareans was conducted at 13 university centers. This secondary analysis was limited to women with twin gestations who experienced labor and underwent cesarean delivery. We compared maternal and neonatal outcomes in women who had vaginal delivery of twin A and a cesarean delivery of twin B to those who had cesarean delivery of both twins. Results: 1,028 women with twins experienced labor and underwent cesarean delivery, 179 (17%) had a combined vaginal/cesarean delivery. The women in the combined group were found signifi cantly more often to have been multiparous and African American. Gestational age at delivery was similar in both groups (34.6 weeks vs. 34.6 weeks, p = 0.97). Selected maternal and infant outcomes are shown in the table. Conclusion: Combined delivery did not affect maternal outcomes related to infection or neonatal outcomes of the second twin when compared to twins where both were delivered by cesarean. anticardiolipin antibodies. Cases were comprised of women with an abruption and a positive thrombophilia screen. Controls were comprised of women with an abruption and a negative thrombophilia screen. All placental histology was systematically reviewed by two perinatal pathologists, blinded to the abruption status. Comparisons of histological lesions were made between cases and controls based on Fisher's exact probability test, and P<0.05 was considered to denote statistical signifi cance. RESULTS: A total of 130 women with abruption were identifi ed, of which eighty-fi ve (65.4%) had at least one thrombophilia. Acute/chronic deciduitis (25% versus 58.1%, P=0.002) and villous hemorrhage (1.3% versus 12.5%, P=0.02) were less common among women with than without thrombophilia, whereas perivillous fi brin deposition was more common in women with thrombophilia (9.4% versus 0%, P=0.05). There was no difference in the overall presence of infarcts between the 2 groups (23.5% versus 37.8%, P=0.10). However, when an infarct was present (28.5% of abruptions), the presence of an old infarct was more common among women with a thrombophilia (90% versus 41.2%, P=0.004). CONCLUSION: Abruption with maternal thrombophilia is associated with higher rates of old placental infarcts and perivillous fi brin deposition, but lower rates of deciduitis and villous hemorrhage, compared with abruption without thrombophilia. This suggests a longstanding disruption of placental blood fl ow in abruption cases associated with thrombophilia. Prior Thrombosis. Jennifer Warren, Robert M Silver, * D Ware Branch, T Flint Porter. Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. Objective: Thrombophilias have been associated with obstetric complications characterized by placental insufficiency including pregnancy loss, preeclampsia, placental abruption, and intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). This has prompted many clinicians to screen and treat pregnant women for thrombophilias. However, heritable thrombophilias are often present in women with uncomplicated pregnancies and most available data comes from retrospective studies using self controls. Our objective was to evaluate the effect of thromboprophylaxis on pregnancy outcomes in women with inherited thrombophilias. Methods: This is a retrospective cohort study of women with thrombophilias but no prior thrombosis. Medical records were reviewed for pregnancy outcomes, adverse events, diagnosis of thrombophilias, and management in subsequent pregnancies. Chi square and Fisher's exact tests were used to compare women who were and were not treated with thromboprophylaxis. Results: Fifty-two women had 74 pregnancies subsequent to their diagnosis of thrombophilia. The diagnosed thrombophilias included Factor V Leiden (n=40), PT 20210A gene mutation (n=5), FVL/PT gene compound heterozygote (n=1), protein C and S defi ciencies (n=5), and antithrombin III defi ciency (n=1). Thirty-six (49 %) pregnancies were treated with heparin, 7 (9%) with low dose aspirin, and 31 (42%) were not treated. Women treated with heparin had similar rates of live births (74% vs. 77%), pregnancy loss (12% vs. 16%), preeclampsia (0% vs. 6%), abruption (5% vs. 0%), and IUGR (0% vs. 0%) as those not treated. Conclusions: Pregnancy outcomes are often good in women with thrombophilias in the absence of treatment. Treatment of women during pregnancy with thrombophilias and no prior thrombosis should be considered investigational. Fetal Thrombophilia Is Associated with Intrauterine Growth Restriction. P Pileri, 1 F Franchi, 2 A Martinelli, 1 S Calabrese, 1 G Frey, 1 E Biguzzi, 2 G Pardi, 1 Irene Cetin. *1 1 IRCCS Policlinico Mangiagalli Regina Elena, Inst. of Obst. and Gynec, Milan, Italy; 2 IRCCS Policlinico Mangiagalli Regina Elena, Haemoph. and Thromb. Centre, Italy. Objectives. Thrombophilia is defined as a tendency to develop venous thrombosis. Some pregnancy complications, such as intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), pregnancy induced hypertension (PIH) and preeclampsia (PE) , are associated with an abnormal placental development, potentially related to disorders of the utero-placental circulation. A case-control study was performed in order to establish whether the presence of maternal and/or fetal factor V and prothrombin mutations are associated with pregnancy complications such as IUGR, PIH and PE. Methods. IUGR were included if there was reduced intrauterine growth (U.S. measurement of abdominal circumference (AC) below the 10° percentile of reference values, alternatively a percentile reduction>40%, compared to the previous measurement of AC) and birth weight below the10° percentile. PIH was defi ned as a blood pressure >140/90 on 2 or more occasions occurring after 20 weeks of gestation without proteinuria. PE was defi ned as PIH with proteinuria (>0.3gr/24h). Controls were normal term pregnancies carrying appropriate for gestational age fetuses. Exclusion criteria were: multiple pregnancies, non Caucasian women, fetal malformations or chromosomal abnormalities. 104 cases (C) and 204 controls (N) were enrolled and tested for thrombophilia (factor V Leiden and prothrombin G20210A). Cases were classifi ed as follows: 51 PE or PIH, 53 IUGR (20 with PE or PIH, 33 IUGR only). Results. Thrombophilia was present in 13/204 (6.4%) mothers and in 19/204 (9.3%) fetuses of the controls compared to 8/104 (7.7%) mothers and 15/104 (14.4%) fetuses of the cases; the OR was 0.8 (CI 95% 0.3-2) and 2.4 (CI 95% 1-5.25 ) for mothers and fetuses, respectively.  Nandor G Than, 1 Offer Erez, 1 Derek E Wildman, 1,2 Samuel S Edwin, 1 Shali Mazaki-Tovi, 3 Francesca Gotsch, 1 Enola Cushenberry, 1 Beth Pineles, 1 Daniel Montegro, 1 Jimmy Espinoza, 3 Chong-Jai Kim, 4 Sonia S Hassan, 1,2 Zoltan Papp, 5 Roberto Romero. * Objective: A prominent galectin, Gal-1, is expressed by the placenta and fetal membranes, is detectable in the maternal circulation, and has pleiotropic effects. This study determined if preterm labor with intact membranes (PTL) and preterm PROM in the presence/absence of intrauterine infection/ infl ammation (IAI) are associated with changes in the maternal Gal-1 serum concentrations. Methods: This study included the following groups: 1) normal pregnancy (n=61); 2) PPROM with (n=36) and without IAI (n=30); 3) PTL who delivered preterm with (n=35) and without IAI (n=52); 4) PTL who delivered at term (n=45). Maternal serum concentrations of Gal-1 were determined with ELISA. qRT-PCR of Gal-1 mRNA expression was assessed in placenta and fetal membranes in PPROM. Results: 1) Women with PPROM (with and without IAI) had higher Gal-1 concentrations than women with normal pregnancies [median: 2295.8 pg/ml (1272.9-4194.8); PPROM with IAI: 4097.9pg/ml (2181. 1-10646.4 ) (p<0.001); PPROM without IAI: 3779.9pg/ml (1488-63549.9) (p<0.001)]; 2) Women with PTL leading to preterm delivery (with and without IAI) had higher Gal-1 concentrations than women with normal pregnancies [PTL with IAI: 4010.8 pg/ml (1002.5-205197) (p<0.001); PTL without IAI: 3725.4pg/ml (793.3-72821.5) (p<0.001); 3) Patients with PTL who delivered at term had higher Gal-1 concentrations than normal pregnant women: 3479.9pg/ml (1328.7-8200) (p<0.001); 4) The presence of infl ammation was not associated with a change in maternal serum Gal-1; 5) Gal-1 mRNA expression in fetal membranes was higher in cases with histologic chorioamnionitis than those without infl ammation (1.53 fold, p=0 .008). Conclusion: PTL and PPROM are associated with a higher concentration of maternal serum Gal-1 than normal pregnancy. This difference could not be accounted by the presence of IAI. However, infl ammation of the chorioamniotic membranes in PPROM was associated with increased Gal-1 mRNA expression. Objective: To determine if race has an impact on election to attempt vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC), VBAC success, and maternal morbidities associated with VBAC. Methods: A retrospective, multi-center cohort study was conducted of women with a history of at least one prior cesarean delivery. Data were obtained on maternal demographics, medical history, antepartum and intrapartum course, delivery mode, and maternal outcomes. This analysis examines the association between race and the choice to VBAC, VBAC success rates, and maternal morbidity, including uterine rupture, and a composite morbidity outcome (uterine rupture, bladder and bowel injury, and artery laceration). Race was determined by patient self-report. Bivariate and multivariable analyses were performed to assess the independent effect of race on clinical outcomes. Results: The cohort includes 25,076 patients with at least one prior cesarean delivery. In unadjusted and multivariable analysis, black patients were more likely to undertake a trial of labor than non-black patients, and slightly more likely to experience a failure of VBAC attempt. However, despite their increased rate of failure, black women who attempt VBAC are less likely to sustain a uterine rupture than non-black women (Table 1) . Conclusions: There is an increased rate of VBAC attempt and VBAC failure among black patients, which may refl ect a disparity in counseling practices or VBAC candidate selection that should be considered. However, the increased VBAC failure rate is not associated with an increased risk of uterine rupture or over-all maternal morbidity. Background: Illicit opiate use, once considered an urban problem, has increased rapidly in rural areas of the country. Current studies of the effect of opiate agonist therapy during pregnancy have been limited to urban populations. The goal of this study was to determine the impact of a program for opiate dependence during pregnancy on prenatal care (primary outcome: gestational age at start of prenatal care and gestational age of initiation of treatment for opiate dependence) and outcome (gestational age at delivery and birthweight) in a non-urban setting. Methods: Data from 105 patients treated for opiate dependence from 2000-2005 at a single tertiary care institution in a rural setting with a wide referral base were reviewed retrospectively. From 2000 From -2002 , women with opiate dependence were referred to the tertiary center and treated on a case by case basis. In 2002, a structured program for the treatment of opiate dependence during pregnancy was initiated in conjunction with a regional treatment center. Trend for change over time was determined for 4 groups (Kendalls tau): Group 1 (2000 Group 1 ( -2002 n=12) ; Group 2 (2003; n=17), Group 3 (2004; n=30) and Group 4 (2005; n=46 Objective: In utero nutrient restriction may result in offspring with enhanced appetite and the development of adult obesity. For appetite setpoints to be programmed in utero, central orexigenic nuclei must be responsive to appetite mediators prior to term. We sought to determine if the preterm ovine fetus demonstrates cellular (Fos) responses in the periventricular (PVN) and supraoptic (SON) nuclei following central injection of leptin and NPY. Methods: Preterm fetal sheep (127 d; n=6) were chronically prepared with cannulas in the lateral ventricle. At 133 d, fetuses received central injection of either artifi cial CSF (aCSF), leptin (0.075mg/kg; Calbiochem) or NPY (0.05mg/ kg; Sigma) in 1 ml. At 90 min, fetuses were sacrifi ced, brains perfusion fi xed, and later sectioned at 35μm and immunostained for Fos (1;10,000, Calbiochem). Vectastain ABC kit (Vector Laboratories) was used for the secondary antibodyperoxidase reaction and DAB was used for staining. The supraoptic nucleus (SON) and periventricular nucleus (PVN) were examined and scored for Fos expression in their neurons. Olympus CX 31 microscope 4x magnifi cation was used and pictures taken with Nikon E 5400 camera. Results: Both leptin and NPY induced Fos expression in the PVN. The mean number of PVN nuclei stained for Fos was higher following both leptin (664+103) (p<0.05) and NPY (412+42) (p>0.05) as compared to control aCSF injection (190+25) . SON did not demonstrate any change in Fos expression with injection of leptin or NPY. Conclusions: The stimulation of preterm fetal Fos expression in the PVN in response to both leptin and NPY indicates that putative appetite pathways (e.g., arcuate nucleus to PVN) are responsive and likely functional in utero. These results support the potential for in utero nutrient-or stress-mediated alterations in central appetite development to program offspring food intake. Restricted Offspring. Mina Desai, 1 Robert Lane, 2 Guang Han, 1 Michael G Ross. *1 1 Obstetrics & Gynecology, Torrance, CA, USA; 2 Dept. of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake, UT, USA. OBJECTIVE: PPARγ2 is an adipogenic transcription factor which promotes adipocyte differentiation and lipid storage. Maternal food restriction (MFR) during pregnancy results in programmed obesity in IUGR offspring. At 1 day of age, IUGR offspring exhibit increased adipose tissue PPARγ2 expression, which persists in adults. We sought to examine upstream transcriptional factors regulating PPARγ2 and its downstream targets. The C/EBP family members (C/EBPβ, C/EBPδ, and C/EBPα) activate PPARγ which then heterodimers with the retinoid X receptors (RXRα) to infl uence adipocyte differentiation. PPARγ2 induces SREBP1, a transcription factor which promotes lipogenesis in the adipose tissue. We determined the mRNA and protein expression of transcriptional factors regulating adipocyte differentiation in 1 day and 9 month old Control and MFR offspring. STUDY DESIGN: Control dams received ad libitum food, whereas study dams were 50% food-restricted from pregnancy day 10 to 21. At birth, litter size was culled to 4 males and 4 females. All pups were nursed by Control dams and weaned at 3 weeks to ad libitum feed. At 1d and 9 months of age, adipose tissue was analyzed for C/EBPβ, C/EBPδ, C/EBPα, RXRα and SREBP1 for mRNA (real time RT-PCR) and protein levels (Western Blot). RESULTS: At 1d of age, MFR pups showed signifi cantly increased protein and mRNA expression of all C/EBP transcription factors (mRNA: C/EBPβ, 3.5-fold; C/EBPδ, 4.5-fold; C/EBPα, 5-fold; p<0.01), and RXRα (6.5-fold), whereas SREBP1 showed no change as compared to controls. At 9 months of age, MFR offspring continued to express persistently increased transcription factor protein and mRNA, with a further increase in C/EBPβ (6-fold) and RXRα mRNA (17-fold), continued increases in C/EBPδ and C/EBPα, and the new expression of increased SREBP1 (4-fold; p<0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Though generally observed only with the development of obesity, growth restricted MFR newborns demonstrate upregulation of adipogenic transcription factors, and exhibit a further increase at 9 months of age. The increased expression of transcriptional factors upstream and downstream of PPARγ2 suggests a programmed pathway of increased adipocyte differentiation and lipogenesis which promotes the development of obesity. Dept. of Physiology, Univ. of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. Objective: Insulin acts via its receptor (IR) in the hypothalamus to inhibit feeding. Of the four known isoforms of IR substrate (IRS), only IRS-2 is implicated in neuronal control of energy homeostasis; lack of IRS-2 results in hyperphagia and obesity. Additionally, both IRS-1 and IRS-2 participate in the mediation of insulin which regulates embryonic development, postnatal somatic growth, and glucose homeostasis. Low levels of IRS-1 and IRS-2 leads to the development of insulin resistance. We have previously shown that maternal food restriction (MFR) during pregnancy results in IUGR newborns which exhibit hyperphagia and reduced anorexigenic responses. MFR adult offspring demonstrated obesity and insulin resistance as adults. We sought to determine if altered hypothalamic IRS-1 and IRS-2 contribute to reduced satiety responses in IUGR offspring. Method: Pregnant control dams received ad libitum (n=5) food, whereas study dams were 50% MFR (n=5) from pregnancy day 10 to 21 to produce IUGR newborns. At postnatal day 1, brains were collected. The hypothalamic region was dissected and analyzed for mRNA levels of IRS-1 and IRS-2 by real time RT-PCR. Data is presented as fold difference normalized to 18sRNA. Values shown are mean ± SE. Results: At 1d of age, IUGR pups had lower body weights (6.2±0.3 vs 7.6±0.3 g, p<0.01) and signifi cantly reduced blood glucose (94±3 vs 102± 4 mg/dl, p<0.01). IUGR pups showed signifi cantly decreased mRNA expression of IRS-1 (0.2-fold) but not IRS-2 as compared to control pups. Conclusion: If replicated in peripheral tissues, the downregulation of IRS-1 is consistent with reduced body weight and plasma glucose levels. The unaltered IRS-2 at day 1 suggests that enhanced appetite and reduced satiety responses of IUGR offspring may be due to programmed anorexigenic pathways other than insulin-mediated. In view of reduced anorexigenic responses to leptin and low plasma glucose, we propose that altered adipose-hypothalamic signaling contributes to offspring obesity. Recent studies have shown that maternal undernutrition imposed during a 1-2 month period before and in the fi rst week after conception can alter embryonic, placental and fetal growth. It is unclear to what extent the effects of undernutrition during the period of follicular and oocyte development (PFUN), are responsible for this altered fetoplacental development. We have therefore tested the hypotheses that maternal undernutrition imposed only during the period of follicular and oocyte development can alter the fetoplacental growth trajectory during early gestation and the perturb the relationship between maternal weight at conception and fetoplacental growth during early gestation. Ewes were maintained on either a control (100% maintenance, n = 10) or a PFUN diet (70% of control feed allowance from at least 52 days, restored to 100% for 13.3 ± 1.5 days before conception, n=7). All ewes were fed a maintenance diet of 100% of nutritional requirements from mating to ∼55 d gestation. Fetal and placental weights were measured at postmortem in all pregnancies at ∼55 d gestation. Fetal weight (P < 0.01) and crown rump length (P < 0.01) was signifi cantly increased in the PFUN compared to control group. The feto-placental weight ratio was maintained in the PFUN group and there was an increase (P<0.02) in the number of placentomes per pregnancy in PFUN compared to control pregnancies. In control, but not PFUN, pregnancies there was a positive relationship between maternal weight at conception and placental weight at ∼55 d gestation. Similarly there were signifi cant relationships between mean placentome size and maternal weight at conception in control, but not PFUN pregnancies. This study is the fi rst to demonstrate that maternal nutrition during the period of follicular and oocyte development, alone, can alter the fetoplacental growth trajectory. In addition, exposure of a developing oocyte to maternal nutrition during follicular development ablates the relationship between maternal weight at conception and uteroplacental growth at ∼55 d gestation. Thus, PFUN alters fetal growth through placental alterations. PFUN may impact on the maternal mRNA pool, responsible for embryo development up to the maternal zygotic transition, to alter the development of cells predestined to differentiate into trophectoderm tissue. Introduction: Recent epidemiological studies have shown an increased risk of obesity in children born to women who smoked during pregnancy. It is unclear whether this obesity is a result of permanent alterations in the metabolism of the offspring, postnatal diet, a combination of these or other confounding factors. An animal model of tobacco exposure has been developed to address the issue, and has shown that nicotine alone at concentrations that are representative of those found in women who smoke, causes postnatal obesity in male rats. However, the contribution of postnatal diet has not yet been examined. Objective: In this study, we examined the interaction between fetal and neonatal exposure to nicotine and postnatal diet on the development of obesity and dysglycemia in male offspring. Methods: Female nulliparous Wistar rats (N= 10 per group) were given saline (vehicle) or nicotine (1mg/kg/d) ("treatment") daily via subcutaneous injection for 2 weeks prior to mating until weaning. At weaning pups were randomly assigned to receive either a low fat diet ("LF", 5% fat, 3.82 Kcal/g,) or a hypercaloric high fat diet ("HF", 21% fat, 4.7 Kcal/g). Weekly from postnatal day 1, the pups were weighed and food consumption was calculated. At week 7, the pups underwent a glucose tolerance test (2g/kg). The animals were sacrifi ced and fat pad weight was determined. Results: Saline treated pups on the HF diet were dysglycemic compared to those on the LF diet. Interestingly, nicotine exposed pups raised on the HF diet did not develop dysglycemia. Compared to saline treated pups, nicotine exposed pups on the LF diet had higher serum triglyceride concentrations, however there were no signifi cant differences in pups receiving the HF diet. Irrespective of treatment, pups on the HF diet had signifi cantly increased fat pad weight, although there was no difference in caloric intake. There was no effect of diet or treatment on body weight, fasting glucose or insulin. Conclusion: Compared to a low fat postnatal diet, a HF diet results in dysglycemia in pups exposed to saline, but not nicotine in utero and during lactation. Exposure to nicotine does not result in obesity at 7 weeks of age, but does result in increased triglycerides in pups on a LF diet. It has been experimentally shown that low-protein diet also causes FGR in pregnant animals. It implies that suffi cient maternal protein intake is necessary for appropriate fetal growth. On the other hand, insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) play a key role in the regulation of fetal growth. Using a mouse model of undernutrition during pregnancy, we investigated whether maternal food protein increment affected the fetal growth and the change of the IGFs gene expressions in placenta and fetal liver. Methods: Pregnant C57Bl/6 mice were food-restricted to 70% (undernutrition, UN) of the control group (normal nutrition, NN) from 10.5 days post-coitum (dpc) to 18.5 dpc using normal protein diet (20% protein included). In another group (undernutrition with high-protein, P-UN), food restriction to the same calorie intake as UN group were performed using high-protein diet (40% protein included). Fetuses and placentas were collected on 18.5 dpc, and their weight was measured. The gene expressions of IGF-I, -II, and type 1 IGF receptor in fetal liver and placenta were measured by quantitative RT-PCR. All experimental procedure was approved by the institutional Animal Research Committee. The fetal weight of UN (0.88±0.01g) was signifi cantly smaller than that of NN (1.05±0.01g), whereas that of P-UN (0.93±0.01g) was signifi cantly larger than those of UN, regardless of the same extent of maternal calorie restriction. In fetal liver, IGF-I and -II mRNA expressions of P-UN were signifi cantly increased compared to that of UN (+54% and +33% respectively). In placenta, IGF-I mRNA expression of P-UN was signifi cantly higher than of UN (+76%). IGF-II mRNA levels showed no signifi cant difference among these groups in placenta. The gene expression of type 1 IGF receptor was not changed among NN, UN, and P-UN in both fetal liver and placenta. Conclusions: The food protein increment in undernourished pregnant mice improved fetal growth restriction. This improvement may be attributed at least partly to the elevated gene expression of IGF-I and -II in the fetal liver. Regulating Gluconeogenesis in the Liver of the Postnatal Lamb. L Rattanatray, 1, 2 Objective: Epidemiological studies have demonstrated a clear positive association between exposure to excessive nutrition before birth and the incidence of the metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes in later life. We have previously demonstrated that lambs of overnourished ewes are hyperglycemic but it is unknown whether exposure to overnutrition in late gestation alters the expression of hepatic gluconeogenic enzymes in early postnatal life. Hypothesis: We have investigated the hypothesis that increased prenatal nutrition increases hepatic glucose output by upregulating hepatic gluconeogenic capacity. Methods: Ewes were provided with either 100% (Control, C, n=8) or 160% (Well fed, WF, n=8) of maintenance energy requirements (MER) from 115 d gestation until delivery. Postmortem was performed on postnatal day 30. The relative hepatic expression of key regulatory (PGC-1, PPARα) and gluconeogenic genes (PEPCK, G6PHOS) were determined by qRT-PCR. IGF-BP1 IGF-2 IGF-1R IGF-2R IGF-BP1 IGF-BP3 CTR 16.3 ± 2.4 2.5 ± 0.4 15.0 ± 4.5 1.9 ± 0.3 45.7 ± 8.0 9.8 ± 2.3 2.8 ± 0.7 MNR 5.2± 1.6* 5.5 ± 1.3** 2.6 ± 0.9* 0.2 ± 0.1* 14.9 ± 6.1* 62.6 ± 9.8* 27.2 ± 4.5* Different from CTR *p< 0.05, ** p=0.06 Cun Li, 1 Natalia E Schlabritz-Loutsevitch, 1 Victor KM Han, 2 Karen Nygaard, 2 Mark J Nijland, 1 Thomas J McDonald, *1 Peter W Nathanielsz. *1 1 Obsterics and Gynecology, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA; 2 Paediatrics and Child Health Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. Introduction: IGF system members infl uence fetal growth: 1) indirectly by effects on placental growth thereby modulating the maternal-fetal interface and 2) directly by effects on the fetus. While effects of NR on serum and tissue concentrations of IGF system members have been studied in a number of species [Placenta 24:803] , to our knowledge few data are available about NR effects on mRNA and protein expression of IGF system members other than IGF-I in a nonhuman primate. We examined MNR effects on placental IGF-II, IGF-receptor (R)1, IGF-R2, IGF binding protein (BP)-1 and IGFBP-3 mRNA and protein expression at 50% of gestation in the baboon. We have previously reported that MNR reduces IGF-I in 90 dG placentas -Term 180dG [SGI 53 rd Ann. Mtg. Abst. 157]. Methods: From 30 to 90 dG, female baboons were fed ad lib (CTR; n = 8) or fed 70% CTR diet (MNR; n = 6) with necropsy and tissue collection at 90 dG. mRNA expression was measured by in situ hybridization histochemistry and for protein by immunohistochemistry. For both analyses, quantifi cation by image analysis calculated fraction (area hybridized or immunostained ÷ region of interest x 100%) and statistical comparisons were made by rank sum test. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM with CTR presented fi rst. Results: Placental data are: weight (70.4 ± 5.1 vs. 62.9 ± 1.5 g), volume (30.20 ± 6.3 vs. 14.8 ± 2.9 ml, p = 0.05) and those in Table 1 . In contrast to the present study, 30% MNR in the guinea pig results in decreased IGF-II [J. Endocrinology 179:437] . When combined with our previous fi nding of decreased placental IGF-I in this model of MNR, the increase in IGF-II protein found herein may be a consequence of the decrease in IGF-R2 since this receptor functions primarily in the degradation of IGF-2. IGF-BP1 IGF-BP3 IGF-2 IGF-1R IGF-2R IGF-BP3 CTR 1.5 ± 0.5 4.8 ± 1.1 2.1 ± 0.6 7.2 ± 1.6 15.2 ± 3.9 9.0 ± 3.0 20.3 ± 3.8 MNR 8.7 ± 4.2** 4.9 ± 1.3 7.6 ± 3.1** 22.6 ± 1.3* 52.8 ± 5.9* 1.2 ± 0.3* 13.0 ± 3.6 Different from CTR *p< 0.05, ** p = 0.06. Francisco J Valenzuela, 1 Mauricio Mondaca, 1 Claudia Torres-Farfan, 1 Guillermo J Valenzuela, *2 Raquel Riquelme, 3 Eemilio A Herrera, 1, 4 Anibal J Llanos, 1, 4, 5 Maria Seron-Ferre. 1 Fetal BAT, accrued during pregnancy, is important for newborn thermogenesis. In the fetus, BAT thermogenic function is inhibited by factors produced or transported by the placenta. Maternal melatonin is transferred across the placenta and melatonin receptors are present in several fetal tissues. To asses whether maternal melatonin may be involved in regulation of fetal BAT function we investigated: a) the presence of a melatonin receptor in fetal BAT and b) whether this receptor is functional by measuring in vitro the effect of melatonin on BAT glycerol production stimulated by norepinephrine (NE). Material and Methods: Perirenal BAT and pars tuberalis were collected from three sheep fetuses (90% gestation). A piece of BAT was frozen for membrane preparation and another was preserved in TRIzol for RT-PCR. The presence of a melatonin receptor was investigated by 125 I-iodomelatonin binding to membranes and the isoform of the receptor expressed was identifi ed by RT-PCR, product isolation and sequencing. Fetal pars tuberalis was used as positive control. The remaining BAT was cut in explants (∼25 mg) and incubated during 6 hours with 0.01 to 10 mM of NE and 0,1 and 10 nM melatonin. Supernatants were collected and the production of glycerol was measured by the glycerol oxidase method. Results. Fetal BAT membranes show the presence of a melatonin receptor (Kd: 44.2±12 pM and Bmax: 2.0±0.2 fmol/mg protein; n=3). By RT-PCR we found that sheep fetal BAT expressed a MT2 melatonin receptor. Pars tuberalis (positive control) expressed only the MT1 melatonin receptor as previously known In culture, fetal BAT explants increased glycerol production in response to 1 and 10 uM NE. This increase was abolished by addition of 1 and 10 nM Melatonin to the culture, consistent with the presence of a functional melatonin receptor. Objective: C57BL/6J mice are predisposed to obesity and type 2 diabetes (T2DM) and may be a sensitive model for fetal programming of T2DM. The "maternal low protein diet" (MLP) rat model is well established to study fetal growth restriction effects on programming of T2DM. How data from C57BL/6J mice compare to rat is incompletely known. Here, we evaluate glucose tolerance and tissue weights in C57BL/6J male offspring exposed in utero and during suckling to MLP. Methods: Female mice were fed diets containing 8% (MLP) or 20% protein (control) starting 4 weeks prior to mating. Litters were culled to 6 on day 3 (P3). After weaning, male offspring were single-housed, fed a standard diet and weighed weekly until 12 weeks, then monthly until 1 year. Intraperitoneal glucose tolerance tests were performed at P21, 6 months and 1 year (n=6 per diet). Mice were sacrifi ced at 1 year. Heart, kidneys, pancreas and liver were removed and weighed. Individual hindleg muscles were dissected and weighed. Tibial bone lengths were measured. (Statistics: t-test and ANOVA) Results: At P365, MLP offspring were lighter than controls (27.7+/-2.5g vs. 31.2+/-1.5g, p=0.02). Weight of organs (as % of total body weight) was not signifi cantly different between MLP and control offspring (heart: 0.69+/-0.13% vs. 0.67+/-0.16%, p=0.77; liver: 4.87+/-0.62% vs. 4.52+/-0.66%, p=0.39; pancreas: 1.01+/-0.13% vs. 0.89+/-0.09%, p=0.12; kidneys: 1.80+/-0.20% vs. 1.73+/-0.16%, 0.58). Tibiae (18.00+/-0.19mm vs. 18.37+/-0.15mm, p=0.02) were shorter in MLP offspring. Standardized muscle weights (average weight/ mm tibia length) were lower for tibialis anterior (2.22+/-0.19g vs. 2.63+/-0.10g, p=0.001), gastrocnemius (6.25+/-0.67g vs. 7.18+/-0.41g, p=0.01), soleus (0.41+/-0.03g vs. 0.49+/-0.03g, p=0.005) and extensor digitorum longus (0.52+/-1.00 vs. 0.62+/-0.04, p=0.05), but not for quadriceps (9.67+/-0.47g vs. 10.67+/-0.57g, p=0.07) and plantaris (1.02+/-0.8g vs. 0.97+/-0.07g, p=0.34) (MLP: n=5; control: n=6). All had abnormal GTT at 6 months and 1 year; there was no difference between MLP and controls. Conclusions: C57BL/6J males exposed to MLP have lower total body weight and muscle weight at 1 year of age. The molecular change(s) underlying the reduced muscle mass will be studied for their role in programming of T2DM. Objective: Offspring of maternal food restricted (MFR) dams exhibit reduced microvascular density, decreased newborn thoracic aorta VEGF expression and adult hypertension. We sought to determine if impaired microvascular angiogenesis in MFR offspring is secondary to decreased expression of VEGF. Methods: Pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were food restricted by 50% as compared to control animals from e10 of gestation until term. At birth offspring were cross fostered to dams fed an ad libitum diet. Offspring were sacrifi ced on e21, day 1 after birth and at 2 months of life. The mesentery and thoracic aortas were dissected and fi xed in 4% paraformaldehyde. Paraffi n sections (5μm) of aortas and mesenteric arterioles were made. Sections were immunostained using a polyclonal antibody which recognizes rat VEGF. Digital images were then obtained and analyzed using the Image Pro Plus software in a blinded fashion. The integrated optical density (IOD) was then compared between the controls and MFR vessels. Results: There was a marked decrease in VEGF IOD in e21 (Control 34.4 ± 2.4 vs MFR 20.0 ± 2.8, P<0.01) and 1 day old (Control 30 ± 1.6 vs MFR=22.8 ± 1.8, P<0.01) MFR mesenteric microvessels. At 2 months of life VEGF expression pattern reversed with signifi cantly greater expression in mesenteric arterioles of MFR offspring as compared with controls (Control 2.98 ± 0.4 vs MFR=6.3 ± 0.9, P<0.01). VEGF expression was similar in both genders, and was predominantly within the endothelial cells and vascular smooth muscle cells. Conclusion: These results support our hypothesis that in utero undernutrition induces an inhibition of microvascular VEGF expression and therefore reduced angiogenesis. We propose that postnatal upregulation of VEGF in MFR vessels induces local infl ammation (via T H 2 cytokines) contributing to development of hypertension. Glomerular Sclerosis. John S Torday, 1, 2 Mina Desai, 1 Virender K Rehan, 2 Michael G Ross. *1 1 Dept. of Ob/Gyn, Torrance, CA, USA; 2 Dept. of Pediatrics, Torrance, CA, USA. Objective: Adult offspring of MFR dams, exhibit obesity, hypertension and reduced glomerular number, though the cellular/molecular signaling processes for glomerular scarring is unknown. We hypothesize that MFR-induced hypertension and obesity would cause elevated circulating endothelin (ET-1) and leptin, respectively, stimulating glomerular collagen deposition, remodeling and scarring. Methods: Rat dam food intake was reduced by 50% from e10 to term. At birth, offspring were culled to 4 males and 4 females. To examine the effects of leptin, exogenous leptin (300μg/kg body weight for 1 hr) was administered to randomly selected pups at 3 wks. MFR, leptin treated and control animals were sacrifi ced at 3 weeks and 8 weeks, and kidney sections analyzed by standard morphometric methods and quantifi ed using Image Pro™ software. mRNA expression was determined using PCR; leptin and endothelin-1 levels were determined by ELISA. Results: Despite low birth weight, MFR offspring were heavier than controls at 3 wks with associated elevated plasma leptin (1.48 ± 0.10 vs 1.01 ± 0.07 ng/ml, p<0.01) and circulating ET-1 (166 ± 20 vs 82 ± 17 ng/ml, p<0.01). Exogenous leptin treatment of 3 wk old MFR offspring caused signifi cant increases in kidney mRNA expression of both the ObRa (1.5 ± 0.1 vs 1.0 ± 0.1 AU, p<0.01) and ObRb (1.6 ± 0.1 vs 1.0 ± 0.1 AU, p<0.002) isoforms of the leptin receptor, suggesting increased leptin signaling. The increase in leptin signaling was associated with increased collagen type I mRNA expression at 3 to 8 wks of age, consistent with the glomerular hypertrophy and scarring observed histologically. Conclusions: These results demonstrate that exogenous leptin induced renal leptin receptor and collagen expression, and are consistent with a novel hypothesis for glomerular hypertrophy/glomerular sclerosis involving direct effects of leptin and ET-1 on glomerular collagen deposition and consequent structural changes in the glomeruli. We propose that offspring hypertensioninduced ET-1, and adiposity-induced hyperleptinemia are putative mechanisms contributing to glomerular scarring and the reduced glomerular number observed in MFR offspring. The Effects of Maternal Food Restriction (MFR) on Rat Offspring Kidney Structure. John S Torday, 1,2 Mina Desai, 1 Virender K Rehan, 2 Michael G Ross. * 1 1 Dept. of Ob/Gyn, Torrance, CA, USA; 2 Dept. of Pediatrics, Torrance, CA, USA. Objective: MFR during pregnancy produces offspring with reduced glomerular number and adult hypertension, though the mechanism of impaired renal development is unknown. We hypothesize that MFR-induces offspring glomerular hypertrophy, remodeling and scarring. We sought to characterize the development of phenotypic changes in MFR-offspring kidney structure. Methods: Rat dam food intake was reduced by 50% from e10 to term. At birth, offspring were culled to 4 males and 4 females. Randomly selected animals were sacrifi ced at birth, 3 weeks and 8 weeks, and kidney sections analyzed by standard morphometric methods and quantifi ed using Image Pro™ software. At 12 weeks of age, systolic blood pressure was determined using the tail-cuff method (ML125 NIP System, AD Instruments) in Control and MFR male offspring previously acclimatized to restraint (5 recordings of blood pressure after 30 min baseline period). Results: MFR induced hypertension in rat offspring with systolic blood pressure signifi cantly elevated at 12 wks of age (152±3 vs 146±2 mmHg, p<0.05). Glomerular surface area was signifi cantly increased in MFR as compared to control offspring at both 3 weeks (2.0±0.3 vs 1.5±0.1 nm 2 , p<0.01) and at 8 weeks (2.2±0.3 vs 1.5±0.2 nm 2 , p<0.01). MFR had no effect on glomerular number at birth (27.0±1.8 vs 26.5±2.1 per mm 2 ) or at 3 weeks (31.5±3.1 vs 32.1±2.9 per mm 2 ), but MFR offspring demonstrated a marked reduction (54%) by 8 weeks of age (15.9±3.6 vs 35.1±3.1 per mm2, p<0.01). Conclusions: MFR has profound effects on offspring kidney structure beginning by 3 weeks of age, when the glomeruli are signifi cantly hypertrophic (increased surface area), an effect which was sustained at 8 weeks of age. In contrast, MFR effect on glomerular number occurred between 3 and 8 weeks. These results suggest that the known effects of glomerular hypertrophy inducing glomerular sclerosis may be the putative mechanism by which MFR programs reduced glomerular number in adult offspring. Programming. Mark P Green, Claire C Ospechook, Mark H Vickers, John J Bass, Murray D Mitchell. * NRCGD, The Liggins Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. Myostatin is considered to be as a negative regulator of muscle growth but it also regulates glucose metabolism and homeostasis, as well as adipogenesis. Recent studies have identifi ed myostatin in human and murine placentae and showed myostatin to have direct effects on glucose uptake independent of insulin. Maternal undernutrition is known to have adverse effects on both fetal growth and metabolism, which can predispose the offspring to type II diabetes and obesity in adulthood. Objective: Using a model of developmental programming and postnatal high fat (HF) nutrition, we investigated placental myostatin concentration and generational effects on the phenotype of offspring. Methods: Female Wistar rats received either a standard diet ad lib. (AD group) or 30% of the AD group (UN group) throughout gestation. Female offspring (F1 generation) were fed the standard diet ad lib. until d140, mated with AD males, and fed a standard diet ad lib. during gestation. A cohort of pregnancies was terminated at day E20. Litter size was standardized and the F2 pups (both sexes) were nursed by their dams until weaning, producing 2 groups of offspring (AD-AD and UN-AD). Within each group and sex, F2 animals were fed either a standard or HF (65% kcals fat) diet ad lib. from weaning until d140. Body weights were recorded and on d130 body composition was quantifi ed via DEXA analysis. Results: E20 pup weights were not different between treatments, however, placentae of UN-AD pups were smaller than AD-AD pups. UN-AD compared to AD-AD placentae had increased myostatin concentrations. At weaning, F2 pup body weights were not different between groups, only between sexes. On d140 UN-AD animals (both sexes) fed the HF diet were lighter and growth rates reduced compared to their AD-AD contemporaries. This was not evident in animals fed the standard diet. In HF fed animals DEXA showed a reduced percentage body fat in UN-AD compared to AD-AD animals. Feeding the HF diet to UN-AD animals (both sexes) increased plasma glucose and insulin concentrations relative to animals fed a standard diet. Conclusions: These results indicate that placental myostatin may play a role in regulating nutrient supply and thus facilitate developmental programming over generations. Higher placental myostatin may also provide resistance to diet-induced obesity, albeit at the cost of glucose homeostasis. Supported by Maurice and Phyllis Paykel Trust. 143 Programmed Adipogenesis Mechanisms Contributes to Offspring Obesity. Mina Desai, 1 Robert Lane, 2 Guang Han, 1 Michael G Ross. * 1 1 Dept. of Ob/Gyn, Torrance, CA, USA; 2 Dept. of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake, UT, USA. OBJECTIVE: Maternal food restriction (MFR) during pregnancy results in growth restricted offspring which develop adult obesity. Although increased food intake contributes, in part, to enhanced weight gain, the role of peripheral adipose tissue metabolism is unknown. The development of obesity is associated with increased adipocyte differentiation and upregulation of lipogenic genes. Both glucocorticoids and insulin are potent inducers of adipocyte differentiation. The glucose transporter, GLUT4 in adipose tissue promotes glucose fl ux into adipocytes, which together with insulin facilitates lipogenesis. To examine peripheral mechanisms of programmed obesity, we determined the protein expression of glucocorticoid and insulin receptors, GLUT4 and leptin in 9 month old Control and MFR offspring. STUDY DESIGN: Control dams (n=6) received ad libitum food, whereas study dams were 50% food-restricted (n=6) from pregnancy day 10 to 21. At birth, litter size was culled to 4 males and 4 females. All pups were nursed by Control dams and weaned at 3 weeks to ad libitum feed. At 9 months of age, adipose tissue was analyzed for protein expression of glucocorticoid and insulin receptors, GLUT4 and leptin (Western Blot). RESULTS: MFR adipose tissue showed signifi cantly increased glucocorticoid receptor expression (911±93 vs. 538±89 AU, p<0.01) whereas insulin receptor expression was decreased (553±47 vs. 1455±76 AU, p<0.01) as compared to Controls. GLUT4 expression was signifi cantly increased (2570±374 vs. 1572±219 AU, p<0.01). Consistent with hypertrophic adipocytes, leptin expression was also significantly increased (1187±59 vs. 803±103 AU, p<0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Upregulation of glucocorticoid receptor and GLUT4 may contribute to facilitate adipocyte differentiation and lipogenesis in MFR offspring, resulting in increased adipose tissue leptin expression. Together with prior studies, these results suggest that MFR-induced programmed obesity may result from both increased food intake and enhanced adipogenesis. Mina Desai, 1 Robert Lane, 2 Guang Han, 1 Michael G Ross. *1 1 Dept. of Ob/Gyn, Torrance, CA, USA; 2 Dept. of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake, UT, USA. OBJECTIVE: Key adipogenic transcription factors include peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 2 (PPARγ2), CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-α (C/EBPα), and sterol regulatory element binding protein 1 (SREBP1). PPARγ2 acts synergistically with C/EBPα to activate SREBP1, which promotes lipogenesis in adipose tissue. Maternal food restriction (MFR) during pregnancy results in increased adipose tissue PPARγ2, C/EBPα and SREBP1 mRNA and protein expression, potentially contributing to the development of offspring obesity. We sought to determine if increased adipogenicity was an acute, short term effect or a programmed response in MFR offspring. We further examined the adipocyte response to PPARγ agonist (rosiglitazone) and antagonist (BADGE). STUDY DESIGN: Control dams received ad libitum food (n=6), whereas study dams were 50% food-restricted (n=6) from pregnancy day 10 to 21. At birth, litter size was culled to 4 males and 4 females. All pups were nursed by Control dams and at 3 weeks of age, adipose tissue was obtained and primary adipocyte cell culture was established. Following 100% confl uence, MFR and Control adipocytes were treated to two doses (1 and 10μm) of either rosiglitazone or BADGE for 24h. PPARγ2, C/EBPα, and SREBP1 mRNA levels were analyzed and compared to the respective untreated cells. RESULTS: MFR adipocytes had signifi cantly increased mRNA expression of PPARγ, C/EBPα and SREBP1 as compared to Control adipocytes. Rosiglitazone treatment at lower dose (1μm) was sufficient to increase PPARγ2 (6-fold) and SREBP1 (2-fold) in Control adipocytes, though there was no effect on C/EBPα. Conversely, MFR adipocytes required higher dose of rosiglitazone (10μm) to upregulate PPARγ2 (4-fold) and C/EBPα (2-fold), though no effect was seen on SREBP1. BADGE at 1 and 10μm concentration reduced the expression of PPARγ2 and SREBP1 in Control adipocytes but had no effect on MFR adipocytes. CONCLUSIONS: MFR adipocytes demonstrate programmed upregulation of adipogenic transcription factors PPARγ, C/EBPα, and SREBP1 which promote obesity. The markedly reduced response to PPARγ modulations further indicates impaired adipogenic regulation. These fi ndings suggest that IUGR offspring may not respond to traditional pharmacologic approaches to obesity. Gender Specifi c Programmed Hepatic Lipid Dysregulation in Intrauterine Growth Restricted Newborn. Gyu Y Choi, 1 Guang Han, 1 Darran N Tosh, 2 Roy Z Mansano, 1 Michael G Ross, *1 Mina Desai. 1 1 Dept. of Ob/Gyn, Torrance, CA, USA; 2 Dept. of Physiology, Univ. of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. Objective: Transcription factors, peroxisome proliferators-activated receptors (PPARα, PPARγ) and sterol response element-binding protein (SREBP1) regulate lipid homeostasis. PPARγ and SREBP increase expression of the lipolytic enzyme lipoprotein lipase (LPL) and the lipogenic enzyme fatty acid synthase (FAS). We have previously shown that 25% maternal food restriction during pregnancy results in IUGR offspring with smaller hepatic lobule size, and gender specifi c elevated content of triglyceride and cholesterol in males, and decreased cholesterol in females. We sought to determine if hepatic expression of lipid homeostatic transcription factors and key enzymes explains the gender specifi c cholesterol/triglyceride responses. Method: From day 10 to term gestation, control pregnant rats received ad libitum diet (n=6), whereas study rats were 25% food-restricted (MFR; n=6). Following delivery, all dams received ad libitum diet throughout lactation and nursed their own pups. At birth, litter size was culled to 4 males and 4 females. At 21 days of age, liver from 1 male and 1 female per litter was analyzed for mRNA levels of PPARα, PPARγ, SREBP, LPL and FAS using real-time RT-PCR. Data is presented as fold difference normalized to GAPDH. Values shown are mean ± SE. Results: MFR males had signifi cantly increased mRNA expression of SREBP1 (2-fold, p<0.01) as compared to controls, though no change was seen in PPARα and PPARγ. Further, MFR male expression of LPL was increased (7fold, p<0.01), though there was no change in FAS. Conversely, MFR females showed no change in SREBP1 expression whereas decreased expression was evident in PPARα (0.6-fold, p<0.05) and PPARγ (0.1-fold, p<0.001) as compared to control females. The expression of LPL and FAS in MFR females was comparable to controls. OBJECTIVE: IUGR offspring are at increased risk of newborn hypoglycemia, presumed secondary to reduced placental glucose transfer. Glucose homeostasis is regulated primarily by the liver, via key hepatic glycolytic (glucokinase; GK) and gluconeogenic enzymes (phosphoenopyruvate carboxykinase; PEPCK and glucose-6-phophatase; G-6-Pase). We have previously shown that maternal food restriction (MFR) during pregnancy results in IUGR offspring with smaller hepatic lobule size and relative hypoglycemia through 3 wks of age. We hypothesized that hepatic glycogen content and the expression of hepatic enzymes involved in glucose metabolism of IUGR offspring would refl ect a programmed carbohydrate dysfunction. METHOD: From day 10 to term gestation, control pregnant rats received ad libitum diet (n=6), whereas study rats were 25% food-restricted (MFR; n=6). Following delivery, all dams received ad libitum diet throughout lactation and nursed their own pups. At birth, litter size was culled to 4 males and 4 females. At 3 wks, liver from 1 male and 1 female per litter was analyzed enzymatically for hepatic glycogen and for mRNA levels of PEPCK, GK and G-6-Pase using real-time RT-PCR. Data is presented as fold difference normalized to GAPDH. Values shown are mean ± SE. RESULTS: At 1d of age, MFR pups had lower body weight (6.3±0.1 vs 7.1±0.2 g, p<0.01) with increased relative liver weight (4.6±0.1 vs 4.2±0.1%, p<0.01). At 3 wks, MFR offspring had body and liver weights comparable to the controls. However, MFR females exhibited signifi cantly decreased hepatic glycogen (0.8±0.1 vs 1.6±0.3 μmol/g liver, p<0.01) as compared to control females. Further, mRNA expression of G-6-Pase was signifi cantly decreased in MFR females (0.2-fold, p<0.01) as compared to control females. No change was evident in PEPCK or GK expression. Conversely MFR males exhibited no change in any of the parameters studied. CONCLUSION: MFR during pregnancy results in IUGR offspring with gender specifi c changes in glucose homeostasis. Reduced hepatic glycogen content in 3 wk old MFR females is associated with reduced gluconeogenesis enzyme expression (G-6-Pase). We propose that programmed downregulation of gluconeogenic enzymes contributes importantly to IUGR newborn hypoglycemia. Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Univ of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia. OBJECTIVE: Low birth weight has been associated with increased risk of developing cardiovascular disease in adulthood. Previously we have found that male offspring exposed to placental insuffi ciency had hypertension, altered vascular reactivity and passive mechanical wall properties at 6 months of age. In this study we examined the infl uence of placental insuffi ciency on vascular smooth muscle, endothelial function and passive mechanical wall properties of female offspring at 1 year of age. METHODS: On day 18 of gestation bilateral uterine vessel ligation (Restriction, R) or sham surgery (Control, C) was performed in WKY rats. Female offspring were killed at one year of age. Mesenteric, renal, femoral and uterine arteries were mounted on wire and pressure myographs to assess smooth muscle and endothelial function and passive mechanical wall properties, respectively. RESULTS: R did not alter mean arterial pressure in adult female offspring (C, 121±3 vs R, 126±2 mmHg, n=5 each). Uterine arteries from R rats were more sensitive to endothelial agonist acetylcholine, but maximal relaxation was similiar. However, relaxation attributed to endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor (EDHF) in uterine arteries was significantly reduced in R rats. Endothelium-dependent relaxation in all other arteries was unaffected. Smooth muscle contraction to phenylephrine and relaxation to sodium nitroprusside was not different (R vs C) for all arteries. Passive mechanical wall properties were signifi cantly altered (R vs C) in uterine, femoral and renal but not mesenteric arteries. Vessel wall stiffness was increased (R vs C) in uterine and femoral whereas it was decreased in renal arteries. CONCLUSIONS: Placental insuffi ciency impaired EDHF-mediated relaxation in uterine arteries whereas reactivity to vasoconstrictors and vasodilators was preserved in all other vascular beds. In contrast, placental insuffi ciency had more widespread effects on passive mechanical wall properties across the vasculature. Placental insuffi ciency in female offspring programs region specifi c alterations in vascular properties possibly infl uencing cardiovascular function, and may restrict uterine blood fl ow during pregnancy altering intrauterine development of the next generation. Objective: DNA (CpG) methylation is altered at candidate loci after prenatal modifi cation of dietary methyl donor supply. Mecp2 R308/Y mutant mice, with a truncating mutation of the methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 gene which models Rett syndrome, have increased weight gain on a high methyl donor diet. Rett syndrome patients have subtle changes in glucose metabolism. To investigate whether Mecp2 R308/Y mice are a sensitive model for epigenetic modifi cation of weight and glucose tolerance (GT), we fed them three different methyl-donor diets and studied their weight and glucose tolerance. Methods: Female 129Sv/Ev Mecp2 R308/X mice were fed diets with high (HM), regular (RM) or low (LM) methyl donor content starting 4 weeks prior to mating to wt males; offspring received the same diets. Mecp2 R308/Y and wt male offspring were compared. Diets were continued during lactation and in offspring and were based on the Purina 5001 rodent diet; the HM diet contained 22 mg/kg folic acid, 15g/kg betaine, and was supplemented with vitamin B12 and zinc; the LM diet contained 1.3 mg/kg folic acid, without other supplements. Male offspring were weighed weekly until 12 weeks, then monthly until 1 year of age. Intraperitoneal glucose tolerance tests (GTT) and insulin tolerance tests (ITT) were performed at 6 months and 1 year (n=9-11 per group) on wt and Mecp2 R308/Y mice. Statistical analysis was by T-test and ANOVA (signifi cance set at p<0.05). Results: At 6 months Mecp2 R308/Y mice are heavier than wt mice on all diets, the effect was biggest for HM diet: HM: 28.9+/-4.7gr vs. 24.3+/-1.7gr (n=18 each), p=0.0004; LM: 25.7+/-1.7gr vs. 23.4+/-1.8gr (n=19 and 18), p=0.0002 and RM: 25.9+/-3.5gr vs. 23.5+/-2.5gr, p=0.017 (n=19 and 21). There was no weight difference at 1 year. Mecp2 R308/Y , but not wt mice have impairment of glucose tolerance at 6 months compared to 1 year on HM (p=0.0009) and LM (p=0.004), but not on RM diet. At 6 months, Mecp2 R308/Y mice on HM (p=0.03) and LM (p=0.007) diet had impaired GT compared to wt mice. There were no signifi cant GTT or ITT differences at 1 year. Conclusions: We confi rmed that 129/SvEv Mecp2 R308/Y mice are heavier than wt mice and have diet-dependent impairment in glucose tolerance at 6 months. This suggests that these mice are a good model to study fetal programming. Maternal Diet Induced Obesity and Programming of the Metabolic Syndrome. Celine Morens, 1,2 Brigitte Reusens, 1 Aldert Piersma, 3 Claude Remacle, 1 Frans A Van Assche. *2 1 Catholic University of Louvain, Belgium; 2 KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium; 3 RIVM, Bilthoven, Netherlands. Objetives: With the current worldwide obesity epidemic, pre-gravid obesity is more and more common, so that more and more pregnant women are also obese. Epidemiological studies have suggested a correlation between prepregnancy maternal body mass index and increased risk of obesity in children and young adults. Our current studies aim at determining, in a rodent model, whether maternal diet-induced obesity (DIO) could « program » the development of the metabolic syndrome (MetS) (and especially obesity and insulin resistance) in the offspring. We developed a model in which female Wistar rats are rendered obese by consuming, from weaning on, a diet enriched in fat and/or sucrose (OB1: 45% kcal fat, 15.5% kcal sucrose, and OB2: 45%kcal fat + sweetened condensed milk). A group of females fed lab chow (C) was also included as control. At 3 months of age, females were mated and allowed to deliver spontaneously. At 21 days of age, their offspring were weaned onto usual lab chow diet. Body weight, food intake, plasma parameters, insulin resistance (hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamps) and body composition were assessed in both male and female progeny. Results: The offspring of the DIO dams had signifi cantly lower birth weights (C: 6.9±0.2; OB1: 6.5±0.2 and OB2: 6.1±0.2 g; Anova P=0.0002). However, during lactation, their weight caught up so that, at weaning, they were signifi cantly heavier than the C offspring (C: 56.8±1.7; OB1: 69.9±2.4 and 68.1±5.0g, Anova P=0.0008). After weaning, the weight gain of the OB1 and OB2 offspring remained higher and, at 3 and 6 months of age, both males and females presented an increased body weight, with an increased accumulation of body fat (measured at 6 months). This was, in part, due to an increased food intake, especially in males. At 3 months (males) and 4 months (females) of age, insulin resistance was assessed in the offspring. Animals were submitted to a hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp (insulin infusion rate = 5 mU.kg -1 .min -1 ). PRELIMINARY data show that insulin sensitivity, as measured by the Glucose Infusion Rate (GIR, mg glucose.kg -1 .min -1 ), tended to be reduced in the OB1 and OB2 offspring (especially in the males). Experiments are now running to confi rm those results.  Outcomes of Sensitization Are Expressed Differently in Prenatally and Actively Sensitized Male, but Not Female Guinea Pigs. Egle Bytautiene, Phyllis K Gamble, Monica Longo, Gary D Hankins, * Garland D Anderson, George R Saade. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. Objective: Previously we have shown that maternal exposure to allergens during pregnancy alters immune responses in the offspring later in life. The objective of this study was to determine if responses differ in prenatally sensitized and actively sensitized guinea pigs. Study design: Three months old non-pregnant female and male guinea pigs were actively sensitized with ovalbumin (100 μg) and aluminum hydroxide (100 mg) in saline (active group). Pregnant female guinea pigs were sensitized in the same fashion on days 30-35 of gestation and their offspring followed until 3 months of age (prenatal group). Tracheal rings were then obtained from male and female animals in both groups and mounted for isometric tension recording in organ chambers fi lled with Kreb's buffer. During a 1-to 2-hour equilibration period, tension was gradually adjusted to 2 g. Rings were repeatedly pre-contracted with 60 mM potassium chloride until stable contraction was obtained. Rings were challenged with ovalbumin (150 μg/mL). The other set of tracheal rings was used to obtain concentration-response curves to histamine (10 -9 -10 -4 M) .Contractile responses were calculated as a percentage of the reference contraction to potassium chloride, and Student's t test was used for statistical comparisons (p<0.05) Results: Responses to ovalbumin were signifi cantly higher in males born to sensitized mothers when compared with actively sensitized males. Increase in tension induced by histamine at the highest concentration was signifi cantly higher in prenatal versus active sensitization in males. There were no differences observed between prenatally and actively sensitized female guinea pigs. Conclusions: Hypersensitivity responses are more pronounced with prenatal sensitization only in male animals. We propose that manifestations of type I hypersensitivity reaction, including, but not limited to asthma, depend on the timing, route of initial exposure to antigen, and the gender, and further investigations into these mechanisms could direct research efforts into preventative and therapeutic strategies. Objective: to investigate the impact of intrauterine fetal growth pattern on postnatal growth velocity of very low birth weight (VLBW) infants. Methods: Intrauterine and postnatal growth to over 2 years of age was assessed in 157 VLBW infants (birth weight between 500-1500g) born at Maternal Fetal Medicine Unit and admitted to Neonatal Unit between January '94 and December '99. Inaccurate estimate of gestational age, multiple pregnancy, congenital anomalies, death and loss to follow-up were excluded. We identifi ed six distinct subgroups of VLBW neonates. According to birth weight (BW) we defi ned SGA neonates as BW < 10°centile and AGA as BW between 10°-90° centiles. According to fetal ultrasound biometry we defi ned SGA and AGA as abdominal circumference (AC) < and > 10° centile respectively assessed on distance charts. According to fetal biometry and Doppler velocimetry of umbilical artery we defi ned FGR as AC <10° centile with abnormal Doppler velocimetry and AGA as AC>10° with normal Doppler velocimetry. Body weight was recorded daily up to 28 days, weekly up to discarge, then at 1, 3, 6, 9, 12, 18 and 24 months of age. Individual growth profi les were fi tted with a seven constant, exponential-logistic function suitable for modelling weight loss and weight recovery, two peaks, and the subquent slow decrease in growth velocity. Results: According to birth weight: SGA had a growth velocity rate lower than AGA until 12 months and signifi cantly lower between 12 and 24 months of corrected age. According to fetal biometry: SGA had a growth velocity rate lower than AGA until 1 year of age and the same growth velocity rate afterwards. According to fetal biometry and Doppler velocimetry: FGR had growth velocity slightly lower until 15 weeks of postnatal age and higher afterwards. Conclusions: Fetal biometry associated with Doppler velocimetry identifi es a subgroup of SGA neonates who suffered growth restriction in utero and have different (catch-up) growth during the fi rst 24 months of age. Therefore it is useful tool not only in fetal surveillance and in timing of delivery, but also to identify subjects who need different neonatological, nutritional and medical care. Impact of Maternally Administered Endothelin Receptor Antagonism on Rat Pup Survival and Growth. Larry G Thaete, * Sylvia Synowiec, Mark G Neerhof. * Obstetrics & Gynecology, Evanston Northwestern Healthcare and Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Evanston, IL, USA. Background: Endothelin receptor A (ET A ) antagonism has been shown to normalize fetal growth in several models of fetal growth restriction in the rat. However, direct administration of ET A antagonists to newborn rats within 3 hours of delivery has been consistently associated with neonatal demise, raising concerns about the safety of their use late in pregnancy. Perinatal exposure to ET A antagonists (maternal administration in late gestation) and its impact on rat pup survival and growth has not been investigated. Objective: To determine the impact of an ET A antagonist on pregnancy outcome, survival and growth of rat pups. Methods: Timed pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were treated with FR139317 (12 mg/kg/day; ET A antagonist) or vehicle, by subcutaneous osmotic pump connected to an intravenous catheter, from gestational day 14 (term=22 days) through parturition. Five pregnant rats in each group were allowed to deliver spontaneously and to nurse their pups through post-partum day 7. Viability of newborns, litter sizes, and pup weights were recorded at birth and at day 7. Results are presented as means ± SE. 6.4 ± 4.5 a 0.0 ± 0.0 b a Vehicle group: One stillbirth in each of two rats and three stillbirths in one rat. FR139317 group: One stillbirth in one rat and three stillbirths in one rat. b One vehicletreated rat lost four neonates; no neonatal losses with FR139317. Maternal administration of an ET A antagonist from gestational day 14 through parturition has no adverse impact on survival or growth of rat pups. The next experimental step toward considering this intervention in human pregnancy is to demonstrate equivalent safety of ET A antagonism while treating fetal growth restriction. Objectives: Intrauterine growth restriction and its associated accelerated postnatal growth increase the risk of developing adult diseases, including osteoporosis. We have shown that placental restriction impairs pre-and postnatal nutrition in the rat. This study used cross-fostering to assess the infl uence of the prenatal and postnatal environment on adult bone size and strength. Methods: Bilateral uterine vessel ligation (Restricted, R) or sham surgery (Control, C) was performed on day 18 of gestation in WKY rats. Control, Reduced (RED; reducing litter size of C on day 1 to match R) and Restricted pups were cross-fostered onto C or R mothers 1 day after birth. Male offspring weight (birth to 6 months) and femur length and biochemical markers of bone turnover (6 months) were measured. Global femur mineral content was quantifi ed (DXA) and cortical and trabecular bone area, circumference, density, content, cortical thickness and estimated bone bending strength determined by pQCT at 6 months. Results: Restricted male pups were born lighter than Controls and remained smaller than C-on-C pups at 6 months. Reduced litter pups of normal body weight grew slowly during lactation then accelerated their growth after weaning when suckled on a R mother (RED-on-R). Restricted (R-on-R, R-on-C) and RED-on-R pups had shorter femurs with reduced bone area, cortical thickness, periosteal and endosteal circumferences, as well as bone bending strength (∼20%) compared to C-on-C. Cross-fostering a R male pup onto a mother with normal lactation (R-on-C) did not improve postnatal growth nor restore bone parameters. Bone mineral density and biochemical bone markers were similar across all groups. Conclusions: Being born small (R-on-R, R-on-C) or being born of normal weight but having slowed growth followed by accelerated growth after weaning (RED-on-R) reduced bone dimensions and bending strength. Correcting the poor lactational environment for small pups did not improve postnatal growth, bone growth or strength, suggesting the intrauterine environment is critical for bone programming in males. Being born small, or accelerated growth after weaning programs reduced bone bending strength and may increase osteoporotic bone fracture risk in adult life. Altering the early embryonic environment may lead to late gestation alterations in organ and body development. The objective of this study was to determine effects of a single treatment of sustained release growth hormone on the lambs at birth. Ewes were synchronized using two injections of prostaglandin 8 days apart and the day of the second injection those ewes assigned to treatment received 500 mg of sustained release growth hormone. All ewes were penned with a fertile ram. Upon lambing, all lamb birth weights, crown rump lengths and abdominal girths were determined and a serum sample collected to determine IGF-1 concentrations. Ram lambs were then euthanized to determine liver, heart and brain weights. A portion of the liver was snap frozen and used to determine IGF-1 and GH receptor mRNA utilizing real-time PCR. A portion of the base of the ventricles was removed to determine left and right ventricular wall thickness. Treated ewes gave birth to lambs with a heavier birth weight compared to control lambs (4.67 ± 0.07 vs. 4.08 ± 0.21 kg; P< 0.05). Lambs from treated ewes also had greater abdominal girth (31.6 ± 1.1 vs. 29.9 ± 0.7 cm; P< 0.05). However, there was no difference in crown rump length (50.2 ± 1.2cm). Liver IGF-1 and growth hormone receptor message were reduced (P < 0.05) in lambs gestated by ewes treated with growth hormone compared to controls. The left ventricular wall was thinner in hearts from lambs gestated in growth hormone treated ewes compared to those from controls. There was a positive correlation between lamb body weight and serum IGF-1 (r=0.48; P< 0.05). In conclusion, treating ewes with sustained release growth hormone not only increased lamb body weight but also resulted in alteration in the growth and development of the lambs. Context: While blastocyst implantation can occur in the absence of ovarian estrogen (E) in the progesterone (P 4 )-primed uterus of hamsters, pigs, rabbits, monkeys and possibly in humans, it does not occur in mice and rat without ovarian E. Thus, the hamster as an animal model for P 4 -dependent implantation could likely be exploited to identify uterine receptivity and implantation markers that can be used in humans. As a step towards achieving this goal, we performed a heterologous microarray using mouse genechips to assess changes in mRNA expression patterns between the day 5 uterine implantation and interimplantation sites in hamsters. Up-and down-regulations of a number of known and unknown genes were detected at implantation sites. One of these upregulated genes was the gene encoding C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP). Objective: CNP is the third member of the natriuretic peptide (NP) family. Two other important members of this family are atrial NP (ANP) and brain NP (BNP). The aim of this study was to characterize the expression pattern of CNP, BNP and ANP genes at the implantation site of hamsters and mice. Methods: The cell-type specifi c expression of CNP, BNP and ANP were evaluated by in situ hybridization at day 5 implantation sites of hamsters and mice. Results: We fi rst verifi ed CNP expression at day 5 implantation sites of hamsters and noted that CNP mRNAs were expressed in stromal cells immediate to, but not away from, the implanting blastocyst. We next wanted to verify interspecies differences using the mouse, and noted a similar pattern of increase in CNP expression at the day 5 implantation site of both the mouse and hamster. We observed no expression of ANP and BNP at day 5 implantation sites of hamsters. However, in mice while ANP was strictly expressed in the inner circular muscle layer of the day 5 implantation site, BNP was expressed in the blastocyst. Conclusion: This is the first demonstration that natriuretic peptides are expressed at the implantation site. Since natriuretic peptides share each others functions, expression of CNP, BNP and ANP in three different locations in day 5 implantation sites of mice suggests their cooperative function during implantation. However, sole stromal expression of CNP at the day 5 implantation site of hamsters is not only an example of species-specifi c variation in gene expression but also suggests an exclusive role of CNP in the P 4 -dependent implantation process of hamsters.  The prognosis for metastatic or recurrent type I (endometroid) or type II (non-endometroid) endometrial cancer is poor. The identifi cation of molecular alterations in these tumor types may help redefi ne diagnosis, establish accurate prognosis, and may serve as novel therapeutic targets. We hypothesized that the differential metabolic phenotype observed between malignant and non-transformed cells may constitute a biochemical basis for therapeutic intervention. Increased glucose uptake is one of the major metabolic changes found in malignant tumors, a process that is mediated by glucose transporters such as Glut1. In addition, cellular growth can be regulated by mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) in response to the nutrient milieu. Glucose analogs and inhibitors of mTOR are currently in clinical trials in other tumor types. In this study, we sought to determine if type I and/or type II endometrial carcinomas overexpress Glut1 and/or phosphorylated mTOR (pmTOR). Methods: We constructed three tissue microarrays (TMAs) using 75 cores from 42 patients with type I endometrial cancer, 91 cores from 34 patients with type II endometrial cancer, and 20 cores from benign endometrium. The TMAs were immunostained using polyclonal antibodies to Glut1 and pmTOR. Cytoplasmic pmTOR expression and membranous Glut1 expression was scored as negative, weak, moderate, or strong by a previously validated scoring schema. Cytoplasmic pmTOR was expressed strongly in both types I and II endometrial carcinoma (96 and 98% respectively). Membranous Glut1 was strongly overexpressed in 82% of type I and 55% of type II endometrial carcinomas and as compared to 0% of benign endometrial samples (p<.001). Conclusions: Glut1 and pmTOR are highly overexpressed in endometrial carcinomas. Expression of these metabolically targeted biomarkers may identify patients who may benefi t from adjuvant treatment with mTOR inhibitors and/or glucose analogs. Role of Protein Kinase C in the Regulation of Estrogen Receptor Expression and Cell Morphology in HEC-1B Human Endometrial Cancer Cells. James deVente, * Patti Shaver. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University, Greeville, NC, USA. Background: Expression of estrogen receptor (ER) is a positive prognostic factor in breast and endometrial carcinoma and is associated with a more differentiated and less biologically aggressive phenotype. Studies have implicated the protein kinase C (PKC) family in mediating ER expression in breast cancer. In the following study we evaluate the role of PKC in mediating ER expression in the moderately differentiated human endometrial cancer cell line. Methods: HEC-1B cells were treated with 12-0-tetradecanoyl-phorbol acetate (TPA) in varying concentrations and for varying periods of time. The PKC inhibitor, GF109203X (GF) was added in the inhibitor studies. Cellular proliferation was evaluated via [ 3 H]-thymidine uptake assay. Cellular viability was evaluated using a fl ow-cytometric propidium iodide exclusion assay. Expression of PKC α, βI, βII, ε, δ, η, θ, ζ, ERα, and ERβ were evaluated via western blot analysis on whole cell extracts. Results: Treatment of HEC-1B cells with 10 nm of TPA was associated with marked morphologic changes which could be appreciated in less than 24 hours. Control cells were cuboidal and grew in aggregates whereas TPA treated cell were stellate in shape. TPA -induce morphological changes could be blocked by the PKC inhibitor GF. TPA treatment was found to increase the percentage of viable cell in a dose dependent fashion. TPA-treatment was not associated with any marked change in proliferation. TPA treatment induced an activation dependent down-regulation of PKC α, βI, and δ in a dose and time-dependent fashion. PKC βII and ε expression actually increased with increasing TPA dose and time. PKC ζ did not demonstrate any signifi cant changes in response to TPA. ERα expression was almost completely abrogated by TPA treatment at doses as low as 10 nM in 24 hours. The PKC inhibitor GF was able to block the TPA-induced decrease in ERα expression. ERβ demonstrated little if any changes in expression in response to TPA. Conclusions: Our study suggests that the PKC pathway plays an important role in regulating both ERα expression and cellular morphology in endometrial cancer. These events appear to be dependent on PKC activation given our ability to block these responses with a selective PKC inhibitor. Lastly, our study implicates PKC α and/or βI as attractive candidates in mediating ERα expression in endometrial cancer. Progesterone Alters the Expression of Estrogen-Metabolizing Genes in Endometrial Cancer Cells: Potential Mechanism for the Protective Effect of Progesterone Against Endometrial Cancer. Salama A Salama, Sana M Salih, Ayman Al-Hendy. * Obstetrics and Gynecology, UTMB, Galveston, TX, USA. Background: Endometrial cancer ranks fi rst in incidence and second in mortality among gynecological malignancies. While excessive exposure to unopposed estrogen is a major risk factor for endometrial cancer, progesterone counteracts the carcinogenic effect of estrogen in the endometrium. Substantial evidence suggests that cytochrome P450-mediated metabolic activation of estrogen is crucial for estrogen carcinogenicity. Estrogen metabolism involves oxidation by CYP450 to carcinogenic metabolites catechol estrogens. In extrahepatic tissues, catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) is a key enzyme that inactivates carcinogenic estrogen metabolites. Objective: To investigate the effects of progesterone/progesterone receptors on the expression of CYP1B1, CYP1A1, and COMT genes in an endometrial cancer cell line. Reporter gene assays, real time RT-PCR, and western blot analysis were preformed to assess gene expression. Adenovirus vectors over-expressing either progesterone receptor A or Progesterone receptor B were used to dissect the distinct role of specifi c progesterone receptor isoforms on the expression estrogen metabolizing genes. Results: Our data demonstrated that Progesterone (10 -7 -10 -6 M) increased the activity of CYP1A1-luc reporter construct by 1.6-and 2.9-fold, respectively compared with the control. Under the same treatment condition, CYP1B1-Luc reporter transactivation decreased by 2-and 3.5-fold, respectively, compared with the vehicle-treated control. Using western blot analysis and real time RT-PCR, progesterone down regulated the expression of CYP1B1 gene in a dose-dependent fashion. Our data also indicated that treatment of Ishikawa cells with progesterone up-regulates COMT gene expression. Interestingly, the two progesterone receptor isoforms have distinctive effects on COMT gene expression. While PR-A is associated with up-regulation of COMT gene, PR-B mediated down regulation of the COMT gene. Conclusion: Our results suggest that the protective effect of progesterone against endometrial cancer is attributed, at least in part, to modulation of the expression of critical enzymes involved in estrogen metabolism. During the fi rst half of the menstrual cycle, estrogen signaling is responsible for build-up of the endometrial layer. Subsequently, progesterone levels increase during the second half of the menstrual cycle and induce differentiation of the endometrium and thus inhibit estrogen-induced proliferation. The aim of the current investigations was to reveal the molecular mechanism of progesterone's inhibition of estrogen signaling Methods: 21 healthy, postmenopausal women were included into this observational, open, non-randomized, and controlled study. The following 21 day treatments were conducted: Control-group (n=8); Estrogen-group (n=7), 2 mg/day of estradiol; Estrogen+progestagen-group (n=6), 2 mg/day of estradiol and 5 mg/day of MPA. It was observed that upon treatment for 21 days with estrogen alone, proliferation (measured by Ki67 staining) of the endometrium is increased by at least 9-fold, while the addition of progestagens diminished this increased proliferation almost back to control levels. Furthermore, we measured the levels of ER and PR and were unable to show profound changes in receptor expression levels indicating no progestagenic effects on that level. Next endometrial gene expression profi les were compared. A group of 247 genes was found to be signifi cantly (measured by SAM) estrogen-upregulated (setting > 3-fold). If we take this group as representative for all estrogen regulated genes, and compare the gene expression data with the data obtained after estrogen+progestagen treatment, 10% (25) of genes are unaffected, 25% (61) are partly compensated and 65% (159) of genes are completely compensated for (are back at the control level after estrogen+progestagen treatment). Progesterone very effectively compensates for estrogen regulation of a great number of genes. Since neither the estrogen receptor nor the progesterone receptor levels are markedly affected, it is likely that the compensatory effect takes place at the promoter region of effected genes. Heparanase Is Up-Regulated by Estradiol during Endometrial Hyperplasia-Carcinoma Transition. Ronit Haimov-Kochman, *1 Ahinoam Lev-Sagie, 1 Diana Prus, 1 Michal Lichtenstein, 2 Haya Lorberboum-Galski, 2 Simcha Yagel, *1 Israel Vlodavsky, 3 Inbar Ben-Shachar. 1 1 Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel; 2 Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, Medical School Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel; 3 Vascular and Tumor Biology Research Center, The Rappaport Institute, Technion, Haifa, Israel. Hypothesis: Heparanase is a mammalian endo-β-glucuronidase that cleaves heparan sulphate of the extracellular matrix. The full-length 65kDa proheparanase is activated by cleavage into a 50 kDa isoenzyme. Heparanase expression has been correlated with the metastatic potential of various tumors. The endometrial hyperplasia-carcinoma sequence is dependent on unopposed estrogen exposure. We hypothesized that heparanase may be up-regulated by estrogen and over-expressed during the endometrial hyperplasia-carcinoma transition. Methods: Heparanase isoforms were immunodetected in formalin fi xed, paraffi n embedded sections from patients with the following histopathologic criteria: simple hyperplasia, complex hyperplasia with and without atypia and invasive carcinoma. Normal endometrium served as control. The heparanase proenzyme and the active isoform were detected using polyclonal rabbit antihuman heparanase antibodies LinkAb and 733pAb, respectively. Quantitative PCR was employed to detect the level of heparanase mRNA level in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive Ishikawa, and ER-negative HEC1a endometrial carcinoma cell lines exposed to increasing doses of estradiol in culture. The active isoform of heparanase was consistently detected in endometrial glands throughout the hyperplasia-carcinoma continuum, whereas the heparanase proenzyme localized to endometrial stroma. Along with the malignant transformation the presence of the heparanase proenzyme increased dramatically from none in the stroma of normal and hyperplastic endometrium to abundance in malignant tumors. Cultured Ishikawa cells dramatically increased heparanase transcript levels after exposure to estradiol whereas in HEC1a cells the heparanase transcript remained unchanged. Conclusions: Enhanced expression of the proenzyme of heparanase in the malignant endometrium and up-regulation of the heparanase mRNA transcript by estrogen in an ER positive endometrial adenocarcinoma cell line, support the hypothesis that the expression of heparanase may be correlated with the malignant potential of endometrial hyperplasia and with the clinical course of the disease. Endometrial Cancer Cells Produce Pro-Invasive Vesicles Following Treatment with LPA. Leslie R Boyd, Edgardo V Ariztia, David Fishman. * Gynecologic Oncology, New York University, New York, NY, USA. Objectives: Membrane-derived vesicles are an important feature of malignant transformation, and their presence has been correlated in vivo with poor prognosis in patients with gynecologic cancers. Proinvasive molecules have been documented within these vesicles, including matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which remodel the basement membrane and promote cellular motility. However, little is known regarding the ability of endometrial cancer cells to produce vesicles. Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a bioactive lipid which is elevated in the serum of patients with multiple tumors, including endometrial cancer. We investigated if LPA, a known inducer of vesicles in other cell types, could induce vesicular production in endometrial cancer cells. Methods: HEC-1A cells, originally derived from a moderately-differentiated endometrial tumor, were maintained in a humidifi ed environment as per known protocols. Vesicles were induced by adding fetal bovine serum or LPA at .001, .01, 0.1, 1.0 and 10 mM to starved cells for four hours. Differential centrifugation was performed on the conditioned media, with ultimate recovery of the pellet. Protein assays were performed to determine the optimal concentration of LPA. Vesicles were run in 9% and 15% gelatin zymography assays to determine the presence of several MMPs including MMP-2, MMP-7 and MMP-9. Using a modifi ed Boyden chamber, vesicles induced by fetal bovine serum and/or 1.0 mM LPA were added to HEC-1A cells to assess in-vitro invasion through a collagen matrix. Results: Vesicles were formed using the known protocol, with optimal yields occurring with 1.0 mM LPA. Using gelatin zymography, we documented the presence of active MMP-2 and MMP-9 within vesicles at all concentrations of LPA. MMP-7 was not visualized in any vesicular samples. The addition of vesicles signifi cantly increased invasion of HEC-1A cells through a collagen matrix as compared to controls (p < .005). Conclusions: This is the fi rst report regarding the production of vesicles in endometrial cancer cells. Physiologic levels of LPA induce the production of membrane-derived vesicles in endometrial cancer cells in vitro. These vesicles contain proinvasive MMPs, including MMP-2 and MMP-9, and increase metastatic behavior, as based on the results of an invasion assay. Future areas of investigation include complete characterization of their contents utilizing mass spectrophotometric analysis. Estrogen and Tamoxifen Modulate the Expression of Key Estrogen Metabolizing Enzymes in Endometrial Cancer Cells. Sana M Salih, Manubai Nagamani, * Ayman Al-Hendy, * Salama A Salama. Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. Background: Prolonged exposure to unopposed estrogen or tamoxifen is a well-recognized risk factor for endometrial cancer. The exact mechanisms by which estrogen and tamoxifen induce endometrial carcinogenesis are not fully understood. Estrogen is metabolized by Cytochrome p450 (1A1 and 1B1) to 2 and 4hydroxy catechol estrogen respectively. 2-hydroxy catechol estrogen is an anti-carcinogenic metabolite while 4-hydroxy catechol estrogen is involved in mutagenesis and cancer initiation. Among the postulated mechanisms for estrogen induced carcinogenicity is cytochrome P450-mediated metabolism of estrogen into carcinogenic 4-OH catechol estrogens. These genotoxic catechol estrogen metabolites are inactivated mainly in the extrahepatic tissues by Catechol-O-Methyl Transferase (COMT). Thus, intricate balance in the expression of estrogen metabolizing enzymes in endometrial tissues is fundamental for the development of endometrial cancer. Objectives: To investigate the effects of estrogen and tamoxifen on the expression of estrogen-metabolizing genes (CYP1A1, CYP1B1, and COMT) in endometrial cancer cells Methods: The effect of estrogen and tamoxifen on the expression of CYP1A1, CYP1B1, and COMT genes in Ishikawa cells were assessed using western blot analysis, Luciferase reporter gene assay, and quantitative real time RT-PCR. Results: Estrogen and tamoxifen down-regulated CYP1A1 and COMT genes expression in a concentration-dependent fashion. On the other hand, the expression of CYP1B1 was induced by estrogen and tamoxifen. Conclusion: Our results suggested that down-regulation of CYP1A1 and COMT in concomitant with up-regulation of CYP1B1 may represent a novel mechanism by which estrogen and tamoxifen induce endometrial cancer. Objective: Activin-A is a growth factor with endocrine and autocrine/pacrine actions in the control and maintenance of normal reproductive function. Direct actions of Activin-A in various uterine tissue both during and outside the pregnancy are widely recognized. However, possible roles of Activin-A in the myometrium have not been investigated. In this study, we characterize if myometrial cell lines are responses to Activin-A and investigate possible roles of Activin-A in regulating myometrial function. Methods and Results: PHM1 cells, a cell line derived from pregnant human myometrium, have previously been used as a model for myometrial cells, since they maintain smooth muscle phenotype and responses to oxytocin. In order to characterize activin responses in these cells, we fi rst investigated expression of components of the activin signaling system. We demonstrate, as measured by RT-PCR, that these cells express the activin-bA subunit, the activin receptors ALK4, ActRII and ActRIIB, and the activin binding protein follistatin, signifying that these cells express components required for activin-A production and its signal transduction. In functional experiment, activin-A induced phosphorylation of smad-2 in PHM1 cells, as well as in hTERT HM and ELT3 cells (two other myometrial derived cell lines), as well as in rat uterus explants. We found that activin-A reduces PHM1 cell growth, in a time and dose dependant manner, and that this action can be blocked by follistatin. In order to test the role of activin-A in myometrial function we examined its effect on expression of some genes involved in myometrial function. Activin-A treatment lead to decreased expression of oxytocin receptor and HOXA 10 mRNA, but it did not alter expression of progesterone receptor A and Cox-2 mRNA levels. Furthermore, treatment of PHM1 cells with activin-A attenuate oxytocin induced intracellular Ca2+ accumulation, suggesting a possible role of activin-A in regulating myometrial cell function. Conclusion: We have demonstrated that myometrial cells express activin receptors and signaling mediators and that activin-A can induce myometrial cell responses, regulation of cellular proliferation, and other functional responses. Activin-A inhibition of myometrial cell proliferation, and attenuation of oxytocin action, may suggest that activin-A has roles in regulating myometrial proliferation, myometrial differentiation, and uterine quiescence. Objectives: Study the correlation between adenomyosis and potential risk factors, as well as to identify the accuracy of ultrasound (U/S) in its diagnosis. Methods: Medical records were reviewed for patients who underwent hysterectomy for benign indications at WSU hospitals from 1/1/05 -4/30/06. Pathology reports were reviewed to identify the incidence of adenomyosis and the co-incidence of fi broids, endometriosis, and polyps. Patients with adenomyosis were used as a study group with the remainder as a control. Surgical history was reviewed and the potential risk factors (dilation and curettage (D&C), cesarean, myomectomy, induced abortion, hysteroscopy, and endometrial ablation) were tested in the study group versus the control using the Fisher exact test. Patients who had pre-operative ultrasound were identifi ed and the accuracy of the test was examined against the pathologic diagnosis. Results: 410 patients were included. Adenomyosis was confi rmed by pathology in 197 patients, an incidence of 48%. Adenomyosis was the only diagnosis in 14% of the patients. The co-incidence of other pathologies was 85% for fi broids, 6% for endometriosis, and 4% for polyps. Incidence was 47% in African-Americans versus 51% in all other patients (NS). Of the 283 patients who had pre-operative ultrasound, 12 were positive for adenomyosis yielding a sensitivity of 8%, specifi city of 99%, positive predictive value of 83%, and negative predictive value of 56%. Table 1 shows the odds ratios for the potential risk factors. Conclusion: Adenomyosis was identifi ed in about half of hysterectomy specimens, with no difference in racial incidence. D&C and induced abortion had a statistically signifi cant correlation with the incidence of adenomyosis. Ultrasound was highly specific but not sensitive for the diagnosis of adenomyosis. is associated with the asymptomatic colonization of the genital tract in 20-30% women. Up to 70% of infants born to these women will become colonized and develop early onset or late onset GBS infections. The capacity to adhere, and to invade to epithelial cells allow GBS to breech host cellular barriers. The GBS adherence to epithelium involves the high-affi nity interaction with intermediary molecules of the host extracellular matrix proteins such as fi brinogen, fi bronectin or laminin. We report that GBS are capable to interact directly with monosialogangioside G M1 expressed on the surface of human endometrial cells to promote adherence and invasion. METHODS: GBS clinical strain A909 and its capsule-deficient and penicillin-binding protein 1a-defi cient mutants were used throughout the study. Immunofl uorescence microscopy and antibiotic protection assay were employed to assess the adherence and invasion of GBS to Ishikawa and HEC-1-A cells derived from human endometrium. Monosialoganlioside G M1 expression on endometrial cells was tested by labeling with fl uorescent conjugate of cholera toxin B subunit (CTB) and with western blot analysis. G M 1-ELISA was designed to assess whether GBS demonstrate reactivity with purifi ed G M1 . RESULTS: GBS adhered and invaded into Ishikawa cells, but failed to attach and invade HEC-1-A endometrial cells. Cholesterol depletion of Ishikawa cells did not affect bacterial binding but resulted in almost complete loss of invasiveness. Labeling endometrial cells with fl uorescent conjugates of CTB subunit, which specifi cally binds to monosialoganglioside G M1 , showed that G M1 is expressed on Ishikawa cells but not on HEC-I-A cells. The difference in G M1 expression was confi rmed in Western blot. In G M1 -ELISA GBS appeared to bind to purifi ed G M1 and showed signifi cantly lower reactivity with bovine serum albumin used as a negative control. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that monosialoganglioside G M1 is a cellular receptor for GBS involved in bacterial binding and invasion. Gangliosides are sialic acid-containing glycosphingolipids found on the surface of plasma membrane of vertebrate cells. Further studies are required to assess whether the expression of GM 1 in female genital tract contributes to the colonization and invasive infections due to GBS. Objective: Maternal and intraamniotic infections often lead to an infl ammatory response in the fetal environment. Although cytokine induction is intrinsic to the infl ammatory response, fetal cytokine responses may be associated with adverse consequences (eg, neural injury). To explore mechanisms of cytokine action during fetal development, we sought to determine the mRNA distribution of infl ammatory signaling mechanisms, specifi cally toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), interleukin-1 type 1 receptor (IL-RI) and tumor necrosis factor receptor type 1 (TNF-RI) in rat gestational tissue and fetal brain under basal and infl ammatory conditions. Methods: Samples of e18 rat chorioamnion, placenta, and fetal whole brain were homogenized in Tri-reagent and RNA was isolated according to the manufacturer's protocol. RNA was used as template in single-step RT-PCR assays using Applied Biosystems (ABS) Sequence Detection System 7000. Primer Express software (ABS) was used to design specifi c rat primers for IL-1RI, TLR4, TNF-RI and β-actin (which was used to normalized threshold cycle (C T ) values). Results: Real-time RT-PCR assays showed a differential mRNA expression profi le of IL-1RI, TLR-4 and TNF-R1 in fetal brain, chorioamnion, and placental tissues. IL-1RI mRNA was heavily expressed in the fetal brain (13.4±0.3, mean±SEM of delta C T values) and the chorioamnion (17.8±0.4); however placental IL-1RI levels were extremely low (27.1±1.0). TLR-4 mRNA was most strongly expressed in the placenta (13.5±0.3) followed by the chorioamnion (15.4±0.3) and the fetal brain (15.5±0.3). TNF-RI mRNA was very strongly expressed in the fetal brain (8.4±0.4), whereas more modest levels were observed in the placenta (12.9±0.4) and chorioamnion (13.1±0.5). Comparisons within a signal showed that in vitro treatment of tissues with LPS, IL-1β, or TNF-α did not result in any signifi cant change in any of the three receptor mRNA levels. Conclusions: The differential expression of signaling components for LPS, IL-1β and TNF-α in the fetal brain, chorioamnion and placenta suggests unique tissue-specifi c responses to infl ammatory stimuli. As varying bacterial types and sites of infection may have markedly different impact on the fetal environment, unique anti-infl ammatory interventions may minimize adverse outcomes for the mother and fetus. Objective: Chorioamniotic infections are common during pregnancy and have been associated with adverse neurological outcomes including periventricular leukomalacia and cerebral palsy. In addition to intraamniotic infection, maternal infections induce infl ammatory responses in gestational tissues and the fetus, though it is unclear how maternal infl ammatory stimuli induce fetal brain responses. We sought to determine whether fetal brain and gestational tissue infl ammatory responses are driven by an infectious agent or by secondary cytokine-induced responses. Methods: We used an in vitro rat model to determine tissue specifi c production of proinfl ammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α) in response to LPS as well as select cytokines. Explant cultures of e18 fetal brain, placenta and chorioamnion were treated with LPS (50 μg/ml), IL-1β (5 μg/ml) or TNF-α (5 μg/ml) and media and tissue were collected at 6 h post-treatment to assay for cytokine production. Results: LPS signifi cantly (p<0.01) triggered fetal brain production of IL-1β (15±5 to 138±20 pg/ml) IL-6 (227±30 to 1742±234 pg/ml) and TNF-α (17±5 to 258±19 pg/ml). IL-1β also increased brain IL-6 (862±100 pg/ml) but not TNF-α. TNF-α increased brain IL-6 though not IL-1β. LPS also induced placental IL-6 and TNF-α while TNF-α induced IL-6 only. Chorioamnion explants produced IL-6 to all three stimuli. Conclusions: Fetal brain demonstrates cytokine secretion in response to infl ammatory stimuli (including cytokines), suggesting the induction of an endogenous neuroinfl ammatory cascade and potential neural injury. As placental and chorioamnion tissues selectively secrete cytokines which may access the brain parenchyma, optimal treatment of infections during pregnancy may include suppression of cytokine induction in addition to antibacterial agents. INTRODUCTION. Preeclampsia is characterized by an exaggerated infl ammatory response. Transforming Growth Factor-b1 (TGF-b1) plays a major role in trophoblast growth and differentiation and it is also involved in the modulation of systemic infl ammatory response. OBJECTIVE. To investigate the placental localization and expression of TGF-b1, its receptor TGF-bRI and its activator phosho-Smad2 (p-Smad2) in pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction (PE-FGR). We studied 17 placentas from pregnancies complicated by PE-FGR and 8 placentas from normal pregnancies. All placentas were analysed with immunohistochemistry, RT-PCR, ELISA and Western Blotting. Maternal age, parity and gestational age at delivery were similar in the two groups; neonatal weight and Z-score were signifi cantly lower in the PE-FGR group. Immunohistochemistry showed that TGF-b1 in normal and pathological tissues was localized in the villous trophoblast, mainly in the syncytiotrophoblast, but with a more intense immunostaining in PE-FGR placentas. TGF-b1 concentrations (ELISA) were signifi cantly higher (median 0.097 ng/ml) in PE-FGR than in normal placentas (median 0.0465 ng/ml). Immunohistochemistry showed that TGF-bRI was mainly localized in the myofi broblasts around the villous fetal vessels in normal and pathological placentas and WB analysis showed no differences in protein expression between normal and pathological tissues. RT-PCR for TGF-b1 and TGF-bRI confi rmed the placental mRNA synthesis of these molecules. Immunohistochemistry for p-Smad2 in normal placentas showed a nuclear staining in the myofi broblasts around the fetal vessels and in the stroma of the placental villi; in pathological placentas tissues p-Smad2 nuclear staining was present also in the trophoblast. The percentage of the nuclei stained for p-Smad2 in the PE-FGR placentas was higher (61,5%) than in the normal placentas (38%) but the difference was not statistically signifi cant. CONCLUSION. The increase of TGF-b1 observed in PE-FGR placentas could be explained as an attempt to limit the exaggerated infl ammatory response of PE.  The hemodynamic changes of pregnancy may represent an intrinsic vascular, humoral or autonomic adjustment. The aim of the study was to determine to what extent the renal and mesenteric arterial vasodilatation in pregnancy is due to intrinsic adaptation. In non-pregnant (NP) and 11 days' pregnant (P) Wistar Hannover rats, we studied the renal and mesenteric arterial response to phenylephrine (PE) and nitric oxide (NO) blockade by L-NAME. In the Isolated Perfused Rat Kidney (IPRK) the response of the renal perfusion fl ow (RPF) to PE (10 -6.5 and 10 -6.0 M) and L-NAME (10 -4 M) was measured at constant pressure (90 mmHg). The myogenic response of the mesenteric arteries to PE (10 -7 to 10 -4 M) and L-NAME (10 -4 M) was assessed in a wire myograph. Pregnancy elicits a 11 % increase in RPF (p=0.01). The renal response to increasing doses of PE did not differ between NP and P. In both NP and P, RPF decreased in the same extent by infusion of L-NAME at comparable rate ( Figure 1 ). In contrast, in mesenteric arteries the maximal response to PE in P is blunted [22 %] compared to NP (p<0.01), even though the sensitivity to PE is not altered. The diminished responsiveness in P can partially [12 %] be blocked by L-NAME (p=0.01). In the kidney depleted from innervation and humoral environment, the pregnancy-induced increase in RPF is 11% (in contrast to 40 % in vivo), while the response to vasoactive agents at low dose is comparable. This suggests that the intrinsic renal adaptation to pregnancy is minor, in contrast to the more profound changes in mesenteric arteries. The difference in response between vessel types is partly NO mediated. The intra-renal renin-angiotensin system is upregulated at midgestation in the mouse. Angiotensinogen expression is increased in proximal tubule cells and renin expression is upregulated in principal cells of the cortical connecting tubules (CNT cells in the distal nephron). It is not upregulated in pregnant transgenic mice that fail to maintain hypervolemia of pregnancy after mid-gestation. Given the apparent signifi cance of CNT renin in renal function during pregnancy, our objective was to determine whether pregnant rats and humans also upregulate CNT renin. Methods: We collected kidney samples from Sprague-Dawley rats before pregnancy, at mid-gestation (day 13), and term. Sections were immunostained for renin using a commercially available anti-mouse/rat renin antibody (RDI-Fitzgerald). The juxta-glomerular apparatus (JGA) served as an internal tissue control. Virgin and pregnant mouse kidneys (C57BL/6 at days 5 and 10) served as CNT renin specifi city controls. Immunohistochemical studies in human kidney were performed using archival paraffi n tissue blocks from autopsy specimens (collected at Stanford University Medical Center 1990 -2005 Objective: Histidine decarboxylase (HDC), the enzyme that synthesizes the vasodilator histamine, is upregulated in the renal cortex during pregnancy in mice. Immunohistochemical evidence also suggests that it is upregulated in human fetal kidney and in pregnant women. However, recent studies show that commonly employed antibodies against HDC also cross-react with human dopa decarboxylase (DDC), making that observation less certain. In addition, others have suggested that in contrast to mice, HDC may not be expressed in rat fetal or maternal kidney. The objective of the current study was to determine whether HDC is expressed in human and rat kidney. Methods: We used Western blot analysis to test for specifi c HDC isoforms in whole kidney samples from rats and humans. Renal samples from pregnant C57BL/6 mice served as positive controls. We collected kidney and liver samples from fetal rats (Sprague-Dawley), adult virgin females, pregnant rats at mid-gestation (day 13), term, and male rats. Preliminary studies were also performed using human fetal kidney (20 weeks' gestation). Western blotting and immunohistochemistry was performed using the PROGEN antibody employed in our prior work compared to the polyclonal BioVision antibody, which reportedly does not cross-react with DDC. Human DDC served as a negative control. Results: Western blot analysis using the BioVision antibody revealed strong HDC signal at 64kDa (active enzyme) in the mouse positive control, human fetal kidney, and rat fetal kidney. Samples from adult female rats before, during, and after pregnancy showed a band at 74 kDa (proenzyme), and weaker bands at 64 and 110 kDa (dimer). There was no cross-reactivity with the human DDC control (1 ug) and no non-specifi c 55 kDa band was seen. In contrast, the PROGEN antibody showed strong cross-reactivity with human DDC and revealed a 54 kDa band in all samples tested that may represent either HDC or DDC. Immunostaining rat kidney sections showed only superfi cial cortical proximal tubule staining that did not vary in intensity or location throughout gestation. Methods: Two groups of pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats (n=5 each) were implanted with venous catheters on gestational day 14 (term = 22 days) and received carbamyl-PAF (2.5 μg/kg/h) or saline IV via osmotic pumps on days 14-21. The rats were euthanized on gestational day 21; their kidneys were removed and frozen for total RNA extraction and analysis of preproET-1 mRNA expression by real-time quantitative PCR. Results: After seven days of infusion, the ratio of preproET-1 mRNA copy number normalized to 18S rRNA was signifi cantly higher in the kidneys of PAF-treated rats, compared with the saline treated animals. Means and standard errors for the ratio of preproET-1 mRNA/18S rRNA (X 10 3 ) were 0.46 ± 0.07 and 0.89 ± 0.15 for the saline and PAF treatment groups, respectively (p<0.05 using an unpaired student t test BACKGROUND Automated devices are being increasingly used as an alternative to the mercury sphygmomanometer. Accuracy in one population cannot be assumed in special populations e.g. pregnancy. The algorithm of the Dinamap ProCare is modelled on an auscultatory standard and the device achieved the criteria of both the International protocol of the European Society of Hypertension and the British Hypertension Society (BHS) protocol in an adult population. The ProCare is a robust device with potential for use on labour wards. We evaluated the accuracy of this device in a pregnant population, including women with pre-eclampsia, according to the BHS protocol. METHODS Ethics approval was obtained and thirty women (including 5 with pre-eclampsia) were recruited at a large teaching hospital. Nine sequential same arm blood pressure measurements were taken by two observers, alternating between a mercury sphygmomanometer and the device. The ISSHP defi nition of pre-eclampsia was adhered to and the data was analysed according to the BHS guidelines. RESULTS The Dinamap ProCare achieved an A/A grade according to the BHS protocol with 77%, 91% and 99% of systolic differences and 71%, 86% and 96% of diastolic differences within 5, 10 and 15mmHg of the mercury standard. It also satisfi ed the criteria of the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation with a mean and standard deviation of 1.2 (5.8) mmHg and 0.1 (7.6) mmHg for systolic and diastolic pressures respectively. CONCLUSION The Dinamap ProCare is the fi rst robust device currently available, to achieve recommendation according to the BHS criteria in a pregnant population. Further assessment is required to confi rm its accuracy in pre-eclampsia. To establish normal ranges for arterial pulse wave parameters in pregnancy and to investigate potential ethnic variation. Outside pregnancy, analysis of the arterial pulse wave provides valuable information in hypertension and vascular disease. It may also distinguish the vascular changes of established pre-eclampsia (PE) from normal. However, data on the normal changes in pregnancy are sparse and need to be accurately defi ned before the possibility of screening for PE can be explored. The radial artery pulse waveform was recorded in 168 healthy pregnant and 20 non-pregnant women using applanation tonometry. A mathematical translation was applied to derive the aortic waveform. Augmentation pressure (AP) and Augmentation Index (AI) were calculated. The results in the two major ethnic groups in our pregnant population [Caucasian (94) and Afro-Caribbean (74)] were compared. Mean AP (3.32 versus 6.8) and mean AI (15.8 versus 24.6) were signifi cantly lower in pregnancy than non-pregnancy (p=0.001). There was no signifi cant difference in AP or AI across the three trimesters. There was no variation between the two ethnic groups studied. Conclusions Our work has defi ned the normal changes in arterial wave characteristics in pregnancy, confi rming a fall in vascular resistance in pregnancy. These data provide the foundation for further investigation into the potential role of the technique in diagnosis and prediction of vascular disease in pregnancy, in particular PE. The baboon is a well established pregnancy model, yet little data exist regarding the maternal cardiovascular response to pregnancy in this species. Blood pressure (BP) during pregnancy in humans is collected once pregnancy is confi rmed, typically starting at the fi rst antenatal check. Telemetry provides a high resolution, stable means of measuring BP over time. The baboon provides the unique opportunity for BP and heart rate (HR) measurement before and during pregnancy in the same individual. Pressure telemeters were implanted in 6 non-pregnant baboons (8 -13 years old). Animals were housed within stable groups of 16 and freely exercise and socialised throughout the study. Each day animals entered a feeding system as part of another ongoing study. The animals spent an overnight in the system biweekly when telemetered recordings were made. BP and HR were measured in from 2 weeks before pregnancy to term (180 days gestation). Four overnights provided average systolic, diastolic, mean arterial pressure (MAP) and HR every two weeks. No difference was found between MAP and HR recorded using telemetry compared to recordings using indwelling catheters from individually housed baboons matched for gestational age and time-of-day ( Fig 1A) . Systolic, diastolic and MAP declined after day 14 and were lower than pre-pregnant values during the fi rst 6 weeks of the second trimester ( Fig 1B) . In normotensive pregnant women systolic and diastolic blood pressures decrease from the fi rst to the second trimester and increase again in the third, independent of parity or maternal age. We demonstrate that a similar response trend is also found in the baboon, thereby further highlighting the utility of this animal model in pregnancy research. Methods Female C57Bl6/J (18-22g) mice were injected with streptozotocin (STZ, 200 mg/kg i.p.) or vehicle (saline) 4 weeks prior to mating. Blood samples were taken, immediately before STZ administration then twice weekly for 4 weeks, and blood glucose concentrations determined. Induction of diabetes was indicated by a blood glucose concentration consistently > 10mM. Mice were culled at day 19 of pregnancy (term) and uterine arteries dissected, mounted onto a wire myograph, normalised at 0.9 of L13.3kPa (∼55mmHg) and equilibrated (37ºC; 5%CO 2 /air). Arteries were constricted with phenylephrine (PE, 10 -5 M) and a concentration-response curve to the endothelium-dependent relaxant acetylcholine (ACh10 -10 M-10 -6 M) constructed. Study design. A total of 12 Sprague-Dawley rats underwent unilateral uterine horn ligation to create animals with single uterine horn pregnancies. Uteri were harvested on day 20 of gestation. Segments of uterine arcuate arteries were isolated and studied at 50 mm Hg intralumenal pressure using an arteriograph and videomicroscopy for recording vessel diameters. Concentration-response curves to phenylephrine, sodium nitroprusside (SNP), and acetylcholine were obtained using paired vessels from the pregnant and non-pregnant horns of the same animal. Paired t-tests were used for statistical analyses. Results. Sensitivity to phenylephrine-induced vasoconstriction was signifi cantly increased in the pregnant horn compared to the non-pregnant horn (-log(EC 50 ) = 6.58 ± 0.10 vs 6.28 ± 0.07, p=0.03), along with a reduction in sensitivity to SNP-induced vasodilation (-log(EC 50 ) = 6.27 ± 0.38 vs 7.49 ± 0.24, p=0.03). The effects observed with phenylephrine and SNP on these arteries in the pregnant and non-pregnant horns were similar to the effects observed between pregnant and non-pregnant animals. In contrast, there were no differences in acetylcholine-induced vasodilation between the uterine horns (-log(EC 50 ) = 7.15 ± 0.17 vs 7.31 ± 0.14, p=0.55). (1) differentiate between systemic and local infl uences in effecting myogenic tone by utilizing a surgical ligation model in which implantation is restricted to one of two uterine horns; (2) determine whether augmented myogenic tone is due to increased elevation in smooth muscle intracellular [Ca 2+ ] i ; and (3) defi ne the role of the endothelium in differential myogenic behavior of uterine arteries from the non-gravid vs. gravid uterine horn. Methods: Radial uterine arteries were dissected from the gravid and non-gravid horns, cannulated and pressurized to 10 mmHg. Concurrent changes in arterial diameter and [Ca 2+ ] i in response to the elevation of intraluminal pressure were studied using arteries loaded with the ratiometric Ca 2+ -sensitive dye fura 2 AM (5 μM); Fura 2 fl uorescence was assessed with a photomultiplier system. In a separate set of vessels, the endothelium was removed by passing air bubbles through the lumen and verifi ed by the absence of dilation to acetylcholine. Hemodynamic abnormalities prior to pregnancy predispose to subfertility, maternal gestational hypertensive sequelae and fetal growth restriction. In this study we tested the hypothesis that recurrent miscarriage (RM) is associated with abnormal pre-pregnancy circulatory function. Sixty-one non-pregnant women with a history of RM (≥ 2 pregnancy losses prior to 16 weeks gestational age) were included in this study. Two women with chromosomal or uterine anomalies were excluded. All women were tested for overweight or obesity (  Twelve women (20%) had overweight and 7 women (12%) were obese. THROMB and HHC were present in 11 (19%) and 8 women (14%), respectively. Abnormal circulatory function was found in 46 women (78%). These included low PV (15/59, 25%), hypertension (5/59, 8%) and/or central hemodynamic abnormalities (37/59, 63%). Ten women (17%) had a hyperdynamic circulation with elevated CO and CI, and 18 women (31%) had a hypodynamic circulation with a low CO and CI, mostly in conjunction with a low SV (8/18; 44%). A high TPVR was observed in 10 women (17%). Further analysis showed that hemodynamic abnormalities were independent of THROMB or HHC. RM is often associated with a hyper-or hypodynamic circulation, with or without a low plasma volume, prior to pregnancy. We speculate that an abnormal pre-pregnancy circulatory function may interfere with implantation, placental development and/or uterine perfusion. OBJECTIVE. Several studies have been conducted on the effects of maternal nutrient restriction during pregnancy and/or lactation in the rat. These studies have been directed toward evaluation of offspring outcomes and less attention has been paid to potential direct effects on the mother. We have made the interesting observation that maternal hepatic liver fat content is increased in mothers eating a restricted low protein diet during lactation. Our aim was to evaluate whether this extra maternal hepatic adipose deposition could be related to maternal leptin concentration. METHODS. Pregnant rats were assigned to control (C) (20% casein; CC) or a restricted (R) (10% casein; RR) isocaloric diet in pregnancy (fi rst letter) and lactation (second letter). A third group received C and R in pregnancy and lactation, respectively (CR). A fourth group received R in pregnancy and C in lactation (RC). Maternal serum leptin at PND 25 was measured by RIA. Maternal hepatic fat was determined by Soxtec method. Data are mean ± SEM, analysis was by the Pearson correlation. RESULTS. Both groups restricted during lactation, RR and CR had higher maternal hepatic fat in comparison with CC and RC (p<0.05) Fig 1A. RC group had lower serum leptin (p<0.05) than CR ( Fig 1B) . CONCLUSIONS. Hepatic fat deposition was increased in both groups undernourished during lactation. There are very few data on production of leptin by hepatic cells or in relation to hepatic in distinction to adipose tissue fat. Further studies are needed to determine the relative contributions of adipose tissue and liver to circulating maternal leptin. Maternal and Fetal Disease Group, IRDB, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom; 2 Liver Unit, University of Birmingham Trust Hospital, Birmingham, West Midlands, United Kingdom. Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) has a complex aetiology, with genetic and hormonal components. The pregnane-X-receptor (PXR) is a ligandactivated transcription factor responsible for regulating target gene expression involved in detoxifi cation of xenobiotic and endobiotic metabolites and is a key player in bile acid metabolism. 13 non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been reported in PXR, some of these alter the ability of the protein to bind to and activate PXR target genes Objectives: We hypothesised that: 1) Coding region mutations of PXR, and/or a target gene involved in bile acid metabolism, SULT2A1 are associated with ICP. 2) PXR variants infl uence the response to therapeutic ligands and to the hydrophobic bile acid LCA. Methods: 1) The coding regions of PXR and SULT2A1 were amplified and sequenced in 125 patients using an Applied Biosystems 3100 genetic analyser. 2) HepG2 cells were seeded into 96 well plates and transfected with expression vectors for wild-type or mutant PXR, a PXR responsive CYP3A4 Luciferase reporter gene and an internal control vector, pRL-CMV. Cells were treated for 24h with PXR ligands and assayed for Luciferase activity. Results: 1) We identifi ed 2 non-synonymous SNPs in PXR, G36R and P27S (in 8 and 1 cases respectively) and a single non-synonymous SNP (A261T) in SULT2A1. These variants occur in accordance with the published allele frequencies. 2) Of the 13 known SNPs in the PXR gene, four (R98C, V140M, Q158K, D163G) were observed to have altered transcriptional activation of the CYP3A4 promoter in the presence of Rifampicin, Ursodeoxycholic acid, Dexamethasone and LCA. However, no differential response was observed for the G36R and P27S SNPs that are present in UK ICP cases. Conclusions: 1) Coding region mutations of PXR and SULT2A1 are not associated with ICP in UK cases. 2) Our analysis is the fi rst comprehensive study of functional PXR variants in a single model system. We demonstrated altered activation of CYP3A4 in the presence of 4 PXR ligands (drugs used to treat ICP and LCA). However, CYP3A4 activation did not change with the PXR variants that were demonstrated in UK ICP cases, indicating that these variants are not relevant to treatment response in our population. Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy (ICP) has a complex aetiology with a signifi cant genetic component. Two genes that are mutated in progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) (ABCB4, ATP8B1) have been implicated in the pathogenesis of the disease. Heterozygous mutations of these genes have proved to be a rare cause of predisposition to ICP. The third PFIC gene, ABCB11, encodes the bile salt export pump (BSEP) and homozygous mutations cause a spectrum of disease ranging from PFIC to benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis (BRIC). Objectives. We sought to clarify the role of ABCB11 mutations in ICP by screening 369 OC UK cases for two common European mutant alleles (E297G, D482G) by PCR amplifi cation and DNA sequencing. In addition a second cohort of 158 ICP patients from Sweden and Germany were subject to the same analysis. Methods. PCR primers from the UCSF website (http://pharmacogenetics. ucsf.edu/set1/index.html) were used to amplify and sequence patient DNA using an Applied Biosystems 3100 genetic analyser. Electropherograms were analysed by the use of Codoncode Aligner software, and results checked by an independent observer. Results. Inspection of the two exons of the ABCB11 gene harbouring the known common mutations in the fi rst cohort identifi ed three occurrences of the E297G mutation. In the second cohort, a single occurrence of each mutation (E297G and D482G) was identifi ed. Conclusion. Heterozygosity for the common ABCB11 mutations are likely to represent a rare predisposition to ICP in the UK and European cohorts, accounting for only 1% of cases. Recent fi ndings have demonstrated that neurite outgrowth factor-B (Nogo-B), a member of the reticulon 4 family normally involved in axonogenesis, appears to play a critical role as regulator of cell migration and vascular remodeling. The N-terminus of Nogo-B promotes migration of endothelial cells but inhibits migration of vascular smooth muscle cells. Vascular injury in Nogo-A/B-defi cient mice promoted exaggerated neointimal proliferation, (Nat Med. 2004) . This led us to investigate whether Nogo-B is present in human pregnant and non-pregnant endometrium, a tissue requiring continuous angiogenesis in the adult. Methods: After obtaining informed consent, endometria from reproductive age women were obtained from hysterectomies for benign conditions. Portions of endometrium or decidua were formalin-fi xed and paraffi n-embedded for immunohistochemical studies. The remainder were used for cell culture, protein and mRNA analysis. Results: Initial immunohistochemical studies now demonstrate that Nogo-B is widely but differentially expressed throughout the pregnant and non-pregnant endometrium. Of special interest, it was observed that Nogo-B expression was essentially absent from the glandular epithelium during the proliferative phase of the cycle but highly expressed in the secretory phase and throughout pregnancy. We confi rmed these fi ndings in vitro both at the mRNA and protein levels using cultured endometrial stromal, endothelial, or glandular epithelial cells. Western blotting revealed that Nogo-B was detected at the predicted MW of 50 kD in stromal cells and endothelial cells in the presence or absence of steroid hormones. Consistent with results of the immunohistochemical studies, Western blot analysis and quantitative RT-PCR demonstrated that as in the proliferative phase, glandular epithelial cells cultured without progestins did not express Nogo-B. Conclusion: While several angiogenic factors have been identifi ed and are believed to be involved in physiological as well as pathological angiogenesis in the human endometrium, we propose that Nogo-B may be a critical angiogenic factor in endometrial and uteroplacental vascular development. The regulation of Nogo-B in the endometrial glandular epithelium suggests that the protein may be essential in the process of decidualization. Objective: To examine the relationship between bone mineral density (BMD) and parity among healthy, multiethnic reproductive-aged women. Methods: A total of 707 African American, Hispanic, and Caucasian women aged 16-33 years who participated in a longitudinal study on BMD and contraceptive use completed questionnaire items assessing demographic and behavioral correlates of bone density. Bivariate associations were analyzed using Pearson and Spearman r, 2 test, and ANOVA. In addition, multivariate regression analyses were performed to evaluate the effect of parity on BMD at the lumbar spine (L1-L4) and dominant hip while adjusting for race/ethnicity, age, age at menarche, body mass index (BMI), and tobacco use. Results: At the bivariate level, race/ethnicity and parity (0, 1, and ≥ 2) were independently associated with lumbar spine BMD (p < .05). The relationship between parity and dominant hip BMD was non-signifi cant. Further analyses demonstrated that the relationship between parity and lumbar spine BMD was moderated by race/ethnicity (p < .05). In the multivariate analysis, the main effect of parity on lumbar spine BMD diminished after adjusting for key clinical covariates. Conclusions: Our fi ndings suggest that while race/ethnicity remains an important factor, parity does not have an appreciable effect on BMD levels among reproductive-aged women. The vasodilatory mechanisms of Rlx vary according to the duration of exposure to the hormone. After day(s) of recombinant human (rh) Rlx administration to rats, vascular (matrix metalloproteinase) MMP-2 activity is increased which processes big (endothelin) ET to ET 1-32 at a gly-leu bond, that in turn, activates the endothelial ET B receptor/NO vasodilatory pathway (KP Conrad, J Novak Am J Physiol 287: R250, 2004) . After hour(s) of exposure, vascular MMP-9 rather than MMP-2 activity is increased and serves as the endothelin converting enzyme (A Jeyabalan et al. Endocrinol, in press) . We hypothesized that these slow vasodilatory responses to Rlx require bi-directional communication between the endothelium and vascular smooth muscle involving VEGF (VSM → EC) and NO (EC → VSM). Small rat renal and human subcutaneous arteries were mounted in a pressure arteriograph and myogenic reactivity was investigated (% change in diameter over baseline in response to a 20 mmHg step increase in intraluminal pressure). After incubation with 30 ng/ml rhRlx for 3 h in vitro, there was a signifi cant reduction in myogenic reactivity that was prevented following incubation with 0.1 mM L-NMA, 10 mM RES-701-1 (an ET B receptor antagonist) or 1 mM GM6001 (a general MMP inhibitor). Pre-treatment with the VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, SU5416 (3mM) prevented the decrease in myogenic reactivity induced by rhRLX (p<0.004 vs dilute DMSO vehicle). A comparable inhibitory response was observed after instillation of 3 mg/ml VEGF neutralizing antibody in the artery lumen (p<0.002 vs goat IgG). In contrast, post-treatment with SU5416 did not block the vasodilatory action of Rlx. In preliminary studies, pre-treatment with either SU5416 or VEGF neutralizing antibody also blocked the reduction in myogenic activity by rhRlx in the human subcutaneous arteries. Conclusions: (i) Incubation of small arteries with rhRlx in vitro inhibits myogenic reactivity via a vascular MMP/ET B /NO pathway; (ii) VEGF is a new player in the vasodilatory pathway that is most likely in series with, and upstream of, vascular MMP-9 or -2. The vasodilatory mechanisms of Rlx vary according to the duration of exposure to the hormone. Fast relaxation responses to Rlx were reported for human pre-constricted gluteal, but not pulmonary arteries, that were abolished by endothelial denudation (C. Fisher et al. Circ. 106:292-5, 2002) . We studied small coronary, mesentery and renal arteries from rats, as well as human subcutaneous arteries isolated from fat obtained after abdominal reductions. The arteries were mounted in a pressure arteriograph, and after pre-constriction to EC 50 with phenylephrine, they were incubated with increasing concentrations of recombinant human relaxin (rhRlx) from 1 to 100 ng/ml (maximum relaxation response < 5 min). Of the 3 types of rat arteries investigated, only the small renal arteries demonstrated a concentration dependent relaxation (p<0.001 by ANOVA) with a maximum response of 20-30% relaxation at the highest dose of rhRlx. This relaxation response was abolished by prior endothelial removal or by pre-incubation with 0.1mM L-NMA (p<0.001 by ANOVA with vs without L-NMA). Pre-treatment with the PI3 kinase inhibitors, LY294002 (3mM) or Wortmannin (10nM), attenuated the fast relaxation response by ∼ 80% (p<0.05 by ANOVA vs dilute DMSO vehicle). Human subcutaneous arteries also demonstrated a concentration dependent relaxation (p<0.001 by ANOVA) with a maximum response of 60-80% relaxation at the highest dose of rhRlx. In preliminary studies, the rapid vasodilatory response to rhRlx in human subcutaneous arteries was completely inhibited by both L-NMA and LY294002. In conclusion, some rat and human arteries show a fast relaxation response to relaxin mediated by PI3 kinase and NO. Women. Shahzya S Huda, 1 Eng K Tan, 1 Colin Perry, 2 Ian Greer, *1 Anna F Dominiczak, 3 Dilys J Freeman, 1 Naveed Sattar. 1 1 Division of Developmental Medicine, Glasgow University, Glasgow, United Kingdom; 2 Department of Endocrinology, Glasgow Royal Infi rmary, Glasgow, United Kingdom; 3 BHF Cardiovascular Research, BHF Cardiovascular Research Centre, Glasgow, United Kingdom. Introduction: Pre-eclampsia (PE) is a major cause of maternal morbidity and mortality. Obesity is a key risk factor for this disease. Women with PE have an early exaggerated rise in triglycerides and free fatty acids (FFA). The cause of these lipid abnormalities is not known but disordered adipocyte function in women with PE may be a contributor to the pathogenesis of this syndrome. Methods: Subcutaneous adipose samples were obtained from 11 pregnant women with paired visceral samples in 10. Adipocyte suspensions were prepared and incubated with isoproterenol (2x10 -7 M), insulin (10nM) and isoproterenol with insulin for two hours. Lipolysis rates were determined by measuring release of FFA and glycerol in an aliquot of incubation medium. Cell diameter was determined by direct microscopy of fresh cells in suspension. Results: Subcutaneous adipocytes (SA) were signifi cantly larger than visceral adipocytes (VA) [104.5um (13.8) vs 78.9 um (17.9) p=0.002]. BMI correlated with both visceral fat cell size (r=0.81, p=0.004) and subcutaneous fat cell size (r=0.63, p=0.036). In VA isoproterenol has a stimulatory effect (mean increase 216% p=0.013) and insulin an inhibitory effect (mean decrease 51% p=0.0040) on basal lipolysis rates. Insulin attenuated the effect of isoproterenol stimulated lipolysis (mean decrease 67.4% p=0.002). In SA there was no signifi cant inhibition of basal release of FFA (p=0.09) and glycerol (p=0.47) by insulin. The degree of isoproterenol stimulation of lipolysis is inversely correlated to the basal lipolysis rate in SA(r=-0.82 p=0.002) and VA (r=-0.799 p=0.006). When corrected for fat cell size there was no signifi cant difference in basal, isoproterenol stimulated or insulin inhibited lipolysis rates between VA and SA. Conclusion: Metabolic properties of adipocytes are related to both regionality of the tissue and cell size, with visceral adiposity and increasing adipocyte size predisposing to adverse metabolic profi les. Increasing BMI in healthy pregnant women is associated with increasing adipocyte size in both visceral and subcutaneous adipose depots. This may be an important mechanism through which obesity leads to altered adipocyte function and may predispose to pre-eclampsia. Hypothesis Pre-eclampsia is a multi-system disorder with an underlying pathophysiology of endothelial dysfunction. In vitro, myometrial small arteries show reduced endothelial-dependent relaxation, which is improved in the presence of phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5) inhibitors. Clinical intervention with the PDE5 inhibitor sildenafi l citrate (Viagra®) would therefore be expected to improve relaxation of small myometrial arteries and thus improve uteroplacental blood fl ow. Methods Myometrial and omental biopsies (N) were taken from women participating in a multi-centre double-blinded randomised placebo controlled trial of sildenafi l in women with pre-eclampsia before 34 weeks gestation. Small arteries (n) were dissected free and mounted on wire myographs gassed with 20, 5 and 2% oxygen. Contraction was assessed with vasopressin (AVP; max. 10 -8 M) and endothelial-dependent relaxation with bradykinin (BK; 10 -10 -10 -6 M). Results 7 myometrial biopsies from each group, 8 omental biopsies from women taking sildenafi l and 6 omental biopsies from women taking placebo were collected. Myometrial contraction was not altered by clinical intervention with sildenafi l ( Table 1 ; ANOVA). Similar data was seen with omental arteries. At 20% oxygenation, maximal BK-induced myometrial arterial relaxation was not signifi cantly different with sildenafi l vs. placebo (46±10% vs.40±12 %; P>0.05 ANOVA). Similarly, no difference was seen at 5 or 2% oxygenation. Omental arterial relaxation was signifi cantly improved 2% vs 20% oxygen in sildenafi l and placebo groups (P<0.05; 2-way ANOVA). Relaxation of omental arteries from women taking sildenafi l was not signifi cantly improved vs. placebo (P>0.05; 2-way ANOVA). Conclusions Clinical intervention with sildenafil did not improve the endothelial-dependent relaxation in myometrial or omental small arteries. Pharmacokinetic data suggested reduced plasma sildenafi l compared to healthy volunteers. Additionally, the fi nal sildenafi l dosage was often many hours premyography. Thus, acute effects of sildenafi l may not have been present at the time of investigation. To compare arterial pulse wave analysis in women with pre-eclampsia with both normal pregnant and non-pregnant women. 2. To ascertain the effects of antihypertensive treatment on arterial pulse wave analysis in women with pre-eclampsia. Background Vascular compliance can be measured using applanation tonometry. One report suggests that this technique can distinguish the vascular changes of pre-eclampsia (PE) from those of normal pregnancy. Our previous work using applanation tonometry has shown that vascular compliance is increased in normotensive pregnant compared with non-pregnant women. Methods Using applanation tonometry, radial artery pulse waveform was recorded in 35 women with PE (repeated after antihypertensive treatment when applicable), a similar number of gestational age-matched controls, and 20 healthy nonpregnant women. From this, an averaged aortic waveform was calculated. Augmentation pressure (AP) and Augmentation Index at heart rate 75/min (AI-75) -measures of vascular compliance -were calculated. Mean AP (11.9 versus 3.0) and mean AI-75 (32.3 versus 16.8) were signifi cantly higher in pre-eclamptic compared with normotensive controls (p<0.001), and pre-eclamptic compared with non-pregnant women (11.9 versus 6.8, p=0.009; and 32.3 versus 24.6, p=0.011). Antihypertensive treatment did not signifi cantly affect mean AP (12.9, 11.9) or mean 30.1) . This study confi rms that vascular compliance is reduced in pre-eclamptic women compared with normotensive controls and non-pregnant women; vascular compliance was not improved by antihypertensive treatment. This technique has promise for the assessment and treatment of PE. The potential for early prediction of PE should also be explored.  Neonatal outcomes in near-term infants born to preeclamptic mothers are signifi cantly different from outcomes in near-term neonates delivered due to other indications. Infants born to preeclamptic mothers were more likely to be small for gestational age, but had a decrease in mortality. This may be a refl ection of the differences in the underlying pathophysiology behind indicated preterm birth due to preeclampsia and preterm birth due to other etiologies. Objective: To investigate the expression of autophagy-related proteins (beclin-1 and LC3) in human placenta and their changes in placentas from pregnancies complicated with preeclampsia or intrauterine fetal growth restriction Material and methods: Human term placentas were collected after delivery from women with a normal pregnancy (n=6), preeclampsia (PE, n=10), and intrauterine fetal growth restriction (IUGR, n=8). Direct visualization of autophagosome was performed with electron microscopy. The expression of beclin-1 and LC3 was assessed by immunofl uorescence, immunohistochemistry and Western blotting. Results : Using electron microscope, we confirmed the presence of autophagosome in trophoblasts of the human placenta. Beclin-1 and LC3 were well expressed in human placenta. The expression of beclin-1 in placenta was decreased in IUGR and PE, compared to normal pregnancy. Importantly, the expression of LC3 was decreased in placentas from IUGR and increased in PE compared with normal controls. Moreover, massive proteinuric PE (> 10 g/d) was associated with a striking increase in the expression of placenta LC3. Conclusions : The human placenta expresses autophagosome and autophagyrelated proteins such as beclin-1 and LC3. The difference in the expression of autophagy-related proteins between PE and IUGR may be related to the pathophysiology of these conditions. Objective: Our purpose was to investigate Interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrotic factor-α (TNF-α), lipid peroxides levels, oxygen-radical absorbance capacity (ORAC), and antioxidant vitamin levels in umbilical venous plasma and to evaluate the roles of them in the pathophysiology of preeclampsia. Study design: Samples of umbilical venous plasma were obtained from 20 normal and 20 preeclamptic women between 33 and 40 weeks gestation. IL-6 and TNF-α were assayed by an enzyme-linked immunoassay. Lipid peroxide levels were measured by thiobarbituric acid reaction. The ORAC values were measured by Cao's method. Ascorbic acid, retinol, α-tocopherol, and γ-tocopherol were measured by high performance liquid chromatography. Results: There was no signifi cant differences of IL-6 levels in umbilical venous plasma between women with normal and preeclampsia (2.79±0.21 vs. 2.94±0.17 pg/ml). TNF-α levels in umbilical venous plasma of women with preeclampsia were signifi cantly higher than that of women with preeclampsia (3.04±0.01 vs. 1.40±0.01 pg/ml, p<0.01). Lipid peroxide levels in umbilical venous plasma of women with preeclampsia were signifi cantly higher than that of women with normal pregnancy (7.32±0.09 vs. 5.18±0.14 nmol/mg protein, p<0.01). The ORAC values in umbilical venous plasma of women with preeclampsia were signifi cantly lower than that of women with normal pregnancy (12836.5±249.4 vs. 10490.2±276.9 U/ml, p<0.05). Ascorbic acid levels in umbilical venous plasma of women with preeclampsia were signifi cantly lower than those of women with normal pregnancy (320.2±48.5 vs. 538.5±68.2 nmol/ml, p<0.05). Conclusion: These findings suggest that increased TNF-α in placenta may induce oxidative stress origin and increased lipid peroxidation and decreased antioxidant activity in placenta is involved in the pathophysiology of preeclampsia. An antioxidant vitamin, ascorbic acid, may act an important antioxidant factor and be involved antioxidant ability of fetus in preeclampsia. Objective: Preeclampsia and cardiovascular disease share many risk factors and women with preeclampsia are at increased risk of cardiovascular mortality later in life. We investigated whether two measures associated with vascular dysfunction that are elevated in preeclampsia, cellular fi bronectin (cFN) and uric acid, would remain higher months postpartum. Methods: We measured plasma cFN and uric acid in 30 women with uncomplicated normotensive pregnancies and 20 women with preeclampsia in samples collected at both predelivery and several months postpartum. cFN was quantifi ed by ELISA, inter-assay CV=7%. Uric acid was determined by commercial kit, inter-assay CV=4.5%. Data are mean±SD. Statistical analysis was by one-way and paired Students t-tests with statistical signifi cance accepted at p<0.05. The mean concentration of cFN and uric acid were both signifi cantly elevated in plasma samples collected predelivery from women with preeclampsia compared to women with uncomplicated pregnancies (p<0.0001 for both). cFN was still higher months postpartum in women with previous preeclampsia compared to women with a previous uncomplicated pregnancy (p<0.05). Similarly, uric acid was also still higher months postpartum in women with previous preeclampsia compared to women with a previous uncomplicated pregnancy (p=0.01). In paired analysis, both cFN (p<0.01) and uric acid (p<0.01) exhibited a signifi cant decrease in concentration postpartum in preeclampsia cases; however, only cFN exhibited a signifi cant decrease postpartum (p<0.05) in uncomplicated controls. Conclusions: Uric acid and cFN are both higher in preeclampsia compared to uncomplicated pregnancy and are still higher months postpartum. These data suggest subtle vascular dysfunction and metabolic differences in women with previous preeclampsia consistent with the increased risk of future cardiovascular disease in these women. Funded in part by National Institutes of Health NIH-5MO1-RR00056 and NIH-2PO1-HD30367. Background: Defi cient placentation and reduced spiral arteriole blood fl ow is believed to be important in the pathogenesis of pre-eclampsia (PET). Preclinical evidence suggests that the phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitor sildenafi l can increase uterine artery blood fl ow. We report a clinical study of the effect of sildenafi l in women with established PET testing the null hypothesis that sildenafi l does not prolong pregnancy. Methods: Women with a singleton pregnancy between 24-34 weeks gestation who developed new onset proteinuria of > 500 mg/24 h with hypertension were randomised to placebo or sildenafi l (20 mg tid, escalating to 40 mg tid after 3 days and to 80 mg tid after a further 3 days). Women for whom urgent delivery (within 24 h) was planned were excluded. Concomitant treatment with antihypertensives was allowed. Delivery was permitted for a pre-specifi ed set of clinical criteria. The primary endpoint was time from randomization to delivery. The log transformed primary endpoint was analysed by ANOVA with gestational age at randomization (<28 w or ≥28 w), presence or absence of IUGR and treatment as factors. Calculations suggested a sample size of 58 subjects was required to detect a difference of > 5 days between groups. The trial was stopped after the fi rst interim analysis when the SD of the primary endpoint was found to be less than expected and simulations indicated the study already had >95% power. Results: 35 subjects contributed to the modifi ed intention to treat sample set. Overall, the ratio of the Log transformed primary endpoint for sildenafi l/placebo was 0.86 with 95% CI of 0.47-1.58. The confi dence interval includes unity indicating no difference between groups. Gestation or the presence of IUGR did not affect the result. Background: Annexin V disruption on the placental endotelil surface is thought to be associated with pathogenesis in intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), thrombin formation on damaged endothelium in antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) in pre-eclampsia and the haemolysis, elevated liver enzyme and low platelet count (HELLP) syndrome leads to the activation of platelets in maternal circulation. We evaluates the relationship between fetal Doppler evaluation, annexin V expression and neonatal hematologic parameters. Study design: Prospective cohort Placental sample were performed at three different point of placental bed, marginal, central and close to the insertion of the umbilical cord, samples were stored in double at -80º C and in formaline. Maternal and fetal blood sample were collected respectively from antecubital vein and umbilical artery. Immuno Hystochemical analysis was performed blinded to the clinical condition. Samples were immunostained in 10 slides, in each slide IHC reactivity was counted per fi eld. The results was expressed in mean between the 10 slides The neonates were also analyzed in two groups based on umbilical artery Doppler status. At birth, the groups were compared for anemia and thrombocytopenia. Results: The newborns with AEDV were delivered 4 weeks earlier and were smaller. AEDV neonates were signifi cantly thrombocytopenic at birth as preterm born from preeclamptic mothers compared to control mothers newborns. Though annexin V was signifi cantly higher in the control group, no signifi cant correlations were found between its quantifi ed assay and the hematologic variables of the mother and the newborn. Conclusion: Hematologic status of the newborn at birth is proportional to the degree of placental dysfunction and is related to the fetal Doppler pattern. Although annexin V was higher in the control group, suggesting a role in the regulation of the coagulatory cascade, its clinical effects have to be defi ned. Magnesium Sulfate Decreases Blood-Brain Barrier Permeability in Response to Acute Hypertension in Late-Pregnant Rats. Anna G Euser, Marilyn J Cipolla. * Neurology and Ob/Gyn, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA. Objective: Magnesium sulfate (MgSO 4 ) is widely used for prevention of eclampsia, despite an unclear mechanism of action. Eclampsia is a hypertensive disorder of pregnancy known to cause cerebral edema, most likely due to blood-brain barrier (BBB) disruption. Because MgSO 4 has been shown to be protective of the BBB in several brain injury models, we hypothesized that BBB protection may explain the effectiveness of MgSO 4 in eclamptic seizure prophylaxis. Methods: In vivo BBB permeability to sodium fl uorescein (NaFl) and Evan's blue (EB) was determined in late-pregnant (LP;d19-21) Sprague Dawley rats (n=11) after infusion of phenylephrine to raise blood pressure to cause autoregulatory breakthrough and compared to sham controls. A separate group of LP rats were treated with 270 mg/kg MgSO 4 i.p. every 4 hours for 24 hours prior to acute hypertension. Permeability in different brain regions (anterior, posterior and brainstem) was determined by infusion of EB and NaFl followed by fl ushing the vasculature with saline. The brains were homogenized and clearance of the dyes into the brain determined by fluorescence spectrophotometry, expressed as counts/sec/g brain tissue (CPS/g). Animals were ventilated to maintain blood gases within normal (PO 2 >100mmHg, PCO 2 =35-45mmHg). Results: Permeability to NaFl was greater than EB in all groups, demonstrating size selectivity of the BBB (p<0.05). Acute hypertension caused a signifi cant increase in EB permeability in all regions vs. sham; however, there was no signifi cant increase in NaFl permeability. There was considerable regional heterogeneity in EB permeability such that the posterior region had the greatest increase in permeability (660%) followed by the anterior region (365%) and brainstem (170%); p<0.05 vs. sham. Treatment with MgSO 4 attenuated BBB permeability to EB after acute hypertension in the posterior region by 36% from 2958±469 vs.1852±385 CPS/g and by 60% in the anterior region from 1587±331 vs. 1165±258 CPS/g. There was no effect of treatment on permeability in the brainstem (n.s.). Conclusions: These data demonstrate that acute hypertension causes increased BBB permeability in LP animals that was greatest in the posterior cerebrum, a region that is susceptible to edema formation during eclampsia. Treatment with MgSO 4 prior to acute hypertension attenuated BBB permeability, suggesting this may be one mechanism by which MgSO 4 prevents eclamptic seizures. Objective: Heparin intervention is known to improve the live birth rates in women with known thrombophilia. This study was conducted to fi nd out the maternal and fetal outcome in women with known thrombophilic disorders, after combined administration with low dose aspirin (LDA) and heparin. Patients & Methods: Sixty fi ve women with a history of at least 3 events of adverse pregnancy outcome were screened for both acquired and congenital thrombophilia at the Civil Hospital, University of Karachi, Pakistan. Screening included complete blood count, antiphospholipid antibodies IgG & IgM, and activities of protein C, protein S and antithrombin. All patients were evaluated for thrombophilia in the non-pregnant state. Pregnancy outcomes were compared between women receiving prophylactic heparin and low dose aspirin(study group) and the remaining women who did not receive treatment. (control group). The safety of heparin and LDA was also recorded. Results: Of 65 women, with poor obstetrical history who were screened, 53(81%) women were found positive for either acquired or inherited thrombophilia. APLS was the most common cause seen in 30 (56%) while Protein C, S and antithrombin defi ciency were seen in 13(24%), 8(15%) and 2(3.7%) women respectively. Sixteen women diagnosed as having thrombophilia (study group) received LDA and subcutaneous prophylactic heparin injection after viability scanning. In the study group, there were 13 (73%) live births as compared to only 2 (5.8%) in the control group. Miscarriages were seen in 3 (15.7%) women in study group as compared to 15 (44%) in control group. There was no fetal deaths in the study group as compared to 11 (32%) in control group. There was no case of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia or clinically signifi cant bleeding. In 4 cases, self-limiting blood oozing from the site of injection was seen. Conclusion: Patients with adverse pregnancy outcome should be screened for thrombophilia. LDA and heparin prophylaxis is associated with improved pregnancy outcome. It appears to be safe in pregnancy, but larger trials are needed to confi rm effi cacy and safety. Objective: The imbalance of increased TX and decreased PGI2 production by trophoblasts (TCs) contributes to the increased placental vasoconstriction in preeclampsia (PE). However, the mechanism of TC-released TX induced vasoconstriction in the placental vasculature is not clear. Because TCs are polarized epithelial cells, we determined if there are differential releases of TX and PGI2 by TCs towards apical and basolateral directions. Methods: TCs from normal placentas (n=7) were cultured in inserts with DMEM with 1.7ml in the upper chamber and 1.5ml in the lower chamber. After 48hrs of culture, the medium from the upper and the lower chambers were collected and measured for TX and PGI2 by their stable metabolites of TXB2 and 6-keto PGF1α, respectively. To investigate if apical exposure of TCs to arachidonic acid (AA) and aspirin could affect TX and PGI production, AA+/-aspirin with different doses were added to the upper chamber and medium levels of TX and PGI2 were determined. Data are expressed as mean±SE and analyzed by ANOVA. A p level < 0.05 was set as statistically different. Results: 1) In control cells, TXB2 concentration was signifi cantly higher in the lower than in the upper chamber, p<0.05; 2) TXB2 concentration was dose-dependently increased in cells treated with AA in both the upper (p<0.01) and the lower (p<0.05) chambers; 3) TXB2 concentrations were dose-dependently decreased in cells treated with aspirin+AA in both the upper and the lower chambers, but with a greater inhibitory effects in the upper chamber, p<0.05, respectively; and 4) There were no differences for 6-keto PGF1α levels in the upper and the lower chambers in control cells and in cells treated with AA +/-aspirin. Conclusions: 1) Basolateral release of TX, but not PGI2, is dominant in placental TCs; 2) Apical exposure of TCs to AA leads to a dose-dependent increase in TX production towards both the apical and basolateral directions without effect on PGI2 production. 3) Aspirin inhibits the AA-induced TX production to a greater degree to apical than to basolateral direction. These fi ndings provide new insights into TC compartmental release of TX in the placenta, mechanisms of TX induced vasoconstriction in the placental vasculature, and possible explanation of the differential outcomes of aspirin in prevention of PE. Sheer stress is a haemodynamic property of blood fl ow which creates a biochemical signalling response in endothelia. In the fetoplacental vasculature of healthy placentas, sheer stress causes vasodilation through endothelial nitric oxide release. This study aimed to investigate the physiological adaptation to sheer stress in the in vitro dually perfused lobule of the term human placenta, to compare effects in four pregnancy groups: 1. healthy, 2. pre-eclampsia (PE), 3. IUGR, 4. PE with IUGR. Placental lobules were perfused as previously described (Brownbill et al, 2006) . Fetal and maternal infl ows were incrementally and proportionately elevated (2.0 to 8.1 and 5.5 to 21.0 ml/min, respectively; groups 1-4: n=7, n=9, n=5 and n=4 lobules, respectively). Steady state fetal-side infl ow hydrostatic pressure (FIHP) was recorded at each fl ow, as a measure of resistance, expressed as % Δ FIHP from that of the lowest infl ow rate to standardise against variance in inherent resistance to fl ow between lobules, and then normalised, by logging, to permitting ANOVA between groups. Each group assumed a hyperbolic profi le when LOG % Δ FIHP (y-axis) was plotted against fetal-side infl ow (x axis), with a diminishing curvature at higher fl ow. 2-way ANOVA of all groups showed a signifi cant 'between groups' effect (p < 0.0001). Further analyses showed that groups 2 and 3 had similar adaptation profi les. Both group 2 and 3 showed a greater adaptive responses to fl ow at low to mid fl ow ranges when compared to group 1 (p < 0.0001, both). Group 4 had the poorest vasodilatory adaptation to fl ow, which was signifi cantly different to all other groups (p < 0.0001, all comparisons) and was most noticeably different at the highest fl ow rates. PE, or IUGR in isolation, showed a slightly greater in vitro adaptive response to fl ow at lower fl ow rates, compared to healthy lobules. When PE and IUGR coincided, the adaptive vasodilatory response to fl ow was almost absent. Whilst villous maldevelopment in IUGR may explain basal resistance to fetoplacental blood fl ow, our data has additionally highlighted an important physiological difference in adaptations to sheer stress between healthy and diseased pregnancies. We speculate that fetoplacental endothelial signaling is altered in PE, IUGR and PE with IUGR, possibly deriving different adaptive response phenotypes. Objective: Pre-eclampsia (PE) is characterized by maternal endothelial dysfunction, potentially initiated directly or indirectly by syncytiotrophoblast (ST) membrane fragments. It is possible that turbulent intervillous blood fl ow in PE, resulting from inadequate spiral artery adaptations, would liberate additional soluble non-particulate material which could also encourage vascular endothelial complications. We therefore used a placental perfusion system to replicate this process in vitro, and have investigated the effects of the soluble fractions on vascular endothelial cell cultures. Methods: Placental lobules from term healthy human pregnancies (N=6) were dually perfused in open-circuit. The intervillous space was perfused at 14ml/ min and then at 45ml/min, thus mimicking the fl ow turbulence and velocity of normal pregnancy and PE. Temporal perfusions were conducted at 14ml/min to permit histological comparisons. Collected maternal venous perfusates were centrifuged at 70,000g to remove particulate material. Generated soluble fractions were analyzed for the soluble markers of ST, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), alkaline phosphatase (AP) and human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG). The effect of these perfusion-generated soluble fractions on human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) was determined by MTT assay. Results: Low fl ow rate perfusions had minimal impact on villus tissue and ST. High fl ow rates caused ST vacuolation and shedding, at the points of cannulae insertion. At 14mls/min and 45mls/min the LDH levels in the maternal perfusates were 0.63±0.29u/ml/min and 1.15±0.47u/ml/min, respectively (ANOVA, p<0.05). There was an additional elevation under high fl ow in liberated AP and hCG. The soluble components from the high fl ow perfusions had a negative impact on endothelial cells in the MTT assay, reducing metabolic activity and viability of HUVECs by 44±6% at 6hrs incubation (p<0.05) and 48±9% at 24hrs (p<0.05), as compared to the low fl ow perfusates, independent of blood contamination. Conclusions: These results provide evidence to confi rm the hypothesis that turbulent intervillous haemodynamics could release material from the ST of a non-particulate, soluble nature. This material, like that of ST membrane fragments, may have the potential to initiate the vascular endothelial complications of PE in vivo. Proteomic Analysis of the Endometrial Secretome. Jessica G Scotchie, 1 Objective: Understanding the changing endometrial secretome will allow further insight into endometrial function. Our objective is to characterize changes in the endometrial secretome during early and mid-secretory phases. Methods: Endometrial lavage was performed in 18-34 year old, normally cycling volunteers, 4 and 9 days after urinary LH surge. Proteins were concentrated and interfering substances removed using Ettan 2-D cleanup kit (GE). High-abundance proteins were depleted using Multiple Affi nity Removal System (Agilent). LH+4 and LH+9 specimens were labeled with Cy3 and Cy5 fl uorescent tags, respectively. The samples were combined and protein species separated using a 2D gel electrophoresis. Separate scanning for fl uorescent signals corresponding to each tag allowed comparison of protein amounts using progenesis software. Spots were picked, in-gel digested with trypsin, eluted, and subjected to MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry for identifi cation using GPS Explorer and Mascot software. Results: 14 proteins were identifi ed as differentially expressed between days LH+4 and LH+9 as summarized in Table  1 . Proteins showing increased expression from LH+4 to LH+9 have functions involving lipid transport, cell metabolism, stress response, coagulation, transcription regulation, phosphorylation, and immune modulation. Several proteins showing decreased expression from LH+4 to LH+9 had unknown functions; however, others were involved with immune modulation, host defense and lipid transport. One protein, apolipoprotein A1, was identifi ed as having increased and decreased expression, suggesting altered post-translational modifi cation causing differential gel migration. Conclusions: 2-D difference gel analysis can quantitate and identify proteins in uterine washings. Secretion of specifi c proteins is altered between the early and mid secretory phase. Implantation is a complex process that requires coordinated interactions between the developing embryo and the constantly changing endometrium. High-density cDNA microarray analysis of timed endometrial samples (LH+5 to +10) was used to compare the transcript profi les of matched fertile women (n=8) and patients with unexplained infertility (n=6). Class Prediction Tool analysis identifi ed 51 endometrial transcripts that were signifi cantly differentially expressed between the fertile and infertile groups. Additional stringent statistical analysis as well as real-time quantitative PCR (RTQ-PCR) validation of a larger clinical sample set (fertile: n=20; infertile: n=15) confi rmed that the expression of the serum-and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase-1 (SGK-1) mRNA was signifi cantly higher in endometria of infertile women when compared to fertile controls. Laser capture micro-dissection followed by RTQ-PCR revealed SGK-1 transcripts were more abundantly expressed in surface epithelial cells than in glandular epithelial cells or in stromal cells. Furthermore, increased SGK-1 mRNA expression in infertile patients was confi ned to the surface epithelium and this was mimicked at protein level as determined by semi-quantitative immunohistochemical analysis. Treatment of endometrial explant cultures with either estrodial (E2, 10-8 mM), progesterone (P4, 10-6 mM), or a combination, revealed that SGK-1 mRNA expression is under progesterone control. In summary, SGK-1 is a serine/threonine kinase that critically regulates electrolyte transport over the cell membrane and is involved survival signalling. Its increased expression in endometrial surface epithelium of women with unexplained infertility suggests a possible mechanism of disrupting embryo apposition and implantation. Objective: Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), a member of the IL-6 cytokine family that exerts complex effects on infl ammation, is critical for implantation, and is a molecular marker of endometrial blastocyst receptivity. Preeclampsia (PE) is associated with an exaggerated inflammatory response as well as restricted trophoblast invasion, which leads to impaired spiral artery remodeling. The pro-infl ammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-1β and thrombin are involved in various aspects of PE, suggesting that LIF may be modulated by these cytokines at the implantation site during placentation in preeclamptic decidua. Methods: Human decidua from patients with PE and uncomplicated term deliveries (n = 4, respectively) were immunostained for LIF. Cultures of fi rsttrimester decidual cells (FTDC) (n = 6) were primed with estradiol (E2) or with E2 and medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), and then treated with or without IL-1β, TNF-α, or thrombin. LIF levels in conditioned media were assessed by ELISA. LIF mRNA levels were measured by quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR). Statistical analysis of the data was performed using Student's t-test and ANOVA followed by post hoc test. Results: Immunostaining of LIF was signifi cantly higher in decidual cells of patients with PE compared with normal specimens, with HSCORE value 175.0±11.9 and 106.7±9.5, respectively (P<0.05). ELISA showed no difference in FTDC-secreted LIF between E2 and E2+MPA treatments. IL-1β, TNF-α and thrombin signifi cantly increased the secretion of LIF in FTDC (52.6± 12.0-, 14.1± 3.6-and 7.5± 3.3-fold, respectively; P < 0.05), and these effects were not altered by MPA. Corresponding effects on LIF mRNA levels were demonstrated by qRT-PCR. Conclusions: Significant induction of LIF in FTDC by IL-1β, TNF-α and thrombin may be closely linked to the early pathogenesis of PE, as a compensatory mechanism in response to pro-infl ammatory challenges during placentation. The stages of embryo implantation have been defi ned based on morphological criteria but molecular mechanisms remain obscure. To overcome scarcity of material we have developed a model of implantation in which mouse embryos attach to human endometrial Ishikawa cells. These cells are polarized and express the surface mucin MUC1 which is associated with luminal epithelium in vivo. Aims:To quantify loose and stable embryo attachment in vitro. To examine the effect of embryo attachment on epithelial cell surface mucin distribution. To examine the effect of assisted hatching on embryo attachment. Methods:Blastocysts obtained from superovulated or naturally mated mice were collected at 96h post-hCG, and co-cultured in microwells with an Ishikawa cell monolayer in DMEM/FCS at 37 0 C and 5% CO 2 . Attachment was assessed by microscopic examination 48h after transfer. After PFA fi xation, indirect immunofl uorescence was performed with mouse mAb BC2 to detect MUC1 as a function of distance from the attachment site. Results:Blastocysts attached and outgrew effi ciently (95%) on tissue culture plastic. Initially, blastocysts attached loosely to the cell monolayer at a high rate (85%). At 48h, 38% of blastocysts (n=413 total) had attached more stably to the epithelium and were retained after fi xation. 57% of embryos undergoing assisted hatching attached (n=33 total). Ishikawa cells express MUC1 as a mosaic of varying intensity. 17% of blastocysts could modify the apical cell surface with loss of MUC1 from both the cell surface and intracellular locations, in patches stretching as far as approximately 50 cells from the embryo. This effect was not increased in embryos from assisted hatching. Normal levels of MUC-1 were retained on cells farther from the embryo. Conclusions:Initial weak attachment of a majority of embryos is followed by a phase in which a stronger adhesive interaction is developed by a smaller proportion of embryos. Loss of mucin occurs from surrounding epithelial cells. The mechanism of this process remains to be established. Attachment to Ishikawa cells is less effi cient than on plastic and less effi cient than in vivo in mouse, suggesting either selection by the maternal cell layer, or the need for embryo activation, or both. The model may be useful in discriminating embryos with varying implantation potential. Objective: The extracellular signal-regulated kinase1/2 (ERK) subfamily is part of the Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) family of proteins and plays a role in a number of cellular processes such as cell proliferation and survival. ERK signaling is a noted regulator of angiogenesis, a critical, periodic process in the endometrium which refl ects the cyclical growth and shedding of the menstrual cycle. We hypothesized that temporal changes in ERK phosphorylation (activity) occurs in human endometrial endothelial cells (HEEC) in parallel with angiogenic activity throughout the menstrual cycle and in early pregnancy. Materials and methods: Staining for total-(T-) and phospho-(P-) ERK was performed on endometrial tissues (n=24) obtained from normal endometrium and decidual tissues (n=5) obtained from women with clinically normal pregnancies terminated voluntarily in the fi rst trimester. Staining intensity was evaluated with HSCORE and grouped according to menstrual cycle phase. Endothelial cells isolated from normal endometrium were grown to confl uence, and cultured cells were treated with or without specifi c ERK1/2 inhibitor [PD98059; 20 μM] for 48h. Cell proliferation was determined by MTS assay. Statistical analysis was done using one-way ANOVA, with p<0.05 considered signifi cant. Results: T-ERK staining was cytoplasmic and nuclear in the endothelial cells, and no signifi cant change in expression was detected across the menstrual cycle, with strong staining throughout. P-ERK staining was nuclear, and showed the strongest immunoreactivity from the early to late proliferative phases (280.0±10.9 and 265.0±11.9, respectively), and underwent a gradual decrease from the early secretory phase (230.0±14.7) to a signifi cantly decreased level in the late secretory phase (150.0±22.8, p<0.001). P-ERK staining in fi rst trimester tissues was even further reduced (106.0±13.2, p<0.001). In vitro analysis revealed that inhibition of ERK signaling signifi cantly reduced cell viability in endothelial cells compared to control (p<0.01). Conclusion: Our results suggest that ERK activity is regulated in HEEC in a menstrual-cycle dependent manner. The highest level of ERK phosphorylation corresponds with the elevated angiogenesis in endometrium during the proliferative phase. Our in vitro data suggests that ERK activity is closely related with HEEC survival and supports our in vivo fi ndings. Objective: To investigate the role of SRC-2 in progesterone receptor (PR)mediated physiological processes required for the maintenance of fertility, a novel PRCre/+SRC-2fl ox/fl ox bigenic mouse was generated 1 to ablate SRC-2 function specifi cally in cell lineages that express PR. Ablation of SRC-2 resulted in an infertility phenotype in the female. The PRCre/+SRC-2fl ox/fl ox infertility defect is due to uterine implantation failure, underscoring the unique importance of SRC-2 in peri-implantation biological processes that require progesterone signaling. The purpose of this study was to investigate the expression and functional signifi cance of SRC-2 in the human endometrium. Methods: Endometrial biopsy samples were obtained using an endometrial Pipelle from regularly cycling women, aged 18-35 years, during the late proliferative phase (cycle day 10-14), mid-luteal (cycle day 20-24) and late luteal phase (cycle day 24-28) of the menstrual cycle. Immunohistochemical detection of human SRC-1, SRC-2, SRC-3, PR and ER, and real-time PCR analyses and in-situ hybridization were performed according to procedures described previously 1 . Results: While real-time PCR demonstrated SRC-2 mRNA levels were highest during the late-proliferative/early luteal phase of the menstrual cycle, in-situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry revealed uterine PR and SRC-2 localize to identical cell-lineages in the glandular epithelium and stroma of the human endometrium, with prominent expression of both proteins at the mid-luteal phase of the cycle. Conclusions: As observed recently in the mouse, the spatiotemporal expression profi les of PR and SRC-2 can be superimposed in the human endometrium. These data provide supportive evidence for an essential role for SRC-2 in progesterone-initiated uterine functions in humans. Ongoing in vitro studies are investigating the functional signifi cance of SRC-2 in cultured human endometrial stromal cells and its role in decidualization. Based on our studies in rat placenta, we hypothesize that IMD mRNA, as well as protein, are expressed in the implantation site and may be involved in embryo implantation and decidualization in rats. OBJECTIVES: 1) To assess the expression of the mRNA transcript and immunolocalize IMD protein in rat implantation sites; 2) To assess the effects of IMD 17-47 infusion on the weights and numbers of implantation sites; and 3) to assess the expression of pro-apoptotic proteins, caspase 3 and cytochrome c in implantation sites of IMD 17-47 treated rats. METHODS: Sprague Dawley rats were used in this study. Osmotic minipumps containing vehicle alone or IMD 17-47 (200 μg/day) were inserted s.c. in pregnant rats on Day (D) 3 of gestation and sacrifi ced on D9 (n = 5). Total number and weights of the implantation sites were recorded. Total RNA and protein was isolated from implantation sites using TRIzol reagent and processed for RT-PCR and Western blots. The results are expressed relative to 18S mRNA or β-Tubulin. RESULTS: Our data demonstrates that: 1) IMD transcript is expressed in rat implantation sites; 2) IMD protein is expressed and localized in labyrinth zone of giant trophoblast cells of D9 rat implantation site; 3) IMD 17-47 causes a signifi cant decline in the weights of D9 implantation sites (p<0.05) but has no effect on their number; and 4) IMD 17-47 has no effect on the expression of pro-apoptotic proteins caspase 3 and cytochrome C in implantation site. CONCLUSION: IMD is expressed in implantation sites on D9 of pregnant rats. Inhibition of IMD effects caused a decrease in the weights of implantation sites suggesting a potential role for endogenous IMD during post implantation period in rat pregnancy. Further, in contrast to the effects observed in D18 rat placenta, these effects are not mediated through apoptosis in implantation sites suggesting that: IMD effects may be gestational age and tissue specifi c. Targeted disruption of either of these two gene products is known to result in infertility due to a specifi c defect in implantation,demonstrating that these genes are important for endometrial receptivity. Transforming Growth Factor Beta 3 (TGF-β3) has been shown to be expressed in the endometrium. It has previously been suggested that during the peri-implantation period, the TGFbeta signaling pathway plays an important role in endometrial receptivity and embryo attachment to sub-epithelial stroma. S100A14 has been also demonstrated to be a target of HOXA10 regulation in human endometrium. We hypothesized that TGF-β3 may act through these important transcriptional regulators of endometrial receptivity. Materials and Methods: Human endometrial stromal cells were grown to 70% confl uence in DMEM with 10% FBS and 10% antibiotic/antimycotic. Media was then changed to steroid free, phenol red free DMEM with 10% charcoal stripped FBS for 12 hrs. Cells were subsequently cultured with recombinant human TGF-β3 protein in concentrations of 0 (control), 0.01, 0.1, 1, 5, and 10 ng/ml for 24 hours. Cells were harvested and mRNA was extracted using the RNAeasy method. cDNA was generated using iScript, and quantitative real time RT-PCR using SybrGreen was performed and normalized to β-actin. Fold change in normalized Hoxa10, Hoxa11, and S100A14 expression was assessed. All experiments were conducted in triplicate, repeated four times and compared using ANOVA. Results: After incubation with TGF-β3 for 24 hours, a dose-dependent response in the mRNA expression of all three gene targets was observed. HOXA10 demonstrated a change in fold expression from 0.99 at a concentration of 0.01 ng/ml to 2.84 at 10 ng/ml. HOXA11 showed an initial decrease of 0.87 fold at 0.01 ng/ml, and a maximum increase of 3.37 fold at 10 ng/ml. S100A14 also showed an initial decrease of 0.76 fold at 0.01 ng/ml, and demonstrated the largest fold increase in expression of 11.27 at 10 ng/ml. In vitro, treatment with TGF-β3 induced a dose-dependent change in expression of HOXA10, HOXA11. Furthermore, TGF-β3 also induced a dose response in the known HOXA10 target gene, S100A14. TGF-β3 appears to play a role in the regulation of known genes necessary for endometrial receptivity. HYPOTHESIS: A novel nonhuman primate in vitro 3-D system can provide cues for implantation and interaction with the extracellular environment not available in 2-D planar models. METHODS: We developed an in vitro 3-D implantation model utilizing blastocyst stage rhesus monkey embryos embedded in 3-D Matrigel explants, coupled with different feeder cell microenvironments. RESULTS: Signs of implantation including enlargement of embryo mass, invasion and proliferation of trophectoderm cell layers, cystic formation, and cellular outgrowths derived from the embryo, initiated within the fi rst week post embedding. Trophoblast structures with protrusion and branches growing from the surface of embryo implants were observed. Rapid proliferation and differentiation of the trophoblast structures provided evidence of interactions between the embryo and the 3-D environment up to 45 days in culture. Immunohistochemical staining for CG and other biomarkers, combined with immunoassays for CG and progesterone showed secretion curves similar to early pregnancy, indicated positive characteristics of trophoblastic cell lineages. In addition, our study found morphological factors to predict successful establishment and prolonged embryo development, as well as an optimized culture microenvironment of media and feeder cells. CONCLUSIONS: We have established a 3-D in vitro system showing the potential to model implantation initiation in vitro, and revealed the capability of the embryo to interact with the extracellular matrix. Continuing studies will accelerate our understanding of nonhuman primate embryo development, with potential for insights into early pregnancy loss and related pathologies. Aims / Objectives: In order to assess whether markers of cell senescence are related to Recurrent Miscarriage (RM), we assessed the expression of nucleolin in endometrial biopsies from women with RM. Materials and methods: This prospective pilot study included 49 women of whom, 10 had idiopathic recurrent fetal loss (miscarriage following identifi cation of fetal cardiac activity) (Group 1), 10 had idiopathic recurrent loss of empty gestation sacs (Group 2), 10 had recurrent implantation failure (Group 3) and 19 had two or more normal pregnancies(Group 4). An endometrial sample was collected during the implantation window (cycle day 22+/-2) from each woman and dated according to recent modifi cations of Noyes criteria by two experienced pathologists1. Nucleolin expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry using a commercially available monoclonal antibody and a semiquantitative scoring system. We also correlated this with the mean endometrial cell telomere length and endometrial telomerase expression. Results: The endometria of fertile, healthy women showed virtually no nucleolin immuno-reactivity during the implantation window. However, in Group 1, immuno-staining for nucleolin was signifi cantly increased in glands and luminal epithelium (p =<0.001). The perivascular nucleolin expression was signifi cantly raised in groups 2 & 3 (p<0.05). There were no signifi cant differences in mean endometrial TL between groups. However, the nucleolin expression was closely related to the endometrial telomerase expression. Conclusions: These data provide novel insight into the biological correlates of clinical types of RM and suggest that specifi c alterations in the regulation of endometrial cell fate are associated with different types of recurrent pregnancy loss. Objective: Appropriate and tightly controlled changes in the vasculature are essential for proper functioning of the endometrium during the menstrual cycle. Although these endometrial vascular changes are controlled by oestrogen (E) and progesterone (P) and mediated in part by the angiogenic protein vegf, the molecular mechanisms underlying the process are not well understood. In this study we quantifi ed the relative changes in mRNA expression of total vegf, individual vegf isoforms (120, 164, 188) and the vegf receptors (fl k-1, nrp-1, nrp-2) in uteri from pregnant and hormone-treated mice. We hypothesised that expression of the isoforms and receptors would increase concurrent with the endometrial angiogenesis that is known to occur during early pregnancy and following E and P treatment in the mouse. Methods: Pregnancy: Uteri were collected from mice (CBA x C57) on days 1-5 of pregnancy (n=6 per day). P Regime: Mice (n=8) were given a single injection of 100 ng of estradiol on day 8 following ovariectomy, followed by a day with no treatment and 3 consecutive daily injections of 1 mg P. Other groups were treated with either the vehicle (n=7) or P (n=8) only. All mice were dissected on day 13 after ovariectomy. Short-term E Regime: Mice (n=7) were given a single injection of 100 ng of estradiol and dissected 24 hours later. mRNA expression was quantifi ed by real time RT-PCR and normalized against 18S rRNA. Results: Overall, the mRNA expression levels were of an equivalent range in pregnant and E-treated animals, but considerably lower than those in vehicle and P-treated animals. Expression of total vegf, vegf 120 , vegf 164 , fl k-1, nrp-1 and nrp-2 mRNA increased signifi cantly across early pregnancy, correlating with the endothelial cell proliferation that also occurs at this time. In contrast, levels of total vegf, vegf 120 , vegf 188 , fl k-1, nrp-1 and nrp-2 mRNA were signifi cantly lower in animals dissected 24 hours following E treatment compared to those treated with vehicle or P, despite endometrial angiogenesis occurring in response to this hormone. Conclusions: Although E has pro-angiogenic effects in the endometrium, we conclude that E down-regulates mRNA expression of vegf isoforms and receptors in the mouse uterus. Basal levels of E may be responsible for the lower overall mRNA expression levels observed in pregnant mice in contrast to those seen in P or vehicle-treated mice. Hypothesis. Human endometrium, during every reproductive cycle, undergoes extensive tissue remodelling in response to cyclic hormonal changes. Angiogenesis,plays an important role in the remodelling of endometrial tissue. Notch receptors and their ligands have an important role in cell specifi cation, proliferation and apoptosis,but also in the regulation of vascular formation.In this study was investigated the cellular localization of Notch-1,Notch-4 and Jagged-1 in normal and pathologic endometrium.Notch activation can modulate cell cycle regulation,so we evaluated the expression of cyclin D1 and p21. Methods.60 samples of physiologic human endometrium (20 in proliferative,20 in secretive and 20 in menopause) and 60 samples of pathologic human endometrium (20 hyperplasia,20 post-menopausal polyps and 20 cancer) were immediately fi xed in formalin for ihc.Results. Notch-1 and Jagged-1 showed an increase from proliferative to secretive phase,instead Notch-4 decreased from proliferative to secretive phase.In contrast all three of them were expressed almost to undetectable level in menopause endometrial tissue.In pathologic endometrium Notch-1 showed a weak expression in polyps that becomes almost undetectable in the hyperplasia and carcinoma.Notch-4 and Jagged-1 was well expressed in the polyps but lower in the hyperplasia and carcinoma. Finally in physiological conditions cyclin D1 is intensely expressed during the proliferative phase but decreased in the secretive phase and menopause.p21 showed a weak level during the proliferative phase,a moderate level during the secretive phase and undetectable level in menopause.In pathological conditions cyclin D1was strongly expressed in polyp and in carcinoma,moderately lower in hyperplasia.The expression of p21was undetectable in polyp,weak in carcinoma and strongly increased in hyperplasia section.ConclusionWe have characterized the expression pattern of Notch receptors and their ligands during the tissue remodelling of human endometrium in physiologic conditions,and compared the Notch pathways in several patological endometrial conditions. Objective: The timed endometrial biopsy followed by histological dating of the endometrium provides no clinically useful information as a screening test for infertile women (Fertil Steril 82, 1264 -72, 2004 . Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF) is increased in the endometrium during the secretory phase in humans. The addition of recombinant HB-EGF to human blastocysts signifi cantly increases trophoblast differentiation in vitro. These important biological actions led us to test HB-EGF protein accumulation in endometrial biopsies for its capacity to differentiate between fertile and infertile women recruited by the NICHD Reproductive Medicine network. Methods: Endometrial biopsies from patients (n=173) originally collected by the Reproductive Medicine Network were biopsied on cycle days 21-22 and cycle days 26-27 respectively. Fertile and infertile women were equally distributed between the 2 biopsy intervals. Paraffi n embedded specimens were immunostained for HB-EG using a robotic DAKO Autostainer. To visualize and quantify (grey level) antigen, a peroxidase kit DAKO was used in conjunction with image analysis, according to our published procedure (Lancet 360, 1215-19; 2002) . ANOVA was used for statistical analysis with signifi cance at * p<0.05. Results: When biopsy specimens are segregated into early, mid and late secretory phase based on histological dating there is a signifi cant increase in HB-EGF grey scale level in both the luminal and glandular epithelium in the mid and late secretory phase. There was no difference in protein accumulation in the endometrial stroma across the secretory phase. There was no difference in HB-EGF levels between fertile or infertile women. Conclusions: This is the fi rst high throughput analysis of a protein marker of the implantation window in well characterized endometrial biopsies. This proof of concept will enable us to investigate other proteins with known function and novel genes currently being identifi ed by gene array analysis. Dogma regarding endometrial regeneration following menses is that estrogen (E)-primed proliferation is required for re-establishment of full thickness endometrium and that while it may not be required for initial re-epithelialization of the uterine surface, it is essential for stromal renewal. Lack of suitable animal models has limited functional studies on menstruation and endometrial repair. Objective: To determine if E is essential for endometrial restoration in a mouse model. Rationale: In the model 1,2 one uterine horn of each ovariectomised (ovx) mouse is decidualized and progesterone (P) support withdrawn. Endometrial breakdown is generally complete by 24h and repair by 48h, closely resembling events in the human endometrium at menses. In this model, which lacks ovarian E, the endometrium is rapidly and fully restored. However, estrogenic infl uences from extra-ovarian sources (diet and fat) remain: dietary E has signifi cant effects on uterine weight 3 . Methods: Two groups of mice were used: control (n=13); ovx + normal diet + vehicle, and E-free (n= 16); ovx + soy-free diet + letrozole (20mg/day after P withdrawal). At 48h uterine weights were measured, uterine mRNA (selected animals) was subjected to qRT-PCR for E responsive genes lactoferrin and progesterone receptor (PR). Analysis of genes included an E-replaced group. Differences in endometrial restoration were assessed using a previously developed morphological scoring system 2 . Results: Uterine weight did not differ between control and E-free groups (15.5±3.4mg vs 14.9±2.1mg). For lactoferrin mRNA (corrected for 18s), control (1.02±0.75 relative units) was not different to E-free (3.1±2.9), but E-replaced was signifi cantly higher (176.8±190.6, p≤0.05) with similar fi ndings for PR mRNA (6.8±5.9 vs 6.0±3.6 vs 87.2±60.7 relative units, p≤0.05), suggesting that extra-ovarian estrogenic infl uences are minimal after ovariectomy. Importantly, scoring of uterine morphology showed no difference in endometrial restoration; endometrium (epithelial and stromal components) from both groups restored to a normal phenotype within 48h of P withdrawal. Conclusion: E is not required for successful endometrial restoration in this model, suggesting it may also not be essential for re-establishment of endometrium in women. The identifi cation of molecules required for implantation is an active area of research in contraceptive and infertility biology. Epithelial membrane protein-2 (EMP2), a member of the tetraspan superfamily, has emerged as a regulator of endometrial function. Specifi cally, EMP2 expression, primarily expressed in the luminal epithelium of the endometrium, is necessary for successful uterine receptivity, and dysregulation of its expression has been shown to correlate with cancer progression. By combining LCM and microarray technology to investigate the molecular phenotype of epithelial specifi c cells, we identifi ed biological networks of proteins and specifi c gene function families related to EMP-2, that were signifi cantly regulated by ovarian hormones in the endometrium of women of mid -reproductive age. Examination of these networks has revealed an important role for EMP2 in guiding the delivery of a distinct network of adhesion proteins related to the integrin mediated pathway to distinct domains on the plasma membrane. Results: Previous experiments reveal the requirement of EMP2 expression for successful implantation as well as in cancer prognosis. We have previously shown that EMP2 is regulated by progesterone, and that its expression regulates key integrin pairs such as αvβ3 integrin. LCM microarray technology was employed to identify epithelial-specifi c candidate proteins that may be regulated by EMP2. Ease analysis revealed signifi cant epithelial over representation of more than 12 members of the integrin mediated pathway. Thus far, LCM microarray analysis has revealed at least 4 candidate proteins that are regulated by EMP2. These include MUC-1, MUC-4, OSF-2, osteopontin, and HEF-1. This important molecular signature is critically for understanding the normal biologic and pathophysiologic functions of EMP2. This study demonstrates that EMP2 expression helps control the surface expression of key adhesion interacting proteins. To our knowledge, this is the fi rst example of such regulation of a membrane protein's traffi cking itinerary in the endometrium. Given the role of EMP2 in implantation and in cancer progression, we predict that this type of molecular modeling will allow for novel therapeutics in contraception design as well as in cancer treatment. Objective: To investigate the dynamic changes and the underlying mechanisms that occur in human endometrium using a murine model which mimics decidualization and regression. Method: Ovariectomized mice were treated sequentially with steroid hormones and then, to induce decidualization, oil was injected into the uterine lumen. Animals were then divided into two groups in which progesterone treatment was maintained or progesterone treatment was withdrawn. The uterine tissues were collected at several time-points after the induction of decidualization. Immunohistochemical, morphometric and microarray experiments were used to study the cellular and molecular changes that accompany decidualization and tissue regression. Result: Decidualization occurred in all experimental animals, and a process similar to menstruation was observed following this in the progesteronewithdrawal group. Histological analysis demonstrated that the decidualization and subsequent tissue degeneration observed in this model shared features with human decidualization and menstruation, including oedema and haemorrhage. The volume fractions of leukocytes, macrophages and neutrophils, but not endothelial cells, increased in decidualized uterus and decreased after progesterone withdrawal-induced tissue degradation was completed. The microarray data showed that the levels of many RNA transcripts encoding immune-related factors changed during the time-course studied. These included transcripts encoding chemokines, cytokines and acute phase proteins. The transcript levels of many of these factors paralleled the changes in the volume fraction of the immune cells. Additional transcripts known to be regulated in human endometrium are also regulated, for example, glutathione peroxidases, metallothioneins and glutathione S-transferases. We have used a murine model of human endometrial decidualization and regression to show that immune cells are recruited into menstruating endometrium, and immune-related genes are regulated in uterus during endometrium remodelling. This model provides a useful alternative to non-human primates with the advantage that it is amenable to genetic manipulation. Objective: The mammary serine protease inhibitor, maspin, is expressed in several human tissues and has been shown to play a role in placental invasion. In the human endometrium maspin is primarily expressed in the glands. Previously, we have demonstrated that maspin expression doubles in the secretory phase compared to the proliferative phase. The objective of this study was to investigate whether maspin expression may be regulated by estradiol and progesterone in human endometrial cells. We used a well differentiated human endometrial epithelial cancer cell line (ECC-1) grown in a 1:1 mixture of DMEM:Hams F-12 with 10% FBS and 0.1% gentamycin. Cells were cultured with and without 1μM 17β-estradiol, and harvested at 0, 3, 7, 9 and 13 days. In a second set of experiments, ECC-1 cells were incubated with estradiol for 5 days, then cultured with and without 1μM progesterone for 2, 4, 6 and 8 days. Maspin expression and progesterone receptor expression in the cell lysates were measured by western blot analysis using anti-maspin antibody and anti-progesterone receptor antibody. Results were normalized to actin expression. Results: There was a time dependent decrease in maspin expression in ECC-1 cells cultured with estradiol. Maximal change in maspin expression occurred by 13 days compared to controls (52% reduction, see fi gure below). To investigate progesterone effects, cells were primed with estrogen for 5 days, and expression of progesterone receptors A + B was confi rmed by western blot analysis. Progesterone alone did not appear to affect maspin expression over an 8 day span. Our preliminary results suggest that estrogen may down-regulate maspin expression in ECC-1 cells. This confi rms fi ndings in breast tissue where estradiol negatively regulates maspin expression by binding to the hormone response element in the maspin gene promoter. During the proliferative phase of the menstrual cycle, when estradiol is the predominate hormone, we have previously demonstrated down-regulation of maspin expression. The precise role of maspin in the human endometrium still needs to be investigated. Stress causes homeostatic responses such as slower cell cycle, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis in preimplantation mouse embryos and in trophoblast stem (TS) cells. These responses are largely mediated by the stress-signaling enzymes, stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK) and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). Both of these kinases are induced rapidly by stress and enter the nucleus. SAPK is necessary to induce and maintain nuclear HAND1 and AMPK is necessary to cause loss of nuclear ID2. Together these stress enzymes are necessary for the induction of placental lactogen 1 (PL1) through regulation of nuclear transcription factors. Therefore, stress, acting through stress enzymes, can take over development. But, is this just a quirk of a single ensemble of developmental problems? A global analysis of the kinetics of the stress response of TS cells suggests that the induction of PL1 protein is a small part of an entire developmental program activated by stress. The transcripion factors mediating early primary and secondary trophoblast giant cells are induced by 24hr of stress. These include hairy enhancer of split 1 (HES 1), retinoic activated 13 (STRA 13), and GATA2. But, transcription factors marking later-arising placental lineages of the inner placenta, spongiotrophoblasts (TPBPa, MASH2) and syncytiotrophoblasts (GCM1, TEF5) are not induced. Besides PL1, other early endocrine factors are also induced. These include proliferin, PLP-M, and PLP-E, but not later endocrine factors such as PLII and PLP-A. Therefore, stress, acting through stress enzymes and then nuclear factors, can regulate TS cell differentiation into the fi rst outer cells of the placenta producing the fi rst endocrine hormones of the maternal recognition of pregnancy. Intermedin (IMD)/Adrenomedullin (AM) 2 is a novel member of the calcitonin/ calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) family. We have shown that IMD mRNA as well as protein are expressed in rat implantation site and that IMD antagonist (IMD 17-47 ) adversely affects rat implantation sites restricting its growth. Therefore, we hypothesize that IMD may be involved in angiogenesis during implantation and placental formation in early gestation in the rat. OBJECTIVES: To analyze the effect of IMD 17-47 on the expression of: 1) Hypoxia inducible factor-α [HIF1-α]; 2) angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), placental growth factor (PLGF) and Angiopoitin 1; and 3) sFLT-1 and Angiopoitin-2, in the rat implantation sites collected from IMD 17-47 infused Day (D) 9 and control rats and assess the changes in their levels. METHODS: Sprague Dawley rats were used in this study. Osmotic minipumps containing vehicle alone or IMD 17-47 (200 μg/day) were inserted S.C. into pregnant rats on D3 of gestation and sacrifi ced on D9 (n = 5). Total RNA and protein was isolated from implantation sites using TRIzol reagent and processed for RT-PCR and Western blots. The results are expressed relative to 18S mRNA or β-Tubulin. RESULTS: Our results demonstrate that: 1) IMD 17-47 caused a signifi cant decline in the expression of HIF1-α (p<0.05) in the implantation sites; 2) IMD 17-47 signifi cantly increased the expression of both VEGF and sFLT-1 mRNA (p<0.05); 3) IMD 17-47 caused a signifi cant decline in the levels of PLGF protein in implantation sites (p<0.05); and 4) levels of Angiopoitin-1 mRNA do not change in response to IMD 17-47 but Angiopoitin-2 mRNA, an antagonist for Angiopoiten-1, is signifi cantly increased in implantation sites of treated rats (p<0.05). CONCLUSION: Hypoxia inducible factor-α (HIF1-α) a known regulator of VEGF production shows a signifi cant decline in response to IMD 17-47 treatment. Signifi cant decline in HIF1-α caused by IMD 17-47 infusion and an increase in the expression of the sFlt-1 and Angiopoitin-2, an antagonist of the angiogenic factors VEGF and angiopoitin-1, respectively; indicates that endogenous IMD may be involved in angiogenesis of implantation site in early pregnancy. Progesterone is an essential regulator of several female reproductive events. In contrast to the established roles of progesterone in the female, there are limited data on the role of progesterone in male. Reports have suggested a role for progesterone in various sperm functions, including capacitation, acrosome reaction, motility, egg penetration, and fertilization. Our laboratory has previously cloned and expressed a truncated progesterone receptor, named PR-M. PR-M, localized to the mitochondria by techniques including Western blot analysis after cellular fractionation of breast cancer cells, immunofl uorescent localization of a GFP tagged recombinant PR-M and Western blot analysis of purifi ed human heart mitochondrial proteins. Recent studies demonstrate progesterone induced changes in mitochondrial membrane potential. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to identify and localize PR-M in human spermatozoa. METHODS: Total RNA was isolated from washed human sperm with RNeasy. RT-PCR, using oligonucleotide primers specifi c to PR-M, was performed with subsequent PCR product sequencing. Immunofl uorescent antibody staining was performed with confocal microscopy. Sperm were selected by density-gradient centrifugation, fi xed and permeabilized. A primary anti-PR antibody (C19, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) directed to the hormone binding domain was used, with a normal rabbit IgG as a control. Mitochondria were stained with MitoTracker 580 (Invitrogen). Dual immunofl uorescent imaging was performed at 488 and 580 nm. RESULTS: A PCR product extending from exon 1 to exon 2 of PR-M was identifi ed. Indirect immunofl uorescence of fi xed sperm using C19 antibody showed the presence of a progesterone receptor in the midpiece. Staining of mitochondria showed co-localization with the PR staining. CONCLUSIONS: Identifi cation of a specifi c transcript for PR-M and demonstration of PR localization in the mitochondria are consistent with the expression of this mitochondrial PR in human spermatozoa. We hypothesize that this receptor may provide a mechanism whereby progesterone within the female genital tract affects sperm energy production necessary for hypermotility and fertilization. Objective: The AKT signaling pathway plays critical role in glucose utilization of most cells. Glucose uptake into cells is facilitated by a family of glucose transporters (GLUTs). However, the specifi c role of GLUTs in the male reproductive system is not yet known. Methods: To compare expression/localization of GLUTs in control, AKT1 null, and AKT2 null mouse testis and sperm, we analyzed the protein expression of GLUT8, GLUT9a, and GLUT9b in testis and epididymal sperm. In addition, we performed CASA and IVF with control oocytes in order to investigate motility and fertilization capacity of AKT1 null and AKT2 null sperm. Results: GLUT8 was localized in innermost cells of seminiferous tubule and Leydig cells of all three testis groups. GLUT9a protein was not expressed in testis of AKT1 null and AKT2 null mice. GLUT9b expression was increased to about 30% in testis of AKT1 null and AKT2 null as compared to control testis and this was confi rmed by western immunoblot analysis (n=3, p<0.01) In sperm, GLUT8 was localized in the acrosomal region, mid-piece, and principal piece of all three groups of sperm. GLUT9a localized to the mid-piece of normal sperm. Similar to the testis, GLUT9a protein was not expressed in AKT1 null and AKT2 null sperm. GLUT9b localized to the acrosomal region, mid-piece, and principal piece of sperm. Apoptosis of AKT1 null sperm was slightly increased (62/721, 8.6%) as compared to normal (11/227, 4.8%) (n=2). In AKT1 null males, sperm concentration and motility were signifi cantly decreased; sperm concentration was 2×106/ml (normal was 82.7×106/ml) and motility was 9.5% (normal was 90%). AKT2 null sperm showed signifi cantly abnormalities, but better than AKT1 null sperm. In vitro fertilization rates and developmental rates to blastocyst were also signifi cantly decreased in AKT2 null male group respectively (52.2% and 13.5%) compared to control mice (88.5% and 64.5%) (n=3, p<0.01). Conclusions: These results suggest that glucose uptake via GLUT8, GLUT9a, and GLUT9b may affect normal spermatogenesis and Leydig cell steroidogenesis in mouse testis. Due to differences in localization, we conclude that these transporters may play distinct roles in spermatogenesis in mouse sperm. In addition, the expression of AKT1 and AKT2 appears to play a critical role in GLUT9a protein expression, and as such may contribute to normal sperm function. Background: Leptin, the protein hormone secreted largely by adipocytes, increases with body mass index and has been shown to increase aromatase activity in various cell lines. Uterine leiomyomas are estrogen sensitive tumors and have increased prevalence in obese populations. We hypothesize that leptin may increase aromatase levels in leiomyomas thereby leading to increased local estrogen and accelerated growth. Objective: To determine the signaling pathway and aromatase promoter region responsible for leptin-induced aromatase expression in leiomyomas. Methods: Primary human leiomyoma cells were serum-starved and then treated with leptin at varying dosages (10-1000 ng/ml) for 48hrs. Real-time PCR was performed to identify the impact of leptin treatment on aromatase mRNA levels. Multiplex PCR was performed using primers recognizing promoter-specifi c aromatase mRNA species to determine which aromatase promoter was utilized in the leptin-induced increase. Western blots were performed on leptin treated protein lysates to evaluate the phosphorylation of the leptin receptor associated downstream effectors, Jak2 and Stat3. Leiomyoma cells were also co-treated with AG490, a Jak2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor, to determine if the effects of leptin would be reversed in the absence of activated Stat3. Results: Total aromatase mRNA in leptin-treated leiomyoma cells increased in a dose-dependent fashion up to 15 fold (p< 0.01) versus control after 48hrs of treatment. Addition of AG490 blocked this increase. Western blots revealed that phosphorylated Jak2 and phosphorylated Stat3 levels were increased with leptin treatment in a time-dependent fashion. Multiplex PCR demonstrated that utilization of promoter I.4 increased strikingly by 35.47-fold in leptin treated cells versus vehicle treated cells (p< 0.01). There was a more modest increase in usage of promoter II by 11.53 times (p<0.05). Conclusions: This study is the fi rst to demonstrate that leptin increases aromatase expression in leiomyoma cells and this increase is mediated primarily via and the Jak2-Stat3 pathway and aromatase promoter I.4 that resides 73 kb upstream of the common coding region. Leptin receptor antagonists or Jak2/Stat3 inhibitors may serve as novel therapeutic agents by decreasing local estrogen production in leiomyoma. The Comparison between the Human Blastocyst Secretome of Sequential Versus Coculture IVF Systems Points to IL-6 as a Predictor of Implantation. Objective Our group has developed a co-culture system with human endometrial epithelial cells (EEC) that improves blastocyst rate compared to sequential media. Our aim in this work is to describe the differential protein secretion and consumption pattern (secretome) of single human blastocysts cultured in sequential or coculture media. M&M Using a single blastocyst transfer program, we compared sequential media (50μl of CCM™, Vitrolife) with co-culture media from day 5 human blastocysts with similar morphology (cultured 24h prior to transfer) using a protein array(Chemiarray ® , Chemicon). Two experiments comparing a total of 20 blastocyst conditioned media (sequential n=10 vs coculture n=10) were analyzed in pools of 5 samples. As a control, we also pooled 5 samples containing only CCM with EEC. Data were analysed using Image J and GEPAS. We also used Fatiscan tool to fi nd out functional terms (such as Gene Ontology and InterPro motifs). After this, we focus on IL-6 quantifi cation in single blastocysts sequential media (n=54) by ELISA (Chemikine®, Chemicon) in order to validate data obtained from protein arrays. Results. We obtained a differential protein profi le in sequential media versus our co-culture model. Among 120 proteins studied, we fi nd out that cytokine binding and transmembrane receptor activity proteins were increased in sequential media while receptor binding proteins were increased in the coculture media. Interestingly, IL-6 (5.2 fold) and PlGF (3 fold ) were the most increased proteins in the co-culture media versus sequential media. When we further analysed IL-6 concentrations by ELISA in sequential media from single blastocysts that implanted (270 pg/μl, n=20) versus those that did not implanted (1640 pg/μl, n=24) we obtained statistical differences between these two groups (p<0.001). Conclusion: We have described the secretome of the human blastocyst cultured in sequential media versus EEC co-culture. We found that IL-6 is a differential predictor that discriminates the secretome of implanting versus non-implanting human blastocyst. These fi ndings strongly suggest that the IL-6 concentration in conditioned media presumably secreted by the EEC monolayer may benefi t not only embryonic development but also implantation ability. Supported by Generalitat Valenciana Government and Bertarelli Fundation. Hongling Du, Hugh S Taylor. * Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. Objective: The Sp1/Kruppel-like family (KLF) member gene, BTEB1, directly interacts with PR to mediate progesterone-responsive gene expression in endometrium. We have previously shown that BTEB1 expression is lower in secretory than proliferative phase in endometrial glandular cells. In contrast, human endometrial HOXA10 expression is higher in the secretory phase. Here we show that BTEB1 was down-regulated by HOXA10 in endometrial Ishikawa cell line and demonstrate mediation by HOXA10 binding to single site in the BTEB1 promoter. Methods: To determine whether HOXA10 directly regulated transcription of BTEB1, Ishikawa cells were transfected with artifi cial reporter constructs containing the BTEB1 promoter regions. Approximately 700bps of the BTEB1 5' upstream regulatory region was cloned. Nested constructs were amplifi ed by PCR and cloned into pGL3 reporter vector. Additionally, mutant BTEB1 promoter sequences were generated and cloned. Ishikawa cells, grown to 50-60% confl uence in 24-well plates, were transfected using Lipofectamine with 0.4 μg of pGL3-BTEB1 promoter vectors and cotransfected with 0.4 μg of empty pcDNA vector or pcDNA/HOXA10 expression vector. The pRL-TK vector was co-transfected as a control for transfection effi ciency. After 48hs, the cells were harvested and Luciferase activity measured. Transfections were performed in duplicate and experiments were repeated three times. Electophoretic Mobility Shift Assay (EMSA) was used to confi rm direct HOXA10 binding to the BTEB promoter. Results: Transient transfection and luciferase reporter assay showed that luciferase activity was decreased by HOXA10 treatment through a single 149bp region. Compared to the control, the luciferase activity of the 700bps BTEB promoter reporter construct was decreased by 43% after HOXA10 cotransfection (p<0.05). This repression was localized to a 149bp BTEB proximal promoter region that demonstrated a 55% decrease in luciferase activity in response to HOXA10 treatment (p<0.05). No signifi cant change in luciferase activity was obtained after treatment using the BTEB promoter region in which a putative HOXA10 binding site was mutated. In EMSA, HOXA10 was shown to directly bind this site. Clinical and epidemiological observations indicate that leiomyomas occur with higher frequency in African Americans (AA) as compared to other ethnic groups. For that reason and fi brotic characteristics leiomyomas have been often compared with keloids. To identify the molecular environments that differentiate leiomyomas in AA and their tissue-specifi c and common profi les with keloids/incisional scars and peritoneal scars we used microarray and 2D PAGE coupled with image and tandem mass spectrometric analysis. At the genomic level (Affymetrix U133A) analysis based on P≤0.01 and 2-fold cutoff change identifi ed 1470 differentially expressed genes in leiomyomas regardless of ethnicity, of which 268 were either overexpressed (177) or underexpressed (91) in leiomyomas of AA as compared to Caucasians. The analysis also identifi ed 424 and 393 genes as over-or under-expressed in leiomyomas of AA and Caucasians as compared to keloids/incesional scars, respectively, with only 85 differentially expressed genes with peritoneal adhesions. The gene expression profi les in these tissues were comparatively analyzed with their corresponding normal tissues, myometrium, skin and peritoneum, and as expected the analysis revealed distinct differences. The expression of 12 of these genes; RUNX3, E2F1, EGR3, FBLN5, COL18, CST6, GAS7, ECM2, ADAM17, THBS1, ESM1 and TBPIP was validated in these tissues using microfl uidic arrays and realtime PCR. At protein level 332 protein spots were identifi ed of which average density/volume of 31 spots varied by ≥1.5 fold in leiomyomas regardless of ethnicity. In leiomyomas the density/volume of 34 proteins of these spots differ (26 overexpressed and 8 underexpressed) in AA as compared to Caucasians. MS/MS analysis of 15 spots resulted in identifi cation of several proteins whose transcripts were also identifi ed by gene profi ling, of which 14-3-3ß and mimecan confi rmed by western blotting and immunohistochemistry. These results provided the fi rst large scale molecular assessment of leiomyomas suggesting that a) the level of expression rather than ethnic-specifi c genes accounts for the difference between leiomyomas in AA and other ethnic groups and b) combination of common and tissue-specifi c genes with altered level of expression compared to their normal tissues, accounts for the shared fi brotic characteristics between leiomyomas, keloids and other fi brotic tissues. (Supported by grant HD37432). Offspring. Sarah B Lieber, Maria Shanabrough, Tamas L Horvath, Hugh S Taylor. * Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. Objective: First recognized for its roles in growth and appetite, ghrelin has since been implicated in reproduction. Reduction in murine litter size and restriction of embryonic growth have been demonstrated in response to ghrelin administration. Here we investigate the consequences of maternal ghrelin defi ciency on fertility of female offspring. Methods and Results: Litter sizes were analyzed for mating events between wild-type male and female ghrelin +/+ mice parented by ghrelin +/-B6D2F1 hybrid mice. Comparison of ghrelin +/+ exposed females with wild-type controls revealed signifi cantly reduced litter sizes among ghrelin +/+ females exposed in utero to maternal ghrelin defi ciency (n = 5, 4.7 ± 3.3 pups for in utero defi cient ghrelin +/+ females; n = 4, 8.7 ± 2.3 pups for wild-type females, p = 0.010 by t-test). Oocyte and corpus luteum number was similar between groups, suggesting a uterine defect. The ghrelin receptor (GHSR) was expressed in uterine endometrium as determined by RT-PCR. Immunohistochemical staining of uterine sections obtained during estrus demonstrated increased expression of proliferating cell nuclear antigen and more uniform expression of common leukocyte antigen in stroma and epithelia of ghrelin +/+ females exposed to in utero ghrelin defi ciency relative to wild-type controls. As HOX genes regulate uterine development, we assessed the effect of ghrelin on endometrial cell HOXA10 expression. Treatment of Ishikawa cells with 1 nM, 10 nM, and 100 nM ghrelin for 24 h produced 5.82-fold, 6.15-fold, and 5.62-fold elevations, respectively, in expression of HOXA10, as determined by qRT-PCR. Conclusion: We demonstrate that maternal ghrelin defi ciency compromises reproduction in female offspring. Ghrelin affects the expression of genes that regulate uterine development. In utero ghrelin defi ciency may lead to anomalous differentiation and subsequent uterine dysfunction. While ghrelin is known to affect the HPO axis in the adult, in utero it likely also contributes to regulation of reproductive tract development. These fi ndings have signifi cant implications for maternal nutrition, energy balance, and maintenance of appropriate ghrelin expression in pregnancy; defi cient maternal ghrelin related to obesity may progam the development of the female reproductive tract. We have previously shown that development of the adult metabolic phenotype in response to a constrained in utero environment is associated with altered fetal one-carbon metabolism. This manifests as persistent changes in gene expression accompanied by epigenetic modifi cations. Given that supplementation with essential nutrients (ENS) prevents adult obesity and hepatic insulin resistance in our heritable transgenerational model of IUGR, we sought to characterize the effect of ENS on expression of epigenetically reprogrammed genes. STUDY DESIGN: Sprague-Dawley P1 dams underwent bilateral uterine artery ligation or sham surgery on e19, and resultant F1 litters yielded IUGR or control lineages, respectively. On d21, weaned F1 were allocated to ENS (Teklad8640+folic acid/choline/B12/betaine/L-methionine/L-arginine/zinc) or control diet (Teklad8640). F1 pairs were mated by d80, and resultant F2 (n 512) were weaned to their parental diet. Expression of fetal genes found to be reprogrammed under an altered in utero environment were examined: IGF1, a circadian regulator Npas2, and the Erk dual-specifi city phosphatase Dusp5. RESULTS: In our model of transgenerational growth restriction, signifi cant phenotypic differences in F2 offspring of IUGR lineages (maternal and/or paternal) when compared with shams are accompanied by altered postnatal (d28) expression of Npas2, IGF1 (exon4/6), and DUSP5 ( Fig. 1) . Abrogation of such altered expression accompanies ENS-mediated prevention of the adult metabolic phenotype (Fig. 1) . CONCLUSION: Diet supplemented with essential nutrients, yet unaltered in its caloric content, prevents adult obesity and insulin resistance in a heritable transgenerational model of IUGR. This is accompanied by signifi cant alterations in the expression of reprogrammed metabolic genes. Postnatal insulin resistance is a characteristic of the IUGR offspring and hepatic IGF-1 may play a role in the development of these morbidities. IGF-1 is epigenetically regulated involving two different promoters, alternative exon splicing of exons 2 and 5, and multiple transcription termination sites. We determined IGF-1 hepatic mRNA levels and epigenetic characteristics in the MFR offspring. STUDY DESIGN: Control Sprague Dawley dams (n=5) received ad libitum food, whereas study dams (MFR, n=5) were 50% food-restricted from pregnancy day 10 to 21 resulting in IUGR newborns. At birth litter size was culled to 4 males and 4 females. All pups were nursed by dams fed ad libitum and were weaned to ad libitum feed. Male plasma and livers were collected at 3 weeks and 36 weeks. Plasma levels of IGF-1 (RIA) and IGF-1 mRNA variant levels (real time RT-PCR) were quantifi ed. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was subsequently performed using the antibody for H3K4 dimethyl, and associated levels of each IGF-1 species were measured by PCR. RESULT: Plasma IGF-1 was not altered in MFR at 3 weeks of age but at 36 weeks was increased (% of control: 222%, p<0.01). Consistent with plasma levels, IGF-1 mRNA was not altered at 3 weeks, and at 36 weeks there was an increase in IGF-1A, IGF-1B, IGF-1 Exon 1 and IGF-1 Exon 2 (143.5%, 183.3%, 146.5%, 149.4%, p<0.001). Analysis of DNA from ChIP with dimethyl H3K4 found no effect at 3 weeks and a decrease at 36 weeks of the IGF-1 P1 promoter (62.6%, p<0.01) and exon 5 (49.4%, p<0.05). CONCLUSION: Adult MFR IUGR males have increased postnatal hepatic IGF-1 mRNA levels and plasma IGF-1 with decreased H3K4 dimethylation at IGF-1. We speculate the IUGR alters IGF-1 mRNA in the MFR adult offspring by affecting IGF-1 histone and chromatin structure, possibly through histone modifi cations other than H3K4 dimethylation. In Vivo Effects of Antioxidants on Vascular Reactivity in the Late Gestation Fetus. AS Thakor, Dino A Giussani. * Physiology, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Introduction: Prenatal vitamin supplements are prescribed worldwide by doctors to help expectant mothers meet the extra nutritional requirements during pregnancy and lactation. Formulations usually include folic acid and antioxidants. While the benefi cial effects of folic acid in guarding against birth defects is established, the effects on the fetus of exposure to antioxidants is much more uncertain. This study investigated the effects of fetal exposure to two different antioxidants on the cardiovascular physiology of the late gestation fetus during basal and stimulated conditions. Methods: Under anesthesia, 25 fetal sheep were surgically prepared with vascular catheters and a Transonic fl ow probe around one femoral artery at 0.8 of gestation. Five days later, in vivo pressor and vasopressor responses were elicited to increasing i.a. bolus doses of phenyleprine (5-50 microg) before and during fetal i.v. treatment with either melatonin (n=7; 0.5+0.1 microg/kg/min) or vitamin C (n=6; 8.9+0.4 mg/kg/min). The remaining 12 fetuses were subjected to 30 min of acute hypoxemic stress (reduced maternal Fi,O2) during saline or fetal i.v. treatment with melatonin (n=6) or vitamin C (n=6). Results: Fetal exposure to either antioxidant markedly diminished the pressor and vasopressor responses to alpha adrenergic stimualtion ( Fig. 1 ) and to hypoxemic stress (Fig. 2) . Conclusion: Exposure of the late gestation fetus to antioxidants has pronounced effects on in vivo vascular reactivity during basal and stimulated conditions. Prescription of prenatal antioxidants to expectant mothers should take these fi ndings into consideration. OBJECTIVE: Nitric oxide and prostaglandins are important mediators of the fetal response to hypoxemia and asphyxia. We have previously reported that 5days of mild chronic hypoxemia increases neuronal death 72 h after four 5-min complete umbilical cord occlusion (UCO) in near-term fetal sheep. The aim of the present study was to ascertain if there were differences in the expression of nitric oxide and prostaglandins-generating enzymes in three different areas of the fetal brain vulnerable to hypoxic damage. METHODS: At 125±1 days, instrumented fetuses were submitted to a 5 days period of hypoxemia (75% of baseline arterial blood PO 2 ). After 5 days animals were submitted to four 5-min complete UCO with 30 min recovery in between. 72 h after UCO, brains were isolated and cryopreserved. 30μm-coronal sections were used (hypoxic n=5, control n=5) to evaluate the expression of nNOS, COX-1 and COX-2 in cerebral cortex, basal ganglia and cerebellum. Immunohistochemistry with ABC staining kit and peroxidase was used. Positive cells per fi eld (200x) were recorded for each antibody used. Averages were compared by unpaired t-test with statistically signifi cant difference considered if P<0.05. Fig 1A) whereas no differences were found in cerebral cortex. COX-1 and COX-2 ( Fig 1B) showed increased expression in cerebral cortex of hypoxic animals (P<0.05) with no differences in basal ganglia and cerebellum. CONCLUSIONS: Chronic hypoxemia modifi es in a region-specifi c manner the expression of nNOS and COX enzymes. Up-regulation of nNOS in the striatum may be related to the increased neuronal death we observed in this region with this protocol of asphyxia. Increased expression of COX enzymes could be related to their role in asphyxia-induced infl ammatory processes. NIH HD37885. Objective: Exposure to chronic fetal hypoxia results in the sparing of growth of key organs such as the brain and adrenal and the relative slowing of growth of other tissues including the fetal liver. Whilst it is established that IGF2 is a major fetal growth factor, it is not known if chronic hypoxia acts via the hypoxia inducible factors (HIF) to differentially regulate IGF2 expression in the fetal adrenal (growth spared) compared to the fetal liver (growth slowed). HIF transcription factors are heterodimers consisting of a HIFα (1α, 2α and 3α) subunit bound to a HIF1β subunit, which act via the hypoxia response element of target genes, including IGF2. Hypothesis: We hypothesise that HIF1α and HIF1β mRNA expression will be differentially regulated in tissues in which growth is spared (adrenal), slowed (liver) or unchanged (lung) in the chronically hypoxic fetus and that these changes will relate directly to changes in IGF2 mRNA expression. Methods: Carunclectomy was performed in 12 non-pregnant ewes to induce placental and hence fetal growth restriction (PR fetuses). Vascular catheters were inserted in 12 PR and 12 control (C) fetuses at 103-117d and arterial blood samples were collected for blood gas analysis at frequent intervals until post mortem at 140-145d. The expression of HIF1α, HIF1β and IGF2 mRNA was determined using real-time RT-PCR. Results: Fetal weight (C, 4.5±0.2kg; PR, 2.7±0.3kg) and mean gestational PO 2 (C, 20.7±0.9; PR, 13.7±0.5mmHg) were signifi cantly lower in PR fetuses (P<0.05). Relative lung weight was maintained, whilst relative adrenal weight was higher and relative liver weight was lower in PR fetuses (P<0.05). The expression of HIF1α in the adrenal, lung and liver was not different between C and PR groups, whereas the expression of HIF1β was higher in the adrenal of the PR group compared to the C group (P<0.05). There was a positive correlation between HIF1α and HIF1β in the adrenal (R 2 =0.34, P<0.05), lung (R 2 =0.35, P<0.01) and liver (R 2 =0.53, P<0.05). HIF1α expression was positively correlated with IGF2 expression in the adrenal (R 2 =0.62, P<0.05). The relationship between HIF1α and IGF2 in the fetal adrenal, an organ in which growth is spared in chronic hypoxia, suggests that HIF1α may play a role in mediating the effects of hypoxia in the regulation of IGF2 expression and adrenal growth. Background: Glucocorticoids play a key role in regulation of catecholamine synthesis, and may also play a role in adrenal responsiveness to ACTH. These effects are mediated through the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Previous studies from our laboratory showed that long term hypoxia (LTH) signifi cantly alters catecholamine and cortisol responses in the ovine fetus. This study was designed to test the hypothesis that LTH alters adrenal GR protein expression and/or distribution. Methods: Pregnant ewes were maintained at high altitude (3,820m) from 30 to 138∼140 days' gestation. Animals were then transported from high altitude to Loma Linda University when a maternal tracheal catheter was used to infuse nitrogen and maintain a reduced PO 2 at a level comparable to high altitude. Age matched normoxic fetuses were used as controls. At 139-141 days' gestation, fetal adrenals were collected. The medulla and cortex were separated and individually processed for GR Western analysis. Immunohistochemical localization of GR was performed in additional adrenals. Results: There were no differences in GR in the medulla. In the cortex, 2 forms were observed; one consistent in molecular weight with the GR (95kDa) and a 45kDa form (values=relative optical densities). Localization of GR in the medulla showed even distribution in both groups. In the cortex from control fetuses, heavy GR staining was observed in the zona glomerulosa and innermost zone with only light staining in the zona fasciculata. In the LTH adrenals, heavy, even staining was observed throughout the entire cortex. The 45 kDa form of the GR has previously been reported and proposed to be a proteolytic fragment of the GR or arises via an alternative translation initiation codon. Preabsorption with synthetic GR peptide eliminated this band, confi rming its specifi city to the GR. The trend towards a decreased 95:45 kDa ratio in the LTH group suggests increased GR turnover in the adrenal cortex of these fetuses. Together with the differences in adrenal cortical localization, it appears that LTH alters GR function in the fetal adrenal cortex. (Supported by HD31226). Experimental studies demonstrate a sensitizing effect of endotoxin (LPS) on the developing brain when given prior to hypoxia-ischemia (HI); the most severe brain injury is observed with a time interval of 12 hours between LPS and HI. To test the hypothesis that upregulation of pro-infl ammatory cytokines contributes to this synergistic interaction we examined the role of Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF) cluster, consisting of TNFa, lymphotoxin a (LTa) and lymphotoxin b (LTb) using transgenic mice. Animals heterozygous for a deletion of the entire TNF cluster were bred and their offspring were used at postnatal day 7. HI was achieved by left carotid occlusion under isofl urane, followed by exposure to 8% oxygen for 30 minutes. LPS from E.coli (serotype 055:B5) or vehicle (normal saline) was administered intraperitoneally 12 hours prior to HI. At 48 hours the brains were perfused, extracted and post-fi xed. Animals were genotyped using PCR and the brains of knockout and wildttype were evaluated. Infarct volumes are expressed as a percentage of the contralateral (uninjured) hemisphere. Pretreatment with LPS 12 hours prior to HI increased infarct size in wildtype mice from 3% to 22%. No increase in infarct size was seen in the animals with deletion of the TNF cluster (1% saline pre-treated, 4% LPS pre-treated). When the regions were analysed separately LPS sensitisation was demonstrated in the wildtype animals in all forebrain regions studied. Knockout of the TNF cluster abolished LPS sensitisation in all forebrain regions (see Fig 1) . These data show that the TNF cluster plays an important role in the neurotoxic interaction between LPS and HI. This partly explains the known correlation between pro-infl ammatory cytokines (including IL-1b, IL-6 and TNFa) and brain injury and recent data showing an association between LTa polymorphisms and cerebral palsy ( Introduction: Pre-B cell colony-enhancing factor (PBEF), also known as visfatin, is a 55 kDa protein that is present in myometrium. PBEF is a cytokine linked to the initiation of labour and up-regulation of the PBEF gene by the distension of amnion cells has been demonstrated. Increased PBEF expression in the fetal membranes is seen in labour, and infl ammatory stimuli such as LPS, TNFα, Il-1β, and Il-6 all up-regulate PBEF gene expression. Our aim was to determine the effects of stretch and Il-1β on PBEF gene expression in the myometrium. Methods: Primary human uterine myocytes were cultured in 6 well plates. When 90% confl uent cells were serum starved overnight and incubated with 1ng/mL Il-1β for 6 hours. Uterine myocytes were also cultured in 6-well fl exible-bottom plates pre-coated with collagen type I. When cells were 90% confl uent, they were subjected to static stretch of 11% for 1h using a fl exercell strain unit. Inhibition of ERK, JNK and p38 was achieved by incubation of cells with 10μM U0126 for 2h, 20μM SP600125 for 1h or 10μM SB203580 for 30 min respectively prior to stimulation. At the end of incubations RNA was extracted and converted to cDNA. Paired upper and lower segment myometrial tissue was collected at caesarean section either before or after the onset of term or pre-term labour and frozen for extraction of RNA (n=9 for PTNL;PTL; n=8 for TNL; n=10 for L). Copy numbers of PBEF, GAPDH and beta-actin were measured by quantitative PCR. Results: 1h of stretch increases PBEF by 114% and this is unaffected by treatment with MAPK inhibitors. 6 h incubation of myocytes with 1ng/mL Il-1β caused a marked increase in PBEF by 385% (n=6; p<0.028) and this is unaffected by JNK inhibitor but partially decreased by either the ERK or p38 inhibitors. PBEF expression was similar in the upper and lower segment myometrium in preterm patients. In term lower segment myometrium the PBEF: beta-actin mRNA ratio was signifi cantly greater in term labour (160.65±50.07) versus term non labour (6.75±2.23) samples (mean ± SEM; p<0.026). Conclusions: These data show PBEF is increased by Il-1β in human myometrium in part by fi rst activating ERK and/or p38 MAPK. PBEF expression increases markedly in lower segment myometrium in term labour. . Aim: Elafi n is a protease inhibitor with antibacterial and antiviral properties, which also modulates the adaptive immune response. Our aim was to examine vaginal and cervical production of elafi n, and see if amounts were altered in pregnant women with bacterial vaginosis. Methods: Cervicovaginal secretions were collected from women in the second trimester of pregnancy (n=113). Bacterial vaginosis status was assessed by Gram stain using Nugent's criteria. Enzyme liked immunosorbance assay (ELISA) was used to measure elafi n and cytokines. Immortalized cell lines derived from the vagina, ectocervix and endocervix of one patient formed an in vitro model. Cells were treated with the bacterial wall products lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or lipoteichoic acid (LTA), or the infl ammatory cytokine interleukin-1 beta (IL-1ß). Elafi n and cytokine expression were determined by Taqman There were no signifi cant differences between the groups in terms of age, racial mix or parity. Signifi cantly lower levels of elafi n were found in cervicovaginal secretions of women with bacterial vaginosis (p<0.05). Higher levels of IL-1ß and IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA) were also associated with bacterial vaginosis (p<0.05). Production of elafi n was greater in vaginal cells than in ectocervical or endocervical cells (p<0.05). LPS upregulated both elafi n mRNA and protein expression in endocervical cells (p<0.05) but did not effect expression in vaginal or ectocervical cells. Conclusion: Elafi n is produced by the vagina and cervix and may have an important role in defence against infection. The decreased amounts of elafi n found in bacterial vaginosis may predispose to the condition, or contribute to its sequelae which include preterm rupture of membranes and preterm labour, and increased transmission of HIV. OBJECTIVE: Preterm birth rate (PTB) is higher in African Americans (AA) than Caucasian (C). Despite the fact that the overall rate of disparity is decreasing, the difference is still signifi cant and the overall rate of PTB is increasing (∼10% in the mid 1980s to ∼12% now). It has been hypothesized that a differential infl ammatory response may explain this disparity. This study examines the infl ammatory cytokine, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), and soluble TNF receptor concentrations (sTNFR1 and sTNFR2) in the amniotic fl uid (AF) of AA and EA women at delivery in a case-control study DESIGN, SETTING AND PATIENTS: AF samples were collected (333) during active labor (158 spontaneous PTB, 52 AA and 106 C, gestational age ≤36 0/7 weeks) and 175 controls (>37 0/7 weeks, 87 AA and 88 C). AF TNF-α and sTNFR1 and sTNFR2 concentrations were measured by immunoassay. Differences between cases and controls were analyzed using non parametric Wilcoxon signed Ranked test. The molar ratios of TNF-α to its receptors were compared between cases and controls within each ethnic group. RESULTS: TNF-α concentration was higher in cases vs. controls when C and AA were analyzed together (p= 0.0001). There were no differences in total sTNFR (R1+R2) or sTNFR1 and sTNFR2 concentrations between cases and controls. However, AA cases had higher TNF-α concentration than AA controls (p=0.0001), but C cases did not differ from C controls (p=0.2). TNF-α was also higher in AA cases with microbial invasion of the amniotic cavity (MIAC) compared to AA cases with no MIAC (p=0.0009). This was not observed in C (p=0.8). There was no difference in total sTNFR concentration in AA (p = 0.08) or C(p=0.5) cases vs. controls. The molar ratio of TNF-α/sTNFR (R1+R2) was 20 fold higher in AA cases than in AA controls in favor of TNF-α. This was not observed in C.  The results suggest substantial ethnic differences in one important hypothesized pathway that can affect pregnancy outcome. The TNFα/sTNFR profi le in pregnancy differs between ethnic groups, suggesting a difference in bioavailability of TNF-α. The larger molar ratio of TNF-α/sTNFR in AA cases may be indicative of a TNF-α mediated pathological process of PTB in AA as compared to C. Preterm Premature rupture of the membranes (PPROM) is a major cause of preterm birth and perinatal morbidity/mortality. Higher levels of Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs), as MMP-7 and MMP-8, have been described in amniotic fl uid of patients with PPROM. Recent investigations of tissue remodeling of membranes have revealed that genetic variants that is associated with a changed expression of those proteases. Increased levels of MMP-7 and MMP-8 leading to rupture of membranes and labor, therefore, cause a preterm delivery. Objectives The goals of this study was to determine if functional polymorphisms in the MMP-7 promoter and MMP-8 promoter, with higher expression of both proteases, are associated with PPROM (-181 A/G and -153 C/T in MMP-7, and -799 C/T and +17 C/G in MMP-8). Methods: A case control study was conducted on neonates with cases defi ned as pregnancies complicated by fetal membrane rupture prior to 37 weeks of gestation. Controls were singleton pregnancies delivered at term with no prior history of preterm birth. Results: We found that the fetal carriage of the -799 T allele in MMP-8 was signifi cantly associated with PPROM (OR 2.42 95%CI 1.01-5.79), that association was not fi nd it in the +17G allele, However when we did the haplotype analysis we found a higher risk of PPROM when both polymorphisms were present (-799T/ +17G, OR 4,58 CI 95% 1.73-12.1). In the MMP-7 promoter the 2 polymorphisms were not associated with PPROM. When we include the haplotype that contains both promoter variants -799T/+17G for MMP-8 and -181G/-153T for MMP-7 we found a higher risk of PPROM (OR 8,42 CI 95% 1,2-60) Conclusions: We conclude that 1) fetuses who carry the -799 T allele in MMP-8 promoter have a greater risk of PPROM; 2) fetuses who carry the Haplotype -799 T/+17 G for MMP-8 have a greater risk of PPROM; 3) the MMP-7 alleles are not related to PPROM, and 4) Fetuses that carry the haplotype with the variants in MMP-7 and MMP-8 promoter have risk of PPROM. OBJECTIVE: C-reactive protein (CRP) is an acute-phase reactant produced in response to stress, tissue injury and other infl ammatory stimuli. In non-pregnant patients, subclinical elevation (>3.0 mg/L) is a marker for endothelial damage, atherogenesis and cardiovascular disease. During pregnancy, infl ammation plays an important role in pregnancy-specifi c conditions such as pre-eclampsia and preterm labor. We sought to characterize CRP values in a diverse population of healthy pregnant women using a highly sensitive assay. STUDY DESIGN: Cross-sectional study of 775 pregnant women enrolled prospectively in a study of oral health in pregnancy. CRP studies were performed on serum specimens drawn before 26 weeks gestation using commercially available highly sensitive ELISA kits. For analysis, the cohort was stratifi ed by trimester of pregnancy and by maternal race. RESULTS: Median CRP value for all patients was 4.8 mg/L (inter-quartile range 0.63 -15.7). Median CRP value was signifi cantly higher in the second compared to the fi rst trimester (6.24 vs 3.94 mg/L, p=.0057). Blacks had higher median CRP values than whites (7.68 mg/L vs 2.59 mg/L, p<.0001). CRP values increased from the fi rst to the second trimester for white (1.72 vs. 3 .83 mg/L, p=.007) but not black women (7.61 vs. 7.72, p=1.00). Blacks had signifi cantly higher median CRP values for both the fi rst and second trimester when compared with whites (p< .0001). This relationship persisted even after controlling for known confounders such as maternal weight. Pregnancy is an infl ammatory state as measured by CRP. Elevations manifest early in gestation, and persist throughout pregnancy. Blacks have higher levels of serum CRP when compared to whites, which is measurable from even the earliest gestational ages. The etiology of this difference is unclear, but may be important for understanding risk differences in the incidence of preterm labor and pre-eclampsia between black and white women. METHODS: (i) Immunohistochemical studies were performed on tissue sections of term decidua with or without clinical / histologic evidence of IAI (n=3 for each) using anti-VEGF antibodies (Santa Cruz, CA). VEGF expression in IAI vs controls was scored by an investigator blinded to the identity of the samples. (ii) Term DSCs were retrieved from elective cesarean (n=7), purifi ed, and depleted of leukocytes. Confl uent term DSCs Cells were treated with 10 -8 M estradiol (E2), 10 -7 M medroxyprogesterone acetate (P), both, or vehicle for 7 days. After 24h incubation in fresh media, cells were stimulated with IL-1b (0.01-10 ng/mL) or TNFa (1 ng/mL) for 24h. Levels of free VEGF in conditioned supernatant were measured by specifi c ELISA and corrected for cell protein. RESULTS: VEGF expression in term decidua was signifi cantly increased in tissues with evidence of IAI vs controls (p<0.05), and localized primarily to DSCs. IL-1b enhanced VEGF production by term DSCs in a dose-dependent fashion irrespective of the hormonal milieu (eg, 2.7-fold stimulation by 1 ng/mL IL-1b from 5.0±1.2 to 13.2±3.8 pg/mL per mg protein for E2+P; p=0.034); no stimulation was seen with TNFa (eg, 5.0±1.2 vs 5.6±1.2 pg/mL per mg protein for E2+P; p=0.89). CONCLUSIONS: IAI is associated with increased VEGF expression in term decidual tissue in vivo. IL-1b (but not TNFa) stimulated VEGF production in term DSCs in vitro. Since aberrant VEGF expression alters vascular permeability, these data provide a mechanism by which IAI can promote extravasation into the decidua of maternal clotting factors (with thrombin generation and abruption) and leukocytes (with 'decidual activation' and preterm labor). OBJECTIVE: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are the critical recognition factors for initiating innate immune responses to bacterial pathogens. We have previously shown using mutant mice that TLR-4 (frequently referred to as the LPS receptor) is essential for normal susceptibility to E. coli-induced preterm labor. Engagement of TLR-4 by its ligand triggers activation of two independent intracellular signal transduction pathways, one known as the 'MyD88-dependent' pathway and the other as the 'MyD88-independent' (TRIF-dependent) pathway. The purpose of this study was to test whether E. coli-induced labor is mediated via MyD88, TRIF or both. METHODS: TRIF knockout (n=41), MyD88/TRIF double-knockout (n=25) and B6129SF2/J wild-type control (WT, n=27) mice on day 14.5 of gestation underwent intrauterine injection with varying quantities of killed E. coli. Mice were observed after surgery for preterm delivery (delivery of at least one pup within 48 hours). RESULTS: TRIF-defi cient and wild-type mice were no different from each other in their dose-responsive susceptibility, while mice lacking both TRIF and MyD88 were completely protected from bacterially induced preterm delivery. Pregnancies with preterm delivery after treatment # organisms 5 x 10 8 10 9 5 x 10 9 10 10 WT 3/6 (50%) 7/9 (78%) 8/8 (100%) 4/4 (100%) TRIF KO 5/12 (42%) 8/11 (73%) 9/11 (82%) 7/7 (100%) MyD88/TRIF KO 0/6 (0%) 2/12 (17%) 0/7 (0%) P value (chi square) 1.000 0.005 <0.001 <0.001 Susceptibility to E. coli-induced preterm labor in the mouse is not altered by TRIF defi ciency but is completely prevented by combined MyD88/TRIF defi ciency. These results suggest that of the two alternate signaling pathways downstream of TLR-4, the MyD88-dependent pathway is the critical one for bacterially induced preterm labor. OBJECTIVE: An increase in adverse neurological outcomes has been observed in neonates from preterm births (PTB) complicated by infl ammation. One hypothesis is that infl ammation-induced neonatal brain injury is the result of bacterial by-products, such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS), reaching the fetus and activating the LPS receptor, TLR-4. These studies were performed to determine if activation of TLR-4 in the fetal brain is an essential mediator of fetal brain injury in infl ammation-induced PTB. STUDY DESIGN: An established mouse model of PTB and embryo transfer technique was used. Timed pregnant CD-1 dams; CD-1 dams with embryo transfered CD pups; CD-1 dams with HEJ (TLR-4 -/-) pups; and CD-1 dams with OUJ (WT to HEJ) were randomized to intrauterine injection with saline (NS) or LPS into the lower right horn. 6 hrs after infusion, placentas, and fetal brains were collected from the upper left horn (3-5 pups per dam; 6-9 dams per treatment group). Amniotic fl uid (AF) was collected for LAL assay to determine the time period for intrauterine LPS to reach AF. Expression of infl ammatory mediators and markers of glial development were assessed by quantitative PCR. Embryo transfer blunted the LPS-induced cytokine response in CD fetal brains. IL-1, TNF and CCL3 expression were similarly affected by LPS between OUJ and HEJ brains. IL-13 mRNA was increased 5.5-fold in HEJ brains compared to OUJ (P<0.001). Fold changes(LPS/NS) in GFAP, PLP, MAG and MBP mRNA were not signifi cantly different between OUJ and HEJ fetal brains. Nestin and NCAM were signifi cantly increased in OUJ brains exposed to LPS; this up-regulation was not observed in HEJ fetal brains. CONCLUSION: TLR-4 modulates the fetal/placental immune response to infl ammation-induced PTB. However, if a placental or fetal brain cytokine response is mechanistically involved in neonatal brain injury, then targeting TLR-4 is unlikely to be effective at preventing adverse neurological outcomes from infl ammation-induced PTB. Objective: Homeobox genes encode transcription factors that control cell differentiation and patterning. Increasing evidence indicates that many homeobox genes are aberrantly expressed in cancers, and that their dysregulation contributes to tumor progression. The homeobox gene HOXA10 controls uterine organogenesis during embryonic development and functional endometrial differentiation in the adult. This study identifi es a novel, functional 5' repressor element of HOXA10. Methods: To identify regulatory activity, we cloned 2 KB 5' of the HOXA10 transcription start site. Nested deletion were created, cloned into pGL3 reporter constructs and used in luciferase assays using Ishikawa and human endometrial stromal cell lines (HESC). Renilla luciferase activity was used for normalization. Transfection was performed with Lipofectamine in Ishikawa and Mirus in HESC. Transcription factor binding sites were identifi ed using MatInspector. Mutagenesis was performed using site directed mutagenesis. Student's t-test was used for statistical evaluation. Results: A segment -965/-33 bp 5' of HOXA10 minimally drove reporter gene expression, while a focal element within this region located -965/-563 (P2) upstream region of promoter did drive expression; these results suggested the existence of a repressor element in the -563/33 region. In Ishikawa cells P2 drove luciferase reporter gene activity to 5 times that of empty pGL3 (p<0.001). Addition of the repressor element to P2 drove reporter activity to -5 times that of P2 alone(p< 0.0001), returning to near basil levels. In HESC transfection with P2 resulted in reporter activity similar to pGL3. We identifi ed 2 binding sites for Wilms tumor supressor (WT1) in the repressor region. The site directed mutagenesis of WT1 binding sites confi rmed that WT1 directly binds and represses reporter gene expression. Conclusion: We demonstrate a WT1 regulated suppressor region located between -562 and -33 upstream of the HOXA 10 gene. WT1 is a known transcriptional regulator, controlling the expression of genes involved in proliferation and differentiation. Absence of this factor causes urogenital developmental abnormalities and cancer, including Wilms tumor, accompanied by high levels of expression several homeobox genes. These fi ndings suggest a novel regulatory relationship in which homeobox genes are directly regulated by WT1. Indolamine 2, 3-dioxygenase (IDO) was previously identifi ed as promoting immune tolerance and to promote induction of regulatory T cells via activity of tolerogenic dendritic cells. We hypothesize that IDO may play a mechanistic role of immune tolerance in ovarian cancer. We performed immunohistochemical analysis for IDO and tumor infi ltrating lymphocyte (TILs) in 108 cases of ovarian cancer. IDO expression, intensity and staining patterns (nuclear, cytoplasmic) were recorded. The interrelationship between TILs and expression of IDO was investigated. These results were then analyzed for statistical relationship with demographic data. Survival distributions were calculated by the Cox's proportional hazards model or Kaplan-Meier's product limit estimator. In either case, curves were compared across groups using the log rank test. Due to skewness, the number of TILS was compared across groups with Kruskal-Wallace rank sum procedures rather than ANOVA. To correlate the immunohistochemical IDO results with gene expression, we randomly selected a group of tumors and performed real time PCR to quantify gene expression of IDO. We then correlated this value to the TILs results to inquire if a relationship exists between relative gene expression of IDO and TILs in the tumor microenvironment. The median age was 62 years, 74% had stage IIIC disease and 90% had grade 3 histology. Seventy-four (69%) of patients have died, and the median time to death is 3.3 years (CI 2.5, 4.1). The estimated median time to progression is 2.7 years. IDO expression or staining patterns did not correlate with survival, histology or stage. All specimens had cytoplasmic staining, while 19 (5.7%) also had positive nuclear staining. The strongest relationship was between TILs and nuclear staining pattern of IDO approached statistical signifi cance (p=.07). IDO demonstrated high frequency expression in ovarian cancer patients and is suggestive of a potential mechanism for tolerance induction. The nuclear immunohistochemical staining pattern of IDO may indicate increased enzyme activity and nuclear staining pattern correlates with TILS. Regulation of FOXO1A Expression in Endometrial Carcinoma. Erin C Ward, Anna V Hoekstra, John R Lurain, Diljeet K Singh, Barbara M Buttin, Julian C Schink, J Julie Kim. * Obstetrics and Gynecology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA. Objective: In 30-80% of Type I endometrial cancers, the PTEN gene is inactivated. The loss of PTEN activity leads to constitutively active Akt, which inhibits several downstream targets including FOXO1A. FOXO1A is a member of the FOXO sub-family of Forkhead/winged helix family of transcription factors that is involved in cell cycle regulation, differentiation and apoptosis, and is highly expressed in the human endometrium. We propose that the deregulation of FOXO1A protein in the endometrium results in the aberrant expression of genes that regulate the cell cycle and apoptosis, thereby promoting tumorigenesis. Methods: Immunohistochemical staining for FOXO1A was done for normal and endometrial cancer tissues. RT-PCR and western blot analyses were conducted on 4 endometrial cancer cell lines, Ecc1, Ishikawa, Hec1B and RL95 to look at FOXO1A mRNA and protein expression levels respectively. To begin elucidating the mechanism of FOXO1A regulation, western blot analysis was used to determine levels of Skp2, the oncogenic subunit of the Skp1/Cul/Fbox protein ubiquitination complex, in the four cell lines. In two independent experiments, siRNA techniques were used to silence Skp2 in Ishikawa cells and an inhibitor of Akt was applied to the same cell line to inhibit phosphorylation of FOXO1A. Western blot analyses were used to ascertain the effects of the two treatments on FOXO1A protein expression. Immunofl uorescence for FOXO1A was conducted on Akt inhibitor treated Ishikawa cells to determine the localization of FOXO1A. Results: In normal endometrium, FOXO1A protein was highly expressed in both the glands and stroma while endometrial carcinoma showed very little to no detectable staining for FOXO1A. The four endometrial carcinoma cell lines demonstrated that FOXO1A mRNA was expressed while very little FOXO1A protein was present. Skp2 was expressed in all four cell lines with the highest levels produced by the Ishikawa cells. Levels of FOXO1A protein increased when Ishikawa cells were treated with a siRNA specifi c to Skp2. Finally, FOXO1A protein levels increased and the protein was localized to the nucleus in Ishikawa cells after treatment with an Akt inhibitor. The loss of FOXO1A may be an important event in endometrial neoplasia and determining the mechanisms to reinstate this pathway will provide insight to the development of alternate therapies. Expression Analysis of the VEGF Receptor Family in Mouse Peri-Implantation Uterine Vessel Formation. Nataki C Douglas, Hongyan Tang, Raul Gomez, Mark V Sauer, * Ralf C Zimmermann. * Obstetrics and Gynecology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. Objective: Prior to placenta formation, interactions between the embryo, endometrium and ovary create a uterine environment that supports early embryonic development. Induction of angiogenesis in the uterine decidua is a key event in peri-implantation uterine differentiation and blastocyst implantation. Members of the VEGF receptor family are major regulators of angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. To determine the factors involved in peri-implantation uterine vessel formation, we examined the expression of VEGFR-1, VEGFR-2, VEGFR-3, PECAM (blood endothelial cell marker), and LYVE-1 (lymphatic endothelial cell marker) on embryonic days (EDs) 4.5 to 7.5. Design: Expression analysis Materials and Methods: 8 week old mature female CD1 mice were mated with males of proven fertility. A vaginal plug the following morning was interpreted as successful mating and counted as day 0.5 of pregnancy. Mice (n=16, 4 mice per ED) were sacrifi ced on EDs 4.5, 5.5, 6.5 and 7.5. Cross sections of uteri were processed for immunohistochemical analyses with the following antibodies: PECAM, LYVE-1, VEGFR-1, VEGFR-2, and VEGFR-3. Immunofl uorescent double staining was performed according to standard protocols. Results: Blood vessels are present throughout the peri-implantation uterus. Vascular density starts to increase on ED 4.5, the time of implantation, peaks on ED 5.5-6.5, and declines on ED 7.5 at the site of placenta formation. Lymphatic vessels are present around the embryo, in the primary decidual zone (PDZ). Double staining of LYVE-1 and PECAM confi rms unique populations of blood and lymphatic vessels. Whereas, VEGFR-2 is expressed on vessels of the PDZ and secondary decidual zone (SDZ), VEGFR-1 expression is restricted to the PDZ, and VEGFR-3 expression is restricted to vessels in the mesometrial pole of the PDZ. Double staining to detect co-localization of PECAM with VEGFR-1 or VEGFR-2 indicates that these receptors are expressed on blood endothelial cells. Double staining to detect co-localization of VEGFR-3 with PECAM or LVYE-1 indicates that VEGFR-3 is expressed on both blood and lymphatic vessels. Conclusions: Peri-implantation uterine vessel formation involves both angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. The differential expression pattern of VEGFR-1, VEGFR-2, and VEGFR-3 in the peri-implantation uterus suggests that each VEGF receptor plays a unique role in blood and/or lymphatic vessel formation. Ovarian Cancer Cell Attachment to Extracellular Matrix Is Regulated by S1P and LPA. Yoel Y Smicun, Orlando Gil, Kate Devine, Jennifer Gilman, David A Fishman. * Obstetrics and Gynecology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA. Objective: Lysophophatidic acid (LPA) and sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) are found in high levels in serum and ascites of ovarian cancer patients. We have demonstrated that LPA and S1P regulate invasion of epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC) cells. Detachment and reattachment to extracellular matrix (ECM) are integral to invasion. Therefore, we investigated effects of S1P and LPA on cell-ECM attachment, cell-ECM adhesion protein β1-integrin and membrane associated focal adhesion kinase (FAK), which connects ECMintegrin complexes to the cytoskeleton. Methods: After 4 hrs treatment with 40μM LPA, 0.5μM S1P or 20μM S1P, Dov13 EOC cells were labeled with calcein and applied to Matrigel-or collagen-I-coated wells, incubated, washed, and counted. Attached cells were lysed or detached and allowed to reattach for 3, 6 or 24 hrs (simulating invasion) before being lysed. Membrane and cytoplasm fractions were analyzed by Western blot. Results: Pretreatment with 40μM LPA decreased attachment to Matrigel by 2/3 (p=0.031) but did not signifi cantly affect attachment to collagen-I. Both S1P concentrations increased attachment to Matrigel (1.5fold)(p=0.045,0.009) and collagen-I (3 fold)(p=0.015,0.005). Cell-matrix adhesion protein β1-integrin and membrane-associated FAK increased dose-dependently in attached cells pretreated with S1P but decreased with LPA pretreatment, in correlation with the phospholipids' respective effects on attachment. FAK was depleted from membranes of reattaching cells regardless of treatment. Treatment during attachment with LPA, S1P, Lyso-phosphatidylcholine (LPC) and lysophosphoglycerol (LPG) (phospholipids without know biological activity) was inhibitory. Conclusions: ECM attachment contributes to cell invasion, and LPA and S1P appear to regulate both processes. While 40μM LPA pretreatment signifi cantly increased cell invasion and decreased Matrigel attachment, 20μM S1P stimulated attachment to Matrigel and inhibited invasion. Interestingly, 0.5μM S1P increased both attachment and invasion, indicating invasion is a complex process not entirely dependent on decreased attachment. All tested phospholipids were inhibitory when applied during attachment, suggesting that S1P and LPA act via different mechanisms depending upon whether EOC cells are attached. Focal adhesion is likely a negative regulator of invasion as FAK was depleted from membrane of attaching cells. Background: VEGF plays an important role in the neovascularization of malignant gynecological tissues and has been used as a prognostic marker for multiple tumor types including gynecological. Objectives: Our objectives were to 1) compare VEGF levels in benign and malignant endometrial epithelial cells, 2) defi ne the signaling pathways responsible for upregulation of VEGF in endometrial cancer cells (EnCa), and 3) determine if VEGF has autocrine/paracrine effects on EnCa cell proliferation. Methods: Levels of VEGF mRNA in EnCa cell lines (RL-95, HEC1A, HEC1B, SK-UT2, Ishikawa, AN3CA) and short-term cultured primary endometrial epithelial cells (EEC, n=3) were determined by Q-PCR. VEGF protein was assessed in conditioned medium by ELISA. VEGF promoter activity was evaluated by luciferase reporter assay. EnCa cells were treated with the following inhibitors: PI3K/AKT/mTOR (Adeno-PTEN, Wortmannin, Rapamycin), JAK pathway (AG490), and MEK1/ERK 1/2 pathways (PD098059) to assess their contribution to the regulation of VEGF. Cell proliferation was determined by cell counts. Results: Benign EEC expressed less VEGF (p<.001) when compared to the high level expressed in 5 of 6 EnCa cells The increase in protein was not concordant with VEGF mRNA expression in all EnCa cell lines. In addition, there was no difference in VEGF promoter reporter activity in the benign and malignant cells. Chemical inhibition of the PI3K pathway reduced but did not completely inhibit VEGF secretion by An3Ca cells (p < .001). Adeno-PTEN or PD098059 only modestly reduced VEGF production (p < .05 each). In contrast, inhibition of JAK2 increased (p < .05) levels of VEGF without an increase in HIF1α. Inhibition of VEGF receptor activation with Adeno sFLT reduced (p < .05) EnCa cell proliferation. Conclusions: EnCa cells produce signifi cantly more VEGF than their benign counterparts. Multiple signaling pathways contribute to VEGF production/ secretion in EnCa cells. VEGF produced by EnCa cells has autocrine/paracrine effects on cell proliferation.  Human fi rst trimester (FT) and term (TT) trophoblast and endothelial cells (EC) express insulin receptors (IR). Two IR isoforms differ by inclusion of exon 11 (Ex11) and by signaling effi ciency. Alternative splicing is accomplished by splicing factors of the MNBL and CELF (CUGBPs) family favoring the longer (Ex11+) and shorter (Ex11-) isoforms, respectively. This study hypothesized differential IR splicing and, hence, insulin signaling in FT/TT vs EC as a result of tissue-specifi c expression of splicing factors, and dysregulation of splicing in pathological pregnancies. IR isoforms and splicing factors were measured (RT-PCR) in primary placental cells (EC, FT, TT) and cell lines and in placentas from normal, gestational diabetic (GDM) and IUGR pregnancies. Cells were cultured under various insulin, glucose and dexamethasone concentrations. IR splicing effect on signaling was determined by measurement of ERK1/2 and PKB phosphorylation (western blot) after insulin stimulation (0-60 min). IR splicing differed in trophoblast vs endothelial cells: FT/TT expressed IR11+ (>90%), whereas EC mainly expressed IR11-(70%). Splicing factor MBNL3, promoting Ex11 inclusion, prevailed in IR11+ producing FT/TT, whereas CUGBP2, supporting Ex11 skipping, prevailed in IR11-expressing EC. Mitogenic insulin signaling differed in FT/TT vs EC. Splicing was unaltered in vitro by glucose, insulin, and dexamethasone. IR11-expression was lower (p<0.05) in both IUGR and GDM than in normal placentas. The changes in IUGR were the result of altered cellular composition of the placentas whereas abnormal IR splicing accounted for the changes in GDM. Cell type specifi c splicing of IR in the human placenta accomplished by differential expression of splicing factors allows maternal vs fetal insulin to regulate placental function separated in space with a preferential activation of mitogenesis in trophoblasts. Reduced IR11-expression in GDM highlights the role of proper IR splicing/insulin signaling for placental development. (Jubilee Fund 10053, 10896 Vienna). Is Mediated by the mTOR Signaling Pathway. Nicholas P Illsley, * Stacy Zamudio, * Andrea Albieri. Obstetrics, Gynecology and Women's Health, UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA. Introduction: The mTOR (mammalian Target Of Rapamycin) signaling pathway is responsible for integrating the effects of nutrients and growth factors in the regulation of major functions involved in cellular growth. Foremost of these is the control of mRNA translation, however little is known about the processes regulating protein synthesis in trophoblast cells. As protein synthesis plays a crucial role in placental growth, we designed this study to investigate whether mTOR is involved in the regulation of protein synthesis in trophoblast cells. The specifi c inhibitor, rapamycin, was used to identify mTOR modulated processes. We hypothesized that inhibition of the mTOR signaling pathway would be associated with a decrease in the extent and effi ciency of protein synthesis. Methods: BeWo choriocarcinoma cells were incubated for 24 hr in DMEM/10% FBS in the presence and absence of 0.2μM rapamycin. Extracted cells were blotted for phospho-and total mTOR, p70S6 kinase 1 (p70S6K1) and 4E-binding protein 1 (4E-BP1) and quantitated by densitometry. Cell culture lysates, after removal of the nuclear fraction, were separated on a 15-50% sucrose gradient and fractionated to generate an RNA profi le by measuring optical density at 254 nm. The poly(ribo)somal section of the profi le was integrated to quantify the extent and effi ciency of translation. Results: Rapamycin did not inhibit mTOR phosphorylation but it reduced phosphorylation of p70S6K1 and 4E-BP1, to 23 ± 7% and 67 ± 15% of the FBStreated control (p < 0.05, n=4). After fractionation, integration of the polysomal faction revealed that RNA associated with the polysomes was reduced to 65 ± 7% of control by rapamycin (p < 0.05, n=4). Translational effi ciency in the same samples was reduced to 71 ± 9% of control by inclusion of rapamycin. Conclusions: Both p70S6K1 and 4E-BP1, located downstream of mTOR, are involved in the initiation of protein synthesis. Rapamycin inhibited the phosphorylation of p70S6K1 and 4E-BP1, indicating that the phosphorylation process is mediated by mTOR kinase. Rapamycin also caused a decrease in the extent and effi ciency of protein synthesis. We conclude that regulation of mRNA translation in trophoblast cells is mediated, at least in part, via the mTOR signaling pathway. Background: Syncytin, a human endogenous retrovirus envelope protein encoded by the human endogenous retrovirus (HERV-W), is expressed in the placenta and has fusogenic properties as well as a putative immunosuppressive peptide sequence (ISU) within the transmembrane (TM) subunit of the protein. Syncytin is thought to play a critical role in human placental morphogenesis by mediating cytotrophoblast fusion to form the syncytiotrophoblast. Exosomes are membrane vesicles that are released by the cell upon fusion of multivesicular bodies with the plasma membrane. Placental exosomes are immunosuppressive and retroviruses may use the exosomal pathway to propagate. We hypothesise that the human placenta produces exosomes that carry the retroviral protein syncytin. Methods: We have raised antibodies to the putative immunosuppressive peptide of syncytin (ISU). Human placental explants were cultured for 72 hours at 37 o C (5% CO2). Following culture, the supernatant was removed and exosomes were enriched by differential ultracentrifugation (pelleting) and/or sucrose gradient fractionation (rate zonal separations). Proteins were extracted from the exosomal fraction using a CHAPS based buffer, SDS-PAGE Silver staining and Western Immunoblotting were used to analyse the proteins. The presence of exosomes was confi rmed by Transmission Electron Microscopy. Results: Exosomes were isolated using three different procedures; differential centrifugation, differential centrifugation followed by sucrose gradient and differential centrifugation using a sucrose cushion followed by sucrose gradient. Differential centrifugation with a sucrose cushion produced a highly purifi ed exosomal fraction. Using Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), 100 nm membrane vesicles were observed; the predicted size and density of exosomes. Western Blotting analysis of the enriched placental exosome fractions identifi ed a 24kDa protein, the expected size of the Syncytin TM subunit. Preliminary observations show cross-reactivity of our antibody with a 24kDa protein present in human plasma from pregnant women. Conclusions: Human placental exosomes express a protein with the molecular weight and immunological characteristics of the 24kDa protein corresponding to the TM subunit of syncytin. These results suggest a novel mechanism by which the placenta may infl uence the maternal immunology during pregnancy. Objective The villous trophoblast is the biological machinery of the human placenta responsible for maternofetal exchange. Alterations in the morphology of this membrane may lead to perturbed oxygen and nutrient transfer ultimately leading to compromised fetal growth. PET and IUGR are associated with alterations in placental villous and vasculature morphology and alterations specifi c to the trophoblast are yet to be described. The objective of this study is to stereologically assess morphological alterations in placental villous trophoblast in placentae from pregnancies complicated by PET, with and without associated IUGR, and to determine what effect age-of-onset has on trophoblast morphology and whether these changes, if any, have detrimental effects on villous membrane function. Methods 39 placentae were collected from pregnancies complicated by PET (n=9), IUGR (n=10), PET associated with IUGR (n=10), and gestationalaged-matched controls (n=10). Placentae were divided into early-onset (< 34 weeks gestation) or late-onset cases (>34 weeks) for each study group. Placental samples were obtained uniform-randomly and 5μm formalin-fi xed paraffi n embedded sections were stained with H&E. Trophoblast morphology was assessed stereologically and volume estimates were obtained for cytotrophoblast, syncytiotrophoblast and syncytial knots. Results Placentae from early-onset PET were associated with signifi cant reductions in the volume of the cytotrophoblast, syncytiotrophoblast, syncytial knots and total placental volume (all p=<0.001) when compared to agematched controls. Neglible effects on trophoblast morphology were observed in placentae from late-onset PET with signifi cant reductions observed in the volume of syncytial knots (p=0.041). Early-onset IUGR had no effect on trophoblast morphology, whereas placentae from late-onset IUGR were associated with signifi cant reductions in syncytiotrophoblast volume (p=0.004) and total trophoblast volume (p=0.003). Conclusion Alterations in trophoblast morphology are dependent upon ageof-onset in PET but not in IUGR further validating the hypothesis that PET can be classifi ed as two separate disease entities, one with abnormal placental pathology and one with normal placental pathology. Inst. Boliviano Biología Altura, La Paz, Bolivia. Introduction: Residence at high altitude (>2700 m) increases the incidence of preeclampsia and decreases birth weight. Placental 11β-HSD2 activity is positively correlated with birth weight, suggesting that the activity of this enzyme is important in fetal growth. We have shown that placental 11β-HSD2 expression and activity are fetal sex-specifi c. In the male fetus under maternal stress 11βHSD2 activity is maintained, and male fetuses maintain normal growth. Expression and activity are down-regulated in female fetuses, as is growth, under similar levels of maternal stress. We asked whether ethnic differences in growth under hypoxic stress are associated with differences in 11β-HSD2 activity in the placenta, and whether there are sex-specifi c changes in activity in preeclampsia (PE). Methods: TLC was used to evaluate placental 11β-HSD2 activity in women of European ancestry (n=18 at 300 m, 24 at 3600 m) vs. Andean ancestry (n=18 at 300 m, 27 at 3600 m), and in 10 Andean women with PE at 3600 m. Results: Altitude increased placental 11β-HSD2 activity in the placentas of European migrants to high altitude, but not in natives. Increase in activity was equivalent for male vs. female fetuses among migrants to 3600 m, but did not contribute to increased fetal growth as birth weight diminished by 420 g, while similar Andean babies had only a 180 gram decrease relative to low altitude controls. In contrast to our hypothesis, and in the absence of sex-specifi c differences in fetal growth, placentas of Andean male fetuses had lower 11β-HSD2 activity at high vs. low altitude. Consistent with our hypothesis, preeclamptic pregnancies where fetal sex was female showed markedly down-regulated 11β-HSD2 activity, while activity was unchanged in the placentas of male fetuses. We provide the fi rst estimates of male versus female human placental 11β-HSD2 activity under conditions of mild chronic hypoxemia in low vs. high altitude pregnancies and in PE. Changes in 11β-HSD2 activity appear to be unrelated to birth weight at high altitude and suggest that changes in bioactive cortisol may not be the most infl uential factor on fetal growth under conditions of hypoxaemia and in the absence of PE. Support: NIH HD42737, NSF BCS 0309142. Hypothesis: Impaired materno-placental perfusion can lead to pre-eclampsia and fetal growth restriction. We hypothesised that local over-expression of VEGF in the uterine artery would lead to a sustained increase in uterine artery blood fl ow (UABF) through enhanced vasodilatation of the uterine vascular tree. Methods: We injected adenovirus vectors containing the VEGF or βgalactosidase gene (Ad.VEGF-A or Ad.lacZ, 5 x 11 particles) into the left and right uterine artery of fi ve Romney ewes at laparotomy (97 -102 days gestation, term = 145 days); the investigators were blind to the side of VEGF injection. Using Doppler sonography, UABF was calculated as the product of blood fl ow and vessel cross sectional area, measured before and 4 -7 days after injection. At post mortem examination, sections were taken from the uterine arteries at 4 levels and studied in an organ bath. Results: The mean UABF signifi cantly increased after Ad.VEGF-A injection when compared with before injection (408 ml/min ± SD 273 to 1321 ml/ min ± SD 728, p = 0.005); Ad.lacZ injection did not signfi cantly increase UABF. Compared with Ad.lacZ vessels, Ad.VEGF-A transduced vessels were signifi cantly less responsive to phenylephrine (E max 148±10.9 vs E max 228.2±27.5, p < 0.05) and had signifi cantly increased relaxation to bradykinin (pD2 (-log EC50) values 9.11±0.01 vs 8.65±0.11, p< 0.05). β-galactosidase expression was shown using X-gal histochemistry, β-galactosidase ELISA and immunohistochemistry. Conclusions: Adenovirus mediated local over-expression of VEGF results in increased uterine artery blood fl ow and relaxation of the uterine arteries. These results suggest it may be possible to develop a therapeutic intervention to increase placental perfusion by increasing VEGF expression, to improve the outcome of pregnancies complicated by severe fetal growth restriction and pre-eclampsia. AIM: Placental inactivation of cortisol by 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-2 (11βHSD2) may protect the fetus from deleterious effects of both endogenous and exogenously derived glucocorticoid (GC). We have previously demonstrated a sexually dimorphic fetal response to infl ammatory stressors in pregnancy. 11βHSD2 was implicated in the mechanisms contributing to the growth reduction observed. We aimed to investigate the relationship between placental 11βHSD2 activity, GC exposure, and birth weight in preterm neonates with respect to sex. METHOD: Placental 11βHSD2 activity was measured by radiometric conversion assay in neonates at 24-28 weeks (n=20), 29-36 weeks (n=20), and 37-42 weeks (n=20) gestation. Mann Whitney U-test was used for comparison between groups and linear regression used to assess correlation between variables. RESULTS: Total placental 11βHSD2 activity (activity rate x placental weight), but not placental 11βHSD2 activity rate (nmol/mg/hr), showed a signifi cant correlation with gestational age (r=0.53, p<0.0001) and birth weight percentile (r=0.27, p<0.05). Small for gestational age (SGA) infants had lower placental 11βHSD2 activity (335.2 ± 47 vs 504.4 ± 51 nmol/mg/hr, p=0.02) and lower total placental 11βHSD2 activity (87.1 ± 14 vs 187.6 ± 29 μmol/hr, p=0.01) than infants of normal weight for gestational age. Preterm infants exposed to antenatal GC had a higher placental 11βHSD2 activity rate (479.8 ± 50.3 vs 299.6 ± 48.1 nmol/mg/hr, p=0.02), but not total placental activity (p=0.06), than those not exposed. A signifi cant interaction between infant sex, steroid exposure, and total 11βHSD2 activity was evident for the preterm infants (F=4.98, p=0.03), with only females exhibiting a signifi cant increase in activity following maternal GC exposure, reaching levels equal to those observed at term. DISCUSSION: The sexually dimorphic response in 11βHSD2 activity following antenatal GC exposure has not previously been reported. The defi nitive role of placental 11βHSD2 remains unknown. Placental metabolism of cortisol by 11βHSD2 may facilitate the development of an autonomous fetal hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis. Following preterm birth adrenal insuffi ciency is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. The sexually dimorphic response exhibited by the female fetus may explain the increased incidence of poor outcome observed in males. The We have previously reported that both IL-1β and IL-6 lead to increased expression of OTR at mRNA level peaking at 4 hours and reducing by 24 hours. We have also shown that IL1b leads to a transient increase in oxytocin binding to myocytes. In this study we have examined the effects of IL1β upon OTR protein expression and of IL-6 upon both protein expression and oxytocin binding. Human myocytes in culture were incubated with IL-1β (1ng/ml) or IL-6 (NF-IL6, 10ng/ml). Cultures were stopped after 15, 30, 60 minutes, 2, 4 8, 12 and 24 hours and protein prepared for Western analysis. In parallel experiments OTR binding was measured in a competitive binding assay using the OT analogue ornothin vasotocin at 2, 4, 8 and 20 hours. IL1β led to a modest 20% increase in OTR protein expression at between 2 to 8 hours. IL-6 also led to a modest 20% increase in OTR protein expression at between 30 minutes and to 4 hours decreasing to 80% between 8 and 24 hours. Binding was increased by IL-6 by 30% at 4 hours reducing to normal by 8 hours and to 80% of basal by 20 hours. These data show that the biphasic effect of IL-β and IL-6 causing a transient increase in mRNA expression followed by a decrease, is also refl ected at protein expression and receptor binding levels. The changes that we have seen in OTR expression are modest in comparison to changes seen in the expression of other labour-associated genes such as COX-2 or IL-8. The study was designed to assess the differences in the adrenal steroid levels between women with female and male fetus who delivered preterm. HYPOTHESIS: Male fetus produces the precursors of estrogen and cortisol at a different rate than female fetus. STUDY DESIGN: In a behavior in pregnancy study, 524 ethnically diverse women were prospectively followed at 18-20 weeks (T1), 28-30 weeks (T2) and 34-36weeks (T3). Maternal urine samples were collected at each stage for 17-a Hydroxy progesterone, Androstenedione and Cortisol and analyzed on the basis of fetal sex in fi fty eight who delivered preterm (11.1%;19 female and 39 male). RESULTS: Signifi cant differences were found in the levels of 17-a-Hydroxy progesterone and Androstenedione in subjects with female and male fetus at all three time points. For 17-a-Hydroxyprogesterone ( CONCLUSION: This is the fi rst report suggesting a distinct fetal sex dependant activation mechanism that determines maternal adrenal steroid levels during pregnancy prior to preterm birth. Fetal sex seems to play an important role in 17-a-Hydroxy progesterone production which can be converted to either androstenedione resulting in the synthesis of estrogens or to cortisol via 11desoxycortisol. However, elevations in cortisol levels are similar in both male and females at T1 and T2 who deliver preterm except for the last time period (34-36 weeks) which may imply the increased risk of preterm birth for male fetuses. Objective: Placental abruption (decidual hemorrhage) is a leading cause of pre-term delivery (PTD). Thrombin generation during abruptions refl ects enhanced access of circulating clotting factors to decidual cell-expressed tissue factor. The results of a multicenter trial established that progestin administration reduced the occurence of PTD in high-risk patients suggesting an integral role for progesterone receptor (PR) activity in protecting against PTD. Therefore, the current study evaluated the separate and interactive effects of thrombin and the synthetic progestin, medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) on PR mRNA levels and PR DNA-binding activity in term decidual cells (DCs). Methods: Decidua from non-laboring patients (n=6) undergoing repeat Cesarean section was scraped from chorion and digested by collagenase-DNAase. Purifi ed DCs were grown to confl uence and passaged until fl ow cytometry indicated that the cultures were >99% free of CD45+-bearing cells. Confl uent passaged term DC cultures were incubated with 10-8 M estradiol (E2) or E 2 + 10-7 M medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) for 7 days, then switched to serum-free defi ned medium with steroids ± thrombin. After 24h, DCs nuclear proteins and total RNA were extracted following standard methodology. Gel shift analyses were carried out using a radioactive labels consensus PR binding site. Quantifi cation of total PR messenger was performed using real time RT-PCR and normalized to b-actin. In term DCs incubated with E 2 , the mRNA level for PR was 29.2 ± 5.2 (mean ± SEM). The addition of MPA or thrombin decreased PR mRNA to 10.2 ± 2.8 and 10.5 ± 3.1, respectively. Additionally, the combination of E 2 +MPA + thrombin caused an even greater reduction in PR mRNA levels (3.0 ± 0.7). Moreover, gel shift analysis demonstrated that thrombin, added at 0.1 to 2.5 U/ml, elicited a concentration dependent decrease in PR DNA binding activity. In view of the strong association between thrombin generation and abruption-related hemorrhage, the inhibitory effects elicited by thrombin on PR mRNA levels and PR DNA binding activity suggest that abruption leads to physiologic progestin withdrawal. This may account for the reduced risk of PTD when progesterone therapy is administered to high-risk patients. Fibroblasts. Amy E Noll, Kimberly Hyatt, Dean A Myers. * OB/GYN, University of Oklahoma HSC, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. BACKGROUND: Prostaglandins, key regulators of parturition, stimulate extensive biochemical changes in the composition of the cervical connective tissue. This cervical remodeling allows for cervical dilatation and in conjunction with increased uterine contraction results in subsequent birth of the fetus. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and F2α are the major PGs mediating cervical ripening. PGE2 signals through four major G-protein coupled receptors (EP1-EP4). Detailed studies examining regulation of EP1-EP4 expression need to be conducted. Estrogen (E2) and progesterone (P4) are also known to play a major role in cervical ripening. To date, few studies have addressed regulation of EP receptor expression in cervical fi broblasts, a major cell type involved in tissue remodeling. The purpose of the following study was to 1) determine if human cervical fi broblasts (HCFs) express either progesterone or estrogen receptors (PR and ER respectively) and 2) to examine the effect of estradiol and progesterone on EP and FP receptor expression. Human cervical fi broblasts previously established from explants of cervical tissue (non-pregnant) were maintained in vitro in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. Total RNA was prepared from HCFs and subjected to reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) using primers specifi c for ERα, ERβ, PR total (PR-A+B) or PR-B. HCFs were treated with E2 or P4 (100, 10, 1.0, 0.1, 0.01 nM) for 24hrs. Total RNA was prepared and subjected to semi-quantitative qRT-PCR for EP1, EP2, EP3, EP4 and the prostaglandin F (FP) receptor. RESULTS: Based on RT-PCR, HCFs were observed to express PR-A and PR-B; in addition HCFs express ERα but not ERβ. Based on RT-PCR, HCFs express EP1, EP2, EP3, EP4 and FP; the relative abundance of mRNA, based on Ct values was EP4>EP1>EP3=FP>EP2. E2 decreased EP2 mRNA in a dose dependent manner to 55% of control; maximal suppression was observed at 1nM. P4 similarly decreased EP2 mRNA to 47% of control; maximal suppression was observed at 100nM. E2 increased EP4 mRNA by 44% with maximal stimulation noted at 10nM. P4 had no effect on EP4 mRNA. Neither E2 nor P4 had an effect on EP1, EP3 or FP mRNA. CONCLUSIONS: HCFs represent direct targets for estrogen and progesterone in regulating HCF function. Based on our fi ndings these steroids potentially regulate the responsiveness of HCFs to prostaglandins by selectively modifying EP receptor expression. Previous studies have indicated that spontaneous preterm labor is a host infl ammatory response disease, and that prostaglandin E2 and F2a, mediated through their respective receptors named EP1-4 and FP are believed to play important roles in the myometrial contraction and the initiation of labor. The present study was undertaken to determine the effect of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on infl ammatory cytokines and prostaglandin pathway gene expression patterns using human uterine smooth muscle cell (USMC) line as a model. USMC (Cambrex Bio Science Walkersville, Inc), passages 4-10 were exposed to 0, 0.1, 1 and 10 μg/ml of LPS for 6, 24 and 48 hours. The production of IL-8, IL-6 and TNFalpha was determined using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and the expression of prostaglandin pathway genes, specifi cally, cyclooxygenase (COX)-2, EP1-4, FP, and oxytocin receptor (OXTR) was determined by real-time PCR. Immunofl uorescent staining for FP was also performed. LPS at concentration of 1 and 10μg/ml increased the production of IL-8, IL-6 and TNFalpha and the expression of COX-2, EP3, FP and OXTR mRNA while decreasing EP2 mRNA after 24 and 48 hours. Immunofl uorescent staining revealed that FP receptor appeared to be located in the nucleus as well as evenly dispersed throughout the cytosol of uterine smooth muscle cells and the nuclear staining intensifi ed after LPS treatment. USMC responded to LPS with increased secretion of IL-6, IL-8 and TNF alpha and expression of contractile-associated genes COX-2, EP3, FP and OXTR. Based on these results, we propose that IL-6, IL-8 and TNF alpha are involved in the initiation and promotion of labor under infl ammatory conditions by inducing PGE2 or PGF2a production, EP3, FP and OXTR expression in myometrium. Objective: The induction of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and increased synthesis of prostaglandins (PGs), PGE 2 and PGF 2α , by infl ammatory cytokines play a central role in the initiation pre-term delivery (PTD). We recently found that medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) blunts this increase in COX-2 expression and PG synthesis. MPA is known to possess both glucocorticoid and progestin properties. Thus to elucidate whether this effect was due to glucocorticoid or progestin actions, we examined the effects of MPA, Dexamethasone (Dex), and a pure progestin (PP) on interleukin-1 beta (IL-1) induced COX-2 expression and PG production in cultured term decidual cells (DCs). DCs were isolated, purifi ed and grown to confl uence. After priming with 10(-8) M estradiol (E2) or E2 plus 10(-7) M of either MPA or Dexamethasone (Dex) synthetic pure progestin (PP; ORG 2058) for 7 days, cultures were incubated in a defi ned medium with corresponding steroid(s) with or without IL-1 (1 ng/ml). After 24 hr, COX-1 and COX-2 protein levels in cell lysates, and PGE 2 and PGF 2α levels in culture media were measured by Western blotting and ELISA, respectively. COX-1 and COX-2 mRNA levels were assessed by quantitative real-time RT-PCR after 6hr. Results: Neither COX-1 protein nor mRNA expression changed across the different treatment groups. COX-2 protein and mRNA expression was upregulated by IL-1b, but this regulation was blunted by MPA and Dex, and PP to a lesser degree. The addition of IL-1 increased secreted PGE 2 and PGF 2α levels by 206±123-fold and 27±7-fold in cultures maintained in E 2 , respectively (p<0.05; mean±SEM, n=4). The addition of MPA and Dex both signifi cantly reduced the effect of IL-1 on PGE 2 and PGF 2α secretion by more than 50%, while PP reduced this effect by only 25%. Conclusions: IL-1 increased COX-2 and PG production in term DCs, while MPA and Dex, and progestin, less so, blunted these effects. Given the importance of PGs in the pathogenesis of PTD, their inhibition by both glucocorticoids and progestin suggests that exogenous glucocorticoids, in addition to progesterone, may be a better strategy in the the prevention of PTD. Introduction: Although the myometrial contractions of labour signal the normal physiological end-point of pregnancy the biochemical onset of labour may occur at or before term via a series of changes in expression of labour-related genes. Historically, expression of oxytocin receptor (OTR) and connexin-43 (Cx-43) were suggested as 'marker genes' of the terminal myometrial phenotype. However, the major role played by prostaglandins and infl ammatory cytokines in labour implies that expression of prostaglandin H synthase (PGHS-2), Il-8 and Il-1β may also be suitable candidates to defi ne myometrium as being in labour. Our aim was to explore which of these genes were defi nitive markers for preterm and term labour. Methods: Paired samples of upper and lower segment myometrium were taken from pregnant women undergoing LSCS either before or after the onset of term or pre-term labour and frozen. RNA was extracted and converted to cDNA (n=9 for PTNL; PTL; n=8 for TNL; n=10 for TL). Copy numbers of PGHS-2, OTR, Cx-43, Il-8 and Il-1β and beta-actin were measured by qPCR using a Rotor-Gene™. Western blotting was performed for PGHS-2, OTR, Cx-43 and beta-actin. Immunocytochemistry for PGHS-2 and OTR was performed on myometrial tissue sections. Results: PGHS-2 expression increased in both the upper (p<0.01) and lower (p<0.003) segment myometrium in term labour. A similar pattern was seen with Il-1β expression (p<0.01 and p<0.006 respectively). However, Il-8 expression was signifi cantly increased in the lower myometrial segment in preterm (p<0.047) and term labour (p<0.006). No effect of labour was seen in either OTR or Cx-43 expression. Immunoblotting for PGHS-2 was strongest in the term labour samples, whereas OTR showed no differences in the upper myometrium and a tendency to decrease with labour in the lower myometrium. No differences were seen for Cx-43. Immunocytochemical staining was strongest in the term labour samples for PGHS-2. Individual cells within tissue sections showed strong staining for OTR in upper and lower segment myometrium under all conditions. Conclusions: These data show that PGHS-2, Il-1β and Il-8 may be more appropriate 'marker genes' of the terminal myometrial phenotype. This study also highlights differences between term and preterm labour and upper and lower segments of myometrium. OBJECTIVE: In most animals labor is initiated by progesterone withdrawal. The mechanism for progesterone withdrawal in human parturition is unclear since labor occurs without a decrease in circulating progesterone levels. It is hypothesized that human parturition involves a functional progesterone withdrawal whereby changes in myometrial progesterone receptor (PR) expression decrease progesterone responsiveness. Our previous mRNA data suggest that functional progesterone withdrawal is caused by increased expression of PR-A (a suppressor of progesterone actions) relative to PR-B (the principal mediator of progesterone actions) i.e., the PR-A/PR-B expression ratio. The objective of this study was to test the PR-A/PR-B hypothesis at the protein and functional levels. STUDY DESIGN: Lower uterine segment biopsies were obtained at the time of c-section from consenting women at preterm and not in labor (PTNIL; n=6), at term and not in labor (TNIL; n=6) and at term and in labor (TIL; n=6). Western blotting for nPRs was performed on total cell lysates using the PgR1294 PR antibody. Cellular localization of PRs was determined by PgR1294-immunohistochemistry. Relative abundances of PR-B and total PR mRNAs were measured by quantitative RT-PCR and PR-A/PR-B function was assessed by co-transfecting PHM1-31 cells with PR-A and PR-B and measuring activity of a progesterone-responsive luciferase reporter construct. RESULTS: The myometrial PR-A/PR-B protein ratio increased signifi cantly with advancing gestation (0.5 before 32 weeks vs 1.0 at term, p < 0.001) and with the onset of labor at term (1.0 not in labor vs 2.5 in labor, p < 0.01). The increase was due to increased abundance of PR-A; PR-B levels remained relatively constant. PRs were localized exclusively to the nuclei of myometrial cells. PR mRNA levels were consistent with the changes in PR proteins. In PHM1-31 cells PR-A repressed the transcriptional activity of PR-B at a PR-A/PR-B ratio similar to that of term laboring myometrium. CONCLUSION: These data support the hypothesis that functional progesterone withdrawal in human parturition is mediated by an increase in expression of PR-A relative to PR-B. The We have shown, in transient transfections in human myocytes, that the combination of transcription factors NFκB and C/EBP leads to a synergistic increase in OTR promoter activity greater than either alone. This effect is independent of any NFκB binding site but is mediated through the distal 405bp region of the promoter. We have undertaken studies to refi ne the region which responds to NFκB or C/EBP in combination. Deletions were made in a 1.1kb OTR promoter construct. This construct was transfected into myocytes together with NFκB and/or C/EBP expression vectors. A series of deletions in the OTR promoter were made and their effect upon synergy examined. These studies showed that the critical region lies in 20bp -710 to -691. Two C/EBP binding sites had sequences within this region. Deletions across these sites eliminated synergy. To date the synergistic effect of NFκB and C/EBP upon OTR has been shown only at promoter level. We therefore performed immunoblots to determine the time of peak expression of overexpressed proteins. Both NFκB and C/EBP were endogenously expressed. Overexpression peaked at 24 to 36h. TaqMan RT-PCR showed that overexpression of NFκB or C/EBP caused a two fold increase at 24h whilst NFκB and C/EBP combined caused a 20 fold increase in OTR mRNA. However western analysis showed that NFκB or C/EBP alone had no effect upon protein expression whilst their combination caused a 10% increase at 36h. We conclude that the synergistic effect of NFκB and C/EBP upon OTR promoter activity is via C/EBP sites between -710 to -691. This effect upon OTR promoter activity is dramatic, but the effect upon endogenous mRNA synthesis and protein expression is less marked. We have found in other studies that cytokines stimulate signifi cant changes in OTR mRNA but small changes in protein concentrations and ligand binding ( OBJECTIVE: Non-Caucasian women experience preterm labor (PTL) and delivery more frequently than women of other ethnicities. This has been partially attributed to genetic differences. Interactions between genes and pharmocotherapy have also been reported. This study was conducted to identify differences in tocolytic response among African American, Caucasian, and Hispanic women. A retrospective review of 255 consecutive patients, managed by a single university practice, at 22-34 weeks gestation with PTL and intact membranes from January 2003-June 2006 was performed. Patients received magnesium, Indocin, or both. Women were grouped by ethnicity and compared. Variables examined included maternal age, parity, cervical dilation at presentation, tocolytics administered, presence of bleeding, prior preterm delivery, prior cervical surgery, tobacco abuse, gestational age at presentation and at delivery, APGAR scores, infant birthweight, and presence of a twin gestation. ANOVA and Chi-square analysis were used where appropriate. Stepwise multiple logistic regression was also performed. Response to tocolysis, defi ned as prolongation of pregnancy for at least 48 hours, was the outcome variable. The analysis included 238 patients; 35.3% African American, 50.8% Caucasian, and 13.9% Hispanic. All variables analyzed were similar between ethnic groups. In 29 patients, delivery was imminent and tocolytics were not administered. 28.7% of Caucasian, 33.8% of African American, and 47.4% of Hispanic patients did not respond to tocolysis. In the multivariate model, a trend toward Hispanic ethnicity as an independent risk factor for nonresponse to tocolysis was noted as compared to Caucasians, although this did not reach statistical signifi cance (OR 2.24, 95% CI 0.82-6.06). CONCLUSION: This study is limited by a small sample size, but suggests ethnicity may infl uence response to tocolysis. Further studies are needed to explore the effect of ethnicity on genetic expression, and elucidate interactions between the process of PTL, tocolytics, and genetics. Compelling evidence suggests that PE, idiopathic IUGR, and labor-associated PTD manifest common but also distinct pathways of placental dysfunction. We hypothesize that unique global patterns of placental gene expression are responsible for the widely divergent clinical manifestations of PE, IUGR, and CA. METHODS: Placental gene expression profi les (n=3) were generated from women, whose pregnancies were complicated by severe PE [gestational age (GA): 29.7 ± 1.0 weeks], idiopathic severe IUGR (GA, 33.3 ± 0.5 weeks), PE+IUGR (GA, 27.9 ± 2.2 weeks), CA (GA, 27.8 ± 2.2 weeks), idiopathic preterm delivery, IPTD, (GA, 30.0 ± 2.7 weeks), and those at term (39.1 ± 0.3 weeks). Preterm groups were matched for GA. Total RNA was isolated from placental specimens and was hybridized to an Affymetrx HG_U133 Plus 2.0 chip containing approximately 47,400 human genes and expressed sequence tags (ESTs). The microarray results were analyzed with GCOS 1.4 and GeneSpring GX 7.3.1 software. Following per chip and per gene normalization and exclusion of absent genes, comparisons among groups were conducted based on only those genes identifi ed to be regulated vs IPTD and term groups by one-way ANOVA using a 2-fold cut-off (p < 0.05). The ratios of up-and down-regulated genes in a specifi c group/genes regulated in common were unique and characteristic for PE, IUGR, PE+IUGR, and CA groups ( Table 1 ). The proportion of genes regulated in common in the 4 groups was < 40%, and for several comparisons was only 1-2%. Conclusions: PE, IUGR, and CA are characterized by distinct placental gene expression profi les for both up-and down-regulated genes. This indicates that a unique set of placental genomic responses may be responsible for the diverse panel of clinical manifestations. Objective: Despite the increasing usage of 17-OHPC for prevention of preterm birth in high risk groups, no data exist as to the pharmacokinetics of this treatment in pregnant women. The objective of this study was to determine the pharmacokinetics of 17-OHPC in women with twin gestation participating in a multicenter RCT of 17-OHPC vs placebo in the prevention of preterm birth. Methods: We recruited 6 women who were receiving weekly IM injections of 17-OHPC in castor oil from the time of recruitment (16 0/7-20 6/7 weeks) until 35 weeks gestation. The PK study was performed during the second or third trimester after at least 4 injections had been administered. For each PK study, plasma was collected prior to the next injection and daily for seven consecutive days after an injection. Plasma 17-OHPC concentrations were quantifi ed using LC-MS with a sensitivity of 0.5ng/ml and a coeffi cient of variation of less than 10%. Results: The mean (± SE) plasma concentrations prior to and after IM injection of 250 mg 17-OHPC are depicted in the fi gure below. The PK parameters (mean ± SE) for these 6 women include: AUC(ng/ml/day) Cmax ( ng/ml) Tmax (days) T 1/2(days) 70.2 ± 29.3 13.0 ± 6.2 1.2 ± 0.45 9.1 ± 4.2 AUC is area under the plasma concentration time curve. Cmax is maximum concentration Tmax is time of maximal concentration. T 1/2 is half life Conclusions: These are the fi rst data reporting plasma concentrations and pharmacokinetic parameters with 17-OHPC therapy in pregnant women. AUCs differ three fold suggesting substantial individual variation in release and metabolism. It is unclear if this variation may lead to a differential response in effi cacy. The long half life suggests that release from the castor oil depot rather than metabolism of 17-OHPC dictates the plasma concentration -time profi le. Whether these concentrations differ substantially from those seen in singleton gestations remains to be determined. Objective: The hypercoaguable state of pregnancy protects against the hemostatic challenges of delivery. Tissue factor (TF) is the primary initiator of hemostasis via thrombin generation. In human endometrium, TF expression is enhanced during progestin-induced decidualization of stromal cells in the luteal phase and in decidual cells (DCs) of fi rst trimester placentas. The current study determined whether TF expression also includes DCs of term placentas and is regulated when term DCs are incubated with medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) and thrombin added separately or together. Study Design: Immunohistochemical (IHC) TF expression was observed in specimens of normal term decidua (n=4). Purifi ed DCs from normal term deliveries were passaged until >99% free of CD45+ cells by FACS. Confl uent DCs were primed with 10 -8 M estradiol (E 2 ) or E 2 + 10 -7 M medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) for 7 days, then incubated with corresponding steroids +/thrombin. After 24h, DCs proteins were assayed for TF by ELISA. Total RNA extracted from parallel cultures were used to assess TF mRNA levels by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Results: IHC observations localized TF at the cell membranes of DCs in term placentas. In term DC monolayers (mean ± SEM, n=10) membrane-associated TF levels incubated were 248 ± 69 with E 2 and 634 ± 171 pg/ml/ug total cell protein with E2 + MPA. Compared with E2, thrombin (2.5 U/ml) enhanced TF output in incubations with E 2 (2.8 ± 0.3-fold, p< 0.05) and further with E 2 + MPA (11.5 ± 6.6-fold, p<0.05). TF mRNA levels corresponded to changes in ELISA TF protein levels. Conclusions: Under sustained progestin exposure term DCs continue to express TF. Localized at the cell membrane, DC-expressed TF binds to circulating clotting factors. The latter convert pro-thrombin to thrombin, which promotes hemostasis via fi brin formation. Since thrombin is generated during abruptions (decidual hemorrhage) further enhancement of TF expression by the DCs observed in vitro suggests a feed forward mechanism that confers protection against abruption-related pre-term delivery. Women Who Deliver Preterm. Rita S Leite, Amy G Brown, Samuel Parry. * Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Objective: To identify candidate protein biomarkers in cervicovaginal fl uid of pregnant women that may be linked to preterm labor and delivery. Methods: Cervicovaginal fl uid was collected from women who presented to our obstetrical triage unit with uterine contractions between 20 and 32 weeks gestation. Women were excluded if their cervix was greater than 2 cm dilated, vaginal bleeding was present, or the fetal membranes were ruptured. Obstetrical outcomes were determined by chart review. Samples were fl ash-frozen, stored at minus 80 C, spotted onto WCX2 chips, and analyzed using SELDI-TOF-MS. Spectra were obtained for each sample and peak differences were determined using Biomarker Wizard Software. Protein peaks with signifi cantly greater intensity in women who delivered preterm (less than 37 weeks) were identifi ed using a Q-STAR XL tandem mass spectrometer (ABI) equipped with a PCI-1000 ProteinChip Interface (Ciphergen). Results: Demographic characteristics were similar between women who delivered preterm (n=19) and women who delivered at term (n=46). Proteomic analysis revealed 9 peaks that were signifi cantly different between preterm and term deliveries, of which 4 protein peaks had signifi cantly greater intensity (P values less than 0.002) in women who delivered preterm. Two of these peaks were determined to be fragments of calgranulin B: candidate markers at 2,178 Da (amino acid sequence: ASHEKMHEGDEGPGHHHKPG) and 2,509 Da (amino acid sequence: RKDLQNFLKKENKNEKVIEH). Conclusions: We conclude that: 1) there is a distinctive cervicovaginal protein signature differentiating women with preterm contractions who deliver preterm and women with preterm contractions who eventually deliver at term; and 2) specifi c calgranulin B fragments found in higher intensity in samples from women who delivered preterm may play a role in infl ammation-induced preterm delivery. Calgranulin A and B form a heterodimer known as calprotectin, which is stored in the cytoplasm of neutrophils and macrophages and participates in the host defense response against pathogenic microbes in the female genital tract. Calgranulin B previously has been detected in amniotic fl uid and serum of pregnant women with preterm labor and intra-amniotic infection. Detection of markers such as calgranulin B might have application in the identifi cation of women at highest risk of spontaneous preterm delivery.  Consecutive patients with spontaneous PTB were identifi ed from the March of Dimes PERI project (#20-FY03-30) at NYU, NY and Yale, CT from Jan 1989-June 2005. Cases were matched (4:1) with uncomplicated term deliveries (controls). DNA was extracted from stored buffy coats and genotyping performed using established primers. All specimens were linked with demographic and medical data abstrated from maternal/neonatal records. Genotyping was performed using Sequenom MALDI-TOF platform with individualized assay designs created by automated Spectrodesign software (Sequenom, San Diego, CA). Data were analyzed by permutation-based exact chi-square test for 2x3 genotype tables and by logistic regression analysis with adjustment for race (SPSS, Chicago, IL). p<0.05 identifi ed a signifi cant association. The total number of positive associations was placed in stochastic context by computer simulation (Resampling Stats, Inc). The analysis was confi ned to Hispanics due to lack of power for other ethnic groups. RESULTS: Genotyping was successful in over 96% of samples. Hardy-Weinberg expectations were met in all but 3 SNPs. In Hispanics, 4 gene variants were positively association with PTB: ENPP1S121 (p=0.003); CCR5S1 (p=0.007); CYP2C9S144 (p=0.047); IL6S174 (p=0.045). At p<0.05, 4 positive genes would be expected by chance in 85% of the time based on 10,000 computer simulations involving 120 genetic comparisons; however, 2 positive genes at p<0.01 would occur in only 12% of computer simulations. The rare allele of ENPP1 SNP was signifi cantly overrepresented in PTB cases [OR 2.1 (95% CI: 1.4, 3. 2)]. CONCLUSION: SNPs in 4 candidate genes appear to be associated with spontaneous PTB. Although not more than expected, the strong association of the ENPP1 SNP was particularly compelling. Additional studies are ongoing to further investigate these associations. MOD #21-FY05-1250 (to EN). , 2006) . Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human SP-A gene have been associated with respiratory diseases, including neonatal respiratory distress syndrome, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, and adult respiratory distress syndrome. Their association with preterm birth has not been previously examined. This study investigates the association between the +62(G>A) SNP in the maternal SP-A gene and preterm birth. METHODS: Consecutive patients with spontaneous (non-iatrogenic) preterm birth were identifi ed from the March of Dimes Perinatal Emphasis Research Initiative project (MOD # 20-FY03-30) at New York University, NY and Yale University, CT from Jan 1989-June 2005. Cases were matched (4:1) with uncomplicated term deliveries (controls). DNA was extracted from stored buffy coats and genotyping performed using established primers. All specimens were linked with demographic and medical data abstrated from maternal/neonatal records. Genotyping was performed using the Sequenom MALDI-TOF platform with individualized assay designs created by automated Spectrodesign software (Sequenom, San Diego, CA). Data were analyzed by permutationbased exact chi-square test for 2x3 genotype tables and by logistic regression analysis with adjustment for race (SPSS, Chicago, IL). RESULTS: Genotyping was successful in 98.7% of samples. Hardy-Weinberg chi-square genotype distributions were as expected in cases (p=0.99) and controls (p=0.24). The overall genotype distributions of the +62(G>A) variant in cases (n=89) was GG=51, GA=33, AA=5; and GG=242, GA=157, AA=38 in controls (n=437). In logistic regression analysis with adjustment for race, there was no association between the +62(G>A) genotype and preterm birth (p=0.619). The +62(G>A) SNP in the human SP-A gene is not associated with spontaneous preterm birth. Further studies are required to better defi ne the role of SP-A in the onset of labor, both at term and preterm. Funded by March of Dimes #21-FY05-1250 (to EN). Introduction: MAPKs are evolutionary conserved serine-threonine signalling kinases that connect receptors at the cell surface to intracellular regulatory targets. They are central to mediating gene regulation in intrauterine tissues during parturition. There are 3 distinct groups of MAPKs: 5 extracellular signal-related kinases (MAPK1, 3, 4, 6 and 7), 3 jun amino-terminal kinases (MAPK8, 9 and 10), and 4 p38 kinases (MAPK11, 12, 13 and 14). The MAPKs are activated by phosphorylation through a cascade of other kinases and are inactivated by 3 common MAPK phosphatases (MKP-1, 2 and 3). The importance of MAPKs phosphorylation in myometrium and fetal membranes at the time of parturition led us to explore whether regulation of MAPK and MAPK phosphatase genes also occurred in preterm and term labour. Methods: Paired upper and lower segment samples of myometrium from pregnant women undergoing LSCS either before or after the onset of term (TNL and TL) or pre-term (PTNL and PTL) labour were taken and frozen for extraction of RNA. Matching samples of amnion and chorion from the same patients were similarly frozen (n=6 in all cases). RNA was extracted and converted to cDNA. Copy numbers of MAPK1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and MKP-1, 2, 3 and beta-actin were measured by quantitative real-time PCR using a Rotor-Gene™ (Corbett Research, Australia). Results: All 12 MAPK and 3 MKP genes were expressed in both upper and lower segment myometrium, and in amnion and chorion of preterm and term labouring and non-labouring women. There was remarkably little change in expression between non-labour and labour states in myometrium, amnion and chorion for these 15 genes. MAPK3 (ERK1) and 14 (p38alpha) were the most abundant MAPKs in the amnion and the chorion and were signifi cantly greater than in the myometrium (p<0.05 in all cases). In addition to these 2 MAPKs, the JNKs were prominent in the myometrium. Of the phosphatases, MKP-1 showed the highest expression in all tissues examined. Conclusions: These data show that all the MAPK and the 3 MKP genes were expressed in myometrium, amnion and chorion. As there is no difference in expression of the proteins regulation of their activity at parturition is apparently primarily by phosphorylation. The BK Ca channel α-subunit has revealed many different splice variants. One such variant, a 132 bp exon encodes an additional 44 amino acid segment, which has decreased sensitivity to calcium. It is expressed in the uterus, and has been shown at the mRNA level to increase as a proportion of the total channel α-subunit in human myometrium with the onset of labour. This suggests a contribution during the labour process. The goal of this study was to determine the functional signifi cance of the 44 aa spliced exon of the BK Ca alpha subunit (mK44) in non-pregnant (NP), pregnant non-labouring (PNL) and pregnant labouring (PL) myometrium samples. METHODS: Protein was extracted from human NP, PNL, and PL myometrium and quantifi ed. Myometrial protein samples (35 μg) were resolved on a 7.5% SDS-PAGE gel, blotted and probed with rabbit anti-132 antibody (1:500), an antibody generated specifi cally to the 132 spliced exon of the BK Ca α-subunit. Protein expression levels of the BK Ca alpha subunit containing the 132 bp spliced exon were determined by laser densitometric analysis. Differences between the groups were determined by analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by post-hoc Tukey analysis where appropriate, using the statistics program SPSS. A P value of < 0.05 was considered to be statistically signifi cant. RESULTS: Western blot analysis of the BK Ca channel α-subunit mK44 variant in NP, PNL, and PL myometrium using an anti-132 antibody revealed no signifi cant differences in the expression of the variant between NP, PNL, or PL groups following ANOVA and post-hoc testing (P<0.05). This study has provided insight into the functional signifi cance of the BK Ca, specifi cally the 44 aa spliced exon-containing variant of the channel. As the expression of the whole channel decreases at labour, the channels expressing the mK44 variant remain the same. Given that this variant has decreased sensitivity to calcium, this may facilitate uterine contractility at labour. Objective: Infection/infl ammation-induced preterm delivery is associated with a robust increase in proinfl ammatory cytokines and chemokines, including monocyte chemoattractant factor-1 (MCP-1). In human pregnancies, elevated MCP-1 in serum and uterine tissue has been reported during pregnancies complicated by preterm labor. The origin of the elevated MCP-1 levels, however, is unclear. The current studies sought to characterize the expression of MCP-1 in the pregnant uterus and other organs during intrauterine LPSinduced preterm delivery (PTD) in the mouse. Methods: Using sterile surgical technique, day-15 pregnant CD-1 mice underwent intrauterine injection of 250 μg LPS. Subsequently, 10-14 mice for each group were euthanized at 0, 2, 6, 12, 18 and 24 hours after LPS injection. Uterus and other mouse organs were harvested, placed in RNAlater or frozen in Tissue-Tek OCT compound. Total RNA was isolated using the Trizol reagent; genomic DNA was removed using TURBO DNA-free. cDNA was made using iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit. Qualitative MCP-1 expression was determined using the iTaq DNA polymerase kit and mouse specifi c sense and antisense primers. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR was performed in an ABI Prism 7000 multicycler using the Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix. RT-PCR data were normalized using 3 constitutively expressed genes. Immunohistochemical studies were performed on 25 μm sections of pregnant uteri using anti-MCP-1 polyclonal antibodies and the Vectastain Elite ABC kit. Results: With this model, PTD is rare before 6 hours (only 7.7%); whereas, by 12 hours 71.4% and by 18 hours 91.7% had delivered. Qual-RT-PCR confi rmed MCP-1 mRNA expression in uterus, lung, kidney and liver. Real-time quant-RT-PCR demonstrated a 75 fold increase in MCP-1 mRNA in uterine tissue at 2 hours, 46 fold at 6 hours, and 8 fold at 12 and 18 hours. MCP-1 mRNA also increased markedly in kidney (260 fold) and liver (185 fold) at 2 hours; and less in lung (12 fold The systemic infl ammatory response syndrome (SIRS) is associated with the activation of coagulation and fi brinolysis, due in part to increased plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1). In addition to its role as an inhibitor of plasminogen activators, PAI-1 appears to have cellular effects including modulation of cell motility, proliferation, metabolism, and stimulation of fi brosis. The current studies sought to characterize the expression of PAI-1 (in comparison to tissue factor (TF)) in the pregnant uterus and other organs during intrauterine LPS-induced preterm delivery (PTD) in the mouse. Methods: For these studies, day-15 pregnant CD-1 mice underwent intrauterine injection of 250 μg LPS. Subsequently, 10-14 mice were euthanized at 0, 2, 6, 12, 18 and 24 hours after LPS injection. Uterus and other mouse organs were harvested, placed in RNAlater or frozen in Tissue-Tek OCT compound. Total RNA was isolated using the Trizol reagent; genomic DNA was removed using TURBO DNA-free. cDNA was made using iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit. Qualitative PAI-1 and TF expression was determined using the iTaq DNA Polymerase kit and sense and antisense primers for these two mouse genes. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR was performed in an ABI Prism 7000 multicycler using the Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix. RT-PCR data were normalizing to 3 constitutively expressed genes. Immunohistochemical studies were performed on 25 μm sections of pregnant uteri using the Vectastain Elite ABC kit with anti-PAI-1 and anti-TF polyclonal antibodies. IL-8 is a chemokine whose expression within the uterus increases dramatically with the onset of labour and plays an important role in cervical remodeling and probably in contractions. We have previously shown that overexpression of either NFκB p65 or C/EBP LAP alone leads to a 2 fold induction in IL-8 promoter activity in human myocytes. NFκB p65 or C/EBP LAP in combination are synergistc causing a 6 fold induction. IL-1b acts principally to increase NFκB activity whilst IL-6 acts through C/EBP. We have extended these experiments to examine the effect of overexpression of NFκB p65 and C/EBP and of IL1-b and IL-6 upon IL-8 protein synthesis. Human myocytes in culture were transfected with expression vectors for NFκB p65 or C/EBP LAP alone, or the two in combination. Initial western analysis studied were performed to determine the time of peak expression of proteins expressed via transfected vectors. Myocytes were found to express both NFkB and C/EBP without overexpression. Overexpression was seen to peak at 24 to 36 hours. Cultures were stopped at between 8 and 72 hours post transfection and culture medium assayed for IL-8 by ELISA. In separate experiments myocytes were incubated with IL-1b (1ng/ml) and IL-6 (NF-IL6, 10ng/ml) alone or in combination and IL-8 concentrations in the medium were measured at 6 and 12 hours. Overexpression of NFκB p65 increased IL-8 synthesis by 2, 18, 28, and 50 fold at 24, 36, 48 and 72 hours respectively. Overexpression of C/EBP LAP caused a much smaller increases of 3 and 5 fold at 48 and 72 hours. The combination of NFkB p65 and C/EBP LAP caused a synergistic increase of 60 fold only at 72 hours. Incubation of myocytes with IL-6 alone had no signifi cant effect upon IL-8 synthesis whilst IL1b caused a 15 fold increase at 6 hours and 12 hours. Incubuation with IL1b and IL-6 in combination led to 26 and 75 fold increases in IL-8 synthesis at 6 an 12 hours respectively. These data suggest that the large increases in IL-8 synthesis within the uterus seen in association with labour are likely to be due to the combined effects of IL1b and IL-6. The substantially larger increase in IL-8 synthesis seen at the later time point may refl ect the later endogenous activation of C/EBP caused by IL-6. The interaction between NFκkB and C/EBP appears to be important in the regulation of the onset of labour. (n=69) were obtained at elective Caesarean section. Real time PCR was used to quantify the expression of genes that we found by Suppression Subtractive Hybridisation to be altered by labor (matrix metalloproteinases 2, 3 and 9; interferon-induced transmembrane protein 2, oxytocin receptor, interleukin 8, Manganese superoxide dismutase, triosephosphate isomerase 1, nucleophosmin, testin, fi bronectin 1, SerpinF1, prostaglandin E receptors 1 and 2, prostaglandin F receptor) and other genes associated with parturition (progesterone receptors total and B, estrogen receptor alpha, COX2, connexin43, NFkB p50 and p65 subunits). Principal Components Analysis was performed on the entire data set and a clear distinction between NL and L samples was evident. Subsequent analysis focused on NL samples only. Correlations amongst the data were checked using STATA (v9) and the data grouped into 5 latent variables based on the correlation matrix and a priori biological knowledge. The latent variables consisted of a steroid-related group (Steroids; estrogen receptor and a measure of progesterone receptors), two separate infl ammatory factors, (a) NFkB-related and (b) IL8-and COX2related factors, CX43-related and OTR-related factors. To maximize statistical power, latent variables were converted to composite scores which were used for the formal process of inferring biologically plausible inter-relationships using Tetrad and D-Graph. Results. The biologically plausible structure that statistically was most consistent with our data (Tetrad P=0.7, D-Graph P=0.73) was a model where infl ammatory factors drive changes in steroid receptors, and steroid receptors and oxytocin-related factors drive changes in connexin 43-related genes. Conclusion. These results support the hypothesis that infl ammatory factors drive myometrial connectivity near the time of human labor onset. Objective: Infl ammatory processes are implicated in cervical ripening both in human term and preterm parturition (JSGI 10:323, 2003) . In mice, infl ammatory pathways are activated in the cervix prior to preterm delivery (JSGI 12:137A,2005) . Whether progestational agents can modify these pathways as a mechanism for prevention of preterm birth needs to be elucidated. Therefore, studies were performed to determine 1) whether infl ammation-induced preterm cervical ripening involves traffi cking of immune cells or hypertrophy of innervation, and 2) whether a progestational agent alters these pathways. Methods. On day 15 of gestation CD-1 mice (n=3/group) received an intrauterine injection of saline (Sal), lipopolysaccharide (LPS), medroxyprogesterone (MPA) alone, or MPA prior to LPS. Cervices were obtained 6 h later; tissues were fi xed, sectioned, and processed to stain collagen structure or to identify macrophages and neutrophils and nerve fi bers (Biol Reprod 61: 879,1999; JSGI 12: 578, 2005) . Results. In comparison to Sal controls, LPS induced cervical ripening as measured by optical density of polarized light (P<0.001). MPA pretreatment blocked this reduction in collagen structure. Although the number of resident macrophages declined after LPS relative to that in Sal group, a signifi cant increase in resident neutrophil was evident (P=0.01). MPA forestalled the emigration of macrophages and immigration of neutrophils. LPS did not alter the density of peripherin-stained nerve fi bers, however, MPA reduced innervation in the cervix. Conclusions: Intrauterine infl ammation promotes cervical ripening as assessed by changes in collagen structure, immigration of neutrophils, and emigration of macrophages. The role of neural activity in this infl ammatory process, rather than density of innervation, remains a consideration. Progestogen treatment forestalled infl ammatory-associated changes. Thus, infl ammation-induced preterm birth may differ from recruitment of immune cells and hypertrophy of innervation associated with parturition at term. These data raise the possibility that progesterone may regulate traffi c of immune cells and proinfl ammatory mediators that are proposed to ripen the cervix early in the process leading to preterm birth. To determine if absence of T and B cells changes susceptibility to LPS-induced preterm labor in a mouse model. Method: C57BL/6 rag-1 -/-(no T or B cells, RAG-KO) and wild type C57BL/6 (WT) females were mated with same-strain males. On day 15 post coitus they were injected intraperitoneally with 0.6 to 30 μg of LPS. Twenty-four hours later the mice were euthanized and examined for delivery of pups. LPS-induced delivery rates were analyzed by Chi-Square. In a separate experiment, day 15 pregnant RAG-KO and WT mice were injected with 3μg LPS or PBS and euthanized either 6 or 24 hours later (n=2 per strain per time point). Peripheral blood was analyzed for cytokine release by Bio-plex cytokine immunoassay. Assay values from LPS-injected mice minus the average value obtained from PBS injected mice were compared. Results: LPS injection led to dose-dependent preterm delivery in RAG-KO mice, with 8/8, 3/3, 3/3, 8/9, and 1/3 mothers delivering 24 hours after injection of 30, 10, 5, 3 and 0.6μg LPS/mouse, respectively. While WT mice given 30μg of LPS delivered prematurely (7/7), those given 3μg of LPS did not (0/8, p<0.0002), suggesting an increased susceptibility in RAG-KO mice. At 6 hours after injection with 3μg LPS, peripheral blood from day 15 RAG-KO mice had increased IL-1 alpha (12,307; 7041 pg/ml), IL-6 (13,000;12,995 pg/ml), IL-12 p40 (17, Objective: Paracrine regulation of myometrial quiescence has been shown in the human. We found that BNP is synthesized by human fetal membranes (hFM) and inhibits oxytocin-induced contractions of preterm human myometrium. Presently, we sought to test aspects of the hypothesis that a premature decrease in fetal membrane released BNP was associated with idiopathic preterm labor (PT-L). Methods: hFM were obtained from term and preterm cesarean deliveries, either in labor or not labor (n=10 each group), and BNP synthesis and release measured by RIA and RT-PCR. BNP release was based on the levels after a 30min incubation of FM in media (CM). We also quantitated BNP in human amniotic fl uid (AF) samples (n=2 each group). Results: BNP and BNP mRNA were of similar concentrations in amnion and chorion. There was more BNP in the membranes compared to CM. BNP and BNP mRNA were signifi cantly higher in FM and CM from preterm not in labor compared to term not in labor samples. There was a signifi cant reduction of BNP and BNP mRNA in FM obtained from preterm labor patients (Figure1). Further, BNP was increased in preterm compared to term AF (both not in labor). BNP concentration was lower in AF from PT-L patients that failed tocolysis compared to those with successful tocolysis (Figure2). The larger concentration of BNP in preterm samples absent labor and its decrease in samples from women in labor suggests a role for BNP in myometrial quiescence. These results tantalizingly suggest that if the AF BNP is low, current tocolytic agents will not successfully delay delivery. This study was supported by a grant from Chilean Government Fondecyt 1020675. Objective-Cervical epithelia have numerous functions that include proliferation, differentiation, maintenance of fl uid balance, protection from environmental hazards, and paracellular transport of solutes via tight junctions. Epithelial functions must be tightly regulated during pregnancy and parturition as the cervix undergoes extensive growth and remodeling. The objective of this study was to evaluate tight junction proteins as well as markers of epithelial cell differentiation in wildtype (WT) and cervical ripening defective steroid 5a-reductase type 1 defi cient mice (Srd5a1 -/-) to better understand how the permeability barrier is regulated during pregnancy and parturition. Methods-Quantitative real time PCR and Western blot analysis were performed to identify changes in mRNA and protein expression, respectively, of genes involved in apical junction complexes (APC) and epithelial cell differentiation during pregnancy and parturition in the cervix. Immunofl uorescence was carried out on cervical sections to visualize changes in the localization of the tight junction proteins claudin 1 and claudin 2. Gene and protein expression were also measured in the Srd5a1 -/mouse which fails to undergo cervical ripening due to inadequate local progesterone metabolism.  junctions coincides with initiation of terminal differentiation of cervical squamous epithelia as evidenced by the increased mRNA expression of genes expressed by differentiated epithelia late on gestation d18. The cervical ripening defective mouse Srd5a1 -/which has an elevated local progesterone concentration also has aberrant claudin 1 and 2 expressions, fails to form claudin 1 enriched tight junctions, and lacks normal expression of genes involved in epithelial terminal differentiation. Conclusion-These data suggest that changes in cervical permeability barrier properties during pregnancy are in part negatively regulated by progesterone and that dynamic changes in barrier properties of the cervix occur during pregnancy and parturition. Rupture of the fetal membranes (FM) involves programmed processes of biochemical and physical weakening prior to, and during, labor. In an effort to screen for proteomic differences between weak and strong regions of the FM following labored vaginal delivery, 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DIGE) was used to separate and compare protein fi ngerprints of strong and weak amnion fragments after topographical mapping and rupture testing. Full-thickness FM fragments from vaginally delivered fetal membranes were strength tested. Fragments were separated into groups with rupture strength: (A)<4.4, (B)≥ 4.4 and <8.8 and (C)≥8.8 newtons. Amnion was stripped from the chorion of each fragment and pooled amnion fragments from the weakest (A) and strongest (C) groups were processed for 2-DIGE, and differential, in-gel analysis. MW and PI data for signifi cantly up/down-regulated proteins were researched using ExPASy Proteomics Server Tools. Candidate proteins were screened by western blot. 2671 resolved protein spots were detected when comparing the strongest and weakest amnion fragments. Of these, 29 proteins showed -1.5, and lower, fold differences while 35 proteins showed 1.5, and higher, fold changes. 5 proteins showed more than a two fold decrease while 9 proteins showed greater than two fold increase. A cluster of 4 proteins with greater than 2 fold change in the 30-50kD MW/2.5-4.5 PI range was selected for initial study. TagIdent analysis identifi ed 41 suspect proteins in this range. Western blot analysis confi rmed Fibulin-5 expression was decreased by 45% (2.16 ± 0.5 vs 1.28 ± 0.3 OD, p<0.0001) in weak FM fragments. We have previously shown that a weak zone exists in topographically mapped fetal membranes from both vaginally delivered and C-sectioned patients and that these weak zones exhibit biochemical changes including increases in MMP9 and apoptosis, and decreased TIMP-3 protein. Here, we have differentially screened amnion fragments from the strong and weak zones of vaginally delivered, term, FM and identifi ed differentially expressed proteins. Fibulin-5, a regulator of elastic fi ber formation, was found to be depressed in weak zones of the FM. Further characterization and identifi cation of this, and additional proteins by MALDI Mass Spec analysis and western blotting may provide additional insight into the mechanisms of FM weakening and rupture. Support NIH HD048476. Objective: To examine and correlate the effects of hydrotherapy in laboring women on the anxiety, pain, stress hormones, oxytocin, and uterine contractility. Methods: 11 healthy, term women in spontaneous active labor (cervical dilatation -range 3-6cm) were immersed to the xiphoid in 37°C water for one hour. Blood samples were drawn under dry baseline conditions and repeated at 15 and 45 min of hydrotherapy. Plasma epinephrine, norepinephrine, cortisol, oxytocin, vasopressin, and plasma volume % (PVS%) shift were analyzed. Visual analogue scales for anxiety and pain were administered before each blood draw. Telemetric monitoring of fetal heart rate and uterine contractions was used. Results: Labor duration was normal (range-126-1294 min). Hydrotherapy was associated with a decrease in anxiety at 15 min (p<.02). Pain was decreased more for women with high baseline levels than women with low baseline levels after 15 (p=.01) and 45 min (p=.04) of bathing. Hydrotherapy was associated with a decrease in oxytocin at 15 min (p=.02) and 45 min (p=.05, trend). Contraction frequency decreased signifi cantly (p = .04). Epinephrine and norepinephrine did not change signifi cantly. Cortisol decreased twice as much after 15 min from baseline for the high baseline pain group (cortisol mean decrease = 6.2 mircograms/dL) compared to the low baseline pain group (cortisol mean decrease = 3.1 micrograms/dL). Plasma vasopressin decreased signifi cantly after 15 min (p=.02) and after 45 min (p=.02) of hydrotherapy. All women had a positive PVS%, at 15 min the median PVS% was + 4.1% and at 45 min PVS% was +4.1%. PVS% at 15 min of hydrotherapy was positively correlated with contraction duration (r = .74, p= .04). Conclusions: Hydrotherapy decreased anxiety and pain.The fall in stress hormones during hydrotherapy tentatively documents the reduction in pain and anxiety. Unexpectedly, a fall in oxytocin levels and a decrease in uterine contraction frequency were observed. The results may demonstrate two physiologic roles of oxytocin: it's traditional role in uterine contractility and a novel role as an anti-stress hormone. This research was supported in part by a NINR-1KO1NR008385-03 Award: RDB. Objective: 5α-Reductases are key enzymes controlling the production of GABA A active steroids such as allopregnanolone. These steroids may have a role in protecting the fetal brain against excitotoxic injury. In addition, 5α-reduced steroids may have a role in infl uencing uterine excitability. 5αreductase activity by the placenta may have a major role in the production of neuroprotective steroids in the maternal and fetal circulation as well as the fetal brain. The aims of this study were to compare the levels of 5α-reductase type 1 and 2 (5αR1 and 2) expression in the placentas of women at term and after labor in order to elucidate the role of the placenta in allopregnanolone synthesis. Methods: Proteins were extracted from human placenta samples collected from term caesarean sections before labor (n=4) and following spontaneous labor (n=4) for immunoblotting. Densitometric analysis was used to compare the expression of 5αR1 and 2 protein relative to actin expression. Results: 5αR2 expression was found to decrease signifi cantly (72±10% decrease; P<0.05) in the placental samples obtained after labor compared to the term, non-labor samples. 5αR1 expression did not change signifi cantly in association with labor. Conclusions: The marked expression of 5αR1 and 2 suggests that both isoforms contribute to 5α-reductase activity in the placenta. The marked decline in 5αR2 expression may contribute to lowering allopregnanolone levels at labor and thereby place the fetus at risk of hypoxic-induced excitotoxic brain injury. The myometrium expresses GABA A receptors throughout gestation and at term (Erdo SL 1984 Biochem & Biophys Res Comms 125:18) and may regulate excitability. Since 5α-reduced steroids, including allopregnanolone, are potent GABA A receptor agonists, a fall in these GABA A active steroids may also contribute to the rise of myometrial activity at labor onset. Introduction: Relaxin is an autocrine/paracrine hormone in the human decidua. Its expression is increased in patients with preterm premature rupture of fetal membranes and its receptor (LGR7) is upregulated after preterm delivery. LGR7 is a leucine-rich repeat G-protein coupled receptor with several splice variants expressed in the human uterus and brain. Methods: Decidua from twin pregnancies (n=4) before labor (30-37 wks) were collected and RNA isolated (Rneasy midi kit, Qiagen) and used for nested PCR with primers to the 5' and 3' untranslated regions of the cDNA. PCR products were cloned into pCR4Blunt-Topo vector (Invitrogen). For characterization, each was subcloned into pCR3.1 expression vector (Invitrogen) with or without hemagglutinin (HA)-tag. Expression in transfected HEK293 cells was detected by Western blotting with an antibody to the HA-tag. Glycosylation was shown by endoglycosidase treatment and subcellular localization confi rmed by confocal microscopy using a fl uorescent antibody to the HA-tag. Cell surface delivery of wild-type (WT)-LGR7 and splice variants was characterized by ELISA. Results: The full-length LGR7 transcript and two unique splice variants (splice variant C and D) were identifi ed in human decidua. Variant C was spliced between exon 12 and exon 18 and D between exon 5 and exon 16. Their expression varied markedly in the decidua from the four patients. Their expression in membrane fractions of transfected HEK293 cells was detected by Western blotting. Endoglycosidase treatment of the membrane fractions showed them to be highly glycosylated. The WT-LGR7 and variant D were both delivered to the cell surface, but C was not. When each splice variant was co-transfected together with the WT-LGR7, they reduced the cell surface delivery of WT-LGR7 to 36% and 28% respectively of the WT alone. Conclusion: The full-length WT-LGR7 and two unique splice variants of the LGR7 are expressed in the human decidua. Both splice variants reduced the cell surface delivery of the full-length LGR7 exerting a dominant negative effect and are therefore functionally signifi cant. Supported by NIH grant HD24314. Introduction Adipophilin, also known as adipocyte differentiation related protein (ADRP), is believed to be important for assembly of lipid droplets, thought to be intracellular foci for prostaglandin synthesis. However the role of adipophilin in this process has not been defi nitively characterized. The aim of this study was to explore the role of adipohilin in regulation of prostaglandin synthesis. Methods and Results We showed in this study intense immunostaining for adipophilin together with staining for the prostaglandin synthesizing enzymes cytosolic phospholipase A 2 (cPLA 2 ), cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) and microsomal prostaglandin E synthase (mPGES) on lipid droplets using dual immunofluorescent staining in both human amnion epithelial cells and amnion epithelium-derived WISH cells. Transfection of WISH cells with small interference RNA (siRNA) against adipophilin caused a signifi cant reduction of adipophilin mRNA and protein expression as well as the number of lipid droplets coated with adipophilin, but not the number of lipid droplets per se. Consistently, there was a signifi cant 3 fold reduction of basal prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2 ) production in adipophilin siRNA treated cells vs control. In contrast Interleukin-1β (IL-1β, 10ng/ml) induced dramatic increases in COX2 expression and PGE 2 production in both adipophilin siRNA or negative control siRNA-treated cells and overcame the inhibitory effect of adipophilin siRNA treatment on PGE 2 production. Conclusion Adipophilin does not appear to be a crucial protein for formation of lipid droplets but may regulate basal PGE 2 synthesis at this site, i.e it has a functional rather than a structural role at the lipid droplet. The lack of inhibition of cytokine-induced PGE 2 synthesis by adipophilin siRNA suggests IL-1β may mediate PG synthesis via a different route. Relaxin Stimulates Interleukin-8 Independently of Prostaglandin E2 in Human Lower Uterine Segment Fibroblasts. Rivka C Stone, Andrea Wojtczuk, Gerson Weiss, * Laura T Goldsmith. * Obstetrics, Gynecology and Women's Health, New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA. Objective: Elevated circulating maternal relaxin concentrations are associated with preterm birth in singleton IVF pregnancies, whose incidence of prematurity is double that of naturally conceived singleton pregnancies. Relaxin's effects upon the primate cervix include reorganization of collagen and elastin fi brils and increased matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity. Prostaglandins and infl ammatory cytokines play important roles in cervical ripening prior to delivery. Interleukin (IL)-8 acts to recruit neutrophils, additional sources of MMP activity, to the cervix at term. We tested the hypothesis that relaxin regulates cervical IL-8 production via stimulation of Prostaglandin (PG)E2 in human lower uterine segment fi broblasts. Methods: Fibroblasts isolated from human lower uterine segment tissue taken at term pregnancy (LUSF) were incubated in the absence or presence of human relaxin, 1-100 ng/ml, for 72 hours. Media were removed and assessed for Il-8 and PGE2 concentrations by specifi c enzyme immunoassays. Results: Il-8 and PGE2 were detectable in media from LUSF. At the lowest dose of relaxin, 1 ng/ml, no signifi cant effect upon IL-8 was observed. However, at doses of 10 and 100 ng/ml, relaxin signifi cantly stimulated IL-8 to mean levels of 211± 2 (p=0.018) and 253±12 (p=0.004) percent above control, untreated cells respectively (n= 3 experiments, each conducted in triplicate). In contrast, media PGE2 levels were not affected by relaxin. Conclusions: Relaxin signifi cantly stimulates IL-8 production by LUSF through a PGE2 independent pathway. This action of relaxin in the cervix may contribute to the cervical ripening component involved in preterm delivery. Supported by NIH Grant HD 22338. The increased prostaglandin synthesis observed within the uterus at term may be mediated by increased expression of cyclo-oxygenase-2. However, increased COX activity is likely to require concomitant increases in the release of substrate arachidonic acid, catalysed by the action of one or more phospholipase A 2 (PLA 2 ) enzymes. Numerous distinct PLA 2 isozymes have been identifi ed, differing in molecular size, cellular localisation and substrate specifi city. Two classes; secretory (sPLA 2 ) and cytosolic phospholipases (cPLA 2 ) are further classifi ed into groups I, II, III, V, X and IV, VI, VII, VIII respectively. In myometrium, there is a pregnancy and labour associated increase in the expression of sPLA 2 -IIA, but this does not account for the overall increase in PLA 2 activity observed during pregnancy and labour. Objectives: To identify the array of PLA 2 genes that are expressed in human gestational tissues and myometrial smooth muscle (MSM) cultures. Methods: Amnion, chorio-decidua and placenta were collected from women who delivered at term, either before or after the onset of labour. Myometrial biopsies, from lower uterine segment and upper uterine segment (fundus), were taken from non-pregnant women at hysterectomy and women at caesarean section before or after labour onset. Samples were either snap frozen and stored at -80 o C prior to RNA isolation or used immediately for culture of MSM cells. A search of the human genome mapping project and mammalian data-bases was performed to identify PLA 2 genomic sequences. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) primers were designed to identify individual PLA 2 genes, and splice variants where appropriate. RT-PCR products were analysed and verifi ed by sequence analysis. Subsequently, to determine any tissue-specifi c expression patterns we utilized real-time RT-PCR. Results: Expression of PLA 2 -IIA, PLA 2 -IV, PLA 2 -V and PLA 2 -VII was verifi ed. We also identifi ed the novel expression of PLA 2 -IID (placenta>amnion, choriodecidua), PLA 2 -III (amnion epithelial cells) and PLA 2 -X (all tissues). Conclusion: The presence of novel PLA 2 genes in human gestational tissues, suggests the possibility that they may contribute to the release of arachidonic acid within these tissues. Objective: Preterm birth remains a management problem despite major advances in our understanding of it. Urocortin is a 40 amino acids peptide expressed by gestational tissues, whose maternal levels correlate to the status of human myometrium, increasing at term and preterm delivery. The aim of this study was to evaluate whether in women with threatened preterm labor, maternal plasma urocortin concentrations differ between patients who deliver at term and those preterm and if its measurement might be useful in predicting preterm delivery in women with threatened preterm labor. Methods: 85 singleton pregnancies, that experienced threatened preterm labor, were evaluated. Maternal blood samples obtained at the time of admission were stored at -80 o C. A specifi c RIA assay was performed to measure urocortin levels. Results: Thirty out of 85 patients delivered preterm. Patients who delivered preterm were subdivided into those that delivered less than or equal to 7 days and greater than 7 days between the time of admission (sampling) and parturition. Twenty-three out of 30 patients delivered before 7 days from the time of admission whilst the remaining delivered later. Maternal plasma urocortin concentrations were signifi cantly higher in women who delivered preterm than in those who progressed to term. Urocortin concentrations in patients delivered preterm negatively correlated to the delivery time interval (in days) and were signifi cantly higher in those who delivered before than after the 7 day interval. At the cutoff 113.93 pg/mL, urocortin achieved a sensitivity of 80% and a specifi city of 100% as single marker for prediction of preterm labor. When urocortin levels were found above the thresholds defi ned by the ROC curve analysis, the probability of preterm delivery was as high as 100%, whilst the probability was 9.83% when found unaltered. Conclusion: maternal plasma urocortin levels are increased in patients with threatened preterm labor who delivered before 34 completed weeks of pregnancy and their measurement is a promising new biochemical marker to add signifi cant prognostic information for predicting preterm delivery among women at risk. Objective: Placental CRH plays a major role in the mechanisms controlling human pregnancy and parturition. During human pregnancy, biosynthesis and secretion of placental CRH increases exponentially with advancing gestation, and this increase is mirrored by exponential increases in CRH concentration in maternal plasma. Various endogenous factors have been shown to regulate the placental CRH gene expression. In this study we aim to determine the role of phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA), a PKC activator, in the regulation of CRH promoter activity in primary cultures of placental cells. Results: Using primary placental cell cultures transfected with CRH promoterluciferase reporter plasmids, PMA simulated CRH gene promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner with signifi cant (P<0.01) activity at 24 hours following treatment with 10-7 M to 10-5 M PMA. The use of progressive 5'-deletion analysis of the CRH promoter sequences shows that the region between -248 and -213bp, containing a consensus cAMP regulatory element (CRE), is essential for PMA responsiveness following exposure to 10-6 mol/L PMA for 24 hours. Specifi c mutation studies of the CRE, and the use of CRE sites linked to heterologous basal promoters, have determined that this site is essential for PMA actions. Furthermore, 17 beta-estradiol (10-7 mol/L) treatment of transfected primary placental cells resulted in the signifi cant decrease (P<0.01) of both basal and PMA-stimulated (10-6 mol/L) CRH promoter activity when the CRE element was present but had no effect when the CRE was absent. Conclusion: PMA stimulates CRH gene transcriptional activity through the CRE suggesting that cross-talk of PKC and PKA pathways may occur at the CRE in placental cells. Estrogen suppresses this PMA-induced activity, via mechanism(s) that require the CRE. An RCT of Extended Cycle vs 28d Cyclic OCP Therapy on Endometrial and Ovarian Function. Jaimey M Pauli, 1 Richard J Zaino, 1 Carol G Gnatuk, 1 James S Kesner, 2 Juliana W Meadows, 2 Larry M Demers, 1 Allen R Kunselman, 1 William C Dodson, *1 Richard S Legro. *1 1 Ob/Gyn, Pathology, and HES, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA; 2 Reproductive Endocrinology Laboratory, NIOSH, Cincinnati, OH, USA. a) Hypothesis: 168d Extended Cycle(EC) suppression with oral EE 20 mcg/ NETA 1 mg provides greater ovarian & endometrial suppression than 28d Traditional Cycle(28C) therapy with equal safety. b) Methods: We performed a double blind RCT of these 2 regimens in 63 normally cycling women & followed bleeding, endometrial histology by biopsy, follicular development by serial ultrasound, and serum and urinary levels of sex steroids. c) Results: The randomized groups were well matched at baseline. Generalized estimating equations using a log link were fi t to bleeding patterns across visits, and there were no differences between groups due to a rebound increase in the EC arm by study end (Fig 1, P=0 .25). Quadratic random coeffi cients models were fi t to analyze continuous outcomes across multiple visits. There was greater suppression of serum E2 levels in the EC arm(P=0.02, Fig 2) . Total ovarian volume (cm 3 ) was decreased more in the EC arm(-9.0 vs +0.8 for 28C, P=0.02), as did the mean diameter(mm) of the largest follicle(-2.3 vs +5.3, P=0.001). Area under the curve(AUC) for E1G (ng/mg Cr) from daily urines in a subset of 20 subjects was signifi cantly less in the EC arm(AUC per day median 9.1 vs 17.4, P=0.04). Ovulation by urinary PdG measures occurred in 5/10 subjects in 28C and 1/10 in EC. There were no differences in safety outcomes(histology, B/P, BMI, SHBG, G, I, or lipids) between groups. d) Conclusions: This study provides consistent data of greater ovarian suppression with EC treatment and forms the basis for its use in mulitple disorders (i.e. endometriosis, hirsutism, acne). Supported by RO1HD433332(RSL). Objectives: To clarify the basis for symptoms of premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), by assessing brain function, indexed by relative regional activity measured with positron emission tomography (PET) and [F-18] fl uorodeoxyglucose, in the follicular phase and the late luteal phases in women with PMDD and controls. Methods: All subjects prospectively documented symptoms using the Daily Record of Severity of Problems and PMDD subjects fulfi lled DSM 4 criteria for PMDD. Controls were asymptomatic. Subjects documented ovulation using urinary lutinizing hormone detection kits. Estradiol and progesterone concentrations and PET scans using [F-18] fluorodeoxyglucose were performed between days 6 to 9 and 12-14 days after ovulation. Comparisons between groups and phases were made using Statistical Parametric Mapping. Hormonal and mood data was evaluated using analysis of variance with repeated measures. Results: 4 women with PMDD and 5 controls have completed the ongoing study. PMDD subjects, but not controls, experienced a signifi cant increase in symptom number and severity in the luteal phase compared with the follicular. Regional Cerebral Glucose Metabolic Activity: Across all subjects, relative activity was lower in the late luteal phase (vs. follicular), primarily in the inferior aspect of the left superior temporal gyrus and the middle temporal gyrus. In contrast, relative activity was greater during the late luteal phase than in the follicular phase, primarily in the superior aspect of the right superior temporal gyrus. The left hemisphere effect seen in the entire sample was modifi ed by a signifi cant interaction with subject group, whereas this was not true of the right hemisphere effect. The interaction shown by the contrast "Late Luteal < Follicular; CONTROL > PMDD," was signifi cant, extending from the left superior temporal gyrus, into the middle temporal gyrus and posterior insula. Conclusions: The results in the controls are consistent with left lateralization of affective valence in the luteal phase. The left hemisphere is dominant for positive emotions while right is associated with negative emotions. PMDD subjects fail to demonstrate left lateralization of functional brain anatomy in the luteal phase to the same degree as control subjects. Objective: Continuous administration of progesterone antagonists (PA) results in endometrial suppression and amenorrhea. We studied the endometrial effects of intrauterine release of PA ZK230211 (ZK-IUS) in comparison to those seen with use of a levonorgestrel releasing intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) among women scheduled for hysterectomy because of heavy or painful menstruation. Patients and methods: 42 women were randomly fi tted with IUSs releasing ZK230211 at rate 1, 4 or 8 μg/24h, or 20μg/24h of LNG 4 to 8 weeks before hysterectomy. Uterine bleeding and endometrial morphology were evaluated. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed for proliferation markers (Ki67 and PH3), estrogen receptors (ER α and β), progesterone receptor (PR), and insulin like growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1). Results: Bleeding profi le was not altered by the use of ZK-IUSs. ZK230211 was measurable in all endometrial specimens. Endometrium was categorized as partly suppressed in 9 to 30% following the use of the ZK-IUSs whereas suppressed endometrium was seen in 67% following the use of the LNG-IUS. Morphological signs of estrogen effect were evident in 60-82% vs. 11% of the endometria following the use ZK-IUSs vs. LNG-IUS, respectively (p<0.05). However, IHC for Ki67 or PH3 demonstrated negligible proliferative activity in endometria exposed to either ZK-or LNG-IUS. The use of ZK-IUS resulted in high level of PR expression in the endometrial surface epithelium and stroma. PR was not detectable in surface epithelium, and expressed only at low levels in the stroma following the use of LNG-IUS. Expression of ERs did not differ between the two groups. IGFBP-1 was detectable in 89% of endometria exposed to LNG whereas it was absent in all specimens exposed to ZK230211. Conclusions: Intrauterine release of PA ZK230211 is feasible. Expression of the proliferation markers Ki67 and PH3 was negligible following the use of both ZK-or LNG-IUS. Lack of decidualization marker IGFBP-1 and high level of PR immunostaining following the use of ZK-IUS refl ect the PA effects of ZK230211. Clinical utility of the ZK-IUS warrants further evaluation. Indications for hysterectomy included bleeding as well as prolapse, ovarian pathology, pain, and endometriosis. Review of specimens from 53 subjects undergoing hysterectomy between January 2004 to December 2005 revealed the pathologic fi ndings noted in Table  1 . Adenomyosis and fi broids correlated with larger uterine weights. Among three patients who had a hysterectomy for endometrial adenocarcinoma, two had benign fi ndings on endometrial biopsy prior to ablation and one had "quantity not suffi cient for diagnosis" on biopsy prior to ablation. Global endometrial ablation devices like ThermaChoice and Novasure are quick, safe, cost-effective, and transitioning to an offi ce-based procedure. As patients increasingly request endometrial ablation in lieu of hysterectomy, preoperative imaging remains an important step to exclude large myomata or polyps, which may be better treated with hysteroscopic resection or hysterectomy. Our fi ndings suggest a preoperative sonohysterogram or MRI may help predict ablation failure by ruling out adenomyosis or submucous fi broids. To our knowledge, this is the largest study of hysterectomies after endometrial ablation. Pathologic characterization of uterine specimens will continue for all hysterectomy cases from 2000-2005. Our fi ndings underscore the importance of obtaining a repeat endometrial biopsy when symptomatic uterine bleeding recurs after endometrial ablation. Finally, in patients with prolapse or endometriosis, permanent relief offered by defi nitive management with hysterectomy may be superior to an endometrial ablation. Previously, we have demonstrated that N-9 induced apoptosis in a human endometrial explant model. The present study was designed to evaluate the effect of in vivo vaginal application of N-9 to human endometrium. Twenty-fi ve regularly-menstruating women were randomized to receive 1 or 3 applications of N-9 in the proliferative (D9) or secretory (D22) phase of the menstrual cycle. Endometrial biopsies were obtained before and after the N-9 treatment. Apoptosis was determined by TUNEL and cleaved caspase-3 immunostaining. Endometrial proliferation rate and mucin content was assessed immunohistochemically with Ki-67 and MUC-1, respectively. Expression of apoptosis-related genes, Bcl-2, Bax, Fas receptor (Fas) and Fas ligand (Fas L) was quantifi ed using real-time PCR. Results: N-9 exposure led to a signifi cant increase of TUNEL-positive cells in human endometrium relative to pre-N-9 endometrium (n=24). A similar trend was noted in both D9 (n=11) and D22 (n=13) groups. The cleaved Cas-3-positive cells were also increased signifi cantly after one application of N-9 in D9 group. Ki-67-possitive cells in endometrial stroma was signifi cantly reduced after N-9 exposure. A consistent low expression of Ki-67-positive cells was noted in the stroma of each group studied. No such signifi cant changes of MUC-1 expression were detected in human endometrium after N-9 exposure. Real-time PCR analysis (n=12) revealed that all 12 women analyzed show a similar trend of increased Bax expression after N-9 exposure while 8, 6 and 9 out of 12 women showed increased Bcl-2, Fas and FasL expression, respectively. These data suggested that vaginal N-9 could induce endometrial apoptosis implicating the upper reproductive tract as a portal of entry for HIV infection. We suggest that the upper reproductive tract should be tested when developing future contraceptive microbicides. Objectives: HOXA10 is a transcription factor that is expressed in human endometrium. The expression of HOXA10 is essential for adult endometrial receptivity to achieve blastocyst implantation. HOXA10 expression is regulated by sex steroid hormones and markedly increases during the midsecretory phase, corresponding to the time of implantation. Altered expression of HOXA10 has been associated with decreased implantation rates in women. Here we characterized human endometrial HOXA10 expression in patients using copper intrauterine devices (IUD). Methods: Immunohistochemical analysis was used to determine endometrial HOXA10 expression. At the time of IUD removal, endometrial tissue samples were obtained from 17 women who were using copper containing Paraguard T380A. Control endometrial biopsy samples were collected from 10 normal cycling women who were matched for menstrual cycle stage, and who were not using an IUD or hormonal contraceptive method. Immunohistochemistry was performed using a polyclonal antibody to identify HOXA10 expression in human endometrial tissue. Analysis of HOXA10 expression was quantifi ed using the H score method and Mann-Whitney Rank Sum Test. Results: Endometrial HOXA10 expression, which is localized to the nucleus, was markedly decreased in women using IUD contraceptives when compared to the control group. The mean H score for endometrial stromal expression of HOXA10 in women using Paraguard IUD was 0.52 compared to 2.7 in the control endometrial biopsies (p=0.04). The glandular expression of HOXA10 was absent in the endometrium exposed to the IUD. Conclusions: Decreased endometrial HOXA10 expression is apparent in women who use a copper IUD. The expression of HOXA10 is essential for endometrial receptivity. A novel mechanism of Copper IUD action is by regulation of genes required for endometrial receptivity. The dramatic decrease of endometrial HOXA10 in response to IUD usage may contribute to the enhancement of contraceptive effectiveness. Vaginal swabs to assess bleeding were performed daily for 6 cycles. In the 3 rd cycle, animals that displayed BTB (n=4) were treated with mifepristone (1 mg/kg/day) for 3 days. Uteri were collected at the end of the 6 th cycle. Results: In all animals, the LNG-IUS decidualized the endometrium and prevented cyclic menstruation. In the four mifepristone treated animals, irregular BTB occurred at a rate of 9.8+2.4 bleeding days/ cycle before treatment and a rate of 0.31+0.11 bleeding days /cycle after treatment (P<0.05). Mifepristone initially triggered 3-4 days of typical menstruation, followed by a mean interval of 62+19 bleeding-free days after which BTB resumed. Immunocytochemistry showed that typical markers of decidualization (TIMP-3, IGF-BP) were induced by the LNG-IUS in the macaque endometrium. Conclusions: In rhesus macaques, as in women, insertion of an LNG-IUS decidualized the endometrium, suppressed cyclic menstruation and induced BTB in 1/3 of the individuals. In the latter, short term treatment with mifepristone suppressed BTB for over 2 months. How this brief treatment induced such sustained effects remains to be clarifi ed, but the data suggest that intermittent, low dose therapy with progesterone receptor antagonists can suppress BTB induced by the LNG-IUS. Supported by HD 43209 and RR 00163. To assess women's preferences for mode of delivery in case of breech presentation at term, and their judgement of the neonatal short-and long-term risks as well as the maternal risks. Design: Trade-off interviews. Setting: Three hospitals and a midwifes clinic in The Netherlands. Population: 40 women with a fetus in breech presentation (breech group) and 40 women with a fetus in cephalic presentation (cephalic group) with a gestational age from 36 weeks onwards. Methods: We offered pregnant women scenarios of vaginal and caesarean breech delivery in which one-month and two-year neonatal and maternal complication rates were varied. The baseline differences for poor outcome were set at 3% lower short-term neonatal complication rate after a cesarean delivery, no difference in neonatal complication rate after two years and a 1% higher maternal complication rate after a cesarean delivery. The impact of the complication rates on women's preferences was visualised graphically in trade-off curves. Differences in trade-off curves were tested using the Wilcoxon signed ranks test. Main outcome measures: Preference for vaginal or caesarean delivery; tradeoff between maternal and neonatal complication rates. Results: Caesarean delivery was the preferred mode of delivery for 66% of the women. The one-month neonatal complication rate had to be varied between -5% and +8% until a substantial number of women changed their preference, whereas this window was only -2% to +2% for the two-year neonatal complication rate (P= .01). The impact of the maternal complication rate on the preferred mode of delivery was limited. The preferred mode of delivery in women with a fetus in breech position at term is mainly dependent on the neonatal condition at two years of age. Objective: To determine if uterine contraction events, plotted using uterine electromyography (EMG) data, correlate with tocodynamometer (TOCO)plotted contraction events. Materials and Methods: 323 contraction vs. nocontraction events were observed from ten term-pregnant women. Uterine EMG was measured non-invasively from the abdominal surface of each patient for 30 minutes. TOCO was used simultaneously to measure uterine contractions. The spectral-temporal-mapping (STM) and root-mean-square (RMS) methods were applied to the uterine EMG data to generate contraction curves similar to TOCO "bell-shaped" curves. For each patient, begin and end-points of uterine electrical "bursts" and uterine contractions were determined. Correspondence between raw EMG bursts and contractions plotted by various methods was established by looking for temporal overlap. Bursts/contractions were assigned "1" and non-events (no activity in the period examined) "0." Kappa inter-rater statistic was calculated to fi nd a measure of agreement between raw EMG and contraction-plotting methods. Correlation analysis was performed between raw EMG, TOCO, RMS and STM plots using the Pearson-product-moment test. W"",n', ,refe'mc" hr a cOOs"" r de l~ery :CD) relatv. to ~ "gnal del~",y (VO) hade-ofl <",,""s for n"m,taland ",ternal oo tcones orrbined ir one 9roph Th, dott3d hori,o nl allires "pres,nt th e '0111 where 00'" prefers . (aesa"",n and ,agin.1 delv",) ,refe'mc" OBJECTIVE: Numerous studies have demonstrated an infl ux of leukocytes into the cervix during active labor. The role of immune cells in cervical ripening prior to labor, however, is not clear. The objective of this study was to determine if immune cell traffi cking occurs in the human cervix during cervical ripening prior to labor. METHODS: Full thickness cervical sections were obtained near the internal cervical os from 28 puerperal hysterectomies conducted from 1999 -2006 (early pregnant, n = 4; third trimester before ripening, n = 9; term with cervical ripening, n = 7; term in labor, n = 8). Status of cervical ripening was determined by modifi ed Bishop scoring. Sections were stained for collagen using Trichrome stain. Infl ammatory cells were identifi ed by immunohistochemistry with antibodies to CD68 for macrophages and CD45 for leukocytes. One examiner blinded to clinical status counted the number of stained cells in ten randomly selected high power fi elds (hpf) of the subepithelium and deep stroma. RESULTS: Remodeling of the extracellular matrix during cervical ripening was associated with disorganization and loosening of collagen. Leukocytes in cervical stroma were similar in tissues obtained in early gestation (164 ± 71 /10hpf) or at term before cervical ripening (139 ± 26 /10hpf). Interestingly, although the number of intravascular and subepithelial leukocytes increased dramatically in cervical tissues in labor, the number of leukoctyes during cervical ripening was not signifi cantly different from early gestation or late pregnancy (128 ± 45 /10hpf). In contrast, during cervical ripening at term prior to labor, macrophages were increased 4-fold in cervical stroma (from 14 ± 9 to 61 ± 11 /10hpf, P ≤ 0.01) and 7-fold in the subepithelium (from 40 ± 21 to 267 ± 65 /10hpf, P = 0.003) and these levels were maintained in the dilated laboring cervix. CONCLUSIONS: Results from this study indicate that ECM remodeling of the cervix prior to uterine contractions of labor is associated with increased numbers of macrophages, but not leukocytes, in cervical stroma and subepithelium. In contrast, cervical dilation/labor is associated with leukocyte recruitment and extravasation. We suggest that remodeling of the cervix prior to and during labor involves unique processes of immune cell traffi cking and activation. Objective: Given the relatively poor sensitivity of fetal fi bronectin screening, we sought to determine if screening cervicovaginal fl uid samples for infl ammatory proteins that induce fetal membrane degradation could identify women at risk for spontaneous preterm delivery. Methods: Cervicovaginal fl uid was collected from women who presented to our obstetrical triage unit with uterine contractions between 20 and 32 weeks gestation. Women were excluded if their cervix was greater than 2 cm dilated, vaginal bleeding was present, or the fetal membranes were ruptured. Obstetrical outcomes were determined by chart review. MMP-8 and IL-6 levels were determined in each sample by ELISA, and MMP-8 and IL-6 levels were normalized to total protein levels (Pierce protein assay) in each sample. We estimated that we needed to enroll at least 150 women into our cohort to identify a 2.5 fold increased risk of preterm delivery in women with elevated MMP-8 or IL-6 levels (power = 0.80, alpha = 0.05). Results: 156 women were enrolled, and 31 delivered before 37 weeks gestation (15 before 34 weeks). MMP-8 and IL-6 levels (normalized to total protein levels) were similar between women who delivered at term and women who delivered preterm. Using threshold values based on ROC curve analyses, elevated MMP-8 levels (greater than 0.5 ng/mg total protein) or IL-6 levels (greater than 1.5 pg/mg total protein) did not identify women at increased risk of spontaneous preterm delivery at less than 37 or 34 weeks (all P values were greater than 0.4). Conclusions: MMP-8 and IL-6 levels in cervicovaginal fl uid samples are not associated with the risk of spontaneous preterm delivery in women with preterm contractions. The utility of rapid MMP-8 assays to predict preterm delivery may be dependent upon increased levels of total protein in cervicovaginal fl uid, but our results indicate that MMP-8 is not expressed disproportionately in cervicovaginal fl uid compared to other proteins preceding spontaneous preterm delivery. Because preterm labor and delivery is multifactorial and the infl ammatory response is not the only pathway leading to preterm delivery, our hypothesis that MMP-8 and IL-6 screening might be superior to fetal fi bronection for predicting spontaneous preterm delivery was proven false.  The outcome of our study shows that start of induction of labor with intravenous oxytocin round the clock is a safe procedure in terms of neonatal and maternal outcomes. To time birth during offi ce hours one should start induction of labor of multiparous women in the morning. More than 50% of the primiparae delivers after 7:43 a.m. when induction starts in the evening. .08); 4) There was a signifi cantly weaker correlation of WBC count and IAI in "bloody" (r=0.257, p=0.08) vs. "non-bloody" samples (r=0.551, p<0.001, z statistic 2.1, p=0.03); 5) All WBC cut-offs had signifi cantly lower accuracies in diagnosing IAI in "bloody" compared to a "non-bloody" samples (Table) , which did not improve after correction for either maternal and/or neonatal hematological indices; 6) Of all rapid laboratory tests, Gram stain had the highest accuracy to predict IAI (82%) in a "bloody" sample. Conclusion: In the context of an AF sample contaminated with >1000 RBCs/mm 3 , an elevated WBC count is not an accurate indicator of a positive culture result, and thus should be interpreted with caution in the absence of a positive Gram stain. (152) was asked to answer a post delivery questionnaire using a 10-cm visual analogue related to labour experience to evaluate the infl uence of food intake during childbirth on the level of maternal satisfaction towards labour. The primary outcome was the spontaneous vaginal delivery rate (SVD). Duration of labour, instrumental delivery rate, caesarean section rate, augmentation of labour, incidence of vomiting, Apgar scores and need for admission to SCBU/NICU were also evaluated. Recently progesterone therapy has been shown to markedly reduce preterm birth in women at high risk due to a previous preterm birth. Unfortunately there are no accurate predictors for women in their fi rst pregnancy. We have previously shown that maternal plasma Corticotrophin Releasing Hormone (CRH) can predict preterm birth but with a relatively low sensitivity and specifi city. We hypothesised that the endocrine pathways leading to uterine activation may respond to rate of change of endocrine signals rather than absolute levels and that rate of change of plasma CRH and other variables may predict preterm birth more effectively than absolute levels. Methods: Four hundred unselected women were prospectively followed to delivery with serial maternal blood samples taken at 4 weekly intervals. Samples were assayed for plasma CRH, human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) and other variables. Curves were fi tted to time course data for each individual and each variable. Data at 26 weeks were then generated from the fi tted functions. An exponential and a quadratic curve were used to model log transformed CRH and FRIDAY hCG respectively for 27 preterm and 364 singleton term pregnancies. Multiple logistic regression was performed to test the relationship between changes in the variables and the outcome of interest: preterm birth. Results •At 26 weeks multivariate analysis revealed that a combination of Rate log CRH, log CRH and timing of HCG minimum with a probability cutoff of 0.18 produced a sensitivity of 40.74% and a specifi city of 95.08% and correctly classifi ed 91.35% of patients. Conclusions. Like other endocrine systems it seems that gestational tissues respond to dynamic changes in regulatory processes rather than absolute concentrations. This can be exploited to more accurately predict events such as preterm birth. More accurate identifi cation of obstetric risk may allow early intervention with preventative therapies such as progesterone supplementation. Objective: The pathophysiology of premature rupture of the membranes (PROM) is despite recent progress still poorly understood. While infections seem to contribute to the problem, additional factors must be involved. In the present study, we have analyzed the expression of positive and negative modulators for matrix degradation and correlated the findings with histomechanical properties of the membranes as examined by a newly developed machinery called electronic cell drum. Methods: Matrix protease or protease inhibitor molecules have been analyzed on mRNA (heteroduplex RT-PCR) and protein levels (Western blotting). Amnion and chorion have been investigated separately also with regard to their mechanical properties in an electronic laser chamber, generating, e.g., pressure-tension curves. A pressure-resistance mapping of the full chorioamnion has been performed. Results: There was a statistically highly signifi cant association exclusively of MMP-9 overexpression with PROM. Other protease or protease inhibitor molecules failed to demonstrate such correlation. The mechanical examinations of the membranes showed in response local differences of the physical resistance, the uterine pole being the locus of predilection for rupture. Fetal membranes from early weeks of gestation revealed higher absolute values for mechanical resistance, gradually decreasing towards term. The amnion represents a buffer system after rupture of the weaker chorion. Microfi ssures in the membranes can be generated through mimicking premature labor in vitro. Conclusion: Our data support a key role for MMP-9 during PROM and show mechanical differences of the chorioamnion resistance according to embryonic origin of the membrane component, the gestational week and the local part of the membrane in its orientation. The newly developed machinery proves to be a powerful instrument to test membrane rupture and infl uencing parameters separately in vitro. Methods: This study included AA (n=166) and Hispanic (n=93) patients with PTL in the following groups:1) Term delivery after PTL (n=109); 2) PTD without intra-amniotic infection/infl ammation (IAI) (n=109); and 3) PTD with IAI (n=41). Intra-amniotic infection and infl ammation were defi ned as positive AF cultures for microorganisms and an AF WBC ≥100 cells/ml. Maternal plasma concentrations of IL-1β, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12p70, IL-13, IFN-γ, GM-CSF, and TNF-α were determined with high sensitivity multiplex assays. Results: 1) In patients with PTD without IAI, AA women had a higher median plasma concentration of IL-6 (p=0.005), IL-8 (p=0.03), IL-13 (p=0.002) and GM-CSF (p<0.001) than those of Hispanic origin; 2) In women who delivered at term, AA patients had a lower plasma concentration of IL-10 (p<0.001) than those of Hispanic origin. AA patients in this group had a higher median plasma concentration of IL-2 (p=0.03), IL-4 (p=0.02), IL-5 (p=0.04), IL-12p70 (p=0.01), and IL-13 (p=0.02). 3) In patients with PTD and IAI, there were no signifi cant differences in the maternal plasma concentration of these cytokines between AA and Hispanic patients. Conclusions: Differences in the maternal systemic infl ammatory response to insults other than IAI may contribute to the disparities in PTL and PTD between women of AA and those of Hispanic origin. Objective: Preterm labor (PTL) has been associated with increased thrombin generation. Human decidua is a rich source of tissue factor (TF) and a disorder of decidual hemostasis has been proposed as a cause of premature labor and delivery. The aim of this study was to determine whether PTL is associated with changes in maternal plasma concentrations of TF and tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI). We studied thrombin activatable fi brinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) because this protein plays a role in coagulation, regulation of infl ammation and tissue repair. Methods: A cross-sectional study included the following groups: 1) PTL (n=138); 2) normal pregnancy (NP) (n=71). The PTL group was divided into: 1) patients with PTL without intraamniotic infection or infl ammation (IAI) who delivered preterm (n=54); 2) women with PTL and IAI who delivered preterm (n=35); 3) women with PTL who delivered at term (n=49). Plasma concentrations of TF, TFPI and TAFI were measured by ELISA. Results: 1) Maternal plasma concentrations of TF were not changed in PTL even in the presence of IAI; 2) in contrast, women with PTL had a signifi cantly lower median TFPI maternal plasma concentration than women with NP; 3) women with PTL had a signifi cantly lower median concentration of TAFI than NP women (Table) . Conclusion: 1) The maternal plasma concentration of TF is not changed in PTL, regardless of the presence or absence of IAI; 2) In contrast, the concentrations of TFPI were decreased; 3) Similarly, the maternal plasma concentrations of TAFI were signifi cantly decreased. The Preterm Prediction Study: Fetal Gender and Prematurity. Edward K Chien. * For the NICHD MFMU Network, Bethesda, MD. Objective: Fetal male gender has been reported as a risk factor for preterm birth in singleton and twin gestations. The biological basis is unclear although androgens may play a role. Androgens can induce cervical ripening, and the 5α-reductase and apolipoprotein E knockout mice have defects in androgen metabolism associated with failed cervical remodeling and parturition. Our objective was to determine if fetal gender was associated with spontaneous preterm birth using data from an observational cohort study of preterm birth prediction. Methods: Between 1992 and 1994, a prospective observational study was performed to evaluate the risk factors associated with spontaneous preterm birth at 10 university centers. This secondary analysis was performed on the entire data set. The effect of gender on gestational age at birth (categorized into ≥ 37, 32 to 36-6/7, < 32 wks) was determined using univariate and multivariate analyses (logistic regression adjusted for maternal age, maternal race, parity and smoking). OBJECTIVE: Conventional wisdom holds that the pathophysiology of preterm birth in twin gestation is excess myometrial stretch. We postulate that in twin pregancy a thin myometrium predicts women destined to deliver preterm versus those who ultimately deliver at term. The purpose of this study was to to predict preterm birth in twin gestations, by evaluating longitudinally the in vivo changes in myometrial thickness (MT), a potential marker of stretch. STUDY DESIGN: Abdominal ultrasound was performed prospectively in 93 women pregnant with twins. The myometrium was defi ned sonographically as the echo homogeneous layer between the serosa and the decidua. MT was measured by standardized protocol, at the lower uterine segment (LUS), anterior, and fundal uterine walls. Measurements were obtained during each trimester (fi rst <14 weeks, second 14-28 weeks, third ≥28 weeks). Preterm delivery was defi ned as < 35 weeks' gestation. RESULTS: 39 women delivered preterm (median [range], GA: 31 1/7 weeks [20 0/7 -34 6/7]). 54 women had uncomplicated pregnancies and delivered at term (GA: 36 5/7 weeks [35 0/7 to 39 5/7]) (Mann-Whitney Rank Sum, p<0.001). There was a statistically signifi cant difference in MT in the different uterine sites with advancing gestation (p<0.001, 3-way ANOVA). There was signifi cant thinning in the LUS with advancing gestation, with the third trimester LUS being the thinnest site in both term and preterm cohorts (p<0.05). Comparison of term and preterm cohorts did not reveal signifi cant differences in MT thickness at the LUS (p=0.845). CONCLUSION: Twin pregnancy is characterized by thinning of the LUS during gestation in both women who deliver at term and those who deliver preterm. LUS thickness cannot discriminate between the two groups. 1-8 2003) . The mechanism via which intrauterine hypoxia affects fetal lung growth and development remains unknown. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) exert their effects by signalling to target genes involved in arresting the cell cycle and, hence, act to reduce cell proliferation and tissue growth (Zhang et al. Am J Physiol 285: L740-L754, 2003) . This study tested the hypothesis that alterations in BMP signalling contribute to the mechanisms affecting fetal lung growth and development in pregnancies complicated by reduced fetal oxygenation. The hypothesis was tested by investigating, at the end of gestation, the effects on fetal pulmonary expression of key BMP signalling proteins of hypoxic pregnancy in rats. Methods: On day 6 of pregnancy, Wistar rats were randomised into 2 groups: maternal normoxia (n=9) and maternal hypoxia (13% O 2 from day 6-20 of gestation; term 21 days, n=8). Food and water intake was monitored daily. On day 20, dams were anaesthetised, the lung of two male fetuses within any one litter were isolated, weighed and frozen for analysis. Total RNA was extracted from 8 homogenised lungs from each group and RT-PCR was performed on various components of the BMP signalling pathway. Results: In the fetal lung, hypoxia caused a general increase in the protein expression of several key markers of BMP signalling, only reaching signifi cance in the expression of Smad 7 (Fig. 1) . Hypoxia had no effect on maternal food and water intake or on fetal lung weight. In complicated pregnancy, fetal hypoxia as well as undernutrition is an important trigger for the developmental programming of disease. Observations in human infants at high altitude and experimental studies in rat and chick embryos show that early development under hypobaric or isobaric hypoxic condtions, results in fetal growth restriction and induces an increase in aortic wall thickness (Giussani, 2006. In: Developmental Origins of Health and Disease. Ed. Gluckman and Hanson, CUP. pp178-190) . However, the mechanism mediating these effects remain unknown, preventing the identifcation of plausible clinical intervention. We hypothesize that oxidative stress in the fetal cardiovascular system underlies the molecular basis via which prenatal hypoxia contibutes to an early origin of heart disease. If true, treatment with antioxidants of pregnancies complicated by fetal hypoxia may prevent the early origin of heart disease. In this study we investigated whether incubation of chick embryos at high altitude is associated with an increase in cardiac oxidative stress. Methods: Fertilized leghorn chicken eggs native to the low or highlands of Bolivia were incubated (60% humidity, 38C) at sea level (Santa Cruz, 400 m) or high altitude (La Paz, 4000 m) to yield 4 groups: sea level eggs incubated at sea level (SLSL) or high altitude (SLHA) and high altitude eggs incubated at high altitude (HAHA) or sea level (HASL). One day prior to hatching, the embryos were removed from the shell and the hearts were isolated, fi xed and sectioned. Slices were stained for computerized morphometry and immunolabelled with nitrotyrosine, as a footprint for peroxinitrite generation. Results: Embryos incubated at altitude showed an increase in the wall thickness and in the expression of nitrotyrosine in the left ventricle relative to sea level embryos (SLSL=939+30; SLHA=1268+54; HAHA=1374+49; HASL=1158+105, wall width as a % of heart weight and Figure 1 ; all P<0.05, ANOVA with Tukey test). The mechanisms underlying an early origin of cardiovascular disease in complicated pregnancy remain unknown, preventing the identifi cation of targets for clinical intervention. We show in rat pregnancy that developmental hypoxia can trigger a prenatal origin of cardiovascular disease, secondary to oxidative stress. Antioxidants may thus offer plausible therapy against early origins of heart disease in pregnancy complicated by developmental hypoxia. Methods: Group 1 (control pregnancies, 21% O2, 7 litters), Group 2 (chronic isobaric hypoxia, 13% O2 day 6-20 of gestation; term 21 d, 8 litters). Group 3 (chronic hypoxia with vitamin C in the maternal drinking water, 500 mg/ 100ml/day day 6-20 of gestation; 6 litters). Food and water consumption was monitored. On day 20 dams were anaesthetised, pups weighed and measured, and haematocrit noted. The fetal heart and descending aorta were fi xed or frozen. No more than two pups of the same sex within any one litter were investigated. Hearts were analysed by Western blotting for HSP70, a marker of oxidative stress 1 . Aortic wall : lumen area ratio was calculated and vessels were immnunolabelled with nitrotyrosine, as a footprint of peroxynitrite generation 1 . Results: Maternal food or water intake was not affected. Hypoxic pups with (40+1%, n=6) and without (41+1%, n=8) vit C had a higher haematocrit than normoxic pups (34+1%, n=7; P<0.05). Relative to normoxic pups (n=64), hypoxic pups (n=68) had a reduced ponderal index (PI; 6.9+0.9 vs. 7.8+1.4; values x 100000), increased head diameter : body weight ratio (HD/BW, 2.6+0.03 vs. 2.4+0.03), enhanced cardiac HSP70 (Fig. 1A) , and aortic thickening with greater nitrotyrosine (Fig. 1B) . Treatment with vit C prevented the effects of hypoxia during pregnancy (PI = 7.8+1.1; HD/BW =2.3+0.02 (n=67) and Figure 1 ; all P<0.05). Conclusions: Developmental hypoxia and oxidative stress can trigger a fetal origin of cardiovascular disease. OBJECTIVE: Decelerations and accelerations in fetal heart rate (FHR), observed during experimentally-induced asphyxia, are considered indicators of chemoreceptor response and myocardial stability. We have previously shown that 5 days chronic hypoxemia produces hypertension and fetal bradycardia. Following umbilical cord occlusion (UCO), hypoxic fetuses exhibited a more pronounced bradycardia and hypotension. AIM: In the present study we evaluated the characteristics of the FHR pattern in response to UCO; 1) the initial decelerations and 2) the accelerations (overshoot) after release of umbilical cord. METHODS: At 125±1 days fetuses were submitted to 5 d of hypoxemia (75% of baseline arterial blood PO 2 ). After 5 d of hypoxia four 5-min UCO with 30 min recovery in between were performed in control (n=5) and hypoxic animals (n=5). The slope of the deceleration and the time to the minimum FHR during the fi rst minute of each UCO were calculated. The FHR acceleration after occlusion was calculated as the difference between baseline and FHR maxima during the fi rst min after releasing the occluder. Data are shown as mean±SEM and were analyzed by two way ANOVA. RESULTS: A profound bradycardia was observed in all UCO. During the 4 different UCO, the slope of the initial bradycardia was signifi cantly steeper in the hypoxic fetuses (hypoxic 10.8±1 bpm/sec vs control 5.7±0.5 bpm/sec; P<0.05, Figure1A) therefore the time to reach this minimum was shorter (P<0.05). A FHR overshoot was observed in all 4 UCO in both groups. The magnitude of the overshoot decreased with each subsequent occlusion, with the decrease being more marked in the hypoxic fetuses revealed as a signifi cant treatment effect (# P<0.05, Figure 1B) . CONCLUSIONS: Chronic mild hypoxemia in near-term fetal sheep increases chemorefl ex responses to a subsequent acute hypoxic insult. With repeated 5min complete occlusions the fetal heart became less responsive to β adrenergic stimulation after insult. Funded by NIH HD37885. 35:595, 1992) . However, the mechanisms underlying this association remain unknown, preventing clinical intervention. We tested two inter-related hypotheses that : 1) developmental hypoxia contributes to an early origin of metabolic disease; and 2) oxidative stress underlies the molecular basis via which this association occurs. The hypotheses were tested by investigating the effects of hypoxic pregnancy with and without maternal antioxidant treatment in rats on fetal hepatic expression of key insulin signalling proteins. Methods: On day 6 of pregnancy, Wistar rats were randomised to three treatments: Normoxia (21% O2, 7 litters), Hypoxia (14% O2, 8 litters) and Hypoxia + Antioxidant (14% O2+ 500mg/100 ml/d vitamin C in the drinking water, 6 litters). Water and food intake were monitored daily. On day 20, dams were anaesthetised, the pups removed and the fetal liver isolated, weighed and frozen. Only livers from two male pups from any one litter were investigated. Frozen livers from 8 male pups per group were then randomly selected, their protein extracted and analysed by Western blotting for the expression of insulin receptor beta-subunit (IRb), p85alpha and PKCzeta. Results: Maternal food or water intake was not affected. Fetal livers from hypoxic pregnancies showed signifi cant upregulation of IRbeta and PKCzeta, but not p85alpha, relative to fetal livers from normoxic pregnancies. Vitamin C prevented these effects (Fig.1) . Conclusions: Increased expression of hepatic insulin receptors and PKCz in this model of adverse intrauterine conditions may provide a mechanism by which developmental hypoxia leads to increased risk of type 2 diabetes in the offspring. Antioxidant therapy in pregnancies complicated with reduced oxygen delivery to the unborn child, such as during placental insuffi ciency, may prevent an early origin of metabolic disease. Supported by The Lister Institute and The British Heart Foundation. Hypothesis. Pulmonary arteries from newborn sheep whose gestation took place totally or partially in chronic hypoxia have a decreased response to NOinduced relaxation and this effect is related to the stage of fetal development at which the hypoxia started. Methods. Utilizing wire myography we studied the contractile response to KCl and vasodilator action of SNP in pulmonary arteries from 5 newborn sheep in which total (HAHA) and 5 partial (70% of gestation, LAHA) gestation took place at 3,600m above sea level. These responses were compared with a control group from sea level (n=5 A crucial adaptation in the transition from fetus to newborn is the decrease in pulmonary arterial pressure and vascular resistance. Pulmonary hypertension is a frequent observation in adult mammals of lowland species at high altitude. However, little is known regarding the pulmonary circulation in newborn sheep whose gestation partly took place at high altitude. Hypothesis: We hypothesize that partial gestation at high altitudes causes pulmonary arterial hypertension in the newborn sheep (NB), and that this condition is also observed once the lambs are brought to sea level. Methods: Under ketamine anesthesia (15 mg/kg im) 14 NB, whose gestation and birth occurred in lowland (LALALA, Lluta, 50m), and 4 NB, with 70% gestation and birth in highland (LAHALA, Putre, 3,600m) were instrumented with femoral artery and vein catheters and a Swan-Ganz catheter in the pulmonary artery. All procedures and studies were performed at sea level. The studies commenced at least 3 days after surgery, between 8-12 days of age. All experiments were based on a 3h protocol divided into three periods: 1h of normoxemia, 1h of hypoxemia and 1h of recovery. We measured blood gases, pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP), cardiac output (CO), and calculated pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR). Results: In LAHALA neonates, PAP and CO were higher than controls, basally and during hypoxia and recovery. Conclusions: Partial gestation in chronic hypoxia is enough to increase the PAP. These increases may be linked to vascular remodeling in the pulmonary artery and a predominance of vasoconstrictors over the vasodilators agents in the pulmonary circulation. Studies are in progress to investigate these possibilities. Objective. Perinatal asphyxia is a primary determinant of neurological morbidity and mortality in human fetuses that can occur even during unremarkable pregnancies. Resulting encephalopathies often cause adverse effects on neurological development and behavior persisting into adulthood. In the present study, we exposed fetal rats to controlled levels of birth asphyxia and analyzed postnatal neurochemical changes in the striatum and hippocampus. Methods. Gestational day 22 pregnant rat dams were administered spinal anesthesia and the uterus externalized into a heated (37.5° C) saline bath. The blood supply feeding one uterine horn was occluded for 12min (birth asphyxia condition) while the other uterine horn remained undisturbed (control condition). Fetuses were delivered by cesarean section then cross-fostered to newly parturient dams. High resolution in vivo proton MR spectra were acquired beginning on postnatal day 7 using a 7T small animal MRI scanner. Single-voxel MRS imaging was carried out by applying the point-resolved spectroscopy (PRESS) sequence, and positioning of MRS voxels were based on T2-weighted images. Results. As early as Postnatal day 7, we accurately detected from the MR spectra metabolites associated with neuronal density, integrity, and function, including choline-containing compounds (Cho), Nacetyl aspartate (NAA), glutamate and glutamine (Glx), taurine (tau), and myo-inositol (mI). Each neurometabolite, derived from spectral analysis, was compared as a ratio (corrected for creatine + phosphocreatine [Cr + pCR]). We observed a signifi cant increase in NAA in perinatally asphyxiated, as compared to non-asphyxiated control rats. Conclusion. In vivo MRS is a sensitive imaging tool for detecting major neurochemical changes in early life, and can be used as a non-invasive method to study neurodevelopment in relation to birth asphyxia. EPO, in addition to its erythropoietic function, has neuroprotective properties in the brain. The S100B protein is highly concentrated in the brain and has been used as a serum marker of brain damage in adults. Amniotic fl uid (AF) S100B concentrations have been reported to increase in cases with fetal asphyxia or adverse neonatal outcome. However, the importance of AF S100B as a marker of neonatal brain damage has been questioned. Our aim was to study possible associations between AF S100B levels and chronic fetal hypoxia as indicated by increased AF EPO in pregnancies complicated by insulin-treated diabetes (n=22) or hypertension (n=6). Methods: AF samples for EPO and S100B protein measurements were obtained in 28 high-risk pregnant women, in which amniocenteses were done for fetal lung maturity assessment. AF EPO and S100B protein concentrations were measured by immunoassays (Immulite EPO, Diagnostic Products, Los Angeles, CA and Elecsys S100, Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany, respectively). The median (range) of AF EPO levels in 19 healthy controls was 6.3 (1.7-13.7) mU/ml. AF EPO levels >50.0 mU/ml (>8 x median of controls) were considered to indicate chronic fetal hypoxia. Results: AF EPO levels >50.0 mU/ml were found in 9 (32%) high-risk pregnancies. AF S100B protein concentration correlated positively with simultaneously obtained AF EPO levels (r=0.55, p=0.003) and negatively with birth weight z-score (r= -0.49, p=0.008) and placental weight (r= -0.44, p<0.02), but not with umbilical artery pH, pO 2, BE, hemoglobin or Apgar scores at birth. The positive correlation of AF S100B protein with AF EPO is a new observation and suggests that high AF S100B protein levels are associated with perinatal complications. Whether increased S100B levels result from perinatal brain damage secondary to chronic hypoxia or from the placenta or other sources needs further elucidation. Objective: Fetal asphyxia-mediated metabolic acidosis results decreases pH and increases BD and lactate. The relation between fetal lactate and BD is controversial with some studies suggesting production of metabolic acids other than lactate. We sought to determine the relation between fetal BD and plasma lactate in response to UCO. Methods: Ovine fetuses (N=6, 129±2 d) were chronically prepared with fetal brachial artery catheters and an infl atable umbilical cord occluder. Following a minimum 3 d recovery from surgery, fetuses underwent a series of mild (45s duration-5min apart), moderate (1min-3min apart) and severe (1min-2min apart) hourly series of UCO. Fetal arterial blood samples were drawn at baseline, at the end of the 1 st and last UCO of a series, and at 20 and 40 min during moderate and severe UCO (1 min after UCO). Whenever the targeted pH<7.0 was detected and sustained, the UCO series were terminated. Results: Repetitive fetal UCO as studied resulted in development of marked acidosis (pH 7.37±0.03 to 6.92±0.08; BD -3.9±1.9 to 16.3±2.7 mmol/l). Fetal plasma lactate was highly correlated with BD (R = 0.925, p<0.001 (Figure) ). At time of maximal acidosis post UCO there was no change from baseline in fetal arterial pO2 (18.3±2.7 to 18.0±2.4 mmHg) although fetal pCO 2 was signifi cantly increased (52.0±2.9 to 72.0±14.4 mmHg). Conclusion: Fetal metabolic acidosis with UCO insults is entirely dependant upon development of lactic acidosis, without signifi cant contribution of other metabolic acids. Despite the greater placental permeability of CO 2 as compared to O 2 , fetal pCO 2 rises following repetitive UCO with the development of severe combined respiratory and metabolic acidosis. These fi ndings suggest 1) measures of lactate may provide optimal assessment of fetal metabolic acidosis status, and 2) mixed metabolic/respiratory acidosis occurring in most cases of severely acidotic fetuses may be a result of impaired placental CO 2 clearance. The cardiovascular response to acute hypoxia has been well documented in the late gestation sheep fetus and is characterized by a fall in heart rate, a rise in blood pressure and an increase in total peripheral resistance. This results in increased blood fl ow to the brain, heart and adrenals and decreased blood fl ow to the periphery. The cardiovascular responses to chronic fetal hypoxia fetal growth restrictions are however, less well characterized. Hypothesis: We hypothesize that there will be a reduction in blood fl ow to the periphery in chronically hypoxic, growth restricted fetuses in late gestation. Methods: Uterine carunclectomy, to reduce placental and hence fetal growth, was performed in 15 non-pregnant sheep 10 wks prior to mating. Vascular surgery was performed at 110-120d GA with catheters implanted in the carotid and femoral artery, jugular vein and amniotic cavity and a Transonic fl ow probe was placed around the femoral artery. At two points in gestation (∼120d and ∼132d GA), blood pressure, heart rate and femoral blood fl ow were recorded for 2-6h (Chart, ADInstruments, Aus). Fetal arterial PO 2 was measured daily to determine if fetuses were normoxic or hypoxic (<17mmHg). Fetuses were split into 3 groups, control normoxic (n=8), PR normoxic (n=5) and PR hypoxic (n=10) and data analyzed using two way ANOVA ( . There was no difference between the three groups in mean arterial pressure, or heart rate but, femoral artery blood fl ow was lower at both gestational ages in PR hypoxic fetuses compared to both normoxic control and normoxic PR fetuses (P=0.01). Femoral artery blood fl ow increased with gestational age in all 3 groups (P=0.01). Femoral artery blood fl ow was directly related to mean gestational PO 2 while femoral artery resistance was inversely related to mean gestational PO 2 . Conclusions: This data supports the hypothesis that there is a redistribution of cardiac output in the chronically hypoxic, growth restricted fetus to support the growth of the brain, heart and adrenal at the expense of the periphery. (1). Unlike the adult heart, the coronary tree in the ovine fetus can remodel permanently during exposure to anemia (2). Endothelin-1 is a powerful vasconstrictor and may play a detrimental role in coronary development. We sought to determine the role of ET-1 in regulating coronary blood fl ow under basal conditions. We hypothesized that ET-1 is important in maintaining fetal coronary resting tone. Methods: Four pregnant ewes were prepared for surgery at 128-130 dGA (term=150 dGA). Fetuses were instrumented with carotid arterial, jugular venous, right and left atrial, coronary sinus and left circumfl ex (coronary) arterial catheters and a left circumfl ex arterial Doppler fl ow probe. Beginning 5 days following surgery, daily coronary dose response experiments were performed. Resting coronary ET-1 tone was determined via antagonism of the type-A and type-B receptors with 10 pg -1 μg/kg/min IV of PD156707 and BQ788, respectively. Additionally, dose responses to intracoronary ET-1 (0.8-7.5 ng/kg/min) with and without PD156707 and BQ788 were performed. Mean hemodynamic values were recorded for 60 s following the fi rst min of each dose. Results: Infusion of each ET-1 antagonist showed a mild increase in coronary fl ow (Fig 1) . ET-1caused vasoconstriction in a dose dependent fashion that was completely blocked by BQ788 and blunted by PD156707 (Fig 2) . Conclusion: ET-1 regulates coronary fl ow under resting conditions. ET-1 is a powerful vasoconstrictor in the fetal coronary tree and is likely to be important under conditions of hemodynamic stress. In a hyperthermic (HT) ovine model of fetal growth restriction (FGR) we hypothesize that ERK and/or AKT will be phosphorylated (activated) in the umbilical and uterine vessels of 130 days gestational age (dGA) animals. STUDY DESIGN: 4 ewes were exposed to HT conditions for 80 days to induce IUGR and 4 were placed in ambient conditions. Doppler measurements were made, and aortic catheters were placed for blood gas analysis and systemic pressure determination. Umbilical vessels and uterine artery were collected for Western blot analysis with antibodies against (p) ERK, ERK, pAKT and AKT. To study and compare the correlations using scaling analysis of the cardiac time intervals (CTI) of low-risk fetuses, fetuses at high risk for growth restriction due to placental insuffi ciency but with normal outcomes, and high risk fetuses with poor neonatal outcomes. A total of 407 fetal Magnetocardiograms (fMCG) were recorded from 99 fetuses between 27-39 weeks gestational age (GA). 265 recordings were collected from 55 high risk mothers with normal outcomes, 16 recordings from 7 high risk mothers who delivered infants with poor-outcomes, and 126 recordings from 37 low risk mothers who delivered healthy infants. After removing the maternal cardiac signals, the CTI were computed from the fMCG. The correlations in CTI were analyzed using Detrended Fluctuation Analysis (DFA) and quantifi ed by the DFA scaling exponent 'alpha'. The difference between the groups was assessed by the student's t-test and the degree of the separation between the groups which showed signifi cant differences was assessed by Receiver Operating Curve (ROC) analysis. There was a positive trend in 'alpha' with gestational age for lowrisk fetuses but no trend for the other groups. There was a signifi cant difference between low-risk and high-risk groups between 27-31 GA which was not found in later GA range. The comparison between the poor-outcome group and the other two groups were made by including all GA because of lower number of fetuses in the poor-outcome group. There was a signifi cant difference in between the low-risk and the poor-outcome group. and a signifi cant difference between of the poor-outcome and high-risk group (with normal outcome). Based on the ROC analysis there was 66% separation between low-risk and high-risk groups (in 27-31 GA), 75 % separation between low-risk and poor-outcome groups and 71% separation between high-risk and poor-outcome groups. The positive correlation between 'alpha' and GA for lowrisk fetuses, can be explained as an indication of functional development of the autonomic nervous system (ANS). The differences between the low-risk and other two groups may be due to the early development of the ANS in the high-risk/normal outcome and high-risk/poor-outcome groups. Umbilical artery Conclusions: While conventional fHRV measures cannot specifi cally assess the impact of reduced sympathetic activity on FHR modulation, nonlinear components of fHRV complexity derived from AIF of fHRV as presented here specifi cally refl ect changes in sympathetic modulation of FHR. They might serve as a useful tool to detect previously unseen changes of sympathetic and vagal activities of ANS in compromised fetuses. (Figure 1 ). UtA fl ow per unit fetal weight (EFW) (ml/ min/kg) was inversely correlated to epoch in cases and controls ( Figure 2) ; 2) UtA fl ow was inversely correlated to UtA PI (R 2 = 0.2855). CONCLUSIONS: 1) UtA fl ow volume (ml/min) was early and persistently reduced in pregnancies with abnormal UtA PI, compared to controls. UtA fl ow per unit EFW (ml/min/kg) was signifi cantly lower in cases with than in controls. 2) UtA fl ow was inversely correlated to UtA PI either in cases and in controls.  Ontogeny of Growth-Related Genes in Ovine Sheep Heart. Seth A Reini, 1 Maureen Keller-Wood. *2 1 Phys and Func Genomics, Univ of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA; 2 Pharmacodynamics, Univ of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. Objective: We have found that increases in maternal cortisol result in increased fetal heart weight and left ventricular (LV) wall thickness, and increased AT2R mRNA relative to AT1R mRNA. This study was designed to investigate the ontogenetic changes in expression of genes implicated in cardiac enlargement in response to cortisol in the ovine fetal heart. Methods: RNA was isolated from hearts of fetal lambs of 80, 100, 120, 130, and 145 days gestation or newborn lambs (n= 4-5). cDNA was synthesized and real-time PCR was performed. Changes in gene expression relative to expression of 18S were analyzed by ANOVA. Results: There was a signifi cant decrease in glucocorticoid receptor (GR) expression during gestation. There was no overall effect of gestational age on mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) mRNA, although both MR and GR mRNAs were greater at 80d than at 130d or in the newborn. 11βHSD1 mRNA was more abundant than 11βHSD2 mRNA by ∼6 fold; 11βHSD2 expression did not change with fetal age, however 11βHSD1 expression was signifi cantly greater at 80d and 145d than at 120 days. IGF-2 mRNA was ∼100 fold more abundant than IGF-1 mRNA. IGF-1 did not change with gestational age, but IGF-2 and IGF-2R mRNAs were signifi cantly reduced as gestation progressed. IGF-1R mRNA was decreased at 120 and 145d relative to 80d. There were similar levels of AT1R and AT2R mRNAs in fetal heart throughout the ages studied, and both were most abundant at 80d with decreases near term. No change was detected in angiotensinogen mRNA. ACE1 was more abundant in fetal heart than was ACE2 at all ages examined, however ACE2 was greatest FRIDAY at 80d gestation, whereas ACE1 expression was markedly increased at 145 days of gestation and in the newborn lamb, so that the ACE1/ACE2 ratio was increased from 12 fold to more than 100 fold at term. Conclusions: MR and GR are more abundantly expressed at 80d than at latter times in gestation, suggesting that the effects of increased fetal cortisol may be modulated within the developing heart. Both IGF-2 and IGF-2R gradually and signifi cantly decrease in expression towards term starting at 120 days gestation, suggesting the pre-partum rise in cortisol levels may inhibit their expression in the heart. AT1R, AT2R, and ACE2 decrease in expression near term, whereas ACE1 signifi cantly increases, suggesting local production of angiotensin II may be involved in the increase in LV myocyte volume and wall thickness after birth. Background: The prevalence of vitamin D insuffi ciency in women of childbearing age is increasing. Vitamin D is linked to cellular differentiation and there is some evidence to suggest that vitamin D defi ciency leads to cardiomegaly in the fetus. Objective: The aim of this study was to determine the effect of exposure to vitamin D defi ciency from conception on cardiomyocyte number in rat offspring at postnatal day 3. Methods: Sprague-Dawley rats were fed either a vitamin D deplete or vitamin D replete (control) diet during pregnancy and lactation. Cardiomyocyte number was determined in the fi xed hearts of offspring (n = 10/group) at postnatal day 3, using an optical disector/fractionator stereological technique. In other litters, cardiomyocytes from 3 day old offspring were enzymatically isolated and the proportion of undifferentiated mononuclear cardiomyocytes and terminally differentiated binuclear cardiomyocytes was determined (n = 4 litters/group). Results: At postnatal day 3 there was no difference in body weight, heart weight or heart weight to body weight ratio in the offspring between groups. The number of cardiomyocytes in hearts of the vitamin D defi cient offspring was not different compared to controls (7.316 ± 0.101 x 10 7 cardiomyocytes and 8.206 ± 0.128 x 10 7 cardiomocytes, respectively). At postnatal day 3 the number of differentiated cardiomyocytes was low in both the vitamin D defi cient and control offspring (only 3% of nuclei were binucleated in both groups). Conclusion: Vitamin D defi ciency in utero does not affect the number of cardiomyocytes in the heart at postnatal day 3 in the rat. However, since the majority of the cardiomyocytes were undifferentiated at this time it is possible that cardiomyocyte number may be subsequently affected. To understand and distinguish the fetal spontaneous brain activity (FS) acquired with fetal Magnetoencephalography (fMEG) from mothers which presented healthy singleton pregnancies (LR), mothers whose conditions may result in fetal growth-restriction (HR), mothers who smoke (SM), mothers with intrauterine growth restricted fetuses (IUGR) diagnosed in-utero, and HR mothers who delivered infants identifi ed with poor outcomes post-natally. Spectral power of these fetuses was computed in four bands: δ (0.5-4 Hz), θ (4-8 Hz), α (8-13 Hz) and β (13-25 Hz) and compared between different groups. METHODS: A total of 201 fMEG recordings of 6 min duration each were performed from 83 gravid women using SARA (SQUID Array for Reproductive Assessment). 45 recordings (21 subjects) were from LR group, 78 (25 subjects) from HR group, 55 (23 subjects) from SM group, 14 (7 subjects) from IUGR group and 9 (7 subjects) were from fetuses with clinically poor outcomes (PO). The maternal and fetal cardiac signals were attenuated by signal space projection technique. In order to capture FS the power spectrum of fMEG from all the sensors were estimated and the normalized band power power (NBP) was computed. For a given dataset, the NBP from different sensors was then averaged to get an estimate of the same. Table1 shows the comparison of NBP between different groups using Student's t-test. CONCLUSIONS: In LR, the occurrences of discontinuous patterns decrease with maturation while the continuous pattern increases with maturation. The difference in NBP of FS between different groups may be related to difference in the processes governing the occurrences of these patterns such as sleep-wave transitions, asphyxia. Objectives: Neurosteroids may play a signifi cant role in the protection of the fetal brain when faced with hypoxic ischemic insults. Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) has been shown to alter steroidogenic pathways in the fetus, which may limit the level of neuroprotective steroids and/or their synthetic enzymes in the brain leaving these fetus vulnerable to brain injury. The aim of this study was to compare the expression of 5α reductase (5αR) enzymes in the brains and placentas of fetuses from normal pregnancies and those facing IUGR. Methods: A guinea pig model of IUGR was produced by the surgical ablation of the branches of the uterine artery at mid-gestation. Fetal brains and placentas were collected at term (65 days) and prepared for immunoblotting. 5αR1 and 5αR2 expression in the cortex, hippocampul region and placentas of these chronically insulted fetuses (n=4) were compared to sham operated controls (n=4). Denistometry of the specifi c bands was normalized against actin. Results: Birth weights of IUGR fetuses were signifi cantly lower than those of the sham operated controls (44.9±6.9g and 80.2±6.0g respectively; P=0.001). Fetal brain to body weight ratio was higher in the IUGR fetuses (170%; P=0.001) indicating brain sparing occurred in response to the chronic insult. There was no difference in the expression of 5αR1 in the cortex, hippocampul region or placenta between sham and IUGR fetuses. However the placenta was found to have the highest level of expression of 5αR1, followed by the cortex and then the hippocampal region (P<0.05) in both groups. 5αR2 expression was not detected in the guinea pig tissues. Conclusions: A model of IUGR in the guinea pig was successfully established allowing the elucidation of the role of the brain and placenta in neurosteroid production. The fi nding that 5αR1 was strongly expressed in the guinea pig brain and placenta suggests that this isoform is responsible for neurosterid production. As 5αR1 expression did not differ between these groups, suggesting either this enzyme does not control neurosteroid production in the fetal brain or that expression was maximally induced by term. The large amount of 5αR1 in the placenta suggests it plays a more important role in neurosteroid production during fetal life than has been previously suggested. Objective: Much focus has been placed on the effect of infl ammation-induced preterm birth and adverse neonatal outcomes, specifi cally in regards to cerebral palsy (CP). However, chorioamnionitis or maternal fever at term has a stronger association for the the development of CP. We sought to assess whether the immune response in the fetal brain varied by gestational age. These studies were performed to investigate the differential expression of the innnate immune response from mid-gestation to the postnatal period. Methods: Using timed-pregnant CD-1 mice, fetal brains were harvested from different time points in gestation: E12, E16, E18, E19 ( at term, prior to delivery) and from pups on postnatal day 21 (PND 21). A minimum of 3 dams per gestational day were used with 3-9 brains for each day. Quantitative PCR was performed for Toll-like receptors (TLR) 2, 3, 4 and 9. Other essential mediators of the innate immune response were investigated including IRAK-4, MD2 and MYD88. Statistical analysis was performed using One-Way ANOVA and pairwise comparison. Results: TLR mRNA expression is in FIGURE. TLR mRNA expression was only differentially expressed in the neonatal period with relatively constant expression during 2nd half of mouse gestation. MD-2 mRNA was not differentially expressed in prenatal or postnatal period. IRAK4 mRNA was signifi cantly increased 2.3-fold on E19 compared to earlier in gestation (p=0.003); IRAK4 mRNA was signifi cantly decreased in the neonatal brain compared to prenatal (p<0.001). MYD88 signifi cantly decreased in the PND 21 brain compared to E19 (p=0.03). In contrast to TLRs, IRAK4 and MYD88 were signifi cantly down-regulated in PND 21 brains. Conclusions: The innate immune response is differentially regulated through gestation in the fetal brain. The interplay between TLR and accessory and adaptor proteins at term in the fetal brain may allow for a more potent immune response in the fetal brain. Further research is required to determine whether differential expression of the innate immune system plays a mechanistic role in fetal brain injury in the preterm and term human fetus. The applicability of these techniques to the developing brain is questionable because of the temporary occurrence of neuronal and glial structures that are important for brain development. Aim: Evaluation of the suitability of staining with Luxol Fast Blue and phosphotungstic acid/ levanol to label myelin in the developing brain. Methods: Samples of ovine fetal brains were collected at 0.27 (n=6), 0.40 (n=7), 0.53 (n=7), 0.63 (n=6), 0.75 (n=6) and 0.87 (n=3) gestation (term 150 days). Brain samples were immersion fi xed (0.27 and 0.53 gestation) or brains were perfusion fi xed with 4% paraformaldehyde followed by paraffi n embedding. 7 μm coronal sections of the forebrain including the lateral ventricles and cortical plate were cut. Luxol Fast Blue and phosphotungstic acid/ levanol stainings were compared with the immunoreactivity (IR) of myelin basic protein (MBP), a specifi c marker of mature oligodendrocytes, and glial fi brillary acid protein (GFAP), a marker of radial glia early in development. Hematoxylin & eosin (H&E) was used to visualize anatomy. Results: MBP IR was detected fi rst at 0.63 gestation indicating onset of myelination. In contrast, Luxol Fast Blue and phosphotungstic acid/ levanol revealed dense staining patterns before onset of myelination. These patterns represented radial glia but also erythrocytes and cell nuclei as known from the adult brain. As expected, Luxol Fast Blue and phosphotungstic acid/ levanol stained myelinated fi bers after onset of myelination. Objective: Maternal protein restriction leads to low birth weight, reduced nephron endowment and altered vascular reactivity in young offspring, which may program for disease later in life. This study determined the effect of gestational dietary protein restriction on renal and vascular function in aged rats. Methods: Pregnant rats were fed a normal (NPD; 20% casein) or low (LPD; 8.7% casein) protein diet throughout gestation. Conscious mean arterial pressure (MAP) and anaesthetised renal function were measured via clearance methods in NPD (n=8, 4 male) and LPD (n=10, 5 male) offspring at 100 weeks of age. Vascular function and mechanical wall properties in mesenteric arteries from NPD and LPD offspring were also assessed using wire and pressure myographs. Results: At 100 weeks of age, body weight and MAP was not different between the dietary groups. Glomerular fi ltration rate was 0.26 ± 0.04 ml/min/gKW (NPD-male), 0.86±0.16 ml/min/gKW (NPD-female), 0.27 ± 0.04 ml/min/gKW (LPD-male) and 0.40 ± 0.13 ml/min/gKW (LPD-female), respectively (P DS = 0.02; 2-way ANOVA factors diet and sex). In addition, there was reduced sensitivity to the nitric oxide donor, nitroprusside in mesenteric arteries of LPD offspring compared to NPD controls. There was a gender-dependent enhancement of wall tension generated upon pressurization of mesenteric arteries of female LPD offspring, but not in arteries from LPD male offspring when compared to NPD controls. Conclusion: Female offspring exposed to maternal protein restriction may be at greater risk of renal failure and vascular dysfunction at old age when compared to their male counterparts. Objective: Maternal nutrient restriction (NR) results in growth restricted newborns which exhibit hypertension, and reduced glomerular number with compensatory glomerular hypertrophy. Maternal water restriction (WR) and associated dehydration-anorexia also produces growth restricted newborns with hypertension, though a unique programmed phenotype of paradoxically increased glomerular number. As Transforming Growth Factor Beta (TGFβ) family has both stimulatory and inhibitory effects on nephrogenesis, we hypothesized that maternal NR and WR-induced morphologic renal changes are secondary to TGFβ-mediated effects. Methods: From day 10 to term gestation, pregnant rats received either ad libitum food and water (Control, n=7), or WR to produce an increment of ∼6 mEq/l in plasma sodium (n=7), or were NR (∼25%) to equivalent food as that consumed by the WR group (n=7). Following delivery, all dams received ad libitum food and water. At d1 after birth, offspring kidneys were extracted for mRNA. TGFβ receptors 1 and 2 mRNA levels were determined using realtime RT-PCR (presented as fold difference normalized to GAPDH CONCLUSION: Expression of the two isozymes of 11 β HSD is developmentally regulated in kidney cortex and medulla and no sexual dimorphism is observed. Understanding of the mechanisms regulating the differential expression should allow for a better interpretation of glucocorticoids effect in the developing kidney. HL68728, P01 HD04784. Background: The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) has become increasingly more complex over the past several years with the discovery of several key enzymes contributing to the metabolism of angiotensin. ACE2, a recently described homologue of ACE, metabolizes the potent vasoconstrictor angiotensin II (Ang II) to angiotensin (Ang)-(1-7) while neprilysin cleaves Ang I to Ang-(1-7) and Ang- (1) (2) (3) (4) . ACE is the major Ang II forming enzyme in the kidney, but also metabolizes Ang-(1-7) to Ang- (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) . Objective: To characterize the developmental profi le of the enzymes responsible for angiotensin metabolism in fetal and adult sheep kidney cortex. Methods: Solubilized kidney cortex membranes were prepared from male 80 day gestation (dg), 120 dg, 135 dg, and adult sheep. Enzyme assays were performed by incubating either 125 I-Ang I or 125 I-Ang II with the solubilized membranes in the presence or absence of lisinopril (10uM) to inhibit ACE activity, MLN4760 (10uM) to inhibit ACE2 activity, and SCH39370 (10uM) to inhibit neprilysin activity. Separation of metabolic products was achieved by reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) and the rate of enzymatic activity quantifi ed. Statistical analysis was performed using one-way ANOVA with Tukey's multiple comparison test for post-hoc analysis. Results: Neprilysin activity decreased throughout gestation, with lowest levels of activity seen in adult animals (p<0.05). ACE2 activity also decreased throughout gestation but then increased by adult life (p=0.01). In contrast, ACE activity tended to increase throughout gestation. The relative amounts of these peptidases also differ depending on gestational age. ACE2 and neprilysin activities are 3.5 and 4.6 times greater than ACE activity at 80 dg (p<0.05). Compared to ACE activity, neprilysin activity is 2.7 fold greater at 120 dg (p<0.01). In adults, ACE2 activity is 2.6 fold greater than ACE activity (p<0.05). Conclusions: In sheep kidney cortex, the enzymes of the RAS are developmentally regulated. The developmental profi le of ACE, ACE2, and neprilysin suggest that, in sheep, intrarenal metabolism of angiotensin favors the production of angiotensin-(1-7 METHODS. Fetal sheep underwent left nephrectomy at 104 days of gestational age. At the adult stage (∼1.5 y) a small piece of skin (∼4 cm 2 ) was removed during surgery in nephrectomized (NX, n=4) and control (SNX, n=3) animals. Small arteries (∼200 μm) were dissected and mounted in a Multi Wire Myograph (Model 610, DMT) for recording of isometric force. Dose-response curves for potassium chloride, acetylcholine, phenylephrine and sodium nitroprusside were studied alone and in the presence of indomethacin (10 -5 M) or L-NAME (10 -4 M). Maximal response (N/m or %Kmax) and sensitivity (pD 2 ) were analyzed. Data are shown as mean±SEM. Values were analyzed by unpaired t-test and were considered signifi cantly different if P<0.05. RESULTS. No differences were found in maximal response or sensitivity to potassium chloride (NX 6.1±0.6 vs SNX 7.3±1.4 N/m, p>0.05). Acetylcholine shows similar maximal relaxation and sensitivity in preconstricted arteries. Incubation with the α 1 -adrenergic agonist phenylephrine produces a similar contractile response (Panel A) whereas pre incubation with L-NAME induces a greater maximal response in NX animals (Panel B, 189±13 %Kmax vs 146±4%Kmax, P<0.05) with similar sensitivity (pD 2 6.05±0.08 vs 6.09±0.08, P>0.05). No differences were observed in the response to sodium nitroprusside or with pre-incubation with indomethacin. CONCLUSIONS. Skin arteries of uni-nephrectomized adult sheep show a greater nitric oxide-mediated vasorelaxant activity. This activity appears to be dependent of α 1 -adrenergic stimulation. We interpret these fi ndings as a compensatory mechanism for the higher blood pressure observed. HL 68728. Objective: Acetylcholine (Ach) mediates gastrointestinal motility through muscarinic receptors. To date fi ve muscarinic receptors (M1 to M5) have been cloned, with M3 confi rmed as the prominent mediator of smooth muscle contraction. Of other subtypes, M1, M2 and M4 have been shown to function as potent autoinhibitors (i.e. inhibitory presynaptic muscarinic receptors) of Ach release from myenteric plexus (MPL). We sought to examine the maturation and topographical distribution of muscarinic receptor subtypes in ovine fetal distal colon to assess the potential for cholinergic-induced meconium passage. Methods: Ovine fetuses (n=4 for each gestational ages) at very preterm (VPT: 118-120 days), preterm (PT: 130-132 days), near term (NT: 140-142 days) and term (T: 146-147 days) were sacrifi ced and colonic segments obtained. Bouin's solution fi xed, paraffi n sections of distal colon were immunostained with muscarinic receptor subtype specifi c antibodies M1-M5 obtained from commercial sources. Immunoreactive material on the sections was identifi ed by avidin-biotin-peroxidase system using Vectastain ABC-kit (Vector Laboratories, Inc). Immunostaining pattern was examined microscopically. Result: M1-M5 antibodies elicited positive staining in colonic sections at all gestational ages. M4 is expressed most abundantly in circular and longitudinal smooth muscle layers while M3 expressed in rather low levels. M2 expression is more prominent in interstitial Cajal cells in the muscle and myenteric layers. Positive immunostaining for both M5 and M1 in smooth muscle layers are similar but their immunostaining intensity was signifi cantly lower compared to M3, M4 and M2. The percentage of neurons expressing inhibitory autoreceptors (i.e., M1, M2 and M4) in the enteric ganglia was markedly higher (18 to 45%) in distal colonic sections of preterm and near term ovine fetuses, with expression declining rapidly and markedly (2%) at term (p<0.05). Conclusion: These results indicate that inhibitory presynaptic muscarinic receptors in ovine fetal distal colon are developmentally regulated. We postulate that prior to term, muscarinic autoreceptors may limit presynaptic Ach release. The reduction in inhibition at term may result in cholinergically-mediated colonic motility leading to intrauterine meconium passage. Objectives: Lysophophatidic acid (LPA) and sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) are bioactive phospholipids found in serum, ascites and the tumor microenvironment of ovarian cancer patients. We previously demonstrated that LPA and S1P regulate invasion of epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC) cells. Since cell-cell attachment affects motility and invasion, we investigated the effects of S1P and LPA on cell-cell attachment and related surface proteins. Methods: After 4 hrs treatment with 40μM LPA, 0.5μM S1P or 20μM S1P, Dov13 EOC cells were labeled and applied to wells coated with a monolayer of untreated and unlabeled Dov13 cells, incubated, washed and counted. Proteins were extracted from some cells after treatment while others were detached and allowed to reattach for 3, 6 or 24 hrs (to simulate invasion) before extraction of proteins. Extracts were separated into membrane and cytoplasm fractions. Cell surface proteins of treated cells were biotinylated prior to lysis and affi nity purifi ed. Proteins were analyzed by Western blot. Results: Dov 13 cell-cell adhesion was inhibited by half (P=0.002) upon treatment with 40μM LPA and by 26% (P=0.017) with 0.5μM S1P. A highly reproducible (though not statistically signifi cant) 20% increase in adhesion was induced by 20μM S1P. Addition of blocking anti-integrin and anti-N-cadherin to untreated cells in the attachment assay revealed that 15% attached to ECM and 30% to monolayer cells. Membrane N-cadherin (N-cad) and γand βcatenins were increased by 20μM S1P and reduced by LPA in attached cells immediately post-treatment. Reattaching cells were defi cient in N-cad at 3 hrs for all treatments. N-cad in 20μM S1P-treated cells recovered quickly (by 6 hrs), while treatment with 0.5μM S1P or LPA delayed N-cad recovery. γ-and β-catenins were up-regulated by 20μM S1P at 6 and 24 hrs and by 40μM LPA at 6 hrs. Cytoplasmic proteins were not signifi cantly affected by the treatments. Conclusions: Previously demonstrated inhibition of invasion by 20μM and stimulation by 0.5μM S1P and 40μM LPA correlate with respective elevation and reduction in cell-cell adhesion. Up-and down-regulation of the adhesion protein N-cad and its linkers, γ-and β-catenins, correspond to increased and diminished adhesion, respectively. This indicates that ovarian cancer invasion, as regulated by S1P and LPA, is associated with signifi cant cell surface protein modifi cations.  ER-and PR-human breast (T47D-Y) and ovarian (OvCa 429) cancer cells were engineered to stably express AR. Immunocytochemistry and western blot analyses confi rmed that these breast and ovarian cancer cell lines (called Y-AR and OvCa-AR respectively) are PR-, but AR+. Boyden chamber invasion assays were performed using Y-AR and OvCa-AR cells treated with either vehicle, MPA or DHT. The mechanisms of invasion were further investigated using zymographic assays. We show normal AR translocation in both our new cell lines upon hormone treatment. AR activation by either MPA or DHT increases the invasive potential of both breast and ovarian cancer cells with MPA being signifi cantly more effective than DHT at stimulating invasion. However, regardless of the ligand, activation of AR increases tumor cell aggressiveness. To elucidate the mechanisms of this activation in OvCa-AR cells, we used zymographic analysis. Interestingly, we fi nd that MPA activation of AR decreases both the total level and activation of matrix metalloproteinase-9 compared to DHT and vehicle control. Thus the enhanced aggressiveness induced by MPA must occur through pathways other than extracellular matrix degradation. AR plays an important role in the pathophysiology of ovarian cancer. We hypothesize that MPA and DHT have unique downstream effects through AR and are currently using proteomic analysis to identify AR targets differentially regulated by each ligand. Blockade of downstream AR targets may provide interesting therapeutic targets in the treatment of ovarian cancer. Here we set out to compare surface presentation of proteins associated with cell-cell and cell-matrix attachment in EOC and OSE stimulated with S1P and LPA. Methods: Dov13 EOC and IOSE cells were treated with either 20μM S1P or 80μM LPA, for 4 or 24 hrs. Cell surface proteins were biotinylated and affi nity purifi ed. Surface expression of cell-cell adhesion protein N-cadherin and linkers γ-, βand α-catenins and of the cell-matrix adhesion protein β1-integrin and focal adhesion proteins focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and paxilin was detected by Western blot analysis. Results: The basal levels of surface N-cadherin and its linkers γ-,. βand αcatenins were signifi cantly higher in Dov13 than IOSE cells. In Dov13 cells N-cad and β-catenin were down-regulated by LPA and up-regulated by S1P, while in IOSE cells all were up-regulated by both LPA and S1P. Cell-matrix adhesion protein β1-integrin was up-regulated by S1P but unaffected by LPA in Dov13. Neither lipid seemed to affect β1-integrin in IOSE. Focal adhesion protein paxilin was increased by S1P in Dov13 cells and by LPA in IOSE cells. Basal FAK was greater in Dov13 cells, was increased by S1P in both cell lines, and was inhibited by LPA only in Dov13 cells. Conclusions: These results show that increased Dov13 cell invasion compared to IOSE cells corresponds to differences in surface proteins and cell-cell and cell-matrix attachment proteins. First, the basal levels of cell-cell attachment and FAK were higher in Dov13 cells than in IOSE cells. Second, the response of Dov13 cells to S1P and LPA differed from that of IOSE cells; for example, proteins associated with cell-cell attachment were down-regulated in Dov13 cells but up-regulated in IOSE cells following LPA treatment. In conclusion, the malignant nature of EOC cells is refl ected both by increased invasiveness as well as by increased presentation of cell surface proteins and different responses to S1P and LPA, when compared with IOSE cells. Uterine cancer is one of the main causes of death from gynecologic cancers. Despite using extensive surgery, radiotherapy or chemotherapy there is poor survival at advanced stages. Thus, fi nding new strategies of treatment constitutes a great challenge. We already demonstrated that TRAIL, a member of TNF family, induces apoptosis in ovarian cancer. In addition, we have found that 2-methoxyestradiol (2ME), an estrogen metabolite, kills cancer but not normal endometrial cells. Objectives: We investigated if TRAIL induces apoptosis in endometrial cancer and if 2ME enhances TRAIL mediated apoptosis. Furthermore, we investigated the mechanisms behind any interaction between them. Methods: Cell viability was studied by the MTS assay. Apoptosis was confi rmed by DNA laddering, by FACS, in vitro caspase activity assay, and W-B of different proteins involved in the apoptotic cascade. Results: TRAIL induces cell death in endometrial cancer cell lines (established from advanced carcinomas) but not in normal cells. More interesting, TRAIL did not affect cell lines established from endometrial hyperplasia or early stage carcinomas. 2ME also induces cell death in primary cultures of advanced endometrial cancer but not in pre-malignant lesions or normal endometrium. Pretreatment with 2ME enhances TRAIL mediated apoptosis in advanced endometrial carcinomas with no effect on hyperplasic or normal endometrium. The interaction was synergistic by fractional inhibition analysis. The mechanism behind this interaction involved increase in DR5 (RT-PCR, W-B), increase in BID cleavage, increase in BCL2 phosphorylation, decrease in Akt phosphorylation, increase in caspase-8, -9, and -3 activity, and increase in cytochrome-c release. We have demonstrated that phospholipids S1P and LPA, found in high levels in the serum and ascites of ovarian cancer patients, affect MMP activity and EOC cell invasion. S1P and LPA act via G-protein coupled receptor mechanisms. We therefore examined the effects of S1P and LPA on MMP2 and its activating protease (membrane type) MT1-MMP in two EOC cell lines and explored the mechanism of these effects by blockade of Gi with pertussis toxin (PTX). Dov13 and OVCA429 cells were treated for 6 hrs with 1, 10, or 40μM LPA or 0.05, 0.5, 1, 5, or 20μM S1P with and without 50ng/mL PTX. Conditioned media were collected and evaluated via gel zymography, and activity was quantifi ed via fl uorometric gelatinase assay. Whole cell lysates were analyzed via Western Blot. Dov13 cells treated for 24 hrs with 20μM S1P were biotinylated, affi nity purifi ed, and analyzed. and 10 μg/ml) with or without the pan-caspase inhibitor, Z-VAD-FMK. Cell viability was determined after 24h using the Celltiter 96 assay. Caspases-3/7, -8, and -9 activity was measured using Caspase-Glo assay. Autophagic markers LC3-II and Beclin-1 was determined by Western blot analysis and the formation of acidic vesicles was evalauted by acridine orange staining. Results: NV128 treatment decreased cell viability in all tested EOC cells lines in a dose-dependent manner with IC50 between 1 and 5 μg/ml. However, cell death was caspase independent as evidenced by the lack of caspases-3/7, -8, and -9 activity and cell death could not be prevented with the caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK. However, cells treated with NV128 showed characteristics of autophagy: i) morphologic appearance of vacuoles; ii) formation of acidic vesicles, iii) upregulation of the autophagic markers LC3-II and Beclin-1. The transcription factor hypoxia inducible factor 1-α (HIF-1α) plays a vital role in the transcription of genes related to angiogenesis and cell survival. HIF-1α is induced in ovarian cancer, and correlates with induction of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Cytokines, including tumor necrosis factorα (TNF-α), are also overexpressed in ovarian cancer. TNF-α has been linked to increased stabilization of HIF-1α, yet the mechanisms of regulation and effects on hypoxic signaling have not been defi ned. Here, we use immunoblot analysis in SK-OV3 human ovarian cancer cells to test the ability of cytokines to regulate HIF-1α through signaling by : nuclear factor κB (NFκB), mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K). TNFα dose-dependently increased HIF-1α levels in normoxia, but surprisingly reduced the HIF-1α response to hypoxia. Blocking NFκB with IKK inhibitor, Bay-11-7082 reduced induction of HIF-1α in presence or absence of TNF-α, suggesting that NFκB signaling suppresses basal HIF-1α levels. However, in hypoxia, Bay-11-7082 exhibited a sigmoidal dose-response curve, reducing the hypoxic HIF-1α response at low concentrations and inducing the HIF-1α response at high concentrations. Blocking MAPK using the MEK inhibitor, U0126 or blocking PI3K using Ly294002 resulted in reduction of HIF-1α in normoxia, and enhanced the inhibitory effect of TNF-α in hypoxia. These results suggest that NFκB, MAPK and PI3K play a role in cytokine regulation of HIF-1α. Importantly, our fi ndings suggest differences in the regulation of HIF-1α by these pathways under normoxic vs. hypoxic conditions, indicating that ovarian tumors my respond differently to cytokines depending on their oxygen status. The The metastasis of ovarian cancer depends on the creation of new blood vessels. In mouse, expression of the orphan nuclear receptor, chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor II (COUP-TFII), plays a critical role in normal development by specifying patterns of vascular differentiation. However, the role of COUPTFII in most human cancers, including ovarian cancer, is largely unknown. METHODS: RNA was isolated from ovarian cancers using TRIzol. After treating each specimen with DNAase, fi rst strand cDNA synthesis was performed using reverse transcriptase. Real time quantitative PCR was performed using validated primers for COUP-TFII, normalizing to levels of 18s rRNA expression. COUP-TFII expression was also examined using a tissue microarray constructed from 59 ovarian cancers and 10 normal ovaries. Immunohistochemical staining for COUP-TFII was independently scored for both staining intensity (0 to 3+) and the proportion of cells expressing COUP-TFII. At least 500 cells were examined in each specimen tested. RESULTS: Quantitation of COUP-TFII transcripts revealed a dramatic decrease in COUP-TFII expression in ovarian cancers (n=34) to levels less than 20% of those observed in normal ovary (n=6) (p < 0.005). This decrease was observed regardless of tumor histology (22 papillary serous cancers, 5 endometrioid cancers, 4 clear cell cancers, 2 adult granulosa cell and 1 immature teratoma). In normal ovary, robust nuclear expression of COUP-TFII was consistently observed by immunohistochemistry in more than 75% of granulosa cells and stroma (mean staining intensity = 3+). Only minimal COUP-TFII expression was observed in the epithelium in 1 of the 10 normal ovaries examined. However, low levels of COUP-TFII expression (mean staining intensity = 1+) were observed in a signifi cant proportion of the epithelial cells in each of the 59 ovarian cancers tested. We also found that fewer stromal cells in ovarian cancers express COUP-TFII and that COUP-TFII staining intensity in those cells was decreased when compared to specimens of normal ovary (p< 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate a coordinated change in levels of COUP-TFII expression in both the epithelia and underlying stroma of ovarian cancers. These changes potentially play an important role in the pathogenesis of this disease by regulating angiogenesis. Introduction. Inflammation is associated with cancer progression and chemoresistance. We hypothesized that cancer cells may also contribute to the proinfl ammatory microenvironment at the tumor site. We have identifi ed two distinct subtypes of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cells according to their characteristics in NF-κB activation and cytokine production that correlate to tumor survival, progression and chemo-response. Materials. Eleven human EOC cell lines were established from primary cultures isolated from malignant ovarian cancer ascites. NF-κB activity was determined by luciferase assay using a plasmid construct containing 2 κB-binding sites before luciferase reporter gene. Expression of MyD88, IκBα, IKKα and IKKβ were determined by western blotting. Cytokine profi ling was done using the Luminex 200 system. Cell viability was determined by Celltiter 96 assay, and apoptosis was measured in terms of Caspase-3/7 activity using Caspase-Glo assay. Results. Two different subtypes of ovarian cancer cells were identifi ed. Type I are characterized by: i) constitutive cyclicity of NF-κB activation, ii) continue production of cytokines which increased by LPS, paclitaxel or TNF-α stimulation; iii) expression of MyD88, low IκBα, and a high IKKβ/IKKα ratio; iv) chemoresistance. Type II are characterized by; i) absence of NF-κB activity, ii) no cytokines production, iii) MyD88 negative and high IκBα expression, and a low IKKβ/IKKα ratio; iv) chemosensitive. It has been well established that tumor tissues are stiffer than normal tissues. This is the basis of common breast self-examination in which identifying a stiff lump in breast tissue is critical for early tumor warning. While fi ngers can exam the macroscopic stiffness of already formed tumor tissues, measuring the precise stiffness of a tissue in microscopic scale will indicate the early transition process from normal tissue to tumor or cancer. Collaborating with Argonne national laboratory and Illinois Institute of Technology, we developed a novel ovarian cancer diagnostic method by quantifying the disparity of tissue stiffness in micro/nano scale for ovarian normal tissue and tumor tissue. By using atomic force microscopy, we quantifi ed the stiffness of fresh benign and carcinoma ovarian tissues. The force volume image of ovarian tumor tissue showed much low (soft) and high (stiff) slop values of force spectra, indicating a heterogeneous stiffness feature. On the contrary, normal tissues demonstrated more homogenous stiffness distribution with the Young's modulus in the narrow range of 2.2 kPa to 12.7 kPa. High-precision stiffness measurements of ovarian tissues are also expected to give insight into the structure of tissues, tumor stage, and metastases. Moreover, such measurements are of great practical value in order to quantify the effect of drugs and cancer therapy. While most of current ovarian cancer diagnostic methods are depending on the detection of cancer biomarkers, the most important advantage of the this research is that cancer cell itself will be directly detected without any involvement of biomarkers or antibodies. It opens an entirely new avenue for early cancer diagnosis in a completely novel way. The  Using modular incubators gassed at 1% or 5% O 2 and a standard CO 2 incubator (20% O 2 ), we measured the expression of Hif-1α, HSD11B1 and COX-2 mRNA by Taqman qRT PCR in response to infl ammatory (0.5ng/ml Il-1α) and anti-infl ammatory (1μM cortisol (F) challenge in a model system using sheep (s) OSE over 48h at these three O 2 tensions. Results Hif-1a binding is classically up regulated by hypoxia and by infl ammatory stimuli. In sOSE, F alone had no effect on Hif-1α, whereas IL-1α increased Hif-1α 7-to 9-fold, although there was no effect of hypoxia.However, whilst F partially reversed the IL-1α effect at 20% O 2 , this effect was absent at lower O 2 concentrations. In human (h) OSE, HSD11B1 mRNA is up regulated by IL-1α and this effect is enhanced by addition of F. In our sheep model we found IL-1α to have a similar stimulatory effect, and the stimulatory effect was dose-dependently increased by decreasing O 2 . In contrast to hOSE, addition of F reversed the effect of IL-1α in sOSE. COX-2 mRNA followed a similar pattern to HSD11B1 in sOSE, with hypoxia again enhancing the stimulatory effect of IL-1α. In sOSE, F limits its own production in a negative feedback effect, even under severely hypoxic conditions in which the infl ammatory response to IL-1α is increased. Despite hypoxia enhancing IL-1α-stimulated COX-2 mRNA expression, F is able to reverse this effect even at 1% O 2 . Conclusions The lack of effect of hypoxia on Hif-1α may refl ect the time point (48h) used and further time course studies are underway. These results confi rm that the hypoxic environment of the peritoneum alters gene expression in response to infl ammatory stimuli and suggests that normoxia may not be an appropriate environment in which to study OSE function. Further studies of OSE and ovarian cancer cells under hypoxic conditions will permit a better understanding of the mechanisms regulating gene expression in these cells and may give insight into more effective treatment of ovarian cancer. Hypothesis: Obesity is an independent risk factor for hormonally regulated invasive cancers; however, the mechanisms underlying this heightened risk are unclear. Angiogenesis, the development of new vessels, is essential for the growth and survival of tumors. VEGF is an angiogenic promoter secreted by many tumors. Pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), an estrogen-sensitive soluble glycoprotein, is a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis. Both mediators are critical in adipocyte differentiation. We postulated that adipocytes, a rich source of angiogenic mediators, can promote a pro-angiogenic microenvironment due to a loss of PEDF. Methods: Serum-free conditioned medium was collected from adipose tissue harvested from adult wild type C57Bl6 mice and tested in an angiogenesis migration assay using antibodies directed against VEGF and PEDF. A model of adipocyte differentiation was used whereby 3T3-L1 pre-adipocytes were treated with a well-established adipogenic cocktail and conditioned medium collected daily for eight days. PEDF protein levels were analyzed using Western blot. Adipose tissue from wild type and PEDF knockout animals was immunostained with anti-CD31 antibody and microvascular density, a hallmark of angiogenesis, calculated in fi ve non-overlapping high power fi elds. Results: Adipocytes secrete both VEGF and PEDF and media conditioned by these cells have pro-angiogenic activity due to increased levels of VEGF. More robust angiogenic activity was demonstrated when medium was pre-treated with anti-PEDF antibody suggesting that PEDF has functional inhibitory activity in adipocyte secretions. The adipocyte differentiation assay revealed reciprocal expression levels of PEDF and VEGF. High levels of PEDF were demonstrated at days 1-2 whereas PEDF was undetectable in secretions from differentiated adipocytes. In contrast, VEGF levels were highest at later time points. In vivo, adipose tissue harvested from PEDF null mice had a three fold increase in microvascular density. Conclusion: A loss of PEDF induces a more angiogenic phenotype in differentiated adipose tissue in vitro and in vivo. These data suggest that the adipocyte population has the potential to promote a pro-tumoral microenvironment. Objective: Surgery is the gold standard for the treatment of ovarian cancer. However, surgical treatment might result in the development of peritoneal dissemination partly because of the favorable peritoneal surgical environment for cell implantation. It remains unclear which mechanisms stimulate postoperative dissemination. We investigated the impact of peritoneal surgical environment on expression levels of genes involved in ovarian cancer cell adhesion, proliferation, migration and invasion over time course in a syngenic mouse model. Study design: Adult, female C57BL6 mice were divided into four groups: anesthesia alone, CO2 pneumoperitoneum at low (2mmHg) or high (8mmHg) intraperitoneal pressure and laparotomy. A mouse ovarian cancer cell line (ID8) was injected intraperitoneally just before surgical procedures. Groups was further sub-divided into two groups of 8 animals each and a laparotomy was performed to evaluate dissemination on post-operative day (POD) 14 or 42. Disseminated nodules were collected and real-time RT-PCR was performed to investigate expression levels of beta 1 integrin, cMet, protein kinase C (PKC) beta, urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA), uPA receptor (uPAR) and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) mRNA. Comparisons were made using the one-way ANOVA. Statistical signifi cance was defi ned as P<0.05. Results: On POD 14: Expression levels of beta 1 integrin, cMet, PKC beta, uPA, uPAR and PAI-1 mRNA were signifi cantly higher in the laparotomy group than the remaining three groups. There was no signifi cant difference in expression levels of these genes among the remaining three groups. On POD 42: Expression levels of the genes examined in the laparotomy group were signifi cantly decreased compared to those on POD14. There was no signifi cant difference in expression levels of the genes examined among the four groups. The present study suggested that surgical peritoneal environment of laparotomy (host environment) could promote expression levels of genes involved in ovarian cancer cell adhesion, proliferation, migration and invasion. This model will help to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of post-operative peritoneal dissemination to develop new therapeutic strategies. Objectives: Lysophosphatidic Acid (LPA) is a pleiotropic bioactive phospholipid that induces proliferation, reorganization of the cytoskeleton, invasion and shedding of membrane vesicles in ovarian cancer cells. These vesicles promote the invasive behavior of ovarian cancer cells, and they can also induce motility in other cellular components of the tumor microenvironment. The objective of this study is to identify and quantify specifi c proteins that are structural or functional components of these LPA-induced vesicles. Methods: A variation of SILAC (Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino acids in Cell culture) was used. Epithelial ovarian carcinoma DOV13 cells were labeled for fi ve passages in the presence of 13 C-Arginine and 13 C-Lysine. DOV13 cells were stimulated with 80 mM LPA for 4hrs in the presence of 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) to induce the release of vesicles. 10% FBSinduced vesicles were used as control. Two sets of samples were generated. One set was non-labeled FBS-vesicles and 13 C-labeled FBS-LPA vesicles; the other set was the inverse. Membrane vesicles were isolated from culture media by differential centrifugation. Equal amounts of samples were combined and separated electrophoretically. Selected bands were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis by LC/ESI-MS-MS. Validation of data has included western blot analysis and Immnocytochemistry. Results: Analysis of vesicle content by mass spectrometry has revealed that 10% FBS-vesicles and LPA-vesicles shared a number of proteins. However, LPA induced vesicles contain a separate set of proteins that are not present in the FBS-vesicles. Our fi rst interest has turned to actin and other cytoskeletal components. Conclusions: LPA is known to induce a variety of responses in ovarian cancer cells. Preliminary results of proteomic analysis have shown that a specifi c component of LPA-induced vesicles is actin. This cytoskeletal protein does not appear to be incorporated to vesicles generated with serum alone. Immunocytochemical analysis of LPA-stimulated ovarian cancer cells shows that these cells rearrange their actin cytoskeleton and form peripheral bundles close to the cell surface at the same time that vesicle shedding is occurring. Complete validation of results is a current effort. Objective: Although much is known about the molecular biology of progesterone action in hormonal responsive tumors such as breast and endometrial cancer, relatively little is known about the regulation of progesterone action and the role of the progesterone receptor (PR) mediated pathways in ovarian cancer. Epidemiologic and laboratory evidence suggests that progesterone action is protective against development of ovarian cancer, through regulation of growth. Our goal is to identify the direct target genes of PR in ovarian cancer cells in order to help understand the protective effects of progestins on ovarian cancer risk. Methods: We identifi ed genome-wide targets of PR using a PR-antibody, chromatin immunoprecipitation-PCR (ChIP) followed by cloning and sequencing of PR binding sites in the genome of the PR-positive BG-1 human ovarian cancer cell line treated for 2 hours with progesterone (10 -6 M). The genes within the vicinity of up to 166 kilobases of the PR binding sites were tested for responsiveness to progesterone by real-time PCR. Transcripts of selected genes were knocked down by siRNA. Proliferation was evaluated by fl ow cytometry and BrdU incorporation assay. Results: One hundred and fi fty clones in the range of 200-700 bps were identifi ed and blasted against the human genome. Six of these clones were mapped to the human genome and found to be within various distances from a gene: 5'-1.2 kb (C21ORF29), 16.1 kb (LOC338797) and 92.2 kb (SFRS8); 3'-0.9 kb (KRTAP10-6) and 166 kb (IRF-8); and exon 6/intron 6 (SEPN1). Interferon regulatory factor-8 (IRF-8), a known transcription factor, was chosen for further evaluation, since treatment of BG-1 cells with progesterone signifi cantly downregulated its mRNA levels at 2 and 3 hours. Reduction of IRF-8 expression by 75% employing RNA interference decreased proliferation (S-phase and G 2 M) signifi cantly in BG-1 cells. Conclusion: Genome-wide ChIP cloning was used to identify novel PR targets in an ovarian cancer cell line in an attempt to understand the protective mechanism of progesterone action. The transcription factor IRF-8 is regulated by progesterone and may mediate its anti-proliferative effects in ovarian cancer cells. Background: Some studies indicate that women with higher bone mineral density (BMD) have an increased breast cancer (BC) risk than women with low BMD. We examined the relationships between baseline BC risk with either BMD or preexisting vertebral fracture (VF). BC risk was assessed using the Gail model, which estimates the 5-yr predicted invasive BC risk based upon recognized BC risk factors. Material and Methods: Raloxifene is approved for postmenopausal osteoporosis prevention and treatment. The 3-yr randomized, double-blind Multiple Outcomes of Raloxifene (MORE) study compared raloxifene and placebo on VF risk in women with low BMD or osteoporosis. At MORE baseline, BMD was measured, and spine radiographs were taken to identify preexisting VF. The 5-yr BC risk at MORE baseline was calculated using the Gail model questionnaire, with data collected retrospectively for a subset of women (n=4011). The 5-yr predicted BC risk in women with and without preexisting VF were similar (1.78% ± 0.79 and 1.79% ± 0.91, respectively, P>0.05). Also, the proportions of women at high BC risk (Gail score ≥1.67%) were 48% and 45% in women with and without preexisting VF, respectively (P>0.05). The proportions of women at high BC risk ranged from 42% to 46%, irrespective of baseline BMD T-score and measurement site. For women without preexisting VF fractures, there was no signifi cant relationship between BC risk and either lumbar spine, or femoral neck BMD, but that between BC risk and total hip BMD was signifi cant (Table) . Low Bone Mass T-score >-2.5 and ≤-1.0 Osteoporosis T-score ≤-2.5 P-Value Hypothesis: Breast cancer is dependent on angiogenesis for growth and progression. Thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), a multifunctional glycoprotein, is a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis that activates TGF-ß in vitro and in vivo. We postulated that ablation of TSP-1 in the breast promotes epithelial hyperplasia due to loss of inhibitory signals on both endothelial and epithelial cells. Methods: Breast tissue was harvested from TSP-1 null adult mice (n=4) and compared to age-matched wild type controls (n=2). Angiogenesis was assessed by calculating microvascular density in fi ve non-overlapping high power fi elds. Endothelial cell positivity was confi rmed by using anti-CD31 antibody. Ductal or acinar epithelial changes were evaluated by grading of nuclear atypia and by quantifying immunopositivity for proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). Results: The breast tissue of all TSP-1 defi cient mice revealed atypical ductal epithelial hyperplasia characterized by increased nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratios and strong PCNA positivity in glands demonstrating pseudostratifi cation of nuclei and luminal occlusion. All TSP-1 null animals revealed distinctive histologic features in the stromal compartment of the breast. Stromal microvascular density was signifi cantly elevated in TSP-1 defi cient mice when compared to controls (17.0 + 2.9 versus 4.8 + 0.57, respectively; p=0.004). Vascular ectasia was prominent and more vessels demonstrated smooth muscle cell hyperplasia in the TSP-1 null tissue. Moreover, loss of TSP-1 induced a phenotype in the breast-related adipose tissue consisting of pleomorphic adipocytes and excessive lipid vacuolization. Conclusions: Thrombospondin-1 is an important negative regulator of the epithelial and stromal compartments of the murine breast. Loss of this potent angiogenic inhibitor triggered atypical epithelial hyperplasia, increased stromal vascularity with ectasia and modulated the adipocyte population. This study suggests that TSP-1 is multifunctional and is a key regulator of stromalepithelial interactions in breast tissue. Nestin is a type VI intermediate fi lament protein originally described in neural stem cells. Recent reports have documented nestin expression in endothelium of newly formed blood vessels, and suggested its role as a marker of capacity for neovascularization and angiogenesis in endothelial cell. The aim of this study was to investigate the differential expression of nestin in the normal and preeclamptic human placentas. Placental tissues from 5 women with severe preeclampsia and 5 gestational age-matched normotensive women were collected at the time of their cesarean section. Western blot analysis for each placental tissue was performed for nestin quantifi cation. Immunohistochemical staining with anti-nestin antibodies was employed to localize nestin positive cells and to investigate differential staining intensity in each placental cell. The nestin protein expression was detected in all of the normal and preeclamptic placental tissues by Western blotting. Compared with the normal placentas, tissues from severe preeclamptic placentas showed higher expression of nestin protein (p<0.001). Nestin immunoreactivity was localized only to endothelial cells of chorionic villi. However, mesenchymal connective tissue cells, cytotrophoblasts, syncytiotrophoblasts and decidual cells did not reveal any specifi c signal for nestin. We suggest that the capacity for neovascularization and angiogenesis in endothelial cell is increased in preeclamptic placenta compared to that from normal pregnancy. Such changes may be a compensatory mechanism for the reduced materno-fetal exchanges and long lasting fetal hypoxia in preeclamptic pregnancy. Furthermore, these changes in endothelial cell of chorionic villi in preeclamptic pregnancy may give an explanation for fetal response to preeclamptic condition. Previous reports suggested that that the basic machinery governing CRF synthesis is non-existent in rat placenta, and thus this species has not been utilized as a model for the investigation of placental CRF in fetal-maternal stress responses. In the present investigation we sought to demonstrate that rat placenta is the site of CRF synthesis. Methods: Time-date pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats of e13 were housed individually and provided with food and water ad libitum. On day 16 and 22, maternal rats were anesthetized, abdomen opened, and the fetal placental unit carefully dissected. The placenta was separated and divided into two halves. The fi rst half was fi xed in 4% paraformaldehyde and processed for paraffi n embedding. The second half was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and later processed for RNA extraction. Maternal brains were then dissected, cut into two halves and processed as described for the placenta. Tissue sections were subjected to immunohistochemistry with rat CRF antibody (1:250-1:500, Peninsula Laboratory) and the immunoreactive materials on the sections were identifi ed by standard ABC technique. Control sections were incubated without CRF antibody. Purifi ed maternal brain and placental RNA preparations were subjected to RT-PCR analysis with primer sequences (Forward: aaagggaaaggcaaagaaa, Reverse: aacacgcggaaaaagttagc) designed with Primer3 software (MIT), using rat CRF cDNA sequences in GeneBank. Results: Placental sections at e16 and e22 exhibited positive CRF immunostaining in trophoblast cells localized in both the maternal (basal zone) and fetal (labyrinth zone) of the placenta. Control sections showed no immunostaining. RT-PCR analysis identifi ed a single 450bp band both in maternal brain and placental preparations. Conclusion: Our fi nding of CRF protein and mRNA expression in rat placenta is consistent with evidence from the human. We speculate that CRF of rat placenta could serve as model for the study of its role in human fetal-maternal stress homeostasis. Methods: Placentae (n=20) were collected after elective caesarean section at term from women with uncomplicated pregnancies. PK1 and PKR1 were immunolocalised and extracellular regulated signal kinase -1/2 (ERK1/2) phosphorlyation was detected by Western blotting with signalling pathways being dissected using various inhibitors including YM25480, PP2 and AG1478, specifi c inhibitors of G q, c-src and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) kinase, respectively. Placental explants (n=6) were treated with 40nM PK-1 and cyclo-oxygenase 2 (COX-2) mRNA expression detected by taqman PCR. PK1 and COX-2 were colocalised using immunofl uorescence and confocal microscopy. Results: PK1 was immunolocalised to endothelium and macrophages in fetal vessels and Hofbauer cells in placental villi. In contrast, PKR1 was predominately localised in syncytial sprouts. ERK-1/2 phosphorylation in placenta was signifi cantly upregulated (5-fold increase; p<0.05) following treatment with PK1 for 30 minutes. Dissection of the upstream signalling pathway by the chemical inhibitors demonstrated that PK1 induced phosphorylation of ERK-1/2 was mediated via c-src and EGFR transactivation. Treatment of placenta with PK1 for 4 hours induced a signifi cant increase in COX-2 expression (2.9±0.45 fold increase above control; p<0.05). COX-2 expression in response to treatment with PK1 was inhibited following coincubation of the tissue with inhibitors of G q , c-src, EGFR kinase or ERK1/2. Using double immunofl uorescence, co-localisation/co-expression of PK-1 and COX-2 was demonstrated in various cellular compartments within the placenta including trophoblast and macrophages. The cellular immunolocalisation of PK1 and PKR1 within placenta and upregulation of COX-2 by PK1 is supportive of PK1 being involved in placental vascular physiology. In addition, expression of PKR1 in syncytial sprouts, which characterise areas of hypoxia and immature villous formation, suggest that another role of PK1 may be in mediating trophoblast differentiation in response to hypoxia. showed induction of the sphingolipid signaling pathway during early pregnancy at the maternal:embryonic interface. The current studies were completed to examine this sphingolipid pathway, involving enzymes that generate sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), as well as cognate S1P receptors, in tissues from human pregnancy. Methods: Immunohistochemistry, RT-PCR and western analysis were used to study expression of sphingolipid metabolizing enzyme and S1P receptors in the human placenta, choriocarcinoma cell lines, and maternal decidual tissue. In placenta sphingosine kinase (SphK1) protein, an enzyme that converts sphingosine to S1P, was abundantly expressed in the muscular compartment of placental arteries. The S1P receptor S1P 2 was found to be expressed on both sides of the maternal:fetal interface. Decidualized uterine stromal cells robustly expressed S1P 2 , and this receptor localized to stromal and syncytiotrophoblast cells of chorionic villi. S1P receptors S1P 1 , S1P 2 , and S1P 3 were found by RT-PCR analysis to be expressed in Jeg-3 and JAR choriocarcinoma cell lines. Immunocytochemical staining revealed that S1P 2 protein was robustly expressed in Jeg-3 cells. Treatment of Jeg-3 cells with S1P resulted in activation of the ERK signaling pathway demonstrating that S1P receptors were not only present on these trophoblast cell lines, but that they were also functional. Our studies localize enzymes that generate S1P and S1P receptors at the human maternal:fetal interface. Within the placental vasculature, we postulate that through local S1P production, SphK1 activity is an important determinant in regulating vasculare tone within the placenta. Vascular-derived S1P may also regulate trophoblast differentiation in chorionic villi, a possibility supported by fi ndings of S1P 2 protein on both placental syncytiotrophoblast and Jeg-3 cells, as well as S1P-induced activation of ERK signaling in Jeg-3 cells. Our fi ndings highlight the importance of continued studies in primates and humans since differences exist in expression of sphingolipid related proteins between mice and humans. Supported by Vincent Memorial Research Funds. Both of them bind to the Tie-2 tyrosine kinase receptor on vascular endothelial cells, work in concert with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) to regulate vascular morphogenesis, remodeling and maturation during pregnancy. However, their regulation at the human implantation site is yet to be determined. Present study was designed to determine whether adrenomedullin (ADM) and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), which were expressed by trophoblast inhuman placenta, regulate Ang-I and -II gene expression at the implantation site during early pregnancy. METHODS: First-trimester villous tissues were obtained from women undergoing elective legal pregnancy termination. The villous tissues or extravillous trophoblast cells (HTR-8/SV neo cell line) were cultured in RPMI 1640 in standard tissue culture condition in the presence or absence of ADM or CGRP. The mRNA expression of Ang-I and Ang-II were determined by RT-PCR. Meanwhile, the angiostatic factor soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt-1) secreted by trophoblasts in culture media was determined using enzyme immunoassay (ELISA). RESULTS: 1) mRNA expression for Ang-I by HTR-8/SV cells is signifi cantly stimulated by CGRP (10 -8 M) treatment (p<0.05) at 48h of culture and this stimulation is completely blocked by CGRP antagonist CGRP 8-37 (10 -7 M) (p<0.01); 2) Ang-II mRNA expression is stimulated by CGRP treatment but this increase does not reach the signifi cant level (p>0.05); 3) Treatment of the cells with ADM failed to alter Ang-I and -II mRNA gene expression (p>0.05); 4) In human fi rst-trimester villous tissue culture, Ang-I mRNA was increased by CGRP (10 -8 M) (p<0.05) and Ang-II mRNA levels were unaltered; and 5) ADM stimulates Ang-I mRNA expression by villous explant culture but inhibits Ang-II expression in a dose-dependent manner (p<0.05, ANOVA). CONCLUSION: Both CGRP and ADM regulate mRNA levels for Ang-I and Ang-II, favoring placental angiogenesis and vascularization. Thus, locally produced CGRP and ADM at the human implantation site may play a role in placental development and fetal growth during early pregnancy. The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) controls the expression of specifi c sets of genes in distinct cell types. GR promoter-specifi c gene regulation is generated through interactions with specifi c combinations of regulatory proteins termed transcriptional cofactors. Changes in levels of specifi c cofactors have FRIDAY been linked to complications during pregnancy, including placental pathology, such as IUGR. Our objective is to identify GR cofactors from the placenta that may impact GR activity and placenta function. Methods: To identify cofactors that regulate GR activity in the placenta, we carried out a yeast two-hybrid screen from a human placenta cDNA library using the GR-ligand-binding domain as bait. Seventeen positive clones were identifi ed. The corresponding DNA fragments were sequenced, and products identifi ed by a search through the NCBI database. We validated putative cofactor interaction with GR using both in vitro GST pull-down and in vivo co-immunoprecipitation assays. The effect of the cofactor on GR transcriptional activity was determined by co-transfecting either HeLa, U2OS-hGR, or HTR8 cells (a fi rst trimester extravillous trophoblast cell line) with an expression vector for the putative cofactor in the presence of 2 different GR-responsive luciferase reporter genes. Results: Sequence analysis revealed that one of the cDNA fragments corresponds to the transcriptional cofactor DRIP100 (MED24). DRIP100 repressed GR transactivation in a dose dependent manner in both U2OS-hGR (not shown), HeLa, and HTR8 cells (Figure 1 ). We further demonstrated that the carboxyl-terminal region of DRIP100 is suffi cient for interaction with GR. Conclusion: GR binds to DRIP100 and overexpression of DRIP100 reduces GR transcriptional activity in a variety of cell types including a human trophoblast cell line. Future studies are directed toward understanding the mechanisms by which DRIP100 limits GR activity as a corepressor and could affect placental development. Nagamani, * Hui-Qun Wang, Chandrasekhar Yallampalli, * Yuan L Dong. * Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. OBJECTIVES: Normal placentation requires suffi cient cytotrophoblast invasion into the uterine wall and subsequent remodeling of maternal uterine vasculature. In this process, trophoblast cell-derived angiogenic growth factors, vascular endothelium growth factor (VEGF), plays a key role in promoting placental vascularization. However, the regulation of VEGF at the implantation site remains unclear. The present study was designed to determine the colocalization of VEGF, adrenomedullin (ADM) and its receptors at the human feto-maternal interface and examine the effect of ADM on angiogenic growth factor expression during early pregnancy. METHODS: Villous tissues were obtained from women undergoing fi rst trimester legal pregnancy termination. The cellular localization of VEGF, PlGF, ADM and its receptor components calcitonin receptor-like receptor (CRLR) and receptor activity modifying protein 2 and 3 (RAMP 2 & 3 ) was determined by immunohistochemistry. The villous tissues and extravillous trophoblast cells (HTR-8/SV neo cell) were cultured in RPMI 1640 in the presence or absence of ADM. The expression of mRNA for VEGF and angiostatic factors soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase (sFlt-1) were determined by RT-PCR. The concentration of sFlt-1 in villous explant culture media was determined using enzyme immunoassay (ELISA). RESULTS: 1) Immunohistochemical studies showed that VEGF is co-localized with ADM, and its receptor components CRLR/RAMP 2 and RAMP 3 on both villous and extravillous trophoblast cells in fi rst trimester villous tissues; 2) VEGF mRNA expression by HTR-8/SV neo cell line was signifi cantly increased by ADM in a dose dependent pattern (24 h; p<0.05); 3) sFlt-1 mRNA expression by HTR-8/SV neo cells was signifi cantly suppressed by ADM (10 -8 M) after 24h treatment (p<0.05), while without change in the full length Flt-1 (p > 0.05); and 4) In human fi rst-trimester villous tissue ADM (10 -8 M) failed to signifi cantly stimulate mRNA expression for VEGF (p > 0.05), however, ADM (10 -8 M) signifi cantly inhibited both sFlt-mRNA and protein secretion in the culture media (p < 0.01). CONCLUSION: This study supports the hypothesis that ADM may stimulate trophoblast cell-derived angiogenic growth factors and inhibit angiostatic growth factor during early pregnancy, thus playing a role in placental vascular development and fetal growth. The amount of PGs is determined by the expression and activity of COX-2 and PGDH, which catalyze respectively the limiting reactions of PG synthesis and metabolism. COX-2 and PGDH are both expressed in human chorion. We previously observed in chorion trophoblasts that calcium ionophore A23187 up-regulates COX-2 and down-regulates PGDH protein and mRNA expression. We investigated on the role of PKC, target of calcium, and of MAPKs (p38, JNK and ERK1/2) in COX-2 and PGDH gene expression regulation. Methods: Primary cultures of human chorion trophoblasts were treated as follow: 1) PKC activator phorbol ester PMA 10 -9 , 10 -8 , 10 -7 and 10 -6 M for 24h; 2) PMA 10 -7 M for 1h, 2h, 4h, 8h and 24h; 3) PMA (10 -7 M) in presence of the PKC inhibitor GF109203X (10 -5 M) for 8h; 4) A23187 (10 -6 M) or PMA (10 -7 M) in presence of p38, JNK or MEK1/2 inhibitors (SB203580, SP600125 and U0126, 10 -5 M) for 8h. COX-2 and PGDH expression in response to treatments was assessed with Real Time PCR. GAPDH and β-actin were used for data normalization. Results: PMA up-regulated COX-2 and down-regulated PGDH mRNA expression in a dose-and time-dependent manner. GF109203X reversed PMA effect on both enzymes. SB203580 attenuated the effect of PMA and A23187 on COX-2. U0126 attenuated the effect of PMA, but not of A23187, on COX-2. SP600125 apparently had no effect on COX-2 expression. All MAPKs inhibitors failed to reverse the negative effect of either A23187 or PMA on PGDH. Discussion: Calcium influx and PKC activation induce COX-2 and simultaneously inhibit PGDH mRNA expression. p38 MAPK attenuated the positive effect of A23187 and PMA on COX-2 expression. We speculate that an increase in intracellular calcium activates calcium-dependent PKC isoforms which, in turn, acting via p38 MAPK, induce COX-2 mRNA expression. MEK1/2 inhibitor partly inverted the effect of PMA on COX-2, but not the effect of the ionophore. Therefore, we cannot exclude the involvement of calciumindependent PKC isoforms able to induce COX-2 via MEK1/2 activation. The intracellular pathway controlling PGDH inhibition in response to calcium infl ux and PKC activation does not involve MAPKs. Objective: Glucocorticoids (GCs) play an important role in not only parturition but also fetal growth and maturation. However, excessive amounts of GCs may lead to preterm labor and intrauterine growth restriction. 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (11β-HSD2) exhibits only oxidase activity (cortisol to cortisone, its biologically inactive metabolite) under physiological conditions, and acts as a placental barrier to protect the fetus from high levels of maternal GCs. On the other hand, progesterone (P4) is one of major steroid products of the human placenta that play an integrative role in the regulation of pregnancy maintenance and fetal maturation, and has been reported as a potent inhibitor of 11β-HSD2. In the event of intrauterine infection, eicosanoids including lipoxygenase (LOX) metabolites are produced in placenta, and these may contribute to preterm labor and adverse fetal outcomes. We reported previously (at SGI 2006) that LOX pathway regulated both 11β-HSD2 activity and endogeneous P4 production. However, it is still unclear that the effect of LOX pathway on 11β-HSD2 might be mediated through P4. Therefore, we have evaluated the interaction between LOX pathway and P4 on 11β-HSD2 in cultured human placental trophoblast. Methods: Placental trophoblast cells were isolated from human term placenta, and were treated with leukotriene B 4 (LTB 4 ), 12(S)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoate (12-HETE), nordihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA), P4 and RU486. 11β-HSD2 activity was determined by radiometric conversion assay. 11β-HSD2 expression was evaluated by Western blot analysis. Results: 11β-HSD2 activity was signifi cantly down-regulated with P4 and up-regulated with NDGA or RU486. It was also up-regulated with NDGA plus RU486, but the effect was not signifi cantly enhanced by RU486. 11β-HSD2 protein expression was also decreased with P4, and increased with NDGA or RU486. LOX metabolites reduced both the level of 11β-HSD2 activity and protein expression with NDGA or RU486, but there was no signifi cant change with LOX metabolites alone. Objective: In human pregnancy adrenomedullin (AM) is produced by the placenta and fetal membranes and is implicated in different functions from implantation to delivery. We have recently demonstrated that AM receptor (AM-R) is localized in intrauterine tissues and that its distribution changes with gestational age. There is evidence that both the peptide and its receptors are regulated by endocrine factors. AM synthesis by cytotrophoblast cells in culture is stimulated by glucocorticoids. In the rat uterus AM-R levels are regulated by steroid hormones. We speculate that in placental tissues steroid hormones may modulate AM-R expression, regulating, in turn, AM activity. In the present study we investigated the effects of betamethasone and progesterone on AM-R in trophoblast and amnion cells. Methods: Primary cultures of cytotrophoblasts were isolated from human term placentas (n=6) and were maintained in serum-free medium for up to 96 h with and without 10 -7 M betamethasone (BETA), and progesterone (P4). Corion trophoblast and amnion cells were obtained by term fetal membranes (N=6). Time response to BETA, and P4 was performed with the concentration of 10 -7 M at 2h, 8h and 24h. The effect of treatment at each time point was compared to control sample. Immunocytochemical analysis was performed by the avidin/biotin immunoperoxidase method using a specifi c antibody to AM receptor (dilution 1:400). Results: AM-R was localized on either placenta and chorion trophoblast cells and in amnion cells of fetal membranes. The prevalence of immunoreactive positive cells for AM-R and the intensity of the staining was not affected by BETA or P4 treatment at any time-point. Conclusion: The presence of binding sites in the placenta and fetal membranes indicates that AM-R might modulate AM function within fetoplacental tissues. However, differently from AM, AM-R expression in human placenta and fetal membranes seems not to be regulated by steroid hormones. This fi nding may suggest that steroid hormones affect AM function in pregnancy acting on the synthesis and release instead of on AM-R binding. Introduction: In ruminants, placentomes, composed of a fetal portion (cotyledon, COT) and maternal portion (caruncle, CAR), promote fetal nutrient uptake. Accelerated fetal growth is associated with up-regulation of placental nutrient transport. Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway is an important nutrient sensing pathway in mammalian cells and MAPK/ERK1/2 and PI3K/Akt growth signaling pathways are linked to placentomal vascularity. Thus these pathways may play a role in placentomal nutrient transfer. Objective: Localization and quantitation of mTOR, ERK1/2 and Akt in the placentomes from overfed vs. control fed ewes. Methods: Ewes were randomly assigned to a control (C, 100% of NRC recommendations, n=5) or obesogenic (OB, 150% NRC, n=5) diet from 60 days before to 75 days after conception when they were euthanized. COT and CAR tissues were frozen in liquid nitrogen for later protein extraction and Western analysis, and placentomes were fi xed with paraformaldehyde and paraffi n embedded. Paraffi n sections were used to localize mTOR, Akt and ERK and their phosphorylated forms in COT and CAR tissues using specifi c antisera and for vascular density via image analysis. Results: OB and C ewes increased their body weight by ∼50% and ∼7% from diet initiation to necropsy. Fetuses from OB ewes were ∼30% heavier (P<0.05) than those from C ewes on day 75 (374 ± 10 vs. 268 ± 12 g). Preliminary data suggest a reduction (P<0.10) in COT mTOR, Akt and ERK and their phosphorylated forms, in association with reduced vascularity in placentomes of OB vs. C ewes. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that mTOR, Akt, ERK1/2 and their phosphorylated forms were localized in the endothelium and smooth muscle cells of COT and CAR blood vessels. In the placentomal tissues other than vessels, total mTOR, total Akt and total ERK and their phosporylated forms were localized in both cytoplasm and nucleus of trophoblast cells at the fetal:maternal interface. Conclusion: mTOR, Akt, ERK1/2 and their phosporylated forms were mainly located in placentomal blood vessels and trophectoderm where they could play an active role in nutrient sensing and transport. NIH INBRE 1P20RR16474. Although its precise biologic role is not well known, genomic methylation is thought to play an important role in the regulation of gene expression and in chromatin structure in mammals. Anecdotal comments as well as studies from the early 1980s suggest that human trophoblast DNA is substantially less methylated than DNA from other sources, but these data have never been confi rmed, and a systematic determination of the extent and distribution of methylation in human or other mammalian trophoblast has never been performed. We have developed a novel method, based on methylation-specifi c amplifi cation followed by comparative hybridization, that allows genome-wide comparisons of methylation between DNA samples from different tissues. We have used this method to perform a global comparison of CpG methylation between fi rst trimester trophoblast and DNA derived from lymphocytes and other sources. Our results indicate that, overall, trophoblast DNA is indeed hypomethylated. Surprisingly, hypomethylated segments are largely concentrated in specifi c chromosomal regions such that each chromosome has its own specifi c pattern. Some chromosomes (eg 16 and 21) show much higher levels of hypomethylation than others. Oligonucleotide microarray analysis of chromosome 21 indicates that approximately 1000 segments out of a total of 46,470 tested (∼2%) show strong evidence of hypomethylation and that these are clustered in two regions near the centromere and telomere. Hypomethylated segments have a ∼5 fold higher than expected probability of occurring within expressed sequence (known genes and/or ESTs), further corroborating the highly non-random nature of trophoblast hypomethylation. Unexpectedly, small regions of relative hyper-methylation are also present as well. Conclusions: Our data strongly support the idea that DNA methylation plays a signifi cant role in the trophoblast. As a fi rst step towards understanding that role, we plan future studies aimed at understanding how methylation changes as a function of gestational age as well as disease such as pre-eclampsia and IUGR. Introduction: eNOS is an enzyme known to regulate blood fl ow that is modulated by shear stress. Shear stress also modulates the level of activation (phosphorylation) of ERK1/2 and AKT in different tissues. In an established hyperthermic (HT) ovine model of fetal growth restriction (FGR), we hypothesize that phosphorylated (p)ERK1/2 and/or AKT protein levels would be increased in the placenta and that this correlates with an increase in placental eNOS protein observed in these tissues at 130 days of gestation (dGA) (near-term) animals. Study designs: 4 ewes were exposed to HT conditions for 80 days to induce FGR and 4 were used as controls in ambient conditions. Umbilical artery Doppler measurements were performed and aortic catheters were placed for blood gas analysis and systemic pressure determination. Placentomes were separated into caruncle and cotyledon components and used in Western blot analysis with antibodies against eNOS, pERK, total ERK, pAKT and total AKT. Results: Compared to controls, HT pregnancies showed: 1) smaller fetuses (p≤0.03) and placentae (p≤0.03), 2) signifi cantly higher S/D ratios (p<0.009) and higher systemic blood pressures (p<0.03), 3) decreased fetal O 2 saturation (p<0.008) and O 2 levels (p<0.002), 4) a 1.5-fold increase in eNOS protein concentration (p<0.04) in the cotyledon tissues with no signifi cant differences for the caruncle tissues, 5) a 1.5-fold trend of increase in pERK (p<0.08) in the caruncle tissues with no differences in pAKT, 6) a signifi cant increase of pAKT protein (p<0.05) in the cotyledons but no differences of pERK protein expression in this tissue. Conclusion: pERK protein expression was increased near term in the caruncle (maternal compartment) and pAKT protein was increased in the cotyledon (fetal compartment) of HT animals and this increase may be secondary to shear stress at term as suggested by abnormal Doppler and systemic hypertension (Supported by NIH grant R01 HL071990-01A1). The Background:In the human placenta, syncytiotrophoblast has a key role in transporting solutes, hormone production and as the primary maternal-fetal barrier. Syncytiotrophoblast is formed by the proliferation, differentiation and fusion of the underlying villous cytotrophoblast (CTB) and although a balance between these processes is critical for normal placental development, their regulation is poorly understood. In many cellular systems, IGF1R-activated signalling events are important in proliferation and recently the tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) SHP-2 has been implicated in these pathways. Although SHP-2 is highly transcribed in placenta, its cell localisation and role are unknown. mRNA encoding a structurally similar PTP, SHP-1, is also present; in other systems SHP-1 inhibits cell proliferation, but again, its function in placenta is unclear. Objective:To examine the expression and function of SHP-1 and SHP-2 in the human placenta. Methods:We have developed an explant model of human placenta in which the spatial and ontological relationships between cells in the villus are maintained, in order to examine the regulation of placental cell function. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Western blotting of placenta explants was undertaken to examine expression and localisation of SHP-1 and SHP-2 in the placenta. To investigate the role of these PTPs in regulating CTB proliferation, explants were cultured in serum free DMEM/F12, containing BrdU, +/-10nM IGF-I for up to 4 days. Levels of proliferation in the tissue was then analysed by IHC using specifi c antisera for the proliferative markers, BrdU and Ki67. We have established that both SHP-1 and SHP-2 proteins are expressed in the human placenta. SHP-1 is primarily localised to the CTB whereas SHP-2 is present in CTB and, albeit more weakly, in syncytiotrophoblast. Proliferation assays revealed that CTB proliferation increased during 4 days in culture and was further increased by IGF-I. As proliferation increased, CTB expression of SHP-1 decreased whereas SHP-2 was upregulated. Conclusions: Our data demonstrate for the fi rst time, the localisation and modulation of SHP-1 and SHP-2 in the human placenta. We suggest opposing roles for these PTPs in regulating CTB proliferation. Function blocking experiments are planned to confi rm that SHP-2 is a positive regulator, and that SHP-1 is involved in negatively regulating proliferation. Objective: urocortin 2 (Ucn2) and urocortin 3 (Ucn3) are new members of the CRH family of peptides binding selectively the CRF-R2. Although their expression and localization in the human placenta has been described their regulation remains unknown. The aims herein were to investigate whether Ucn2 and Ucn3 expression in vitro were infl uenced by low-oxygenation condition and to understand the role of HIF-1a in regulating their expression. Methods: cell culture and fi rst trimester explants were obtained from elective termination of pregnancy and incubated overnight at 37°C in standard condition (20%O 2 ) to allow attachment then placed in an atmosphere of 8% or 3%O 2 (48h at 37°C). Moreover, placental explants were exposed to dimethyloxalyl-glycin(DMOG), an inhibitor of prolyl-hydroxylases, which mimics hypoxia by increasing HIF-1a stability and to determine if intermittent change in oxygenation affects Ucn2 and Ucn3 expression hypoxia/re-oxygenation(HR) was performed. Total mRNA was collected for real-time qPCR evaluation. Results: increased Ucn2-Ucn3 expression occurs when oxygen tension is lower. Ucn2-Ucn3 expression levels from the cell culture where ten to thirtyfold higher when exposed to 3%O 2 compared to standard conditions. Furthermore, signifi cantly higher mRNA expression was found when fi rst trimester explants were kept in hypoxic environment. Moreover, Ucn2 and Ucn3 expression by DMOG-treated explants was signifi cantly greater than that of explants kept at 20% and that Ucn2-Ucn3 transcript levels in fi rst trimester explants exposed to hypoxiareoxygenation (HR) were higher than in control. Discussion: Ucn2-3 expression is sensitive to O 2 tensions and regulated by HIF-1a. Results in fi rst trimester placental explants, a unique model to study O 2 infl uence as driving force in human trophoblast cell differentiation, development and function allows us to speculate that these peptides might act as differentiating and proliferating factors in low oxygen conditions while their increase in hypoxia-reoxygenation may indicate their involvement in pathological oxidative stress-related conditions as preeclampsia. Determination of the NAFT5/TonEBP Transcription Factor in the Human Placenta. Juan A Arroyo, 1 Bradley Ziebell, 1 Cecila Teng, 2 Henry L Galan, *1 Frederick C Battaglia. *2 1 Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Colorado and Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO, USA; 2 Pediatrics, University of Colorado and Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO, USA. Introduction: In many tissues, osmotic stress causes the accumulation of organic osmolytes such as inositol and sorbitol. Previous studies in our laboratory demonstrated a signifi cant umbilical uptake of sorbitol in both the ovine and human fetal circulations. In addition, we have found high free sorbitol concentrations within the ovine placenta. The induction of the genes for sorbitol synthesis from glucose occurs at the transcriptional level and is mediated by the transcription factor NFAT5/TonEBP. In this study, we tested for the presence of the NFAT5 mRNA and protein levels in the human placenta and will confi rm the levels of sorbitol and inositol in the ovine placenta. Study design: Normal human placentae and ovine placentomes were collected and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. RNA was isolated and cDNA made. RT-PCR was done using primers from the human NFTA5 sequence. Western blot was performed for protein analysis with an antibody against human NFAT5. Actin westerns on the same blots were used to account for inter-lane loading variation. HPLC was used to determine the levels of inositol and sorbitol in the ovine placentae. Results: We demonstrated: 1) NFAT5 mRNA in the human and ovine placenta 2) NFAT5 protein in the human placenta, but not in the ovine placenta, 3) signifi cant high levels of sorbitol (641.0 mg/kg wet T) and inositol (388.9mg/kg wet T) in the ovine placenta. The in vivo studies of sorbitol and inositol umbilical uptake led us to determine the presence of NFAT5 at the level of mRNA and protein in the human placenta and mRNA in the sheep placenta. The fi nding of this transcription factor has not previously been reported in the placenta. We also observed high levels of sorbitol and inositol in the ovine placenta suggesting the presence of a mechanism of induction for these molecules. Presence of NFAT5 in the placenta suggests an involvement for this protein in the induction of these osmolites (Supported by NIH grant R01 HDO34837-08 Objective: Decidua is the maternal portion of gestational tissue derived from endometrium that plays a crucial role in communication between mother and fetus. At term, two distinct areas of decidua are identifi ed: decidual basalis (DB) of basal plate and decidual parietalis (DP) of fetal membranes. We hypothesized that differential decidual localization is accompanied by distinct profi les in gene expression. Methods: Microarray analysis was employed to demonstrate gene expression profi les for DB, DP and placental villous tissue (VT) carefully dissected from placentas and fetal membranes of patients at term without labor (n=4). Total RNA from each specimen was hybridized to an Affymetrix HG_U133 Plus 2.0 chip containing approximately 47,400 human genes and expressed sequence tags (ESTs). The microarray results were analyzed with GCOS 1.4 and GeneSpring GX 7.3.1 software. After per chip and per gene normalization as well as exclusion of genes absent in all samples, differences and correlations among different tissues were analyzed by one-way ANOVA (p < 0.05) and Pearson correlation analysis. Gene ontological classifi cation was applied to cluster the gene exclusively expressed in DP. Results: 1) The gene expression profi le of DP is markedly different from that of DB and VT (correlation coeffi cients: DP vs. DB: 0.237; DP vs. VT: 0.08; z-statistics: 12.9, p < 0.001); 2) 762 genes were uniquely expressed in DP; 3) Differentially expressed genes for DP are mainly involved in catalytic activity, transport, development, adhesion, transcription factors, differentiation, immune response, cytoskeleton, G-protein-coupled receptors, proliferation, apoptosis and cell motility. Conclusions: DP is characterized by a unique gene expression profi le compared to DB and VT. This fi nding suggests the topography of the decidua impacts on its gene expression, thereby fulfi lling a unique role at the maternal-fetal interface. To determine the pharmacological profi le of receptor(s) responsible for the histamine-mediated relaxation of CPAs. Method: Term placentas (N=8) were obtained post-delivery from uncomplicated pregnancies. Biopsies were placed into ice-cold HCO 3 --buffered physiologic salt solution (PSS). CPAs were dissected, mounted onto a wire myograph, normalised at 0.9 of L 5.1kPa and equilibrated (37 o C; 20 mins; 5%O 2 /5%CO 2 ). Contraction was assessed with 120mM potassium solution (KPSS). Histamine hydrochloride (1μM for 60 mins) was added to pre-contracted vessels (EC 80 dose of the thromboxane-mimetic U46619 for 30 mins) in the presence of the H1 receptor antagonist mepyramine (MEP; 3μM), the H2 receptor antagonist famotidine (FAM; 3μM) or both mepyramine and famotidine (MEP+FAM; both 3μM). Results: Normalised luminal internal diameters were 244±18μm (n=32 arteries). KPSS-induced contraction was 6.6±0.5kPa. HIS produced a triphasic effect. (i) An initial small transient contraction (104±1% of contraction to U46619 at EC 80 concentration; n=8) abolished by the presence of MEP. (ii) Subsequently, a signifi cant relaxation (to 65±12% of pre-contraction, N=8). Maximal relaxation was signifi cantly attenuated in the presence of FAM (to 91±2%; N=8; P<0.05 ANOVA) and FAM+MEP (to 96±2%; N=8; P<0.05 ANOVA) but not with MEP alone (to 70±10%; N=8; P>0.05 ANOVA). (iii) In the continued presence of HIS, a slight recovery of tone occured such that, after 60 mins, relaxation was 81±12% N=8; P<0.05 t-test). In the presence of FAM+MEP there was no signifi cant HIS-induced relaxation detectable at 60 mins (101±4%; N=8; P>0.05 t-test). Conclusion: 1μM HIS elicits a complex response; a small transient contraction followed by a biphasic relaxation, in CPAs precontracted with a near-maximal dose of U46619. The initial transient was abolished by H1 receptor blockade whereas H2 receptor blockade was needed to signifi cantly modify the relaxant response. Our data suggest that HIS may play an important role in the control of vascular tone in the fetoplacental circulation. [1] [2] [3] . We have demonstrated that oxygen can modify agonist-induced contraction and relaxation of isolated chorionic plate arteries and veins 4 using wire myography. Aim: To determine the effect of altered oxygenation on vascular tone in pressurised placental chorionic plate veins. Method: Term placentas (N=11) were obtained after vaginal delivery or Caesarean section from normal pregnancies. Biopsies were placed into icecold HCO 3 --buffered physiologic salt solution (PSS). Isolated human placental chorionic plate veins were equilibrated in vitro under conditions of oxygenation (5% O 2 / 5%CO 2 at 37°C); intraluminal pressure (20mmHg) and fl ow (20μl/min intraluminal fl ow) designed to mimic an in vivo physiological setting. The effects of hypoxia on vascular tone were assessed by switching to 5%CO 2 in N 2 . Experiments were repeated in the presence of mild agonist-induced pretone (thromboxane-mimetic U46619; <10 -8 M). Results: Upon completion of the equilibration period, mean luminal diameter of chorionic plate veins was 274±12μm (N=11). Media oxygenation post equilibration was 37.3±0.3 torr (782 oxygen meter; Strathkelvin Instruments). Hypoxia, (pO 2 ; 2.1±0.1 torr) was accompanied by a small but signifi cant decrease in venous diameter (5.4±0.3% of initial resting diameter in 5% O 2 / 5%CO 2 ; P<0.05 t-test). U46619 (concentration range 10 -9 -10 -8 M) produced a small contraction, as assessed by a 12.4±1.5% decrease in diameter. In the presence of pre-tone, switching to 5%CO 2 / N 2 reduced pO 2 to 1.7±0.1 torr. This reduction in oxygenation produced a further signifi cant decrease in arterial diameter (11.6±1.5% of initial resting diameter in 5% O 2 / 5%CO 2 ; P<0.05 t-test; P<0.05 paired t-test vs. no tone). Conclusion: In chorionic plate veins from normal term placentas equilibrated at 20mmHg pressure with intraluminal fl ow at 5% oxygenation, conditions designed to closely mimic anticipated in vivo physiology, subsequent hypoxia elicits vasoconstriction. 1. Howard, Hosokawa and Maguire (1987 Background: Glucocorticoids play a role in vascular reactivity by increasing vascular resistance via effects on both endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells. Excess glucocorticoids in pregnancy, either exogenous or endogenous, are associated with intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Glucocorticoids, either dexamethasone or betamethasone, are administered in the management of threatened preterm labour. We therefore hypothesized that exposure to dexamethasone alters placental vascular reactivity and thus may contribute to IUGR when administered in pregnancy. Method: Term placentas were obtained after vaginal delivery or Caesarean section from uncomplicated pregnancies (N = 22 placentas). Chorionic plate arteries were dissected, mounted on a wire myograph, normalised at 0.9 of L 5.1kPa and equilibrated for 20mins at 37 o C in 5% O 2 / 5% CO 2 . Arterial viability was assessed with a 120mMol KCl. Arteries were incubated for 60mins with dexamethasone (10 -6 M). Arteries were then treated with U46619 (10 -10 -2x10 -6 M) and the effect on vasoconstriction was measured. Time controls were performed in parallel. Results: Normalised luminal diameters of chorionic plate arteries were 327 ± 178μm (n=66 arteries). There was no signifi cant modifi cation in baseline tone. U46619-induced contraction was signifi cantly attenuated by pre-incubation with dexamethasone in placental arteries from female infants (p<0.05; N=10; RM-ANOVA). Conclusions: These data suggest that the acute exposure of dexamethasone to chorionic plate arteries signifi cantly attenuates vasoconstriction in placentas from female infants only. The exact mechanism behind this action is unknown, but is likely to involve a non-genomic signalling pathway which stimulates endothelial nitric oxide synthase and the release of nitric oxide producing vasodilatation. Dexamethasone is not a substrate for 11β-HSD-2 and therefore it seems unlikely that the gender differences observed result from differential expression of this metabolizing enzyme. Natural Killer Cells on Vascular Structure. Judith N Bulmer, 1 Gendie E Lash, 2 Katsuhiko Naruse, 2 Barbara A Innes, 2 Harry A Otun, 2 Roger F Searle, 3 Stephen C Robson. *2 1 CALS, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom; 2 SARS, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom; 3 MED, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom. Background: Remodeling of uterine spiral arteries (SpA) is essential for successful human placentation. Research to date has focused on the role of trophoblast in this process, although morphological alterations are seen in SpA before tropohoblast invasion. Uterine natural killer (uNK) cells appear to be essential for arterial modifi cation in mouse pregnancy, mediated by interferon-γ. Several angiogenic growth factors are produced by human uNK cells but evidence of a role for uNK cells in priming of SpA prior to trophoblast invasion in human pregnancy is circumstantial. We propose that uNK cells cause alterations in the media of uterine SpA faciltating subsequent invasion by extravillous trophoblast. Objective: To develop a simple in vitro model to allow investigation of the role of uNK cells in priming of uterine SpA in early pregnancy and the underlying mechanisms. Methods: Chorionic artery segments were dissected from normal term placentas. Intact cross sections 5mm length were incubated in medium alone or in medium containing 20% (vol/vol) supernatant harvested after 24h culture of uNK cells (10-12 weeks gestational age) purifi ed by immunomagnetic positive selection (CD56+). Chorionic arteries were harvested after 5 days, formalin fi xed and paraffi n embedded (n=5). 3μm sections were immunostained for h-caldesmon and myosin heavy chain. Immunoreactivity of medial smooth muscle was analysed using an Adobe Photoshop-based technique. Protein was extracted from other chorionic artery samples (n=3) for Western analysis of connexins. Results: After 5 days culture control samples showed intact structure and endothelial preservation. There was increased separation of chorionic artery smooth muscle after incubation in uNK cell supernatant compared with controls (surface area of h-caldesmon positive immunostaining: controls 49.6±8.1%; uNK cell supernatant 26.9±8.2%; P=0.016). Western analysis showed reduced connexin 43 in samples incubated with uNK cell supernatant compared with controls. Conclusions: Soluble products of uNK cells induce structural changes in an in vitro model. Chorionic artery rings provide a useful, simple and readily available in vitro model to investigate the effect of uNK cells on arterial structure which complements in situ studies. The physiology of the placental vasculature is unlike any other human organ. As endothelial cells isolated from different vascular beds exhibit unique gene expression profi les, this concept likely also applies to placental microvascular endothelial cells due to their unique role in placental development and function. However, fetal microvascular endothelial cells and their RNA, as yet, have not been successfully isolated from placenta. Thus, this important vascular compartment has not yet been well studied. Our objective was to develop a unique protocol to isolate a pure solution of fetal microvascular endothelial cells and extract RNA. Random 50g samples were obtained from 3 normal term and 6 preterm placentas. The outer 2/3 of placenta was sampled (i.e. closest to the maternal surface), to preferentially sample the terminal villi. Fresh placental tissue was minced, and then digested with trypsin, separating trophoblast cells away from the microvasculature. The remaining tissue was further digested with collagenase, separating the cells into suspension. Blood cells were removed from the suspension by gradient separation with Ficoll. Cell viability was confi rmed using Trypan blue exclusion. Tocosylated magnetic Dynabeads, labeled with Human Endothelial Antigen (HEA) lectin (using the method of Gallery et al), were administered to the suspension, positively selecting intact endothelial cells. The purity of the endothelial cells collected was assessed by CD31 immunocytochemistry. RNA was extracted immediately, purifi ed using Trizol, and stored at -80°C. This novel protocol has been successful in isolating 95% pure microvascular endothelial cells, with between 22.8μg -110.3μg of RNA extracted per 50g of placental sample. The RNA collected was of high quality, and therefore suitable for microarray, RT-PCR, and/or Northern blot. This novel method successfully isolates a previously diffi cult to access cell type, and will lead to advances in our understanding of gene expression in fetal microvascular endothelial cells in normal and pathologic pregnancies. This work is supported by the MFM Fellow's Research Fund, Mount Sinai Hospital. Background: Pre-eclampsia is associated with oxidative stress. The vitamins in pre-eclampsia (VIP) trial [1] assessed whether maternal vitamin C and E supplementation could reduce pre-eclampsia (PE) in women at risk. Increased fetoplacental vascular resistance, a complication of PE, might arise from inappropriate vessel reactivity secondary to chronic oxidative stress and could be alleviated by antioxidants in women at risk. To investigate the effect of vitamin C and E supplementation on placental chorionic plate artery function in a cohort of VIP trial participants. Methods: Post-delivery, chorionic plate arteries from women randomized to antioxidants (N=15) or placebo (N=21) were prepared for wire myography. Arterial contractility to U46619 (thromboxane A 2 mimetic; 10 -10 -10 -6 M) was determined. Paired vessels were incubated with xanthine (XA;10 -4 M) plus xanthine oxidase (XO;10mU/ml), to generate reactive oxygen species or vehicle diluent during the remaining experiment. After 10 min, the U46619 dose-response curve was repeated. Endothelium-independent relaxation was assessed in pre-constricted vessels (U46619 EC 80 ) using sodium nitroprusside (SNP; NO donor, 10 -9 -10 -4 M). Results: Maximal contraction was attenuated by antioxidant supplementation (antioxidant v placebo; 7.6±0.7kPa vs. 9.9±0.8kPa, mean±SEM P<0.05, M-W U test) but the EC 50 was unaffected (antioxidant vs. placebo; 64±13nM vs. 39±8nM). Supplementation did not affect relaxation to SNP compared to placebo. XA/XO enhanced basal tone and contraction to U46619 in both vitamin and placebo groups. XA/XO enhanced relaxation to SNP in the placebo group only (maximum relaxation to 43+5% vs. control relaxation to 55±6% of U46619 EC 80 constriction with 10 -5 M SNP; P<0.05 2-way ANOVA). Conclusion: Vitamin C and E supplements improved the vascular reactivity of chorionic plate arteries in women at risk of PE. We propose that antioxidant supplementation might improve placental vascular function and blood fl ow in-vivo. The VIP trial demonstrated that prophylactic antioxidant treatment did not reduce the incidence of PE in women at risk [1] . These data suggest that oxidative stress effects on the placental vasculature are not the major cause of PE. Objective: Pregnancy is characterized by increased generation of thrombin and is a hypercoagulable state. The balance between pro-and anti-coagulant factors is particularly important in the intervillous space of the placenta, where both prevention of thrombosis and effi cient hemostasis are required. This study was conducted to determine whether the placenta and its cellular compartments express subsets of vitamin K-dependent, anti-coagulant plasma proteins: protein C (PC), protein S (PS), protein Z (PZ). The conventional view has been that these proteins are produced by the liver. Methods: The expression of PC, PS, and PZ mRNA and proteins were studied in preterm (n=9) and term placentas (n=24). Expression was also screened in HTR-8/SVneo and JAR cell lines. mRNA in situ hybridization, qRT-PCR, immunohistochemistry, and immunoblotting were used for analyses. Results: 1) PC, PS, and PZ mRNA and protein expression was detected in the placenta and fetal membranes by mRNA in situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry, and immunoblotting; 2) Extravillous and villous trophoblasts were strongly immunoreactive to PC and PZ; 3) Amnion cells showed distinct immunoreactivity to PC and PZ; 4) In contrast, trophoblasts and amnion cells were weakly reactive to PS. However, PS mRNA expression was relatively abundant compared to that of PC and PZ; 5) PC, PS, and PZ mRNA and protein were also detected in HTR-8/SVneo and JAR trophoblast cells; and 6) Maternal decidua did not show immunoreactivity to PC, PS, and PZ. Conclusion: 1) The human placenta is a novel extra-hepatic source of anticoagulant proteins PC, PS, and PZ; 2) The expression of PC, PS, and PZ by trophoblasts, but not in decidua, suggests compartmentalization of anticoagulant factors during pregnancy; 3) The lower expression of PS protein, but not mRNA in trophoblasts, suggests that a post-transcriptional regulatory mechanism is operative; and 4) We propose that the expression of anti-coagulant proteins by villous trophoblast is central to the prevention of thrombosis in the intervillous space. Regeneration? Thushari I Alahakoon, 1 Susan Arbuckle, 2 Weiyi Zhang, 1 Brian J Trudinger. *1 1 Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Sydney at Westmead Hospital, Westmead, NSW, Australia; 2 Anatomical Pathology, New Childrens Hospital, Westmead, NSW, Australia. Objective Placental vascular disease (PVD) can be recognized in the antenatal period by a high resistance pattern in the umbilical artery Doppler (UAD) fl ow velocity waveforms. It is associated with intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) has been attributed a major role in the mediation of vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. The aim of this study was to determine the expression and localization of placental VEGF and its receptor Flt-1 in pregnancies complicated by PVD with and without pre-eclampsia. Placentas were studies from four groups of patients. Group1: uncomplicated term pregnancies (n=5); group 2: pre-eclampsia with normal UAD (n=9); group 3: pre-eclampsia with abnormal UAD and IUGR (n=6); group 4: IUGR with abnormal UAD (n=10). 4 placental samples were examined from each pregnancy. Immuno-histochemical staining intensity for VEGF and Flt-1 was assessed by an independent pathologist and correlated with histopathological changes. The expression of VEGF and Flt-1 correlated with histological changes, rather than with the clinical groups. The placentas from groups 2-4 displayed focal areas of villous infarction. The residual villi within samples containing infarcted villi, demonstrated reduced VEGF immuno-reactivity in the syncytiotrophoblast (p<0.001). Placental samples without evidence of villous infarction demonstrated increased VEGF expression in syncytiotrophoblast (p<0.0001). Flt-1 expression was signifi cantly increased in all samples from groups 2-4. (p<0.001). We have correlated the angiogenic response of VEGF and Flt-1 in the placenta to histopathological changes as well as clinical features of UAD waveforms and pre-eclampsia. Placental vascular disease is a multifocal disease of the placenta with evidence of villous infarction. We have demonstrated that villi in the peri-infarction areas express reduced VEGF while rest of the placenta shows a compensatory increase in VEGF and Flt-1. These responses may refl ect a placental repair or regeneration process to restore the vascularity in face of an insult. The results of our study raise the possibility that these changes in VEGF and Flt-1 expression may be a consequence rather than the cause of placental vascular disease and pre-eclampsia. Objective: Acute funisitis is the histologic hallmark of the 'fetal infl ammatory response syndrome' (FIRS), which is a risk factor for preterm delivery. A key feature of funisitis is umbilical vasculitis. Phlebitis invariably precedes arteritis, marking different stages of FIRS. Yet, the mechanism for the increased susceptibility of the umbilical vein (UV) for leukocyte infi ltration is unknown. This study was conducted to determine if there is a difference in the proinfl ammatory response between the UV and umbilical artery (UA) in patients with and without funisitis. Methods: Segments of UV and UA were collected from the following groups: 1) normal pregnancy at term not in labor (n=12); 2) normal pregnancy at term in labor (n=12); 3) preterm delivery (PTD) with and without histologic chorioamnionitis (n=11 and n=14, respectively). mRNA expression of interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and IL-8 was evaluated by qRT-PCR. Explant cultures from 5 sets of UV and UA from normal pregnancies at term were used to study the regulation patterns of cytokines following lipopolysaccharide (LPS) treatment in vitro. Non-parametric statistics were used. Results: 1) mRNA expression of IL-1β and IL-8 was higher in UV than in UA in women at term not in labor (p=0.006 and p=0.015, respectively), as well as those in labor (p=0.002 and p=0.003, respectively); 2) IL-8 mRNA expression in UV and UA of women at term in labor was higher than those patients with PTD without chorioamnionitis (p=0.027 and p=0.042, respectively); 3) mRNA expression of IL-1β in UA, and IL-8 in UV and UA from patients with PTD with chorioamnionitis was high when compared to patients with PTD without chorioamnionitis (p=0.003, p=0.016, and p=0.018, respectively); 4) LPS increased mRNA expression of IL-1β and IL-8 in both UA and UV (p=0.043). Conclusions: 1) The UV displays a higher proinfl ammatory response than the UA in term gestations; 2) IL-8 mRNA expression increases as a function of gestational age in the absence of infl ammation in both UV and UA. We propose that these novel fi ndings explain why umbilical phlebitis precedes arteritis in the context of funisitis. Reversible protein phosphorylation is a critical process for regulating cellular function. This process is tightly controlled by protein kinases (i.e., ERK1/2) and protein phosphatases (i.e., PP2B, a serine/threonine protein phosphatase). Recently it has been reported that inhibition of PP2B in human umbilical vein endothelial cells prevents VEGF-induced angiogenesis. We have observed that in OFPAE cells inhibition of PP2A does not affect FGF2-and VEGFstimulated cell proliferation. In this study, we tested whether suppression of PP2B enhanced FGF2-and VEGF-stimulated cell proliferation and NOS3 phosphorylation partly via activation the MEK/ERK1/2 signaling pathway in OFPAE cells. Methods: Small interfering RNA (siRNA) specifi cally targeting PP2B catalytic subunit α (PP2Bc α ) was used to suppress PP2Bc α expression in OFPAE cells. Cell proliferation was assayed with crystal violet method. Levels of ERK1/2 and NOS3 were determined by Western blot analysis. Results: Transient transfection (2 days) of PP2Bc α siRNA decreased (p <0.05) protein levels of PP2Bc α and total NOS3 by ∼ 90% and ∼ 40%, respectively, as compared with the scrambled siRNA, but did not alter PP2Ac α and GAPDH protein levels. This suppression of PP2Bc α expression maintained at least for 3 days after transfection. Suppression of PP2Bc α expression appeared to promote VEGF-, but not FGF2-induced cell proliferation, and increased FGF2-, but not VEGF-stimulated NOS3 phosphorylation on Ser1177. Moreover, the suppressed PP2Bc α expression was associated with an increase in VEGF-induced ERK1 phosphorylation and a decrease in FGF2-induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation. Conclusions: These data suggest that in OFPAE cells suppression of PP2B promotes VEGF-induced cell proliferation and FGF2-stimulated NOS3 phosphorylation partially via increasing and decreasing ERK1/2 activity, respectively. (Supported by NIH grants HL64703 to JZ). Raul Gomez, 1 Hongyan Tang, 1 Nataki C Douglas, 1 Mark V Sauer, *1 Haijun Sun, 2 Ralf C Zimmermann. *1 1 Ob&Gyn, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA; 2 Imclone Systems Incorporated, New York, NY, USA. Objectives FGFR1 signaling regulates cell proliferation, migration and survival being essential for various stages of mammal development. High ovarian mRNA expression levels and upregulation during luteal phase suggested FGFR1 might (as VEGFR2) be a main regulator of ovarian function and angiogenesis locally. Recently, the hypogonadotropic hypogonadism has been linked to mutations in this receptor suggesting FGFR1 could regulate ovarian function at the H-P level. To answer this question IMC-A1 ( Imclone FGFR1 blocking antibody) was administered at a 10 mg/kg dose to female CD1 mice using different approaches Design: Three experimets were performed 1) Mice (n=5) were injected i.p at the estrous stage (day 0) with IMC-A1. Control animals (n=5) received unspecifi c IgG). Injections were continued in both groups every 48 hours until day 12 when animals were euthanized 2) Conditions identical to set 1 plus follicle stimulation with PMSG 20 IU on day 12. Animals were killed 48 hours later (day 14) 3) Design identical to set 2, plus ovulation induced with hCG 20 IU on day 14 (also injected with IMC-A1 at this point) animals were killed 24 hours later (day 15) Methods After euthanization ovaries and uteri were dissected, weighed and fi xed for IHC. Circulating P4 levels were measured. T-test was performed Results FGFR1 blockage suppressed ovarian function. No corpora lutea (CL), preovulatory or antral follicles were observed in IMC-A1 treated animals. Ovarian and uterus weights were decreased by 3 and 6 fold respectively vs controls, p<0.01. PMSG restored folliculogenesis in IMC-A1 treated mice. Similar ovarian and uterus weights and number of preovulatory and antral follicles in control and treatment groups were observed. HCG induced CL formation in IMC-A1 treated mice. Equal number of corpora lutea (8-12), ovarian or uterine weights were found in both groups Discussion: FGFR1 blockage suppressed ovarian function. Exogenous gonadotropins restored ovarian function in IMC-A1 treated animals. In addition, P4 decreases (a subsequent effect of disrupted luteal angiogenesis) were NOT observed in PMSG+hCG animals treated with IMC-A1. We conclude that FGFR1 signaling plays a critical role regulating ovarian function, not locally, but centrally through the H-P axis. To determine: 1) expressions of CGRP and its receptor components (CRLR/RAMP 1 ) at the human implantation site during early pregnancy; 2) whether CGRP regulates in vitro angiogenesis of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC); and 3) if CGRP can improve angiogenic imbalance in preeclamptic placental explants. METHODS: Placental tissues were obtained either during legal fi rst-trimester termination or during the Cesarean section in normal term pregnancies and those with preeclampsia. Cellular localization of CGRP and its receptor components were determined using immunofl uorescent confocal imaging analysis. Proangiogenic bio-activity of CGRP was evaluated using HUVEC migration and capillary-like tube formation on the Matrigel. RESULTS: 1) Immunoreactive CGRP is localized primarily in cytoplasm of villous cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts, as well as extravillous trophoblast cells in the interstitial tissues; 2) CGRP receptor components, CRLR and RAMP 1 , are expressed by both villous and extravillous trophoblast cells, as well as vascular endothelial cells identifi ed by endothelial cell marker CD 34 antibodies; 3) treatment with CGRP (10 -8 M) for 12 h signifi cantly increased HUVEC migration on Matrigel (150 ± 11% vs. 115 ± 5%, p < 0.01) and capillary-like tube formation (211.3 ± 21.5% vs. 121 ± 6%, p < 0.01); 4) increases in both HUVEC migration and capillary-like tube formation are completely blocked by CGRP antagonist, CGRP 8-37 (10 -7 M); and 5) culture medium from preeclamptic placental explants signifi cantly inhibits HUVEC capillary-like tube formation compared to gestation age-matched control (38 ± 4% vs. 100 ± 6%, p < 0.01); and 7) culture medium from preeclamptic placental explants incubated with CGRP (10 -7 M for 48h) signifi cantly improved placental angiogenesis evidenced by increased capillary-like tube formation (79 ± 5% vs. 38 ± 4%, p < 0.01). CONCLUSION: CGRP at the human implantation site may constitute a potential autocrine or paracrine mechanism that could modify placental angiogenesis and neovascularization. Objective: To examine the key molecules of the CRF system in term human umbilical cord. Hypothesis: The expression of CRF, CRF-receptors and CRF-BP within the umbilical cord should support a potential cellular mechanism for their vascular functions. Introduction: Corticotrophin releasing factor (CRF) regulates multiple functions in feto-placental unit. CRF mediates its biological effects through two major types of receptors, CRF-receptor type-1(CRF-1) and CRF-receptor type 2 (CRF-R2). CRF-binding (CRF-BP) protein, a key modulator of CRF actions, has long been speculated to compete with both receptors for CRF. Study Design: Umbilical cords collected at delivery after uncomplicated fullterm pregnancy (n=6) were cut (3-4mm thickness), fi xed in Bouin's solution, and processed for paraffi n embedding. Five micron paraffi n sections were subjected to immunohistochemistry by avidin-biotin-complex system with rabbit polyclonal antibody to rhCRF (1:300, Peninsula Laboratory) or goat polyclonal antibody that specifi cally interacts with both CRF-R1 and CRF-R2 receptors (1:200, Santa Cruz) as well as with rabbit polyclonal antibody to CRF-BP (1:200, Santa Cruz biotechnology, Inc). Immunoreactive materials on the sections were identifi ed as brown staining using 3', 3'diaminobenzadine as a chromogen. Sections incubated with normal rabbit or goat IgG were used as appropriate controls. We interpret the strong positive staining observed with CRF antibody in Wharton Jelly cells as evidence that these cells are the site of CRF expression. The fi ndings of CRF-R1/R2 receptor immunostaining in vascular smooth muscles cells imply that these receptors regulate vasomotor functions of the umbilical cord allowing maximal feto-placental perfusion near parturition. The staining pattern observed with CRF-BP antibody in smooth muscle cells suggests a regulatory role for this protein at the level of vascular smooth muscle cells. In summary the cellular localization of CRF, CRF-Receptors and CRF-BP protein in the umbilical cord are strategically localized and functionally coordinated. Objective: Preeclampsia is a syndrome characterized by abnormal placental angiogenesis manifested as early as the midtrimester of pregnancy. We hypothesized that this defect was due, in part, to an inhibition of PlGF gene transcription by trophoblasts under hypoxic conditions. Methods: The regulation of PlGF expression was studied using real-time quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) and ELISA in JEG-3 and BeWo choriocarcinoma cell models of human trophoblasts. Cells were treated with cobalt chloride to mimic hypoxia. To systematically search for inhibitory elements in the human PlGF gene promoter we cloned genomic DNA extending from -3450 bp to +1 bp relative to the transcriptional start site into a promoterless luciferase vector and created a series of deletion constructs. The constructs were then transiently transfected into the choriocarcinoma cells and analyzed. Results: Cobalt chloride dose-dependently reduced steady-state levels of PlGF mRNA to less than 20% of control and PlGF protein also was suppressed. Our transfection results revealed that an element(s) located between -3450 bp and -2141 bp conferred transcriptional repression of PlGF-luciferase plasmids in both cell types. Constructs containing this motif suppressed luciferase activation by 90%, approaching the activity of an empty reporter vector. Deletion of this 1309 bp sequence restored full transcriptional activity of the promoter. Objective: Human endometrium shows temporal and spatial changes in integrin expression throughout the menstrual cycle and early pregnancy. Integrin-linked kinase (ILK) is a key cytoplasmic serine/threonine protein kinase involved in a range of signaling pathways and functions as a scaffold by mediating interactions between integrins and the actin cytoskeleton. ILK is involved in vascular development and endothelial cell survival, and is a regulator of angiogenesis. We hypothesized that ILK exhibits changes in its expression pattern in human endometrial endothelial cells throughout the menstrual cycle in parallel to angiogenic changes in endometrium. Materials and methods: Immunohistochemical staining was performed using anti-human ILK antibody in 33 endometrial tissues from normal women without endometrial disease and in 5 decidual tissues from women with clinically normal pregnancies terminated voluntarily during the fi rst trimester. ILK staining was evaluated with using HSCORE according to menstrual cycle phases. Statistical analyses of the data was assessed by one-way ANOVA, with p<0.05 considered signifi cant. Results: ILK immunoreactivity was observed mainly in stromal and endothelial cells. HSCORE analysis showed that ILK expression (284±9) does not change signifi cantly except for the endothelial cells (169±19) from mid-secretory endometrial tissues (p<0.05). On the other hand, endothelial cells of spiral arteries revealed a signifi cant decrease (120±12) in ILK immunoreactivity in early pregnancy decidual tissues when compared with microvascular endothelial cells from the same samples and from the other menstrual cycle phases (p<0.05). Conclusion: Strong ILK expression in human endometrial endothelial cells supports the idea that ILK is involved in endometrial angiogenesis. Furthermore, decrease in ILK level in endothelial cells during implantation window and in spiral arteries in early pregnancy decidual tissues may facilitate intersitial cytotrophoblasts invasion into maternal vessels. Pregnancies. Arundhathi Jeyabalan, *1 Robert W Powers, *1 for NICHD MFMU Network. 2 1 Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; 2 Bethesda, MD, USA. Objective: Alterations in maternal circulating concentrations of the antiangiogenic factors, soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt1) and endoglin, and pro-angiogenic placental growth factor (PlGF) precede the development of preeclampsia in healthy low-risk women. Smoking during pregnancy is associated with reduced risk of preeclampsia, reduced sFlt-1 and endoglin, as well as increased PlGF in low-risk women. The objective of this study was to investigate whether smoking affects angiogenic factors (sFlt-1, PlGF, and endoglin) in women at high risk for developing preeclampsia. Study Design: We performed a secondary analysis of serum samples from 993 high-risk women in the NICHD MFMU aspirin trial to prevent preeclampsia. sFlt1, endoglin and PlGF were measured in serum samples obtained at randomization and prior to initiation of aspirin (mean 19.3, range of 7.6-26.9 weeks). Smoking status was determined by self-report. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation and analyzed by Wilcoxon rank sum test. Results: At baseline, cigarette smoking was not associated with altered levels of sFlt-1 in any of the high-risk groups. Circulating PlGF was higher in pregnant smokers with diabetes compared with nonsmokers with diabetes (p=0.005) and in pregnant smokers with previous preeclampsia (p=0.001). Lower concentrations of circulating soluble endoglin were observed at baseline in smokers with multifetal gestations (p=0.002). Smoking was not associated with a reduction in preeclampsia in any of these groups. Introduction Heavy Menstrual Bleeding (HMB) is common, requiring drug therapy or surgery. We studied the endometrium of women with HMB, focussing on glucocorticoid metabolism, since glucocorticoids modulate angiogenesis in other organs. Hypothesis Endometrial glucocorticoid availability may modulate angiogenesis and thus impact upon menstrual blood loss. Methods Endometrial tissue was collected from 29 women with menstrual complaints. Subjects provided written informed consent and studies had Institutional ethical approval. Biopsies were consistent for histological stage, LMP, and serum sex steroid levels at time of biopsy. Menstrual blood loss (MBL) was measured by alkaline-haematin assay, (>80ml MBL as indicative of HMB). qRT-PCR for angiogenic marker genes (angopoietin-1 (ANG-1) and -2 (ANG-2); vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A); thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) and glucocorticoid metabolising enzymes 11βhydroxysteroid dehydrogenases -1 and -2 (11βHSD1,2) was performed. De novo angiogenesis was assessed in 3D-culture, and endometrial biopsies provided stromal cells (ESC) to determine effects of glucocorticoids on angiogenic signalling. Endothelial cell tube forming assays in the presence of cortisol were performed. Results In the secretory phase, increased expression of 11βHSD2 and ANG-1, and decreased expression of TSP-1 mRNA was observed when MBL>80ml (heavy MBL; HMBL) as compared to MBL<80 ml (P<0.05). 11βHSD2 was immunolocalised to epithelial cells (glandular and surface), and, consistent with mRNA expression showed increased immunoreactvity in the HMBL samples. ANG-2, VEGF-A and 11βHSD1 mRNA were unaffected by MBL status. In vitro, cortisol administration (1μM) signifi cantly decreased endothelial sprouting (P<0.05), an effect replicated by 1nM TSP-1. ESC responded to cortisol treatment by increased mRNA expression of TSP-1 (P<0.05). Uterine endothelial tube forming was dose-dependently inhibited by cortisol (P<0.01). Conclusions Increased 11βHSD2 expression predicts reduced local availability of cortisol in HMBL patients. Cortisol is likely important for the expression of anti-angiogenic TSP-1 and regulation of de novo angiogeneis. Glucocorticoids may exert control over anti-angiogeneic factors in endometrium, interruption of this by abberant expression of glucocorticoid metabolising enzymes may contribute to abnormal menstrual bleeding. Recently we demonstrated that similar to AM, IMD antagonist (IMD 17-47 ) causes feto-placental growth restriction, apoptotic changes and impairment of placental morphology in placenta of IMD 17-47 infused rat. Therefore, we hypothesize that IMD is expressed in human placenta and is involved in placental angiogenesis. OBJECTIVES: 1) To immunolocalize IMD protein in the fi rst, second and third trimester human placenta; 2) To assess the effects of IMD peptide on trophoblast invasion in HTR-8SV/neo cells; and 3) to assess the effect of IMD peptide on the expression of angiogenic agents such as VEGF and fl t-1 in fi rst trimester HTR-8/SVneo cells. The consent form and procedure for this study were approved by the institutional research board of UTMB. Samples of placental villous tissues were obtained from normal third trimester pregnant women or from elective cesarean sections of the fi rst and second trimester pregnant women. Five μm thick tissue sections were used in immunofl uorescent studies for double labeling using CD34, CK7 and IMD specifi c antibodies. First trimester HTR-8SV/neo cells were also used to assess the effect of IMD (10 -6 M and 10 -7 M) on trophoblast cell invasion and on the levels of VEGF and fl t-1 mRNA. Matrigel invasion assay was used to determine the invasion index. Total RNA was isolated from the cells using TRIzol reagent and processed for RT-PCR and results are expressed relative to 18S mRNA. RESULTS: Our data demonstrates that: 1) IMD protein is expressed at all stages of pregnancy in human placenta; 2) IMD protein is localized in cytotrophoblast cells, syncytiotrophoblast cells and vascular endothelial cells in human placenta; 3) IMD enhances the invasive capacity of fi rst trimester HTR-8SVneo cells by increasing the invasive index to 3.3 compared to 1.2 of the untreated cells; and 4) IMD causes a signifi cant increase (p<0.05) in the levels of VEGF and its receptor, fl t-1 in fi rst trimester, HTR-8SV/neo cells. CONCLUSION: IMD protein is expressed in human placenta at all stages of pregnancy in early human pregnancy. IMD appears to promote angiogenesis during placental development. Background: Placental angiogenesis is fundamental to successful pregnancy and its aberration has been implicated in preeclampsia. Angiogenesis is a tightly regulated process involving an interplay between vascular endothelial cells and various other cell types. It is known that macrophages (MΦs) regulate angiogenesis in wound repair and tumorigenesis. MΦs are the major subset of leukocytes in the human decidua. However, the effect of decidual MΦs on placental angiogenesis has not been established. Objective: To test our hypothesis that human decidual MΦs induce angiogenesis, at least partially, through TNF-α-mediated ERK1/2 and Ets-1 activation. Methods: Full-tern normal placentas were obtained within 30 min after vaginal delivery or cesarean section. HUVECs were isolated from the umbilical vein by collagenase infusion and maintained in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FBS and endothelial cell growth supplement. Decidual MΦs were isolated from the decidua vera by enzyme digestion and Percoll centrifugation. The purity of the isolated MΦs was evaluated by the fl ow cytometric analysis of CD14 expression. To generate cell-free conditioned medium (CM), the isolated MΦs were cultured in FBS-free RPMI-1640 for 48 h and the culture supernatant was harvested, centrifuged and fi ltered through a 0.22 μM fi lter. The effect of the decidual MΦ-derived CM on the capillary-like structure (CLS) formation and on the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Ets-1 in HUVECs was evaluated, respectively, by in vitro angiogenesis assays using Growth Factor Reduced BD Matrigel Matrix and by Western blot analyses. To investigate whether the CM-induced CLS formation and Ets-1 activation was TNF-α-and ERK1/2dependent, the capacity of an anti-TNF-α antibody and the specifi c ERK signaling inhibitor, PD98059, to attenuate the induction was determined. Results: Compared with the FBS-free RPMI-1640, the decidual MΦ-derived CM signifi cantly increased phosphorylation of ERK1/2 at threonine202/ tyrosine204 and Ets-1 at threonine38 as well as induced CLS formation in primary HUVECs. Both the neutralizing TNF-α antibody and PD98059 attenuated the CM-induced increase in the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Ets-1 as well as the CLS formation. Conclusions: Human decidual MΦs promote angiogenesis in a paracrine manner, at least partially, through their secretory product TNF-α that induces ERK1/2 and Ets-1 activation. Infl uence Endothelial Progenitor Cell Proliferation. Keiichi Matsubara, Emiko Abe, Yuko Matsubara, Masaharu Ito. (SPON: Ronald R Magness). Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ehime University School of Medicine, Toon, Ehime, Japan. Objectives: Preeclampsia is characterized by disturbed neovascularization and hypoxia in the utero-placental circulation. Since endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) are increased under hypoxic conditions and play an important role in neovascularization, it is possible that EPCs are involved in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. Material and Methods: We measured the number of EPCs in nonpregnant women, normal pregnant women, and preeclamptic patients. Peripheral blood was collected from each woman with informed consent. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMNCs) were isolated using density centrifugation with Ficoll-Paque and incubated with anti-CD133, CD34, and Flk-1 antibody. The number of EPC was measured as CD133+/CD34+/Flk-1+ cells using fl owcytometry. Then 8x107 PBMNCs were seeded onto 96-well plates coated with human fi bronectin in endothelial basal medium. Adherent cells were cultured through 7 days and analyzed the uptake of acetylated 1,1'-dioctadecyl -3,3,3',3'-tetramethylindocarbocyanine -labeled low density lipoprotein (acLDL-Dil) and FITC-labeled Ulex europaeus agglutinin-1 (FITC-lectin) was analyzed to detect EPCs. Furthermore, PBMNCs were cultivated with serum for 4 days to investigate the effect of serum on EPC proliferation. Results: The number of EPCs in peripheral blood derived from normal pregnant women did not differ from preeclamptic patients. However, the number of EPCs from preeclamptic patients (2618±642 cells/well) was signifi cantly increased compared with that from normal pregnant women (229±40 cells/well; p<0.001). Serum from preeclamptic patients signifi cantly stimulated EPC proliferation (421±103% vs. control) compared with that from normal pregnant women (142±35% vs. control; p<0.05). Conclusions: EPCs might be increased and activated by a serum factor related to preeclampsia. It is thought that EPCs are involved in the (maintenance) of the utero-placental circulation in preeclampsia. However, it is thought that serum in preeclampsia contains a factor that inhibits mobilization from bone marrow into peripheral blood. Objective: Several recent reports suggest an increase in circulating soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt-1) and decrease in placental growth factor (PlGF) in pregnancies that subsequently develop preeclampsia (PET). In this prospective controlled study, we examined whether the increased risk of PET in subjects with preexisting medical conditions such as chronic hypertension (cHTN) or chronic proteinuria (cPRO) is associated with an imbalance of circulating pro-and anti-angiogenic factors. Methods: We enrolled 42 high risk subjects with preexisting medical conditions and 48 normal control subjects. Serum samples were collected at 5 different time periods during pregnancy (<13 weeks, 15-20 weeks, 24-28 weeks, 30-34 weeks and predelivery) for measurement of sFlt-1, PlGF, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) by ELISA. Angiogenic factors were compared to a primary endpoint of PET and a composite endpoint (PET, small for gestational age, oligohydramnios, or abruption). Two-sided Wilcoxon Rank Sum tests were used for statistical analysis. Results: 22 subjects developed the composite endpoint (CE), 15 of which had PET. Consistent with earlier fi ndings, after 24-28 weeks of gestation the median sFlt-1 was signifi cantly higher and median PlGF was signifi cantly lower in subjects that developed PET or CE. However, in the subgroups of subjects with cHTN or cPRO who developed CE, the median sFlt-1 level during late gestation (predelivery) was signifi cantly lower than that of the normal control subjects who developed CE (cHTN median 5483 pg/ml vs. control median 15,525 pg/ml, p=0.02; cPRO median 5483 pg/ml vs. control median 15,525 pg/ml, p=0.03). Conclusion: This is the fi rst prospective study examining the role of angiogenic factors in the development of pre-eclampsia in patients with medical conditions placing them at high risk for PET. Most subjects who developed PET or CE showed elevated sFlt-1 and decreased PlGF as early as 24-28 weeks gestation as expected. However, subjects with cHTN and cPRO who developed CE did not have elevated sFlt-1 predelivery. This result suggests that patients with cHTN or cPRO may have a different mechanism of endothelial cell dysfunction than the controls. The objectives of the study were to quantify levels of endothelin-1 in women with hypothyroidism and to establish reference levels of endothelin-1 in pregnancy. Methods: Fifteen pregnant women with hypothyroidism and 21 pregnant controls enrolled in the study. Demographic data were collected. Plasma was obtained in the fi rst or second trimester (<27 weeks' gestation) in all subjects and in the third trimester (>34 weeks' gestation) in 13 subjects. Data were also collected on delivery outcomes. Levels of endothelin-1 were determined by QuantiGlo chemiluminescent ELISA. Results: For the control population, mean endothelin-1 levels (pg/mL) were 1.81±0.43 in the fi rst trimester, 1.85±0.45 in the second trimester, and 1.95±0.45 in the third trimester. There was no signifi cant difference among the levels in each trimester. The mean endothelin-1 levels in the group of women with hypothyroidism were 1.50±0.55 in the fi rst trimester, 2.02±0.99 in the second trimester, and 1.64±0.30 in the third trimester. Again, no signifi cant difference was found among the levels in each trimester, and the levels were not signifi cantly different from levels in the control population. For the women for whom delivery data were available, 30% (n=10) of the women with hypothyroidism and 15% (n=13) of the controls developed gestational hypertension (chi-square=0.71, NS). Mean endothelin-1 level in women with hypothyroidism who developed gestational hypertension was 1.34 and in controls who developed gestational hypertension 2.04. Conclusions: Elevations in endothelin-1 have been associated with development of preeclampsia. Women with hypothyroidism, even when well-controlled, have higher rates of preeclampsia, possibly associated with increased levels of endothelin-1. In this study, levels of endothelin-1 were not elevated in women with hypothyroidism. The rate of preeclampsia was not signifi cantly different, though the number of subjects in the study was limited. Contrary to prior reports, there was no difference in endothelin-1 levels across pregnancy in normal controls in this study. Nitroglycerine Administration? Tamao Yamamoto, 1 Yoshikatsu Suzuki, 1 Yoshimasa Watanabe, 2 Takeo Itoh, 2 Hidetaka Izumi. *3 1 Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan; 2 Cellular Molecular Pharmacology, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan; 3 Obstetrics and Gynecology, Izumi Women Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan. We found that reduced action of endothelial nitric oxide (NO) in resistance artery in preeclampsia. We here investigated whether or not the administration of L-arginine plus folic acid improved the reduced action of NO seen in nitroglycerin (NTG) treated rabbit. ACh increased the intracellular NO ([NO] i ; estimated using the nitric oxide-sensitive fl uorescent dye diaminofl uorescein-2) within the endothelial cells of rabbit mesenteric resistance arteries. This was signifi cantly smaller in arteries from NTG-treated rabbits than in those from control rabbits. The reduction in NTG-treated rabbits was prevented when olmesartan (blocker of type 1 angiotensin II receptor (AT 1 R)) was co-administered in vivo with NTG, and also when the superoxide scavenger manganese (III) tetrakis-(4-benzoic acid) porphyrin (Mn-TBAP), or L-arginine plus the active form of folate (5-methyltetrahydrofolate)) was incubated with the arteries in vitro. Endothelial superoxide production (estimated by ethidium fl uorescence) was greatly increased in arteries from NTG-treated rabbits. This was normalized by in vivo co-administration of olmesartan with NTG and also by in vitro application of Mn-TBAP (but not of 5-methyltetrahydrofolate+Larginine). ACh increased the intracellular Ca 2+ concentration (estimated using the Ca 2+ -sensitive dye Fura 2) within endothelial cells, the increase being not signifi cantly different between NTG-treated rabbits and control rabbits. In conclusion, L-arginine plus folic acid might restore the reduced endothelial NO production due to increasing the bioavailability of L-arginine damaged by superoxide and/or decreasing superoxide production itself in NTG-treated rabbits. Women with Preeclampsia. Nicola J Robinson, 1 Jenny E Myers, 1,2 Richard Blankley, 1, 2 Philip N Baker, *1 John D Aplin, 1 Ian P Crocker. 1 1 Maternal & Fetal Health Research Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom; 2 Michael Barber Centre Mass Spectrometry, University of Macnhester, Manchester, United Kingdom. Objectives: Maternal endothelial activation in preeclampsia (PE) is attributed to the release of unknown factors from a hypoperfused placenta. To further characterise these factors we studied the effect of plasma from women with PE in an endothelial bioassay. Factors liberated from serum-free placental villous explant cultures were also investigated in the bioassay. Methods: Human uterine microvascular endothelial cells were incubated with pooled (control or PE; n=23) plasma samples (10%) before or after 2 types of affi nity depletion (removal of 6 or 12 abundant proteins). Cellular ATP levels were measured following 6h exposure using a bioluminescence assay. Term villous explants were cultured in serum-free conditions and exposed to differing oxygen concentrations (20, 6, 1%) to mimic physiological and nonphysiological intervillous O 2 tensions. The resulting explant media from day 4 was applied to primary endothelial cells. Conditions were tested in triplicate. Results: Cells exposed to PE plasma showed reduced cellular ATP levels compared to control plasma (778 ± 51 vs 698 ± 60 RLU). After depletion of abundant proteins, PE plasma showed a greater reduction in ATP when compared to depleted plasma from controls (742 ± 25 vs 511 ± 63; 6 proteins) and 667 ± 29 vs 480 ± 134; 12 proteins). As the O 2 concentration of the placental explant medium decreased, a step-wise reduction in ATP was seen (p<0.0001, Friedman, n=8). The effect of hypoxic explant media on ATP levels was still evident after removal of particulate material using a 0.22μm fi lter (885 ± 71 vs 800 ± 20) and following immunodepletion of fi binogen (752 ± 71 vs 587 ± 64). Conclusions: In endothelial cell cultures, plasma from women with PE reduces cellular ATP. This reduction was maintained following depletion of highly abundant proteins. In a serum-free explant culture model, hypoxia appeared to stimulate release of placental factors which caused a similar reduction in ATP levels. This demonstrates the suitability of the explant model for the identifi cation of soluble factors released from the placenta. We aim to use these parallel strategies in combination with fractionation, depletion and mass spectrometric techniques to identify these factors. Role of Mature and Progenitor Endothelial Cells in Pre-Eclampsia. V Cozzi, 1 G Alvino, 1 S Calabrese, 1 N Fracchiolla, 3 A Martinelli, 1 MC Pasquini, 2 M Cortiana, 3 I Silvestris, 2 A Cortelezzi, 2 Irene Cetin. *1 1 IRCCS F Policlinico, Mangiagalli, Regina Elena, Inst Obs Gyn, Milan, Italy; 2 IRCCS, Milan, Italy; 3 IRCCS, Milan, Italy. Hypothesis: Endothelial dysfunction of preeclampsia (PE) is part of an excessive maternal response to pregnancy. The manifestations of PE suggest systemic maternal endothelial damage. PE expression on the fetal side is placental insuffi ciency. Angiogenesis plays a crucial role at the feto-maternal interface. To test the hypothesis that endothelial cells, both mature (CECs) and progenitor (CEPs), may be involved in the pathogenesis of PE, we quantifi ed CEPs and CECs in PE patients compared with normal (N) pregnancies. Methods: We studied 13 N pregnancies and 17 PE pregnancies in the III trimester matched for gestational age. Maternal age was similar for the two groups, but BMI was signifi cantly higher in the PE vs the control group (p<0.01). PE pregnancies delivered earlier and their fetal-placental weights were signifi cantly lower than N pregnancies (p<0.001). Total CECs and CEPs were quantifi ed by fl ow cytometry. Results: In N pregnancies (n=13) mean values of CECs and CEPs were 20.800/ ml (range 9.22-77.114), and 1.051/ml (range 0.067-3.429), respectively. In the PE panel analyzed, represented by 17 cases and 27 samples, the mean values of CECs and CEPs were 25.465/ml (range 1.655-126.344), and 0.418/ml (range 0-15.447). PE cases showed signifi cantly lower CEP than N (p <0.05). Dividing the PE group for severity, we compared severe (16 samples), vs mild (11 samples) PE: the severe PE group displayed signifi cantly more CECs (p <0.02,), but not CEPs, than controls with mean values of CECs and CEPs that were 29.028/ml (range 1.655-120.780), and 0.512/ml (range 0-15.448) vs 13.578/ml (range 7.667-126.344), and 0.235/ml (range 0-1.410), respectively. Conclusions: PE is characterized by a significant reduction in CEPs. Considering their potential role in vasculogenesis of the placental bed, this fi nding is consistent with PE vascular damage leading to impaired fetal growth. CECs, a marker of ongoing endothelial damage, are increased in severe vs mild PE, confi rming that PE is characterized by a systemic maternal vascular dysfunction associated with a reduced repairing potential. The increased CECs in severe PE might represent a biological marker that correlates with the severity of the disease. Robert W Powers, *1,2 Patrizia Luppi, 3 Nina Markovic, 2,4 James M Roberts, *1,2,4 Carl A Hubel. * Bone marrow-derived endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) enter the systemic circulation to replace defective or injured mature endothelial cells. Nitric oxide is essential for the mobilization and function of EPCs. Asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) is an endogenous competitive inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) that suppresses EPC activities in vitro and correlates inversely with EPCs in coronary disease patients. Objective: To investigate the relationship between maternal ADMA and EPCs in normal pregnancy and preeclampsia. Methods: Primigravid non-smokers with normal pregnancy (control, n=29) or preeclampsia (gestational hypertension, proteinuria and hyperuricemia, n=15) were studied during the 3rd trimester. Patients with multiple gestations, chronic hypertension or other metabolic disorders, or acute infl ammatory conditions were excluded. Groups did not differ by gestational weeks at time of venipuncture (means=35) or blood pressure before 20 weeks. EPCs were enumerated by fl ow cytometry as CD34/kinase insert domain receptor (KDR) and CD133/KDR doubly-positive cells (as percent of total lymphocytes). Data are presented as the percentage of patients with detectable EPCs. Plasma ADMA, arginine (NOS substrate), and biologically inactive symmetric dimethylarginine (SDMA) were measured by HPLC. Results: Control ( Linear regression analysis showed an inverse relationship between maternal plasma ADMA and circulating EPCs; for each 0.05μM increase in ADMA there was an 11% decrease in the number of CD133 positive EPCs (p<0.05) and a 15% decrease in CD34 positive EPCs (p<0.001). In contrast, there was no relationship between maternal plasma ADMA and KDR positive cells that were negative for CD133 and CD34 (negative control). Conclusion: ADMA is higher in women with preeclampsia and is associated with lower circulating EPCs. Funded in part by the PA Dept. of Health and NIH R21HD49453, MO1RR00056 and PO1HD30367. Objective: Inadequate trophoblast invasion and spiral artery remodeling leading to poor placental perfusion are believed to underlie preeclampsia (PE) and intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Recent studies implicate increased circulating endoglin as a contributor to the pathogenesis of PE along with soluble Flt. We have previously demonstrated that placental hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) and sFlt-1 proteins are upregulated in PE but not IUGR. The objective of this study was to determine whether placental endoglin is altered in pregnancies complicated by PE or IUGR. Methods: We utilized 10 placentas each from normal pregnant (NP), PE, and IUGR subjects. Diagnosis of PE was based on the Working Group Report (2000) and hyperuricemia of 1 standard deviation above normal levels for gestational age. IUGR (without PE) was defi ned as normotensive women with infant birth weight less than the 10 th percentile and asymmetrical growth profi le. Additionally, fi ve placentas from pregnancies complicated by both PE and IUGR were evaluated. Endoglin was measured by Western analysis and normalized to β-actin. Densitometric units are presented as mean ± standard error and compared using Kruskal-Wallis and posthoc statistical analysis. Results: Signifi cant differences in endoglin were observed between NP, PE, and IUGR (p = 0.02). Endoglin levels were 2.5-fold higher in preeclamptic placentas compared to NP (14.3 ± 2.8 versus 5.7 ± 1.0, p < 0.01). In contrast, endoglin levels were similar in NP and IUGR placentas (5.9 ±1.2 vs 5.7 ± 1.0, p = NS). Placentas from pregnancies with both PE and IUGR exhibited marked variability in endoglin levels (mean 12.8, range 2.0 to 37.8). Conclusions: In contrast to PE, placental endoglin is not increased in placentas from normotensive women delivering small, asymmetrically grown infants. The present study complements our previous fi ndings of elevated HIF and sFlt proteins in PE but not IUGR. The placentas of women with IUGR appear to be fundamentally different from PE women with respect to endoglin, despite the common pathology of defi cient trophoblast invasion/spiral artery remodeling and poor placental perfusion. Objective: To test the hypothesis that maternal undernutrition induces cellular apoptosis in offspring vasculature resulting in reduced microvessel density. Methods: Pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were fed a standard diet (control) versus a food restriction diet consisting of a 50% decrease in calories from day 10 of gestation to term. Offspring were sacrifi ced on day 1 of life. Aortas and mesentery from 6 different animals from each dietary group were dissected and fi xed in 4% paraformaldehyde. Five micron paraffi n sections of aortas and mesenteric arterioles were made, and subjected to the TUNEL assay. Areas of staining and integrated optical density (IOD) were determined for each vessel using the Image Pro Plus software. Results: In both the aortas and mesenteric arterioles, a higher percentage of apoptotic cells were found in the food restricted offspring. The area of staining in the food restricted aortas was 73.5 ± 6.59% versus the control group 49.5 ± 3.48% (P < 0.0001). The IOD of the food restricted mesenteric arterioles was 38.7 ± 8.9 versus the control group 9.01 ± 4.20 (P < 0.0001). Apoptotic cells were noted in both endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells and in the adventitia. Our results indicate that in utero undernutrition induces increased rates of apoptosis in both the conduit and microvessels of the offspring. Increased apoptosis in endothelial cells can lead to rarefaction and may be an etiology of reduced microvessel density and reduced angiogenesis previously reported by us in these offspring. Reduced number of microvessels can lead to increased resistance to fl ow and contribute to development of hypertension which occurs in adulthood in maternal food restricted offspring.  Placental insuffi ciency is a major source of pro-oxidant reactive species, leading to oxidative stress and cellular damage. In fetal growth restriction (FGR), additional to placental ischaemia-reperfusion injury via reactive oxygen species, there is increased oxidative stress in the fetus, leading to higher levels of oxidative stress. We have studied one such marker of oxidative stress, 8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-oxodG) in the maternal urine. To evaluate a biomarker of oxidative stress at different gestations in pregnancy and determine its relationship with fetal growth restriction. Prospective case-controlled study of healthy, low-risk pregnant women. Urine samples collected at 12 and 28 weeks of gestation were analysed for DNA derived oxidative stress marker (8-oxodG) by liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). FGR was defi ned as birthweight <10 th centile based on customised centile charts (www.gestation.net). These constituted the cases and controls were fetuses with normal growth. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS (Version 12) software. Two hundred subject samples were analysed for 12 and 28 weeks gestation respectively. The mean values for 8-oxodG for growth restricted and normal pregnancies are given in Table1. As there was a positive skew in the data, it was natural logged for normality. Independent t-test was performed, which showed that the group with normal babies had signifi cantly lower scores than the FGR group ( Table 2 ). The ratio of the geometric means between the two groups were 0.781 at 12 weeks and 0.796 at 28 weeks gestation. This study shows higher level of oxidative stress marker in pregnancies complicated by FGR as compared to normal outcome pregnancies at different gestations. Introduction: Hemeoxygenase (HO) catalyses the breakdown of heme into iron, biliverdin and carbon monoxide. In many cell types cells studied to date it has been found that the HO-2 isoform is generally constitutively expressed whereas the HO-1 isoform is a stress protein which is rapidly induced in response to a variety of factors. We have previously shown that HO plays an important role in the placenta (1, 2, 3) . Aim: To determine whether HO plays a role in protecting the placenta from oxidative injury. The fi rst aim was to determine the effect of a fi xed period of hypoxia 0%O 2 followed by re-oxygenation, in 5% or 20% O 2 , on the expression of HO-1 protein, in villous tissue. The second aim was to determine the effect of cycles of hypoxia followed by re-oxygenation, in 5% or 20% O 2 , on the expression of HO-1 protein, in villous tissue. Methods: 25 villous explants from the same placenta were used for each experiment. For experiment 1 four experimental conditions were set up as well as appropriate controls. These were: A; 1hr h0% O 2 , B; 7hr 0% O 2 , C; 7 hr 5% or 20% O 2 , and D; 1hr 0%O 2 then 6 hr 5% or 20% O 2 . For experiment 2, villous explants were cultured in 1, 2 or 3 cycles of 30 min 0% O 2 followed by 30 min 5 or 20% O 2 . Again appropriate conrtols were included. HO-1 protein was measured by Western blotting and bands were quantifi ed by densitometry as in previous publications (1, 2, 3) . Results: There were no statistical differences in HO-1 expression between any of the groups tested for experiment 1 regardless of whether the re-oxygenation was perfomed at 5% or 20% O 2 . In experiment 2 exposing the explants to increasing numbers of cycles of hypoxia-reoxygenation still resulted in no signifi cant differences between groups regardless of whether the re-oxygenation was perfomed at 5% or 20% O 2 . Conclusions Under the experimental conditions tested HO-1 expression was not increased in response to hypoxia-re-oxygenation. It remains to be determined whether induction of HO-1 by other, such as chemical, means could protect the placenta against oxidative stress. Neutrophil infi ltration into systemic blood vessels of preeclamptic women is associated with activation of NF-κB in the vascular smooth muscle. NF-κB is a transcription factor activated by oxidative stress and infl ammatory cytokines which regulates the expression of proteins involved in infl ammation. Neutrophils release reactive oxygen species (ROS) and TNFα that could be responsible for the activation of NF-κB in vascular tissue. HYPOTHESIS: Activated neutrophils or neutrophil products will activate NF-κB in human vascular smooth muscle cells. METHODS: Primary cultures of human vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) were seeded into 24-well plates (40,000 cells/well) and grown to 80% confl uence. Cells were transfected with pGL reporter plasmids containing Firefl y luciferase for 6 h using Effectene and then treatments were applied overnight. The NF-κB reporter plasmid was constructed from human placental cDNA. A 476 bp segment of the IL-8 promoter containing the NF-κB binding site was isolated, amplifi ed by PCR and cloned into a pGL3 plasmid designated pGL3-BF2. A pGL3-BF2 mutant was constructed by site directed mutagenesis of the NF-κB binding site. Dual luciferase assay was used to measure luminescence after treatments. Neutrophils were isolated by Histopaque density gradient separation and activated with arachidonic acid (AA, 50 μM). RESULTS: Neutrophils treated with AA produced a dose response activation of NF-κB from 1,250 to 10,000 neutrophils/well (80,000 VSMC/well). As compared to 5,000 un-activated neutrophils, 5,000 activated neutrophils caused a 6-fold increase in the activation of NF-κB (44 ± 11 to 256 ± 99 RLU, mean ± SE, n = 7, P<0.05). Activation of NF-κB was completely inhibited by co-treatment with SOD/catalase, TNFα neutralizing antibody or by using the mutant plasmid. Neutrophil infi ltration of systemic vascular tissue in preeclamptic women is associated with increased expression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and interleukin-8 (IL-8) in vascular smooth muscle. COX-2 is the inducible form of cyclooxygenase. Products of COX-2 (prostaglandins and thromboxane) mediate infl ammation and vasoconstriction. Activated neutrophils release reactive oxygen species (ROS) and TNFα which could be responsible for increased expression of COX-2 and IL-8. HYPOTHESIS: Products of activated neutrophils will stimulate expression of COX-2 and production of thromboxane (TX) and IL-8 by vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) . METHODS: Primary cultures of human VSMC were seeded into T-25 fl asks and grown to confl uence (n = 6). Cells were treated for 18 h with a ROS generating system (hypoxanthine + xanthine oxidase + ferric sulfate); ROS + SOD/catalase; ROS + NS398 (a specifi c COX-2 inhibitor); TNFα; or TNFα + NS398. RESULTS: Compared to control, treatment of VSMC with ROS caused a greater than 2-fold increase in the expression of COX-2 (P<0.01) which was inhibited by co-treatment with SOD/catalase or NS398. Consistent with the increase in COX-2, ROS signifi cantly increased the production of TX by 2-fold (0.8 ± 0.1 to 1.9 ± 0.1 pg/μg protein, P<0.05). ROS also stimulated VSMC production of IL-8 (2.4 ± 0.6 to 7.4 ± 1.8 pg/μg protein, P<0.05). SOD/catalase and NS398 inhibited the ability of ROS to stimulate TX and IL-8. TNFα stimulated a 3-fold increase in the expression of COX-2 (P<0.001). TNFα increased TX (1.7 ± 0.3 to 2.8 ± 0.7 pg/μg protein) and IL-8 (0.3 ± 0.1 to 6.6 ± 2.7 pg/μg protein, P<0.05). In all cases the stimulatory effect of TNFα was inhibited by co-treatment with NS398. CONCLUSION: Products released by activated neutrophils (ROS, TNFα) induce expression of COX-2 in vascular smooth muscle cells and stimulate the production of TX and IL-8. SPECULATION: Release of ROS and TNFα by neutrophils that have infi ltrated systemic vascular tissue is responsible for increased expression of COX-2 and IL-8 in women with preeclampsia. Linked to the increased expression of COX-2 was a signifi cant increase in the production of TX. Introduction: According to current opinion the primary pathology for the disease is placental in origin resulting in altered placental functions. We hypothesized that preeclampsia would involve distinct changes in placental protein expression patterns that could be studied using proteomics. Objective: Our aim was to investigate differences in placental protein expression patterns in preeclampsia using two-dimensional electrophoresis (2DE) and to validate the differences obtained by other independent methods. Methods: Villous tissue from normal or preeclamptic placentae was lysed at 4ºC using lysis buffer (2% CHAPS, 20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA and protease inhibitors). Following centrifugation at 20,000xg at 4ºC for 5 min, the supernatant was used for 2D electrophoresis (n=3) and western blot (n=6). Gels were analyzed using HT Investigator gel analysis software to identify differences in protein expression. Differentially expressed proteins were then identifi ed by LC-MS. Western blot and immunohistochemistry was carried out with antibodies to Hsp27. Results: Comparison of protein expression patterns between normal and preeclamptic placenta identifi ed seven spots that differed in intensity. Protein spot number 238 was 4x more intense in preeclampsia as compared to normal and was identifi ed to be Hsp27 on the basis of 5 peptide matches. Western blot data confi rmed that placental levels of Hsp27 were signifi cantly greater (p<0.01) in preeclampsia. Immunohistochemical analysis localized Hsp27 predominantly in the synctiotrophoblast (ST) and vascular smooth muscle layer of the placenta with a trend towards greater staining intensity in the ST and smooth muscle layer in the preeclamptic group as compared to normotensive. Weak Hsp27 staining was observed in the stroma and the endothelium. We have here shown using 2DE, LC-MS and western blot that Hsp27 is signifi cantly increased (p<0.01) in preeclampsia. Hsp27 belongs to the group of heat shock proteins that are induced by stress and function as molecular chaperones to help cells survive in a stressed environment. We speculate that the heightened oxidative stress environment prevalent in preeclampsia induces an increase in Hsp27. Hsp27, being anti-apoptotic is also induced during apoptosis, which also exists in the preeclamptic placenta. Objectives: Infections pose a signifi cant threat to pregnancy. The trophoblast plays an active role in the protection against infection by promoting an immune response and producing anti-microbial factors. One of the mechanisms by which trophoblast cells recognize microbial products is through the expression of Toll-like receptors (TLR). We hypothesize that the trophoblast generates a specifi c cytokine response depending on the type of microbial stimuli. The objective of this study was to characterize the trophoblast cytokine profi le following bacterial and viral stimulation. Methods: The human fi rst trimester trophoblast cell line, HTR8, was incubated with or without the TLR-4 ligand, bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 100μg/ml) or the TLR-3 ligand, Poly(I:C) (synthetic viral dsRNA; 25μg/ml). Cytokine expression in cell lysates and secretion into supernatants was quantifi ed using the Beadlyte Multiplex Assay with detection and analysis using the Luminex 100 IS. Results: Signifi cant differences were observed in the trophoblast cytokine profi le following bacterial and viral stimulation. Only high doses of LPS (100μg/ml) induced a moderate increase in the secretion of IL-6 (1.7 fold), MCP-1 (1.4 fold), IL-8 (1.9 fold), GROα (2.1 fold) and this was seen only after 72 hours of treatment. In contrast, the viral stimuli, Poly(I:C), triggered a rapid and robust response, characterized by an increase in both the expression and secretion of cytokines. Increased secretion of IL-6 (28.3 fold), MCP-1 (18.6 fold), IL-8 (25 fold) RANTES (132 fold) and GROα (11.6 fold) was seen after 24 hours of Poly(I:C) treatment. Background: Macrophages are one of the fi rst immune cells observed at the implantation site. Their presence has been explained as the result of an immune response towards paternal antigens. The mechanisms regulating monocyte migration and differentiation at the implantation site are largely unknown. In the present study we demonstrate that trophoblast cells regulate monocyte migration and differentiation. We propose that trophoblast cells "educate" monocytes/macrophages to create an adequate environment that promote trophoblast survival. Methods: CD14+ monocytes were isolated from peripheral blood using magnetic beads. Co-culture experiments were conducted using a two-chamber system. Monocytes were stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and cytokine levels were determined using Multiplex cytokine detecting assay. Results: Trophoblast cells increase monocyte migration and induce a signifi cant increase in the secretion and production of the pro-infl ammatory cytokines (IL-6, IL-8, TNF-α ) and chemokines (GRO-α, MCP-1, MIP-1β, RANTES). Furthermore, the response of monocytes to LPS was different in monocytes pre-exposed to trophoblast cells. Conclusions: The results of this study suggest that trophoblast cells are able to recruit and successfully educate monocytes to produce and secrete a proinfl ammatory cytokine and chemokine profi le supporting its growth and survival. Furthermore we demonstrate that trophoblast cells can modulate monocytes response to bacterial stimuli. (1176) than in controls (716; p < 0.0001). In cases, MIAC was associated with a signifi cant increase in sTREM1 (median 2762) compared to cases with no MIAC (1182; p = 0.008). When data was stratifi ed by race, a signifi cant increase in sTREM was seen in cases from both races. MIAC was associated with signifi cantly higher sTREM in both races compared to non MIAC cases. CONCLUSIONS: Herein we document the presence of a novel family of proinfl ammatory mediators in the AF of women during pregnancy. As an enhancer of infl ammation sTREM elevation in the AF at the time of PTL and even higher concentrations in cases with MIAC suggests its potential role in modulating the immune response and triggering PTB. The exact role of sTREM in the AF is not clear, however, as an activator of cytokine release, sTREM increase indicates a role in infl ammation induced PTB independent of the ethnic variation. The regulation of cortisol availability by the placenta plays an important role in a successful pregnancy. We have shown cortisol bioavailability and regulation differ with gestation, fetal sex and the presence of a number of complications during pregnancy including preterm birth and asthma. Alterations in cortisol concentrations may alter placental immune pathways particularly the balance between Th1 and Th2 cytokines. We examined the placental response to an immune challenge in preterm and term infants in the presence or absence of glucocorticoids, with respect to neonatal sex. Methods: Placentae were collected from normal term deliveries and preterm deliveries of pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia and IUGR. Placental explants were cultured for 24hrs and then exposed to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (1ng/ml), in the presence and absence of 100nM dexamethasone, 1mM cortisol or 10mM cortisone. After 24hrs the supernatants were collected, and assayed for TNF alpha by sandwich ELISA. Results: Placentae from term deliveries had a signifi cantly higher TNF alpha response to LPS than preterm placentae (p<0.05). The TNF alpha response to LPS was signifi cantly inhibited by dexamethasone and cortisol in both term and preterm placentae. The percentage inhibition of the TNF alpha production by dexamethasone and cortisol was signifi cantly greater at term when compared to preterm placentae. No signifi cant differences in response to LPS were observed in placentae from male and female fetuses. However, 50% of placentae from the preterm male neonates demonstrated a minimal response to LPS with no inhibition of placental TNF alpha production by glucocorticoids. This data supports that the normal pro-infl ammatory response to an immune challenge is a function of gestational age. An increase in glucocorticoid sensitivity with advancing gestation is supported by the greater immuno-modulatory effects of glucocorticoids observed at term. A lower response to an immune challenge and relative glucocorticoid resistance was observed in preterm males. This may represent a sexually dimorphic change in glucocorticoid metabolism in response to a maternal infl ammatory stressor and contribute to the observed male excess in morbidity and mortality following preterm birth. Sections of gestational membranes with intact amnion and choriodecidua were mounted onto 12mm Transwell™ frames to create distinct amnion and choriodecidual chambers. The tissue was incubated under normal conditions and treated with TNFα, LPS, or environmental toxicants for 1-24 hours. Using this system, PGs and cytokines secreted into the culture supernatant were measured discretely from the amnion and choriodecidual chambers by enzyme immunoassays. After the culture supernatant was collected, some tissue was removed from the Transwell™ frames, snap frozen and processed for immunoblot analysis to determine tissue protein concentrations (PGHS2, PGDH & PGT). The remaining tissue was processed for immunohistochemistry: Slides containing 6-8μm frozen sections were analyzed for presence of proteins related to cytokine and PG metabolism and fuction and cellular markers. The antigens were labelled with a biotinylated secondary antibody and an avidin: biotinylated enzyme complex, visualized with 3,3'-diaminobenzidine and counterstained with hematoxylin. Stained sections were visualized with an upright light microscope and recorded digitally. Results: TNFα and LPS increased the production of PGE 2 and PGF 2α in the supernatant collected from the amnion side of the membranes, but not in the supernatant from the choriodecidual side. Conclusions: Previous research conducted on explanted tissue without distinction of amniotic or choriodecidual contributions or isolated cells from gestational membranes showed an increase in uterotonic PGs upon infl ammatory stimulus. Historically results such as these have been interpreted to mean that those PGs acted on the myometrium to cause uterine contraction. However, my work indicates that there is no change in PG release on the choriodecidual side of the membrane suggesting that infl ammation-stimulated bioactive PGs do not access the myometrium to effect uterine contractions. It remains possible that amniotic PGs affect uterine contraction or parturition via other pathways.  Results: TGFβ1 and TGFβ-R1 were abundantly expressed in cytotrophoblasts (CT) and syncytio-trophoblasts (ST) of the fi rst trimester placentas, especially in villous column formation sites. TGFβ1 and TGFβ-R1 were less expressed in ST of early third trimester placentas than those in the fi rst trimester and weakly expressed in ST of term placentas. Immuno-reactivity for CD105 and CD133 were also localized and intensively expressed in both CT and ST of the fi rst trimester placentas. CD105 expression was much reduced in ST in the early third and almost lost in the term normal placentas. The pattern of CD133 immunoreactivity was similar to that of CD105. Conclusions: The intensive imunoreactivities of TGFβ1, TGFβ-R1, CD105 and CD133 in CT and ST of the fi rst trimester placenta implicate that these growth factors play an important role in modulating villous out growth. Since CD105 and CD133 are involved in angiogenesis and cell proliferation and differentiation processes, the differential expression patterns of CD105 and CD133 from TGFβ1 and TGFβ-R1 suggest the possible autocrinal and paracrinal regulations of immunoregulatory and angiogenic reactions among these factors during the early placental development and diverse regulatory pathways in the late pregnancy. We and others previously reported that mRNA and protein levels of Bcl-2, an anti-apoptotic gene, are stimulated by progestins in uterine leiomyoma cells. In this study, we explore the hypothesis that progestins regulate the Bcl-2 gene promoter. We employed primary cultures of human leiomyoma smooth muscle cells from 10 patients as a model system. Using the Transcription Element Search System (TESS, http://www.cbil.upenn.edu/tess/), a 15 bp sequence GGATCAtgcTGTACT at -534/-520 from the ATG start site was identifi ed in the Bcl-2 promoter, which is highly homologous to the progesterone response element (PRE) consensus sequence. Gel shift assay indicated that this sequence interacted with the nuclear extracts from leiomyoma cells treated with progesterone for 2 hours. This interaction was specifi c as shown by a cold competitor probe, and a supershift showed the presence of PR in the DNA-protein complex. To investigate whether Bcl-2 promoter activity is regulated by progestins, we cloned the -631/+89 fragment of this promoter containing the putative PRE into a luciferase reporter vector and showed that the Bcl-2 promoter activity was upregulated by R5020, a progesterone agonist, in leiomyoma cells cotransfected with plasmids expressing the full length PR isoform PR-B, but not with those expressing the truncated PR isoform PR-A or empty vector. Finally, we observed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis that PR is recruited to the Bcl-2 promoter in leiomyoma cells stimulated with progesterone. Conclusions: we demonstrated for the fi rst time that the Bcl-2 promoter contains a functional PRE that binds PR and that its activity is upregulated by progesterone or its analogs in primary uterine leiomyoma cells. Our results suggest that ligand-binded PR regulates Bcl-2 transcription via directly binding to its promoter. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a newly identifi ed class of non-protein-coding small RNAs of approximately 20nt with critical function in multiple biological processes through mRNAs degradation or repression. Since alteration in miRNA expression is considered to contribute to cellular machinery that regulates various cellular activities implicated in normal and disease processes, including cancer we profi led their expression in myometrium and leiomyoma. Using miRNA microarray we captured the expression profi le of 207miRNA in normal myometrium and matched leiomyomas, their isolated smooth muscle cells (MSMC,LSMC), in a LSMC culture spontaneously transformed after third passage and in SKLM, a leiomyosarcoma cell line. The results indicated that myometrium express the highest number of miRNA (N=80) as compared to leiomyomas with further decline in expression in MSMC and LSMC derived from the same tissues. We also observed a decline in the number of miRNA expression in the transformed LSMC as compared to MSMC and LSMC, with lowest number of miRNA expression in SKLM as compared to other cell types. We confi rmed the expression of three of the miRNA, mir20, mir21 and mir26a in these tissues and cells using realtime PCR. In addition, we demonstrated that the expression of these miRNA is regulated by estrogen, progesterone and TGF-ß. The results provide the fi rst example of miRNA profi le in myometrium and leiomyomas and during cellular transformation from normal to sarcoma. Because of a considerable decline in the expression of a number of these miRNA our results suggest that aberrant expression of these selective miRNA are involved in the possible development of leiomyoma and their progression from benign into cancerous stages. (Supported by grant HD37432) . Introduction: Adhesion fibroblasts are characterized by low levels of nitric oxide (NO), lower apoptosis, and higher protein nitration than normal fi broblasts. The hypothesis to be tested is that the lower levels of NO observed in adhesion fi broblasts are due to the increased consumption of NO by superoxide to form peroxinitrite, a powerful nitrating agent in a biological system. Peroxinitrite is used for caspase-3 nitration, which leads to the loss of its activity, and subsequently, decreases apoptosis in adhesion fi broblasts. Objective: To test the effects of peroxinitrite in the presence and absence of superoxide dismutase (SOD), a superoxide scavenger, on caspase-3 mediated apoptosis in normal and adhesion fi broblasts under normal and hypoxic conditions. Methods: Fibroblasts from normal peritoneal and adhesion tissues were cultured under normal (20% O 2 ) and hypoxic (2%) conditions and exposed to increasing concentrations of peroxinitrite (0.5, 1.0, 1.5 μM) for 20 min with and without (SOD, 10 U/ml) treatment. Caspase-3 activity and apoptosis were measured by colormetric and TUNEL assays, respectively. Results: Caspase-3 activity was 30% lower in adhesion as compared to normal fi broblasts. Hypoxia treatment resulted in a signifi cant decrease in caspase-3 activity and apoptosis in normal fi broblast with little or no change in adhesion fi broblasts. Treatment of normal and adhesion fi broblasts with peroxinitrite resulted in a signifi cant decrease in caspase-3 activity in both fi broblasts under normal and hypoxic conditions. Treatment with SOD partially prevented the loss in caspase-3 activity at 0.5 μM peroxinitrite concentration, but, it failed to prevent it at 1.0 μM and higher peroxinitrite concentrations in normal and adhesion fi broblasts. Conclusions: Our data suggests that the reduced levels of NO observed in adhesion fi broblasts are due to the presence of higher levels of superoxide which combine with NO to form peroxinitrite. Nitration of caspase-3 lead to a signifi cant decrease in its activity and resulted in lower apoptosis. Removal of superoxide by SOD resulted in a partial restoration of caspase-3 activity and increase in apoptosis. This may be a potential therapeutic intervention for the elimination of the adhesion fi broblast phenotype during peritoneal healing. Real-time PCR analysis revealed that that preproET-1 in PCOS patients were higher than in control group (6.5 ± 1.7 vs. 1.4 ± 0.42). mRNA expression of endothelin converting enzyme -1 (ECE-1) responsible for producing active ET-1, was also elevated in GLC of PCOS patients. The presence of ETA in GLC, in both groups of patients, supports an autocrine action of ET-1 within the follicle. Conclusions: Enhanced expression of ECE-1 and ET-1 mRNA in the granulosa cell layer of women with PCOS may be a diagnostic and pathological marker of this condition associated with low fertility. Elevated ET-1 levels may interfere with the ovulation process and luteal development. Uterine Radial Arteries. Natalie Z Burger, George Osol, * Natalia I Gokina. Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA. Introduction: Our previous data indicate that EDHF-mediated uterine vasodilation is signifi cantly potentiated in rat pregnancy. We hypothesized that estrogen might be an important factor modulating EDHF-mediated vasodilation of uterine radial arteries. The objectives of the present study were: (1) to characterize acetylcholine (ACh)-induced nitric oxide (NO)-and prostacyclin (PGI 2 )-independent vasodilation of uterine arteries from estrogen-defi cient (ovariectomized) rats; (2) to determine the effect of estrogen replacement on EDHF-mediated uterine vasodilation. Methods: Radial uterine arteries were dissected from the uteri of ovariectomized untreated (OVX) and 17ß-estradiol-replaced (OVX+E) rats. The arteries were cannulated and pressurized to 50 mmHg. The production of NO and PGI 2 was inhibited with LNNA (200 μM) and indomethacin (10 μM), respectively. The vessels were pre-constricted with phenylephrine to 50-70% of the initial diameter, and ACh was added in increasing concentrations in 5-minute intervals. A combination of papaverine and diltiazem was used at the end of each experiment to obtain maximally-dilated arterial diameters (D max To this aim, we tested the in vitro effects of androgens on Progesterone (P) and on Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) production by human luteal cells. Indeed, VEGF is essential for normal luteal development and function being an important regulator of angiogenesis and vascular permeability. Since Prostaglandins (PGs) play a central role in modulating luteal function, the infl uence of androgens on PGE 2 and PGF 2α secretion was also investigated. Methods: Highly purifi ed human luteal cells were cultured for 24 h with medium alone (control) or in presence of increasing concentrations (from 10 -8 to 10 -6 M) of testosterone or dihydrotestosterone or androstenedione. mRNA VEGF levels were evaluated by semiquantitative RT-PCR, whereas, in the culture medium, VEGF secretion was assayed by ELISA. Progesterone secretion was evaluated by ELISA, while PGs production was assayed by RIA. Results: Our results demonstrated that testosterone, androstenedione and dihydrotestosterone were all able to signifi cantly reduce both VEGF secretion and VEGF mRNA expression in human luteal cells. Androgens were also able to signifi cantly decrease P and PGF 2α secretion, while preliminary results did not show any effects on PGE 2 production. Conclusion: Increased levels of androgens were able to decrease luteal VEGF synthesis and P production. These effects might be involved in the luteal insuffi ciency frequently observed in women with PCOS. In this context the infl uence of androgens on PGs secretion requires further investigations. Objective: The endometrial functions of reproduction, menstruation, and host defense are regulated by locally-produced cytokines; however, the mechanisms regulating endometrial cytokine expression are poorly understood. Regulation of T-lymphocytes cytokine expression involves differentiation toward either a TH1 or TH2 phenotype, resulting in expression of different sets of cytokines. TH2 differentiation depends upon the GATA-3 transcription factor, while TH1 differentiation requires T-bet. Bias of cytokine expression away from TH1 and toward TH2 is thought to support pregnancy. Our previous work has described cyclic regulation of T-bet in endometrial epithelial cells, with maximal expression in the late secretory phase, suggesting that factors regulating T-cell expression of cytokines may also regulate cytokine expression in the endometrial epithelium. Objective: Determined the endometrial expression of GATA-3 mRNA and protein across the menstrual cycle. Methods: Endometrial samples were obtained, under an IRB approved protocol, from normal volunteers representing all phases of the menstrual cycle (n=18). GATA-3 mRNA was quantitated using TaqMan qRT-PCR, using the delta-delta Ct method and cyclophilin as a housekeeping gene. In addition immunohistochemistry on fi xed endometrial specimens were used to localize GATA-3 protein. An isotype-matched antibody against a non-relevant antigen served as a negative control. Results: Relative expression of GATA-3 mRNA was markedly increased (8-fold) in the late secretory phase of the menstrual cycle as compared to the early secretory phase, while expression was low during the early secretory and mid-secretory phases. GATA-3 protein localized to the cytoplasm of glandular and luminal epithelium during the late secretory phase, but was also present at low levels in the same cells during the early and mid-secretory phases. Conclusions: GATA-3 is transcribed and translated in endometrial epithelium in a cyclic manner, with maximal expression in the late secretory phase. Coexpression of GATA-3 and T-Bet is unexpected and may be unique to endometrium. Objective: The aim of this study was to assess the impact of the implementation of a 2-embryo transfer policy on conception and multiple pregnancy rates in good prognosis IVF patients and in oocyte donation (OD). Materials: A total of 814 cycles were analyzed. Inclusion criteria: (i) IVF patients were ≤38 years and oocyte donors were <32 years; (ii) all women were stimulated with a combination of a GnRH agonist and recombinant FSH; (iii) ≥9 mature oocytes were harvested; and (iv) embryos were selected for transfer on day 3 and excess concepti of good quality were cryopreserved. Patients having a selective transfer of 2 embryos (SET2) in the fresh and subsequent frozen/thawed cycles were compared to patients having a selective transfer of 3 embryos (SET3). We hypothesized that the analysis of the total reproductive potential (TRP) of a single cycle of ovarian stimulation is optimized by including pregnancies arising from fresh and frozen-thawed embryo transfers resulting from the stimulated cycle. Estradiol administration causes increased plasma ACTH and cortisol in the fetus. We have proposed that there is a positive feedback relationship between estrogen and fetal HPA axis activity that is dependent upon cyclooxygenase (COX) activity in the fetal brain. The present study was designed to investigate genomic and hormonal responses to blockade of estrogen receptors in the fetal CNS. Six time-dated pregnant ewes with chronically-catheterized twin fetuses were used in this study. In each pregnancy, one twin was treated icv with the estrogen receptor antagonist ICI 182,780 (25 ug/day; n=6) while the other twin served as an age-matched control. Infusions were delivered by osmotic minipump, initiated at the time of surgery, and continued for 7-10 days. Fetuses were surgically prepared between 120-127 days gestation and sacrifi ced between 130-134 days gestation. Fetal blood samples were drawn for plasma hormone and blood gas analysis prior to sacrifi ce. Plasma hormone concentrations were measured using radioimmunoassay and immunoradiometric assay and mRNA abundances were measured using real-time RT-PCR with specifi c Taqman probes and primers. ICI infusion signifi cantly decreased COX-2 mRNA abundance in fetal hypothalamus, brainstem, hippocampus, cerebral cortex, and cerebellum as well as in pituitary. Decreases in COX-2 expression were especially pronounced in hippocampus and in pituitary. There were no statistically signifi cant changes in COX-1. ICI signifi cantly decreased plasma concentrations of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) and progesterone relative to controls but had no statistically signifi cant effect on fetal plasma ACTH, proopiomelanocortin (POMC), or cortisol. Analysis of mRNA revealed no statistically signifi cant effects of ICI on arginine vasopressin, corrticotropin releasing hormone, steroid sulfatase, and serum and glucocorticoid regulated kinase-1 in hypothalamus, and POMC and prohormone convertase-1 in pituitary. We conclude that COX-2 expression in the late-gestation fetal brain is in part stimulated by circulating estrogens in fetal plasma. We also conclude that fetal DHEAS and progesterone are stimulated by an action of estrogen in the fetal brain, although these effects are not mediated by changes in fetal HPA axis activity. Objective: Serotonin (5-HT) is a central neurotransmitter important in mood regulation, however, recent studies have revealed it is also produced in the mammary tissue and its expression increases during peripartum. Our objective is to determine if mammary 5-HT has effects on the central 5-HT system. Methods: This study used a tryptophan hydroxylase 1 knock out (TPH1KO) mouse model compared to wild type (WT) mice. TPH 1 is found only in peripheral tissue, and is the rate limiting enzyme for 5-HT production, hence TPH1KO mice do not produce mammary 5-HT. Virgin and lactating mice 5-HT levels were compared. Lactating mice were normalized to 6 suckling pups/dam and were taken on the peak day of lactation. Mice underwent perfusion fi xation with 4% paraformaldehyde and the brain and duodenum were removed. Immunohistochemisty was performed for 5-HT in the neural dorsal raphe at the level of the pontine nucleus and in the duodenum (major sources of 5-HT). Positive cells were quantifi ed by counting and represented by the average of triplicate counts, and scored for staining intensity using Image J (n=4/group). Our results were evaluated by one way ANOVA with Tukey's test for differences among groups. Results: The brains of WT virgin mice had substantially greater staining intensity and number of cells stained for 5-HT compared to all other groups. TPH1KO virgin mice had signifi cantly less neural 5-HT compared to WT virgins (p<0.001, p<0.001 cell count and staining intensity, respectively for all data reported) and the WT lactating mice had signifi cantly less neural 5-HT compared to the WT virgin mice (p<0.01, p=0.03). Staining for central 5-HT in the TPH1KO virgin and lactating mice were not signifi cantly different from each other (p=0.90, p=0.97). 5-HT staining in duodenal tissues did not differ signifi cantly between virgin and lactating mice in either genotype (p=1.0, p=0.438), but were signifi cantly less in the TPH1KO mice. Conclusions: Our initial data indicate that central 5-HT levels are signifi cantly less during lactation, thus peripheral mammary 5-HT production impacts central 5-HT levels. This new evidence may lead to a better understanding of how the reproductive system can alter brain physiology, particularly how central 5-HT may be regulated peripartum. (n=15), spontaneous abortion (SAB) (n=30) or singleton term delivery (TD) (n=30). Cytokine assays were run on frozen-thawed serum samples collected 2 (D28) and 3 (D35) weeks post-oocyte retrieval using an automated, immunoassay analyzer. Previously measured hCG and P4 levels from the same serum samples were evaluated. Receiver operating characteristic curves were constructed. Results: Average hCG levels on D28 and D35 were higher in cycles ending in TD than in all other pregnancy groups (p≤.003); an hCG level >94 mIU/mL on D28 and >1372 mIU/mL on D35 predicted a live birth outcome with a sensitivity and specifi city of 80%. In the setting of a rise or plateau in hCG value, median hCG readings on D28 and D35 were signifi cantly lower in the EG group than in than in those with SAB or TD (p<.001); an hCG level <37 mIU/mL on D28 and <637 mIU/mL on D35 distinguished an EG from a SAB and TD with a sensitivity and specifi city >85%. On D28, median IL-8 levels were lower in the EG group when compared to all IUGs combined (p<.04). Contrary to prior reports, no signifi cant differences in IL-2R and IL-6 levels were noted between groups. All patients received 50 mg IM P4 supplementation. Even so, median D35 P4 levels were lower in EG than in SAB and TD cycles (D35: p<.001); a D35 P4 level <35 ng/mL distinguished an EG from an SAB and TD with a sensitivity of 80% and specifi city of 87%. Conclusions: The absolute D35 serum hCG level was the single most predictive measure in early pregnancy. In the setting of a rise or plateau in hCG levels, low D28 IL-8 and D35 P4 levels (despite P4 supplementation) suggested an extrauterine implantation. This assay combination may facilitate earlier diagnosis of an EG when pregnancy location is unclear. Browne, Alicia Armstrong, Rebecca Babb, James Segars, * Steven Pavletic. Reproductive Biology and Medicine Branch, NICHD, and NCI, National Institutes of Heatlh, Bethesda, MD, USA. Objective: To evaluate ovarian function among SLE patients undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) using anti-mullerian hormone and current markers of ovarian reserve. Materials and Methods: A retrospective analysis from a phase II study of 6 patients with Stage IV lupus nephritis, evaluated at the NIH as part of an autologous HSCT protocol, were reviewed between January 2004 and October 2006. Information was abstracted for menstrual and reproductive history, and the use of hormonal medications prior to HSCT. Measures of ovarian reserve included age, menstrual function, FSH, estradiol, and AMH levels measured at 4 and 6-9 months post-treatment. Results: Patients received a mean of 14 cycles of IV cyclophosphamide prior to HSCT. Three patients received hormonal therapy-prior to HSCT. Two patients were menopausal and one pre-menarchal at the start of the study, and did not receive hormonal treatment. One patient expired, one was lost to follow-up, and one patient was only 4 months post-transplant. All patients > 31 years of age had FSH levels in the menopausal range prior to hematopoietic stem cell transplant. Two patients with premenopausal FSH and estradiol levels had regular menses prior to their diagnoses, and subsequently became amenorrheic after receiving IV cyclophosphamide. Patient with regular menses had higher AMH levels. Patients who had amenorrhea and somatic symptoms consistent with ovarian failure had low AMH levels. One patient who developed amenorrhea had normal FSH levels, in the presence of low AMH levels. (CC) is a standard fi rst-line treatment for infertile couples, reported effi cacy varies widely within the published literature. Additionally, effi cacy of CC is thought to differ based on infertility diagnosis, with CC being most effective for the anovulatory population. The aim of this study was to evaluate the overall pregnancy rate with CC in a generalized infertility population using the largest outcomes data for CC to date. MATERIALS / METHODS: A retrospective data analysis of all infertile patients treated with CC at the Boston IVF centers from September 2002 through July 2006 was performed. Pregnancy rate (including live births and losses) for 3,899 CC cycles was evaluated. Pregnancy outcomes were compared among subgroups divided based on age. RESULTS: The overall pregnancy rate was 8.7% per cycle (339 pregnancies for 3,899 total cycles). An inverse relationship between age and success rate was noted (Table 1) . For women under 35 years, a pregnancy rate per cycle of 11.3% was seen. In comparison, the pregnancy rate per cycle for women between age 41 and 42 years and over age 43 years was 4.6% and 1.1%, respectively. The mean patient age in this study was 34.8 years, and ranged from 20 to 48 years. SPSS statistical software was utilized for pregnancy rate analysis. CONCLUSIONS: CC effi cacy in achieving a pregnancy approximated 9% per cycle. However, as with many advanced reproductive technologies (ART), advancing age dramatically reduced the mean pregnancy rate. Given that this is the largest data series to date for CC success in a generalized infertility population, it should prove helpful in counseling women regarding outcomes who initiate treatment with CC. Objective: More than 100,000 assisted reproductive technology (ART) cycles are started yearly in the U.S. A mean number of 3.1 embryos are transferred in ART cycles using fresh nondonor oocytes. This leads to a 34.3% overall pregnancy rate, 29.0% of which result in multiple-infant live births. These statistics refl ect a need for improvement over our current embryo selection methodology that is based on cleavage rates and morphology. In this study, we hypothesized that, embryos that result in pregnancy may be different in their metabolomic profi le compared to embryos that do not, and that the difference may be detected by the non-invasive evaluation of the embryo culture media using proton nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Materials and Methods: Embryo culture medium of 61 embryos from ART cycles using fresh donor or nondonor oocytes were evaluated. Media (G1.3; VitroLife, Sweden) were individually collected after embryo transfer on day 3, and analyzed using proton NMR. The spectra obtained was analyzed using a ppm selective genetic algorithm (GA) to determine regions predictive of pregnancy outcome as determined by logistic regression. To avoid random correlations, a leave-one out cross-validation was used. Sensitivity and specifi city of predicting pregnancy (defi ned as presence of fetal cardiac activity) were calculated. Results: Spectral profi le describing differences in lactate, alanine, and glycine concentrations showed distinct differences between culture media of embryos that resulted in pregnancy and those that did not. Using GA to select spectral regions associated with these molecular species, a model predictive of pregnancy outcome was developed. Compiled outcomes from the leave-oneout cross-validation of the logistic regression using the NMR measurements resulted in a specifi city of 84% and a sensitivity of 86%. Conclusion: In this study we observed a difference in the metabolomic profi les of embryo culture media obtained from embryos that cause pregnancy compared to those that do not. Our fi ndings suggest that metabolomic profi ling may serve as a useful methodology for non-invasive embryo assessment and selection. Confi rmation of these initial observations is planned through a larger prospective study involving additional ART centers. ASRM 2006) . This variation in response may be due to systemic and/or local changes in the endocrine environment during ovarian stimulation and oocyte development. Understanding the endocrine basis of variations in stimulation protocols may lead to the design of more effective protocols. Our objective is to characterize follicular fl uid hormones in different stimulation protocols. Design: Prospective cohort study. Materials and Methods: 80 patients undergoing IVF by one of 3 stimulation protocols were studied. Follicular aspirates were obtained from 1-2 follicles measuring >15mm at the time of oocyte retrieval. Follicular fl uid estradiol (E2), progesterone (P), total testosterone (T), prolactin (PRL), hCG and FSH were measured by chemiluminescent immunoassay. One-way analysis of variance was used to compare the mean values of various hormones in each protocol. Results: Long-lupron protocol produced the lowest follicular levels of progesterone. Microdose fl are produced higher amounts of progesterone than long lupron or antagonist protocols. Although antagonist produced higher progesterone levels than long lupron protocol, the difference was not signifi cant. We also noted higher FSH levels using microdose fl are than long lupron or antagonist protocols. Conclusion: Higher follicular fl uid progesterone in the microdose fl are protocol may adversely affect oocyte development. Further studies are underway to evaluate the impact of follicular progesterone on individual oocyte health as refl ected by fertilization rate and embryo quality and to correlate systemic and follicular endocrine profi les with the different stimulations to better understand the mechanism of this fi nding. Objective: To evaluate the role of midluteal (ML) estradiol (E2) and progesterone (P4) levels in determining pregnancy outcomes in ovulation induction (OI) cycles Methods: In patients undergoing intrauterine insemination / timed intercourse with OI, ML E2 and P4 levels were measured 7 days after ovulation. Clinical pregnancy was confi rmed sonographically by the presence of the fetal heart beat. Biochemical pregnancy was confi rmed by a positive human chorionic gonadotropin drawn 14 days after ovulation. Student's t-test, Fisher's exact test and correlation analysis were used. A value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically signifi cant. Results: 1. There was no difference in mean ML E2 levels between pregnant and nonpregnant cycles. The clinical pregnancy rate in patients with E2 ≥ 250pg/ml was 2.8 times of that of the other group with E2 < 250pg/ml, although it was not statistically signifi cant. 2. There was a trend that mean ML P4 level in pregnant cycles was higher than that of non-pregnant cycles, although it was not statistically signifi cant. Using P4 cut-off at 30ng/ml, there was a signifi cant difference in the clinical but not biochemical pregnancy rate. When P4 level was less than 16ng/ml, no pregnancy was observed. Non-preg (%) P4 < 30ng/ml 2 (4.8) 40 (95.2) P4 ≥ 30ng/ml 8 (19.5) 33 (80.5) p=0.040 3. In cycles with ML E2 < 250pg/ml and P4 < 30ng/ml, there was no clinical or biochemical pregnancy. Both the clinical and biochemical pregnancy rates were signifi cantly higher in cycles with either E2 ≥ 250pg/ml or P4 ≥ 30ng/ml. Objective: Anonymous oocyte donation (AOD) yields high pregnancy rates for patients who otherwise would be unlikely to conceive. Still, many recipients fail to conceive with their initial AOD cycle. We chose to analyze consecutive IVF AOD cycles of recipients utilizing a new oocyte donor following failed IVF to characterize indicators of success after failed oocyte donation cycles. Method: IRB approved retrospective analysis of AOD IVF cycles with a 1 st donor that failed to yield a pregnancy compared to AOD cycles in the same recipients utilizing a 2 nd donor. Results: Baseline characteristics and outcome measures were analyzed for the two groups. Comparison of the 1 st AOD cycle to the 2 nd cycle with a new donor revealed no difference in mean donor age (28.9 ± 3.7 vs 27.7 ± 2.8, p=0.45). Analysis of retrieval and transfer outcomes are found in Table 1 and 2, respectively. Six of the 9 patients delivered on their 1 st transfer with the 2 nd donor. One patient delivered on the 2 nd transfer with the 2 nd donor. Conclusions: AOD recipients who fail to deliver with an initial donor have a high chance of conceiving utilizing a 2 nd donor. This occurs despite homogeneity of characteristics with the exception of improved fertilization rates and, thereby, Figure 1 FRIDAY increased number of fertilized oocytes. This data supports encouragement of couples who have failed with a donor to consider a 2 nd attempt with a new donor. A relatively low yield of embryos with one donor can potentially be overcome by switching to a new donor. Objective: To determine if IVF/ICSI improves fertilization rates in patients with PCOS compared to conventional IVF. Patients with tubal factor infertility undergoing conventional IVF or IVF/ICSI were used as a control group. Methods: A retrospective cohort of patients with PCOS undergoing IVF for infertility were compared with a cohort of patient with PCOS undergoing IVF/ICSI for male factor infertility. Patients with tubal factor infertility were used as a control group because the ICSI procedure could improve fertilization rates irrespective of the infertility diagnosis. Fertilization rate was calculated as the proportion of normally fertilized embryos, ascertained by the presence of two pronuclei on the day following insemination, divided by the number of mature oocytes retrieved. Implantation rate was defi ned as the number of gestational sacs present on 6 week ultrasound divided by the number of embryos transferred. Positive pregnancy outcome was defi ned as the presence of fetal heart tones on ultrasound. Statistical analysis was performed using a two-way analysis of variance and multiple comparisons of group means was conducted using a Fisher's least signifi cant difference approach. Results: There were 23 cycles of PCOS patients undergoing IVF and 18 undergoing IVF/ICSI. There were 94 cycles of tubal factor patients undergoing IVF and 36 undergoing IVF/ICSI. There was a statistically signifi cant difference in fertilization rate between PCOS patients undergoing IVF (51.3%) compared to IVF/ICSI (68.1%, p=0.03). In contrast, there was no difference in fertilization rate in tubal factor patients undergoing IVF (72.6%) compared to IVF/ICSI (66.2%, p=0.1). Analysis of variance demonstrated that the impact of the procedure (IVF or ICSI) differed depending upon the diagnostic group (PCOS or tubal factor, p=0.012). The two diagnostic groups did not differ for the ICSI procedure (p=0.79) but they were different for the IVF procedure (p<0.001). PCOS patients undergoing IVF or ICSI had no difference in implantation rates (12.0% vs. 15.2%, p=0.93) Objective: Growing evidence points to a role for endogenous opioids in the regulation of insulin secretion and carbohydrate metabolism in hyperandrogenemic women. This study assessed effects of long-term inhibition of the opioid system using naltrexone in clomiphene citrate (CC)-resistant women with PCOS. Methods: Women with PCOS who failed to ovulate in response to CC (up to 200mg) were evaluated. All subjects received 50mg of naltrexone daily for 6 months. After 12 weeks, patients who did not ovulate on naltrexone alone also received CC (50mg/day for 5 days; the dose increased in 50mg increments up to 200mg). Ovulations were detected sonographically and by serum progesterone (on day 21). Evaluations performed at the baseline, at 12 weeks, and at the end of the study included: body mass index (BMI), hirsutism, acne, fasting insulin and glucose, total testosterone, LH and FSH. Results: The enclosed table summarizes major outcomes. In addition, during naltrexone monotherapy 5 of 16 (31.2%) amenorrheic women began menstruating and 2 of 14 (14.2%) oligomenorrheic women resumed regular menses. After naltrexone+CC, 6 of 11 amenorrheic women began menstruating and 10 of 12 oligomenorrheic women resumed regular menses. Conclusion: Naltrexone monotherapy improved menstrual cyclicity, hyperandrogenism, LH secretion and hyperinsulinemia in CC-resistant women with PCOS. Furthermore, naltrexone improved CC sensitivity, resulting in a signifi cant number of pregnancies. We propose that naltrexone is effective in the treatment of clinical, endocrine and metabolic aspects of PCOS and, in particular, it improves sensitivity to CC. Objectives: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is associated with cardiovascular risk factors including insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, systemic infl ammation and endothelial dysfunction. C-reactive protein (CRP) is a marker of systemic infl ammation and an activator of endothelium. Urinary albumin excretion is a marker of endothelial dysfunction refl ecting the integrity of glomerular endothelium. However, the relationship of CRP with urinary albumen and other cardiovascular risk factors remains unclear. This study was designed to evaluate CRP and urinary albumen in relation to clinical, endocrine and metabolic parameters in women with PCOS. Materials and Methods: The study included 82 hyperandrogenic women with PCOS; subjects with diabetes, hypertension and non-classical congenital adrenal hyperplasia were excluded. Evaluations were performed 3-9 days after spontaneous or progestin-induced menses. Studied parameters included body mass index (BMI), blood pressure (BP), CRP, urinary albumin excretion, testosterone, 17-hydroxyprogesterone LH, FSH, lipid profi le, vitamin E, as well as glucose and insulin during 2-hour glucose tolerance test. Measures of insulin sensitivity included quantitative insulin sensitivity check index (QUICKI) and insulin sensitivity index (ISI). Statistical evaluation consisted of linear regression analysis. Results: Signifi cant elevation of CRP (>3 mg/L) was observed in 50% of patients. In univariate analysis, CRP correlated most signifi cantly with BMI (r=0.62; P<0.0001), diastolic BP (r=0.45; P<0.0001), ISI (r=-0.5; P<0.0001), and vitamin E (r=-0.34; P=0.005). In a multiple regression analysis, independent predictors were BMI (P=0.0005), diastolic BP (P=0.026) and ISI (P=0.03); R 2 of this model was 0.47. Microalbuminuria (urinary albumen 20-200mg/L) was detected in 23% of subjects. In univariate analysis, urinary albumen correlated with diastolic BP (r=0.24; P=0.05) and 17-hydroxyprogesterone (r=0.49; P<0.0001); there was no correlation with CRP or measures of insulin sensitivity. In multiple regression analysis, independent predictors of urinary albumen were diastolic BP (P=0.004) and 17-hydroxyprogesterone; R 2 =0.33. Conclusions: PCOS is associated with a high rate of signifi cant systemic infl ammation and endothelial dysfunction. It appears that CRP is an independent risk factor from microalbuminuria suggesting distinctly different mechanisms involved in regulating these markers of cardiovascular risks. Summer James, Xin Ma, Manubai Nagamani. * Division of Reproductive Endocrinology, OB/GYN, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. Objective: Most women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) are insulin resistant and are at high risk for type2 diabetes. Role of insulin in PCOS has been extensively studied. There are hormones other than insulin that play an important role in glucose homeostasis. Amylin is a 37 aminoacid peptide co secreted with insulin from the pancreatic ß cells. Receptors for amylin have been demonstrated in the ovaries.The role of amylin in women with PCOS has never been studied. Methods: Twenty women with PCOS who had anovulatory cycles and evidence of hyperandrogenism were recruited for the study. Ten women with ovulatory cycles who matched the PCOS patients in BMI served as controls. After a high carbohydrate diet for 3 days, an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) was performed. Blood samples were obtained at fasting and 1, 2 and 3 hours for measurement of glucose, insulin and amylin. The area under the curve (AUC) for insulin, amylin and glucose was calculated. Levels of testosterone, DHEAS, FSH and LH were also measured in all patients. Eight women with PCOS were treated with metformin for 6 months. Amylin levels were measured before and after treatment. Results: Fasting insulin levels (23.1 + 2.4μU/ml vs 7.1 + 10 μU/ml [+ SE]) and area under the curve (AUC) of insulin (476.5 + 71.5 vs 156.3 + 20.1μU/ml) during OGTT were signifi cantly increased (P <0.001) in women with PCOS compared to control women, while the glucose levels were normal indicating insulin resistance. Fasting amylin (12.1 + 2.4 vs 7.7 + 0.7 pM) and amylin AUC (91.2 + 10.8 vs 28.6 + 5.4 pM) were also signifi cantly (P < 0.001) increased in women with PCOS. There was signifi cant positive correlation between insulin and amylin at fasting (r =0.64, P <0.02) and after glucose ingestion (r=.582, P <0.04). There was no correlation between basal glucose and amylin levels. However, amylin response (AUC) during OGTT positively correlated with the glucose responce (r =0.674, P <0.01). Metformin treatment resulted in signifi cant decrease in amylin levels. Conclusions: (1) there is hypersecretion of amylin in women with PCOS, (2) increased production of amylin in PCOS may be a consequence of co-regulation of insulin and amylin.(3) treatment with metformin reduces not only insulin but also amylin secretion, (4) role of amylin in the development of insulin resistance and ovarian dysfunction in women with PCOS needs further investigation. Objective: Circulating AMH levels in women with PCOS are signifi cantly higher compared to those of normal women. The basis for this difference has been attributed to increased follicle number in PCOS women as AMH mRNA expression is most prominent in preantral and small antral follicles. In addition, serum AMH has been shown to exhibit a tight positive correlation with small antral follicles of 2-5 mm size. Recent studies have demonstrated a direct correlation between fasting insulin levels, insulin resistance and levels of serum AMH which suggests that insulin may be related to increased AMH production. In vivo studies to determine whether insulin has an effect on AMH synthesis and secretion have not been performed. The aim of our study was to test the hypothesis that insulin increases AMH levels in PCOS. Methods: 7 women with PCOS and 7 normal women were recruited for study. Each PCOS subject underwent a 10 hour hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp at an insulin infusion rate of 200 mU/min. Glucose levels were clamped at 85 mg/dl. Levels of insulin and AMH were measured at baseline and at the end of the study. In both groups, baseline levels of reproductive hormones were determined. A two tail paired t-test was used to compare serum hormone and AMH levels. Results: In PCOS women, the mean (±SE) age and BMI were 29.0 ± 2.3 and 40.1 ± 2.0, respectively, compared with that of normal women, 28.6 ± 1.5 and 27.4 ± 1.9. As expected, in PCOS subjects serum testosterone and androstenedione were signifi cantly higher than those of the normal group. In addition, in PCOS serum LH was increased compared to normal women whereas no differences in FSH and serum estrogens were observed between groups. During insulin infusion, circulating insulin levels acutely increased from a mean of 49 ± 14 to 655 ± 19 μU/ml. These levels were kept constant until the end of the 10 hr infusion. Mean serum AMH prior to, 7.61 ± 1.13 ng/ml, and at the end of infusion, 7.85 ± 1.29 ng/ml, were not signifi cantly different. Conclusions: Notwithstanding the direct correlation between insulin and AMH levels found by some investigators, we were unable to demonstrate a direct effect of acute insulin infusion on serum AMH. These fi ndings do not exclude the possibility that an effect of insulin on AMH production may require chronic exposure to hyperinsulinemia. Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrinopathy characterized by hyperandrogenism and altered ovarian follicular development. In the PCOS ovary, overproduction of androgens by theca cells, and an apparent lack of aromatization to estrogens in granulosa cells (GCs), leads to a high androgen: estrogen ratio. In order to further understand the mechanisms regulating GC steroidogenesis in PCOS, we have begun to investigate steroid biosynthesis and steroidogenic enzyme gene expression in GCs in long-term culture. Objective: To compare aromatase activity, progesterone (P4) biosynthesis, and mRNA abundance of cytochrome P450 cholesterol side-chain cleavage (CYP11A1) and cytochrome P450 aromatase (CYP19) in normal and PCOS GCs in long-term culture. Methods: GCs were isolated from 5-8 mm follicles from normal or PCOS ovaries and propagated in culture for 31-38 population doublings. Following treatment with and without 10 μM forskolin (FSK), an activator of adenylate cyclase, aromatase activity was measured by tritiated water assay, P4 was measured by RIA, and CYP19 and CYP11A1 mRNA abundance were assayed by quantitative real-time PCR. Results: As compared to GCs propagated from normal women, PCOS GCs were observed to have elevated aromatase activity, P4 production, and CYP19 and CYP11A1 mRNA abundance. FSK stimulated aromatase activity, P4 production, and CYP19 and CYP11A1 mRNA abundance in both normal and PCOS GCs. Transient transfection with CYP11A1 and CYP19 promoter constructs demonstrated an increased activity of these promoters in PCOS GCs, suggesting increased activation of these genes in PCOS GCs. Conclusions: PCOS GCs in long-term culture are intrinsically different than normal GCs, with a phenotype of signifi cantly elevated aromatase activity and P4 biosynthesis that correlates with increased mRNA abundance and transcription of the CYP19 and CYP11A1 genes. The observation of increased aromatase activity in PCOS GCs is in agreement with previous reports of PCOS GCs in primary culture. The ability of PCOS granulosa to express aromatase in culture makes them an effective resourse for examining the mechanisms involved in dysregulation of aromatase in the PCOS ovary. Objective: In the human ovary, expression of anti-mullerian hormone (AMH) is detected primarily in granulosa cells of preantral and small antral follicles. These fi ndings are consistent with the reported tight correlation between circulating AMH levels and the number of small antral follicles (2-5 mm) in normal and PCOS women. In addition, the greater follicle count in PCOS is mirrored by signifi cantly higher serum AMH levels compared to those of normal women. Despite the potential utility of AMH measurements in evaluating ovarian physiology and function, the regulation of AMH remains poorly understood. The objective of this study was to determine whether follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) acutely regulates granulosa cell AMH production in women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and normal women. Methods: A prospective study to compare ovarian responses in two groups of women was conducted at the GCRC in a tertiary academic medical center. Women with PCOS, 18-35 years (n = 16), and age-matched normal ovulatory controls (n = 11), were recruited for study. Serial blood samples were obtained over a 24 hour period following intravenous injection of recombinant human FSH, 150 IU. The main outcome measure was serum AMH responses following FSH administration. Results: Basal serum AMH levels were markedly increased in women with PCOS compared to that observed in normal women. Following FSH injection, PCOS women failed to demonstrate changes in circulating AMH over 24 hr. A similar lack of alteration in serum AMH was observed in normal women. Conclusions: Based on these fi ndings we conclude that, in PCOS and normal women, acute administration of FSH does not effect granulosa cell AMH production. Safety Profi le of Rosiglitazone during the First Trimester of Pregnancy. Ghassan F Haddad, Cristiano Jodicke, Michael A Thomas, * Mira Aubuchon. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Universtiy of Cincinnati Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA. Objective: To examine the safety profi le of rosiglitazone in the fi rst trimester of pregnancy. Introduction: Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is a common reproductive disorder marked by insulin resistance. PCOS patients have an increased risk of miscarriage, gestational diabetes, macrosomia, caesarian deliveries, and pre-eclampsia. The incidence of these complications is decreased with the use of metformin, a pregnancy class B biguanide insulin sensitizer. However, the signifi cant gastrointestinal disturbances associated with metformin often lead to its discontinuation. Rosiglitazone is a pregnancy class C thiazolidinedione insulin sensitizer with few side effects and is very effective at inducing ovulation in PCOS patients; however, there is paucity of data on its use during pregnancy. Materials and methods: This case-series was compiled through an IRB-approved retrospective chart review of PCOS patients who have gotten pregnant at our center between January of 2003 through December of 2005. PCOS patients who refused metformin therapy due to side effects and who subsequently achieved pregnancy (with documented fetal heart motion) on rosiglitazone were included. After thorough counseling on the limited data regarding rosiglitazone use in pregnancy, 8 patients elected to continue rosiglitazone through the fi rst 12 weeks of pregnancy. Pregnancy outcomes for those 8 patients were obtained by chart review or, if unavailable, through telephone contact with patients. Results: Six of 8 patients delivered healthy babies at term; the remaining 2 had uncomplicated ongoing late third trimester pregnancies at the time of this submission. No congenital anomalies were noted. None of the pregnancies were complicated by diabetes, preterm delivery, or pre-eclampsia. Summary: Rosiglitazone use was not associated with any maternal or fetal complications when taken during the fi rst trimester. To our knowledge, our case series is the largest to describe the safety of rosiglitazone use in pregnancy. Conclusion: Rosiglitazone taken pre and post-conception was not associated with adverse maternal or fetal outcomes. Objective: Plasma aldosterone in women correlated directly with visceral adipose tissue and inversely with insulin sensitivity. Women with PCOS have hyperinsulinemia, selective insulin resistance and increased cardiovascular risk independent of obesity. PCOS patients are commonly treated with spironolactone and glucophage to lower androgen levels, improve hyperandrogenic manifestations and menstrual cycle. Dietary magnesium prevents fructose induced insulin sensitivity in rats and magnesium supplement reduces development of diabetes in rat model of spontaneous NIDDM. Hence we included treatment with magnesium oxide also. We earlier determined free fatty acid (FFA) levels in these groups and found that they were unchanged in glucophage and magnesium oxide treated groups but signifi cantly decreased in spironolactone treated group. We wanted to investigate how aldosterone levels change in these group. After obtaining consent from patients, 36 women with PCOS were randomly divided into three groups. Patients in group 1 (n=14) were treated with 500 mg glucophage po bid, group 2 (n=10) were treated with 400 mg magnesium oxide po bid, and group 3 (n=12) were treated with 50 mg spironolactone po bid for 12 weeks. A glucose tolerance test with 75 g glucose load was performed before and after treatment, collecting blood at 0, 1 and 2 hours. Aldosterone levels were compared by repeated measure ANOVA. Results: Pre-treatment aldosterone levels decreased in response to glucose load, whereas this decrease was not found after treatment in glucophage group. Aldosterone levels were expressed as mean ± SE. The aldosterone levels were fasting: 78.8 ± 15.2 pg/ml and one hour after glucose load: 57.99 ± 14.6 pg/ml (p=0.03). This decrease was not found after treatment with glucophage (p=0.59). The decrease in aldosterone in response to glucose was observed in spironolactone group at both pre (p=0.006) and post (0.045) treatment. Magnesium oxide group did not show this decrease at pre or post treatment. As expected the basal aldosterone levels increased signifi cantly after treatment with spironolactone (<0.0001). Objective: In PCOS excess ovarian androgen production has been attributed to increased theca cell responsiveness to luteinizing hormone (LH) stimulation. However, it is also recognized that other factors may contribute to hyperandrogenemia. Relative to this notion, in vitro studies have demonstrated that granulosa cell stimulation may infl uence theca cell androgen responsiveness to LH. Clinical studies specifi cally designed to examine the role of the granulosa cell on ovarian androgen production have not been performed. To determine whether the granulosa cell may exert an infl uence on theca cell androgen production, androgen responses to follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) administration were assessed in women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and normal women. Methods: A prospective study to compare ovarian responses in two groups of women was conducted at the GCRC in a tertiary academic medical center. Women with PCOS, 18-35 years and normal ovulatory controls were recruited for study. Serial blood samples were obtained over a 24 hour period following intravenous injection of recombinant human FSH, 150 IU. The main outcome measures were serum androstenedione (A), testosterone (T), dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), and 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP) responses following FSH administration. Results: Basal serum A, T, and 17-OHP levels were markedly increased in women with PCOS compared to that observed in normal women whereas serum DHEA levels were similar between groups. Following FSH injection, PCOS women exhibited increases in serum A, DHEA, and 17-OHP that were greater than corresponding increments observed in the control group. T levels remained relatively unchanged in both PCOS and normal women. Conclusions: The findings show that FSH stimulates ovarian androgen production in PCOS and, to a lesser extent, normal women, which is consistent with in vitro studies. That the magnitude of androgen responsiveness was greater in PCOS women compared to normal women suggests a role for granulosa cell-mediated theca cell androgen production in this disorder. Introduction: Adolescent girls with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) exhibit excessive hair growth and irregular menstrual bleeding much like those of adult women. In addition, it has been demonstrated that ovarian morphology is also similar in both groups. Specifi cally, ovarian volume and antral follicle number are signifi cantly greater in PCOS individuals compared to normal ovulatory controls. Recently, it has been shown that serum AMH correlates tightly with antral follicle counts and may have clinical utility in the diagnosis of PCOS. Based on this consideration and diagnostic criteria (Rotterdam) that PCOS may exist in women with oligomenorrhea and PCO, we undertook to assess serum AMH levels in non-hirsute, oligomenorrhea girls and adolescent girls with PCOS. Objective: To determine whether serum AMH levels differ between oligomenorrheic adolescents without evidence of hyperandrogenism, adolescent PCOS girls, and normal ovulatory girls. Methods: Serum AMH was measured in a total of 53 adolescent girls between the ages of 12-19. The groups comprised of oligomenorrhea (OLIGO) without evidence of hyperandrogenism (n=12), adolescent PCOS (n=26), and normal ovulatory girls (n=15). Results: The median serum AMH level for OLIGO girls was 6.4 ± 2.3 ng/ml (95% CI: 4.7-8.1) higher than that of the normal adolescent group, 4.5 ± 2.4 ng/ml (95% CI: 3.0-6.0) whereas compared to adolescent PCOS girls, 6.6 ± 3.5 ng/ml (95% CI: 5.5-7.8), the values were equivalent. Analysis of variance failed to detect any statistically signifi cant differences among groups. Conclusions: The present study showed that AMH levels in OLIGO females were elevated compared to normal adolescent controls and similar to levels observed in adolescent PCOS girls. The lack of statistical differences among groups was likely due to the relatively small number of normal and OLIGO subjects studied. The fi ndings suggest that in OLIGO girls AMH levels are elevated, which may refl ect similar ovarian morphology as that of adolescent PCOS girls. Objective: CTF18/Cutlet encodes an evolutionarily conserved protein that is crucial for germline development in the fl y and that is essential for faithful transmission of chromosomes during DNA replication in yeast. The objective of our studies is to determine the function of CTF18 in mammalian germ cell development. We generated a mouse model that lacks CTF18 by utilizing Cre/ loxP technology to direct site-specifi c recombination. Initially we cloned and characterized the human and mouse orthologues of CTF18. Northern blot analysis was performed to reveal the expression pattern of CTF18 RNA in human and mouse tissues. Western blot and immunohistochemical analyses of mouse testis and ovary were performed to demonstrate expression of CTF18 protein. The phenotypic consequences of CTF18 deletion were assessed by gross, histological, chromosomal, and immunofl uorescence examination of CTF18-null and wild-type gonads. Results: Adult mutant male and female mouse gonads are much smaller and morphologically abnormal compared to those of their wild-type adult littermates. Seminiferous tubules from CTF18-mutant males show a paucity of spermatids and spermatozoa, and they contain large multi-nucleated cells that appear to be degenerating. Some areas of tubules are almost devoid of spermatogenic cells. Ovaries from CTF18-mutant females are smaller and contain fewer follicles than wild-type females. Many of the follicles are degenerating and contain misshapen oocytes. In addition, chromosomal spreads from CTF18-null mouse gonads reveal a clear defect during meiosis. Conclusion: CTF18 plays a signifi cant role in mammalian gametogenesis, and likely fertility. Objective: HOXA10 is a transcription factor required for uterine development and endometrial receptivity. Spastin is a cytoplasmic ATPase implicated in microtubule dynamics. Although, human spastin has a nuclear localization signal, so far it has no ascribed role in either the reproductive tract or in the nucleus in any tissue. Here we identify spastin as a novel cofactor in HOXA10 mediated endometrial gene transcription. We conducted a screen to identify novel HOXA10 cofactors by immunoprecipitation of Ishikawa nuclear extract using anti-HOXA10 followed by sequencing. Spastin expression was determined in Ishikawa and endometrial stromal cells by RT-PCR. In Luciferase reporter assays, Ishikawa cells were transfected with either 4.0 μg spastin-myc chimera, 4.0 μg pcDNA/HOXA10 or both and empty pcDNA as a control. Cells were additionally transfected with a previously characterized HOXA10 responsive EMX2-luciferase vector. Transfections were done in triplicate. Luciferase activity was assayed 48 hours post-transfection. Electrophoretic Gel Mobility Shift Assay (EMSA) was performed using 32 P-labeled EMX2 HOXA10 responsive element and Ishikawa nuclear extract after transfection with 4.0 μg spastin-myc. Results: Spastin expression was identifi ed in endometrial stromal and Ishikawa cells. Spastin co-immunoprecipitated with HOXA10 using nuclear extracts from these cells. In EMX2-Luciferase assays, reporter activity decreased with HOXA10 transfection (p<0.004) whereas it increased with spastin (p<0.02) transfection. Additionally, spastin reverses HOXA10 mediated repression of EMX2-Luciferase activity. In EMSA, the shift obtained with Ishikawa nuclear extract was supershifted using either anti-HOXA10 or anti-myc, indicating that HOXA10 and spastin directly interact. Here we demonstrate that Spastin, an ATPase mutated in hereditary spastic paraplegia, is a novel cofactor in HOXA10 mediated endometrial transcriptional regulation. Spastin is expressed in endometrial epithelial and stromal cells where it co-localizes with HOXA10. Additionally, Spastin directly binds an EMX2 regulatory element in conjunction with HOXA10, thereby altering target gene expression. We identify a novel role for Spastin as a HOXA10 cofactor in the regulation of uterine gene expression. It is likely that Spastin functions widely as a HOX cofactor in non-reproductive tissues. Estrogen plays a critical role in endometrial function. Recently, GPR30, an integral membrane protein which can act via the EGF receptor, was shown to function as an estrogen receptor (Revankar, Science 2005). Expression of GPR30 has not been described in the uterus of any species, but a report suggests that GPR30 may mediate proliferative effects of estradiol and tamoxifen in endometrial cancer cells (Vivacqua, Mol Endocrinol 2006) . Objective: Describe the expression, regulation, and function of GPR30 in human endometrial cells. Methods: Proliferative and secretory endometrium from healthy, normally cycling volunteers was obtained under an IRB-approved protocol. Immunolocalization and Western blot analysis of GPR30 was performed using a rabbit polyclonal antibody (Abcam, ab12563). Real-time RT-PCR for GPR30, Cyr61 and constitutive genes, PPIA and GUS utilized predesigned primers & probes (Applied Biosystems). Results: Immunohistochemistry demonstrated endometrial GPR30 expression, predominantly in epithelial and endothelial cells. Staining was markedly darker in midsecretory specimens, but was non-uniform, so that only some cells in each gland were stained. Real-time qRT-PCR demonstrated GPR30 mRNA expression in both proliferative and secretory endometrium as well as ECC1, RL95-2, and HES cell lines. A small amount of transcript was seen in Ishikawa cells and none in Hec-1B cells. A candidate marker of GPR30 action, Cyr61 was stimulated 3-6 fold by treatment with 1-100 nM estradiol, diethylstilbesterol, 1μM progesterone or 10 μg/mL epidermal growth factor (EGF) in ECC1 and HES cells. Estradiol stimulation of Cyr61 mRNA was maximal at 1 nM and both EGF and estradiol effects were apparent 15 minutes after exposure. Changes in protein expression were apparent at 4 hours after exposure. Estrogen stimulation of Cyr61 was blocked by pretreatment with the anti-EGF receptor antibody, C225. Conclusions: GPR30 mRNA and protein are expressed by human endometrium. Protein expression appears increased in the midsecretory phase, and is localized to specifi c epithelial cells, suggesting functional differences between endometrial epithelial cells in the same gland. A candidate marker of GPR30 action, Cyr61, is rapidly induced by physiologically relevant estradiol levels in an EGF receptor-dependent fashion. Objective: The forkhead family of transcription factors are involved in regulating cell proliferation, differentiation, oxidative stress and apoptosis. FOXO1 is differentially expressed in the endometrium and plays an important role during differentiation of the endometrium. In this study we investigated the expression and regulation of FOXO1, FOXO3 and FOXO4 in myometrial and leiomyoma cells to determine whether these proteins are differentially expressed and regulated in these two cell types and whether this may infl uence cell proliferation. Methods: Cells were isolated from myometrial and leiomymoma tissues and grown in culture. Western blot analysis was used to evaluate expression of FOXO1, FOXO3 and FOXO4 proteins. Cells were also treated for 24 hours with various regulators of FOXO expression, including TNF-α, R5020 (progestin), 17-β estradiol, an Akt inhibitor, and dbcAMP. Western blots and proliferation assays were performed to assess the effect of these treatments on cell proliferation and expression of the FOXO1, FOXO3 and FOXO4. Results: Leiomyoma cells showed a signifi cantly lower protein expression of both FOXO1 and FOXO3 compared to myometrial cells. There was no difference in expression of FOXO4, however, between the two cell types. In myometrial cells, Akt inhibitor, at 6uM and 12uM concentrations, increased the expression of FOXO1. Treatments with 1uM R5020 increased the expression of FOXO1 and FOXO3. In response to 0.5mM dbcAMP, expression of FOXO1 and FOXO3 increased. TNF-α increased expression of FOXO3. Leiomyoma cells responded differently in that only Akt inhibition increased FOXO1 and FOXO3, while R5020 increased FOXO3 expression only. Cell proliferation assays revealed increased proliferation in leiomyoma cells when treated with estrogen or progesterone. TNF-α and Akt inhibitors signifi cantly inhibited proliferation in both myometrial and leiomyoma cells. In women, Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes has been found to negatively affect pregnancy by causing poor prenatal outcomes such as increased risk of congenital anomalies and early miscarriage. Maternal diabetes in murine models adversely affects pregnancy outcomes as well, with defects observed as early as the preovulatory oocyte stage of development. These defects include impaired meiotic maturation, abnormal metabolism, and increased apoptosis. During the early stages of oocyte development, gap junction communication between the oocyte and surrounding cumulus cells is critical for the regulation of oocyte growth and meiotic maturation. OBJECTIVE: To analyze the effect of maternal diabetes on gap junction communication between the oocyte and cumulus cells, and to investigate the expression levels of gap junction proteins, known as connexins (Cxs). METHODS: Cumulus cell enclosed oocytes (CEOs) were collected from diabetic and nondiabetic C57BL/6JXSL/J mice for use in FRAP (Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching) analyses to examine gap junction communication. The differential expression of connexin proteins was studied using real-time PCR, western blot analyses, and immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: FRAP analyses showed a 20% decrease in communication in diabetic CEOs (13.6 ± 4.1 % FRAP, n = 3 experiments) as compared to nondiabetic (34 ± 2.6 % FRAP, n = 3 experiments). Real time PCR confi rmed the presence of Cx57 and Cx37, and revealed the presence of Cx26 mRNA in nondiabetic mouse oocytes. Cx57 and Cx26 mRNA was expressed more highly in the diabetic oocytes as compared to the nondiabetic oocytes, and more highly expressed in oocytes versus the surrounding cumulus cells. In contrast to the mRNA expression, immunohistochemistry and western analyses showed a decrease in Cx26 protein expression in diabetic oocytes as compared to nondiabetic. CONCLUSIONS: The decrease in Cx26 protein expression may lead to the decreased communication between the diabetic oocytes and surrounding granulosa cells. This may in turn cause the impaired meiotic maturation and poor pregnancy outcomes in diabetic mice. This work is funded by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Cooperative Program on Female Health and Egg Quality, U01 HD044691. Objective: After intercourse, seminal fl uid interacts with cervical cells to induce infl ammatory changes that potentially infl uence female tract immune responses to seminal antigens and sexually transmitted pathogens. Soluble factors of unknown identity in seminal plasma activate expression of several pro-infl ammatory genes including cytokines GM-CSF, IL-6, IL-8 and MCP-1. Our animal studies have identifi ed TGFβ as a key signaling agent in semen, and all three isoforms of TGFβ are abundant in human seminal plasma. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether TGFβ1, TGFβ2, and TGFβ3 are mediators of seminal plasma signaling in the cervical infl ammatory response of women. We also evaluated the interaction between TGFβ and IFNγ, a cytokine that inhibits TGFβ actions in mouse reproductive epithelia. Methods: Primary cervical epithelial cells from ectocervix of hysterectomy tissues, or immortalised Ect1 ectocervical epithelial cells, were incubated with recombinant human TGFβ (isoforms 1, 2 or 3) +/-IFNγ, or with pooled human seminal plasma. Epithelial cell mRNA expression profi le was evaluated by Affymetrix HG-U133Plus2 microarray and by QRT-PCR, and culture supernatants were analysed by ELISA to quantify GM-CSF, IL-6, IL-8 and MCP-1. Results: Microarray data showed that Ect1 cell incubation with TGFβ3 induced expression of several, but not all the pro-infl ammatory cytokine genes elicited by pooled seminal plasma. TGFβ1, TGFβ2 and TGFβ3 showed comparable capacity to stimulate >5-fold increases in both GM-CSF and IL-6 mRNA, and secretion of immunoactive GM-CSF and IL-6, in a dose-responsive manner. Addition of neutralising antibodies for individual TGFβ isoforms inhibited seminal plasma-induced cytokine synthesis. In contrast, TGFβ did not stimulate IL-8 or MCP-1 synthesis. IFNγ potently inhibited TGFβ-induced GM-CSF release and also inhibited seminal plasma-induced IL-8, but did not affect IL-6 secretion. Conclusion: The data show that all three TGFβ isoforms are major active male-female signaling agents in human seminal plasma, while seminal IFNγ can inhibit TGFβ signaling to differentially attenuate cervical cytokine expression. Through their control of cervical cytokine expression profi le, these seminal fl uid factors are implicated in programming the phenotypes of local leukocyte populations with immune-regulatory actions, thereby infl uencing female reproductive tract immune competence for pregnancy and defence against sexually transmitted disease. Objectives: Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factors (COUP-TFs; NRF2) are orphan members of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily. COUP-TFI and COUP-TFII have been identifi ed in an array of mammalian tissues. It has been reported that haploinsuffi ciency of COUP-TFII results in female reproductive dysfunction. Luteinizing hormone βsubunit (LHβ) gene expression is known to be dependent on stimulation by steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1; NR5A1), acting through direct interaction with two cis-elements, termed GSEs. The objective of this study was to determine the effects of COUP-TFI/II on rat LHβ promoter activity. Methods: Western blot was used to detect the presence of COUP-TFI/II protein. CV-1 cells were transfected with a rat -207/+5 LHβ promoter-reporter vector as well as expression vectors for COUP-TFI/II, and/or SF-1. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) was performed to identify COUP-TF binding sites in the rat LHβ promoter sequence. Results: Both COUP-TFI and COUP-TFII protein were expressed in mouse primary pituitary cells and in the gonadotrope cell lines, LβT2 and αT3-1. Both COUP-TFs increased rLHβ promoter activity 7-fold when transfected individually. When cotransfected with SF-1, COUP-TFI and COUP-TFII signifi cantly inhibited the stimulatory effects of SF-1 on rLHβ promoter activity, with greater inhibition by COUP-TFI. Mutation of the 3'-GSE ciselement, but not the 5'-GSE, eliminated the COUP-TF effect. Consistent with the transfection data, in vitro translated COUP-TFI and COUP-TFII specifi cally bound to a probe spanning the 3'-GSE site, but not to the 5'-GSE site. A mutant COUP-TFI (C 141 -s hCOUP-TFI) containing a mutation in the DNA-binding domain was unable to bind to the 3'-GSE probe. This mutant had no stimulatory effect on rLHβ promoter activity, but retained the ability to blunt SF-1 effects. Scanning mutations in the 3'-GSE probe were tested for their ability to bind the COUP-TFs and SF-1. The binding pattern was identical for the COUP-TFs, but differed from SF-1. These observations indicate that the COUP-TFs transcriptionally activate the rat LHβ promoter through interaction with the previously identifi ed 3'-GSE region. Based on analysis of the mutated COUP-TFI, repression of SF-1-mediated increases in rat LHβ promoter activity occurs through a mechanism other than competitive binding by these two transcription factors to the same cis-acting element. HOXA10 Regulation of the Calcium Binding Protein S100A14 in Endometrium. Erin F Wolff, Hongling Du, Ivan Pena, Hugh S Taylor. * Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. Objectives: S100A14 is a member of the family of proteins which bind calcium through EF-hand Ca 2+ binding motifs and are thought to be involved in signal transduction. S100A14 expression has been reported in several tissues and cancers of epithelial origin, including the uterus and ovary. Expression of S100A14 has not been reported in normal endometrium. S100A14 was identifi ed in a mouse microarray as a target gene which is reciprocally regulated by HOXA10. HOXA10 is a transcription factor necessary for endometrial differentiation and receptivity. In this study we characterize S100A14 expression and regulation in murine and human endometrial cells. Methods: Decidualized endometrium from reproductive aged women in the fi rst trimester was obtained by dilatation and curettage under an approved HIC protocol. To determine if S100A14 was regulated by HOXA10, HESC, decidual, and Ishikawa cells were transfected at 60% confl uence in triplicate with 4 ug pcDNA/HOXA10; transfection with the empty pcDNA served as a control. 48 hours after the transfection was complete (72 hours total), cells were trypsinized and RNA was extracted. cDNA was generated and qRT-PCR was performed in duplicate (N=4). Quantitative Real Time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to measure S100A14 expression in the endometrium, the human endometrial stromal cell line (HESC), fi rst trimester human decidual cells, and in Ishikawa cells. Results: S100A14 was expressed in murine and human endometrium. S100A14 was also expressed in Ishikawa, HESC, and fi rst trimester human decidual cells. In Ishikawa cells, S100A14 was upregulated by 50% in cells transfected with HOXA10 relative to controls. Expression of S100A14 was decreased in decidua cells by 40% by HOXA10 transfection. In contrast, S100A14 expression in HESC was decreased by 70% in response to HOXA10 transfection.(p=0.014) S100A14 was expressed in endometrial epithelium where it is regulated by HOXA10. Conclusions: S100 proteins were expressed in the endometrial epithelium. HOXA10 is required for endometrial receptivity; it functions as a transcription factor and is required for the regulation of multiple genes involved in embryo implantation. The expression of S100A14 was regulated by HOXA10 in endometrial epithelial cells. The tissue-specifi c and regulated expression of S100A14 suggests a role in endometrial receptivity. Objective: Clinical and epidemiological studies indicate that intrauterine infection increases the risk of perinatal brain damage especially in preterm fetuses. Moreover, it has been shown that both viral and bacterial perinatal infections increase the risk to develop neuropsychiatric disorders durinmg later life. In these cases specifi c cytoarchitectural alterations in the cerebral cortex have been found. Methods: Fifteen fetal sheep were chronically catheterized at a mean gestational age of 107 ± 1 days (term is 147 days). Three days after surgery the fetuses received either 100 nanogram endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide, LPS derived from E. coli; O127:B8, Sigma-Aldrich) (n=9) or 2 ml 0,9% saline (n=6) i.v. Fetal sheep were monitored for seven consecutive days. Thereafter in vivo perfusion fi xation with was performed. Immunohistochemical detection of glial fi brillary acidic protein (GFAP), calbindin, calretinin and parvalbumin was performed according to standard procedures described in the literature. Results: (i) In control brains astrocytes showed a strong GFAP signal in both, cell bodies and processes. This was found in all cortical layers. After LPS administration astrocytes showed a decrease in GFAP immunoreactivity. (ii) In control brains, calretinin (CR) positive neurons were present in cortical layers I-III. The expression in both cytoplasm and processes was equally intensive. Neurons expressing CR were uni-, bi-, and multipolar. In the LPS treated brains, CR expression was signifi cantly decreased in small and medium sized neurons. (iii) In comparison to CR expression, a positive reaction with calbindin (CB) was observed in a smaller number of neurons in the control brains. CB reactivity was mainly present in small and medium sized neurons of both cortex and caudate nucleus. (iv) In the control brain, extremely strong parvalbumin ( Results: Plasma leptin concentrations were signifi cantly higher in leptin infused compared to saline infused fetuses both across the whole infusion period (P<0.05) and on day of postmortem (5.07 ± 0.79 vs 2.0 ng/ml ± 0.54 ng/ml, P<0.02). Total brain weight, but not fetal body weight, was higher in the leptin infused group (56.5 ± 1.1 vs 52.3 ± 1.3 g, P<0.05). There was no effect of leptin infusion on the expression of NPY mRNA in the fetal brain. There was, however, a signifi cant inverse relationship between NPY mRNA expression and mean plasma leptin concentrations on the day of postmortem (NPY = -0.5 leptin + 0.69, r 2 =0.36, P=0.05, n=11). There was no effect of leptin infusion on the expression of POMC or OBRb mRNA in the fetal brain. Conclusions: These fi ndings provide the fi rst evidence that leptin may have the capacity to regulate the central expression of the appetite stimulating neuropeptide, NPY, before birth, and suggest that the central neural network for appetite regulation has the capacity to respond to peripheral signals of nutritional status before birth. These fi ndings have clear implications for understanding how the central neural network for appetite regulation responds and adapts to altered levels of prenatal nutrition. Objectives: Caffeine, a known non-selective adenosine antagonist, has long been consumed world-wide, even during pregnancy, and it readily crosses both the placental and blood-brain barriers. Adenosine is a potent vasodilator of cerebral arteries, and also a potent suppressor of neuronal activity. Surprisingly, little research has examined the effects of this adenosine antagonist on fetal cerebral blood fl ow and cerebral oxygenation. Thus, we tested the hypothesis that adenosine inhibition by caffeine would signifi cantly alter fetal cerebral oxygenation. Methods: By use of a fl uorescent O 2 probe with a laser Doppler fl owmeter in the cerebral cortex, and the placement of sagittal sinus catheter, in 6 near-term fetal sheep we measured values of cortical tissue O 2 tension (tPO 2 ), sagittal sinus oxyhemoglobin saturation ([HbO 2 ]), and laser Doppler cerebral blood fl ow (LD-CBF) in response to 30 minutes of i.v. infusion of caffeine citrate (400 mg: 2 to 3 cups of coffee) into the near-term pregnant ewe. Results: In response to maternal caffeine infusion, we observed rapid and signifi cant decreases in fetal cortical tPO 2 (from 10±1 to 5±1 Torr), and sagittal sinus [HbO 2 ] (from 45 to 35%) (p<0.01 for each), accompanied by a modest 15% decrease in fetal LD-CBF. Fetal systemic arterial blood gas values did not change signifi cantly. Conclusions: Maternal caffeine administration signifi cantly decreased fetal cerebral oxygenation, without affecting overall systemic oxygenation. These fi ndings may have clinical relevance for the pregnant mother and fetus. (Supported by USPIHS, HD 03807). In mice, we previously showed that combined deletion of COX-1 and COX-2 results in PDA. Prolonged COX inhibition on d15-19 of gestation also leads to PDA, suggesting that prostaglandins may regulate DA development in addition to their role as vasoactive mediators. Objective: We hypothesized that postnatal DA responsiveness is dependent on signaling via specifi c prostaglandin receptors which direct DA development in mid-to late-gestation. Methods: Wild type (WT) fetal DA segments were collected on d14-19 (term=d19) and postpartum (n=10-18 DAs/timepoint, x3). Quantitative RT-PCR was performed for PGE receptors EP1-4. EP localization was examined by in situ hybridization. WT females were treated with selective COX-1 and COX-2 inhibitors on d15-19. Responsiveness of WT (n= 7), COX-1+COX-2 inhibited (n=9), and COX-1/COX-2 double null (n=5) DAs at term was examined in a cannulated microvessel myography system. Results: EP2 expression was at the limits of detection; EP1 and EP3 increased slightly with advancing gestation, whereas EP4 increased on d15 and remained elevated on d16-19 of gestation. EP4 was localized to the DA smooth muscle and endothelium. At physiologic pressures, COX-inhibited and COX-deleted DAs had signifi cantly greater resting dimensions than WT, but similar KClinduced constriction (69, 67, 72% of baseline, respectively). Compared to WT, COX-inhibited and COX-deleted DAs had diminished response to indomethacin (18% vs 13, 6%, respectively) and variable response to L-NAME (9% vs 3, 26%, respectively). U46619 potently constricted all DAs. COX-inhibited and COX-deleted DAs had less oxygen-induced constriction than WT. Conclusions: Disruption of the COX pathway in utero impairs postnatal DA closure due to failure of EP4-mediated signaling during a critical window of DA development. DAs from an environment of reduced or absent COX stimuli have less tone and less response to indomethacin but are responsive to oxygen and may have enhanced response to nitric oxide inhibition. These data suggest that prostaglandins play a novel role mediating DA development. Methods: Using fl uorescent microspheres, we measured CBF in 11 brain regions in chronically instrumented fetal sheep at baseline and 3-5 and 24 h after two maternal i.m. injections of 110μg/kg BM at 0.73 gestation (n=7) or 170μg/kg at 0.87 gestation (n=6) corresponding to 8 or 12mg BM administered to a 70kg pregnant woman at 29 and 34 weeks gestation. These developmental stages are before and during the preparturient increase in HPA activity and maturation of the cerebrovascular system. Controls received an equal volume saline (n=6 or n=7, respectively). To determine BM effects in relation to sleep states, CBF was measured in additional animals at 0.87 gestation 24h after the fi rst and 3-5h after the second injection of BM (n=10) or saline (n=7) in REM and NREM sleep. Results: BM did not affect CBF in any brain region at either age when fetal sleep states were not considered. Considering the sleep states, BM decreased CBF in REM (p<0.05) and in NREM sleep (p<0.01) 3-5 h but not 24 h after injection by 35 to 40 % in most brain regions. The BM effect corresponds to fetal peak BM plasma concentrations. Conclusion: BM at clinical doses reduces CBF transiently at 0.87 but not 0.73 gestation when the HPA axis and the systems regulating cerebrovascular tone are immature. Background-Evidence has emerged that fetal undernutrition is a risk factor for cardiovascular disorders in adulthood. Recently, the local expression of angiotensinogen and related bioactive substances has been demonstrated to augment cardiac remodeling, i.e. fi brosis and hypertrophy, which is called as local cardiac rennin-angiotensin system (RAS). The aim of the present study was to elucidate the possible involvement of the local cardiac RAS in fetal undernutrition-induced cardiovascular disorders. Materials and Methods-Using a mouse animal model of fetal undernutrition by maternal food restriction (30% restriction 10.5-18.5 dpc; UN offspring), we assessed the cardiac remodeling, as a risk factor of cardiovascular disease, by measuring cardiomegaly (cardiac weight [mg]/body weight [g]), cardiomyocyte enlargement (mean transverse diameter), coronary perivascular fibrosis (digital image analysis after Sirius Red Staining) in the UN and normal (NN) offspring at 8 and 16 wks. The whole cardiac tissue were collected at 18.5 dpc and at 3, 8 and 16 wks, in which mRNA expression of angiotensinogen (Ang), ACE, ANP, BNP, and endothelin-1 (ET-1) was measure by quantitative RT-PCR. The Immunohistochemistry of angiotensin II and ET-1 was carried out. Objective: To study materno-fetal hemodynamic in Bi/Bi twin pregnancy. In this paper we propose a new US method, named Multigate Spectral Doppler Analysis (MSDA), that overcomes the limitation related to the use of a single sample volume. In this method, 128 small sample volumes are aligned along an US scan line that intercepts the vessel. The Doppler data from each sample volume can be independently analysed to produce a high resolution fl ow profi le. Methods: The Multigate Spectral Doppler Analysis (MSDA) system employed in this study consisted of commercial ultrasound machine (Aloka SSD1400) connected to personal computer (PC) where a proprietary electronic board was plugged and where the G.A.S.P software ran. Imaging was performed within standard safety guidelines. We scanned left and right uterine arteries and fetal aorta in 7 Bi/Bi twin gestation at 6 week 9 week and at 11 week of gestation after in-vitro fertilization. We evaluate velocities profi les, wall distension rate and shear rate calculating from consecutives cardiac cycles. Results: We were successfully able to generate a velocity profi les from all the vessels interrogated maternal and fetal. No signifi cant differences were found between twin A and twin B of velocity profi les, WSR and rWDR. Conclusions: We found a substantial difference between conventional Doppler results and velocity profi le from MGSD. Qualitative description of fl ow show the complete distribution across the lumen instead of cross-sectional mean which preserve his profi le during consecutive cycles. Concordance between values demonstrate using a twin model the sensibility (98%) of this new technology. As previously shown distension of fetal aorta adapt to fl ow demand and maintain constant wall shear rate. Fetus WSR (7) rWDR (7) VP (7) Objective: The presence of infl ammation in a preterm birth (PTB) is associated with adverse neurological outcome in the neonate. Specifi cally, preterm infants from PTBs complicated by infl ammation are at increased for cerebral palsy. While there has been much focus on the role of infl ammatory pathways in fetal brain injury associated with PTB, we hypothesize that disruptions in neuronal development and an imbalance in excitatory/inhibitatory pathways may be a mechanism by which infl ammation-induced PTB results in adverse neurological outcomes. Methods: An established murine model of intrauterine infl ammation was used. On E15, timed pregnant CD-1 dams were randomized to intrauterine infusion of saline or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) into the right uterine horn (n=4-5/treatment group). Fetal brains were harvested 6 hrs after exposure to intrauterine LPS. MRNA expression of NMDA receptor (NR) subunits was assessed by real-time PCR. Amino acid (AA) concentration was assessed using high performance liquid chromatography. Results: In control brains, NR1 and NR2 had the lowest mRNA expression compared to NR2A, NR 2B, NR 2D, or NR 3A. Exposure to intrauterine LPS signifi cantly up-regulated NR 2B, NR 2D, and NR 3A (p<0.05 for each compared to saline exposed). Intrauterine exposure to LPS resulted in at 19.6fold in NR 1 (p=0.016) and a 10-fold increase in NR 2C mRNA compared to saline (p=0.01). AA concentrations shown in FIGURE. The branched chain AA were increased 2-fold in LPS exposed. Aspartate and glutamate were signifi cantly decreased in fetal brains exposed to LPS (p=0.006 and 0.011, respectively). Conclusions: Intrauterine infl ammation results in the differential regulation of NMDA receptor sub-units as well as altering AA compositon in the fetal brains. Pertubations of neuronal function in the fetal brain may be a key to understanding adverse neurological outcomes in preterm neonates. Evidence for a Novel Mechanism for Human Myometrial Activation. David A MacIntyre, 1 Mark Read, 1 Roger Smith, *1 Elisa Tyson, 1 Kenneth Kwek, 2 George Yeo, 2 Chan Eng-Cheng. 1 1 Mothers and Babies Research Centre, University of Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia; 2 KK Women's and Children's Hospital, Singapore, Singapore. Background: In vascular smooth muscle post-translational modifi cations (PTM) to small heat shock proteins (sHSPs) modulate their interaction with the actin cytoskeleton and thus contractility. The mechanisms regulating human myometrial contractility during gestation and labor are poorly understood but are also likely to involve the PTM of sHSPs. Hypothesis: Labor is associated with PTM and altered interaction of the sHSPs and the cytoskeleton. Aim: To identify changes in PTM and interactions of myometrial sHSPs at the time of labor. Methods: Myometrial biopsies obtained during Caesarean Section (nonlaboring; NL) or following spontaneous labor (L) were analysed quantitatively using 2D-DIGE (n=6 per group). Proteins that changed with labor were sequenced using MALDI-ToF. Immunoblotting of NL (n=14) and L (n=11) myometria was performed using antibodies to α-B-crystallin, HSP27, its phospho-isoforms (pHSP27-ser15, ser78 and ser82) and α-smooth muscle actin. Immunoprecipitation and immunofl uorescence (n=5) were performed using antibodies to α-B-crystallin, HSP27 and α-smooth muscle actin. Results: 2D-DIGE analysis demonstrated a 3.3-fold decrease in the sHSP -Bcrystallin with labor. We also found specifi c changes in the phospho-isoforms of HSP27 between NL and L myometria. pHSP27-ser15 was 3-fold higher in L myometria whereas pHSP27-ser82 was 6.5-fold lower in L myometria. Immunoprecipitation studies revealed in vivo associations between HSP27 and α-B-crystallin, and HSP27 and α-smooth muscle actin in both NL and L myometria. Immunofl uorescence showed high levels of co-localisation between HSP27 and α-B-crystallin in the perinuclear and cytoplasmic region of NL myometria and a relocation of HSP27 to the cytoskeleton in L myometria. Discussion: These data support a model for human myometrial contraction in which α-B-crystallin associates with HSP27 in NL myometrium. In labor, phosphorylation of HSP27 leads to its dissociation from α-B-crystallin and subsequent relocation to the actin cytoskeleton where it stabilises fi lamentous actin, enabling contraction. Conclusion: Myometrial contraction involves the regulation of fi bril actin by sHSPs. These proteins may provide a rational target for the development of novel therapeutics for the treatment of preterm labor. Prostaglandins play an important role in the initiation and maintenance of labor. PGs act by binding to their specifi c receptor. In human pregnancies PGF 2α is associated with stimulation of contractions in labor, acting via the prostaglandin F 2α receptor (FP). This receptor is a member of the seven transmembrane G αq protein-coupled receptor group. Recently, Zaragoza et al. cloned and characterized the promoter region of the FP receptor. Their results showed the presence of repressor and enhancer regions in the promoter suggesting that this gene can play an important regulatory role in pregnancy. The objective of this study was to explore the in vivo interactions between different regulatory proteins, transcriptor factors, and the PGF 2α receptor promoter using the Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. Methods: Biopsies of myometrium (n=3) were obtained during cesarean section of women in labor at term. Tissue was pulverized in liquid nitrogen, then the protein crosslinked to DNA with 1% formaldehyde. Immediately after the chromatin was isolated, DNA was sheared by enzymatic digestion. The chromatin was pre-cleared and then immunoprecipitated with antibodies against glucocorticoid receptor, cFos and cJun. The DNA was eluted and analysed by PCR. The antibodies used in this study were selected after analysis of the promoter using the Transcription Element Search System (TESS). This program predicts transcription factor binding sites in DNA sequences. It can identify binding sites using site or consensus strings and positional weight matrices from the TRANSFAC, IMD, and our CBIL-GibbsMat databases. Results: Our results show that the glucocorticoid receptor, c Jun and cFos bind to the FP receptor promoter region, using a primer specifi c for the promoter region -1505 to -1340 of the 4106 bp DNA fragment of the FP promoter DNA. Conclusions: These novel data suggest new avenues of approach for determining which factors regulate expression of the FP receptor in human myometrium and which may control the changes in the quiescent myometrial phenotype, that exists through most of gestation, to the contractile phenotype of labor. PGHS-2 (PTGS2) gene activity is up-regulated in the amnion at late gestation, and the resulting increase of PGHS-2 expression is critical for generating prostaglandins that promote parturition. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with fresh amnion, we have demonstrated that the proximal 1000bp region of the PGHS-2 promoter has permissive chromatin structure with highly acetylated histones H3 and H4. ChIP studies have suggested that NFκB factors bound to the 2 consensus NFκB binding sites in this region are not involved in the stimulation of PGHS-2 gene activity in term amnion in vivo. Objective: Here we examined if other transcription factors, such as the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), phosphorylated cAMP-response element binding protein (pCREB-1) and CBP (CREB-binding protein, a histone acetyltransferase), bind to the PGHS-2 promoter potentially regulating its activity. Methods: Amnion was collected after spontaneous labor or elective Caesarean section (n=3 and 4) at term, and ChIP was performed using cross-linked chromatin from fresh tissues and antibodies for GR, pCREB-1 and CBP. The immunoprecipitated DNA was analysed by real-time PCR using 8 primer pairs distributed along the fi rst 2500bp of the PGHS-2 promoter. Results: We have detected GR-binding to the proximal 1000bp region of the PGHS-2 promoter (p<0.05, ANOVA) where chromatin structure is permissive, but no consensus GR-response sequence (GRE) is found. No GR binding was detected in the upstream restrictive chromatin region. Further, GR binding was most pronounced at 213-222 bases upstream of the transcription initiation site. Binding to this site decreased after labor (p<0.05. t-test). pCREB-1 has also exhibited signifi cant binding to this site prior to labour, but not after labor. No signifi cant binding of CBP was detected along the 2500bp region examined. The data suggest that glucocorticoids may be involved directly in the control of the PGHS-2 gene promoter in the amnion before labor in vivo. The existence of an amnion-specifi c GRE or a GR complex with other factors (eg, pCREB) remain to be determined. CBP does not appear responsible for chromatin remodelling in the proximal PGHS-2 promoter region. Pro-infl ammatory cytokines contribute directly to term and preterm human labor. Previously we demonstrated that monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) gene expression was dramatically upregulated in the rat myometrium prior to and during labor (when plasma progesterone (P4) levels fall). Expression of MCP-1 gene and protein was up-regulated by stretch in human endothelial and mesangial cells. Thus we hypothesize that (1) mechanical stretch of the uterus imposed by the growing fetus and (2) physiological withdrawal of a P4 induce myometrial MCP-1 gene expression. We studied the effects of maintained P4 levels at term and the infl uence of early hormone withdrawal on MCP-1 mRNA levels. We also used unilaterally pregnant rats (in vivo model) and primary culture of rat myometrium smooth muscle cells (SMCs) (in vitro model) to study MCP-1 gene induction by static mechanical stretch. To confi rm the involvement of MCP-1 in human labor we evaluated its mRNA expression in non-pregnant, preterm and term laboring myometrium. MCP-1 gene expression analysis was performed by real-time RT-PCR. Results. MCP-1 was expressed at very low levels in gravid horn from early gestational myometrium with a dramatic increase observed before and during labor. In contrast to the gravid horn, expression of the chemokine in the nongravid horn was very low throughout pregnancy, implying a role for uterine stretch. To examine the effects of elevated P4 during late gestation, rats were injected with P4 or vehicle starting from d20 of pregnancy. Administration of P4 caused a failure in the normal elevation of the MCP-1 mRNA levels on d22-d23 and delayed the onset of labor. In contrast, treatment of pregnant rats with P4 receptor antagonist RU486 on d19 induced preterm labor on d20 and a premature increase in mRNA levels of MCP-1. Static mechanical stretch of freshly isolated primary rat myometrial SMCs (25% for 30 min) induces (1) a rapid increase in MCP-1 gene expression, an effect that was (2) enhanced by pro-infl ammatory cytokine IL-1b but (3) repressed by pretreatment with P4. MCP-1 mRNA levels were increased in human myometrium during term and preterm labor compared to non-pregnant control. Conclusion: These data indicate that MCP-1 serves to integrate mechanical and endocrine signals that induce labor and may represent a novel target for human preterm tocolytic therapy. Centre, Newcastle, NSW, Australia. Background The small heat shock proteins (sHSP) 27 and 20 are implicated in modulating smooth muscle contraction and relaxation. p38MAPK-induced phosphorylation of HSP27 enhances contraction in smooth muscle. Conversely, cyclic nucleotide induced phosphorylation of HSP20 relaxes smooth muscle, in part by opposing the effects of HSP27. The role of the sHSPs in human myometrium, particularly with the transition of myometrial smooth muscle to a contractile phenotype at labour, has not been examined. Recently, we demonstrated an increase in total HSP27 protein throughout human gestation and an increase in phospho-HSP27-serine15 with labour. Hypothesis That oxytocin, a powerful uterotonic, will induce phosphorylation of HSP27 in myometrium in vitro, whereas increases in cAMP and cGMP, as occur with some tocolytics, will cause an increase in phospho-HSP20. Aim To examine in human myometrial strips, the effects of oxytocin, forskolin, sodium nitroprusside, rolipram (cAMP phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitor) and vardenafi l (cGMP PDE5 inhibitor) on: (i) myometrial contractility, (ii) HSP27 phosphorylation and (iii) HSP20 phosphorylation. Methods Myometrium was obtained at elective Caesarean section. Force generation in spontaneously contracting strips was measured following exposure to either a single sub-maximal or cumulative log doses of each drug. Following treatment, protein from strips was extracted and resolved by 1D and/ or 2D SDS-PAGE. Western immuno-blotting was performed using antibodies for total and phosphorylated forms of HSP20 and HSP27. Results Oxytocin caused a signifi cant increase in pHSP27-ser15 (n=5, P<0.05), functionally associated with a 133±25% increase in myometrial tension. Phospho-HSP27-ser78 and 82 were unchanged. Oxytocin did not alter pHSP20. Forskolin, SNP, rolipram and vardenafi l all signifi cantly increased pHSP20 (n=4, P<0.05), associated with an 84-100% reduction in tension, however there was no change in total or phospho-HSP27. Conclusion Oxytocin-stimulated contraction of human myometrium induces a specifi c phosphorylation of HSP27 on serine 15. Agents that elevate cyclic nucleotides increase phosphorylation of HSP20, associated with myometrial relaxation. These data provide functional and biochemical support for a novel role for phosphorylated sHSPs in modulating human myometrial contractility. There is increasing evidence to suggest that specifi c isoforms of progesterone receptors (PRs) are differentially expressed within the myometrium at term and at the onset of labour. The promoter regions for the PRs contain various functional transcription factor sites (PR-B has one Sp1 site and PR-A has two Sp1 sites and a half ERE site), however, the regulatory processes that control expression of PRs within the myometrium are not fully understood. PSF, a multi-functional RNA and DNA binding protein that increases in the upper uterine region at term, has an inhibitory effect on the expression of PRs in human myometrial cell cultures. Objectives: To investigate how PSF contributes to the regulation of PR expression by identifying nuclear co-activators/co-repressors that interact with PSF and to determine potential transcription factor binding sites for PSF and its co-factors within the regulatory regions of the PR promoter sequences. Methods: Co-immunoprecipitations (Co-IPs), immunofluorescence, electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) and DNA affinity immunoprecipitation assays (DAPAs). Results: Co-IPs indicated that PSF directly interacts with Sp proteins, histone deacetylases, mSin3A, and MEF-2. Dual-labelling immunofluoresence confi rmed co-localisation of these nuclear co-factors within myometrial nuclei. We identifi ed a potential MEF-2 transcription factor site (CTA(A/T 4 ) upstream of the Sp1 sites within the PR promoter; to determine whether the MEF-2 site is functional oligonucleotides were designed containing the MEF-2 sequence (and a mutated MEF-2) and EMSAs performed. Nuclear myometrial proteins do interact with the MEF-2 sequence and the addition of specifi c antibodies to MEF-2 or PSF resulted in a supershift of the MEF-2 oligonucleotides. DAPAs indicated that PSF, MEF-2, HDAC1, HDAC2, mSin3A and another co-factor RbAp48, are part of the multi-protein complex bound to the MEF-2 sequence. DAPAs show that PSF, Sp1, HDAC1, HDAC2 and RbAp48 also interact with the Sp1 site within the PR-B promoter. Finally, Co-IPs showed that PSF also interacts with specifi c PRs and progesterone response elements within myometrial nuclei. Conclusions: Our data suggests that PSF and co-factors may play a role in PR expression and progesterone mediated gene regulation within the human myometrium. Whether PSF, via the MEF-2 binding site and/or Sp1 binding sites infl uences PR expression in the myometrium will now be investigated. Myometrium: Changes with Gestation and the Onset of Labor. Amy A Merlino, 1 Huiqing Tan, 2 Li Juan Yi, 2 Brian Mercer, *1 Sam Mesiano. *2 1 Department of Reproductive Biology, CASE -MetroHealth Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, USA; 2 Department of Reproductive Biology, CASE -University Hospitals, Cleveland, OH, USA. OBJECTIVE: Progesterone maintains pregnancy by promoting myometrial quiescence through genomic and non-genomic mechanisms, and labor is thought to be initiated by progesterone withdrawal. The role of non-genomic progesterone actions in human pregnancy and parturition are not clearly understood. Non-genomic progesterone actions are mediated by membranebound PRs (mPRs): mPRα, mPRβ, mPRγ, and progesterone receptor membrane components -1 and -2 (PGRMC-1 and PGRMC-2). The goal of this study was to measure the extent of mPR expression in biopsy specimens of human myometrium obtained at cesarean delivery, and to determine whether expression changes with advancing gestation or the onset of labor. STUDY DESIGN: Lower uterine segment myometrial biopsies were obtained at the time of delivery from 35 consenting women who were preterm not in labor (PTNIL: n = 7), term not in labor (TNIL: n=12) and term in labor (TIL: n=16). Relative abundance of mRNAs encoding mPRα, mPRβ, mPRγ and PGRMC-1, PGRMC-2 were determined by quantitative RT-PCR, normalized to mRNAs encoding the constitutively expressed myometrial-specifi c gene h-caldesmon, and compared between the 3 groups. RESULTS: In all samples mRNAs encoding PGRMC-1 and PGRMC-2 were more abundant than mPRα mRNA, which was greater than mPRβ and mPRγ (least abundant) mRNAs. There were no differences in mRNA levels for each mPR between PTNIL and TNIL biopsies. However, labor at term (TIL group) was associated with a 2 to 3-fold increase in relative abundance of mRNAs encoding PGRMC-1 (p=0.04) and PGRMC-2 (p=0.029) compared with TNIL. Expression of the other receptors was not affected by labor status. CONCLUSION: These data demonstrate for the fi rst time that the human pregnancy myometrium (at least from the lower uterine segment) expresses robust levels of PGRMC-1, PGRMC-2 and mPRa, suggesting that progesterone may infl uence its contractility non-genomically via these receptors. The functional signifi cance of the labor-associated increases in PGRMC-1 and PGRMC-2 is unclear. Changes in expression of these receptors during pregnancy may be important for the hormonal control of parturition. MicroRNA Expression Profi ling of the Human Uterine Cervix in Term Labor. Sonia Hassan, 1,2 Roberto Romero, *1,3 Beth Pineles, 1 Adi L Tarca, 1, 4 Daniel Montenegro, 1 Jimmy Espinoza, 1,2 Pooja Mittal, 2 Shali Mazaki-Tovi, 2 Juan Pedro Kusanovic, 1 Lara Friel, 2 Francesca Gotsch, 1 Sorin Draghici, 4 Chong Jai Kim. 1 OBJECTIVE: MicroRNAs (miRNA) are noncoding RNAs involved in posttranscriptional regulation of target genes. miRNAs play a role in embryonic development, granulocyte differentiation and oncogenesis. The objective of this study was to determine whether cervical ripening/dilatation during human parturition is associated with changes in the miRNA expression profi le. METHODS: The miRNA expression pattern of cervical tissue was characterized using miRCURY™ LUNA microarrays. Samples were collected at term from patients without labor (TNL; n=9) and after spontaneous labor (TL; n=8). Pvalues for differential expression derived from a moderated t-test model were adjusted for multiple comparisons. Results were confi rmed using qRT-PCR. RESULTS: 1) Microarray analysis revealed that 226 miRNAs were expressed in human cervical tissue at term; 2) Unique miRNAs (miR-223, miR-34b, miR-34c) were differentially expressed in the cervical tissue of women who underwent spontaneous labor compared to those not in labor (false discovery rate < 0.05); 3) miR-223 (fold change FC= 4.8), miR-34b (FC=3.3), and miR-34c (FC=8.2) were up-regulated in the cervical tissue of women in labor when compared to that of patients not in labor; 4) Targeted qRT-PCR assays confi rmed these fi ndings [miR-223 (FC=5.7, p<0.001), miR-34b (FC=4.5, p<0.001), miR-34c (FC=6.2, p<0.001)]. We also obtained confi rmation of non-differentially regulated miRNAs with qRT-PCR. CONCLUSION: 1) We report for the fi rst time that miRNAs are differentially regulated in the human uterine cervix during spontaneous labor; 2) Cervical remodeling after term labor was associated with changes in the miRNA expression pattern which is characterized by over-expression of miR-223, miR-34b, and miR-34c; 3) We propose that miRNAs participate in posttranscriptional regulation of genes involved in cervical remodeling. The Role of LOX-1 Receptor in the Pathophysiology of Preeclampsia. Sowndramalingam Sankaralingam, 1 Yi Xu, 1 Tatsuya Sawamura, 2 Sandra T Davidge. *3 1 Physiology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada; 2 Vascular Physiology, National Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, Osaka, Japan; 3 Obstetrics/Gynecology & Physiology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. Background: Preeclampsia (PE) is characterized by the onset of hypertension and proteinuria after the 20th week of gestation. Oxidative stress may mediate vascular dysfunction in PE. We have shown evidence of peroxynitrite (ONOO -) formation in the vasculature of PE women. Furthermore, endothelial cells incubated with plasma from PE women generate ONOOas measured by nitrotyrosine staining. There is also increased levels of oxidized low density lipoprotein (oxLDL) in the plasma of PE women. oxLDL binds to the lectin like oxLDL receptor -1 (LOX-1) on the endothelium of blood vessels and generates superoxide (O 2 .-) via NADPH oxidase. Our preliminary data shows increased LOX-1 receptor expression and presence of oxLDL in the omental arteries of women with PE, while there was negligible expression in the normotensive pregnant (PREG) women. However, the mechanisms of increased LOX-1 receptor in PE is unknown. We hypothesize that circulating factors in PE plasma will upregulate the LOX-1 receptor resulting in enhanced O 2 .generation and subsequently ONOO -. Furthermore, ONOOwill provide a feed forward loop to upregulate LOX-1. Methods: Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were treated with 2% plasma (n=3-5 per group) from PREG or PE women for 24 hours. LOX-1 receptor expression was assessed by Western blot. O 2 .generation in response to plasma was measured using dihyrdoethidium, in the presence of a monoclonal blocking antibody to LOX-1 receptor (mAbLOX-1) or apocynin, an NADPH oxidase inhibitor. In some experiments, LOX-1 was assessed in HUVECs treated with ONOO -(25 μM) for 6 h. Results: PE plasma tended to increase (∼ 30±1.5 %, p<0.07) LOX-1 receptor expression in HUVECs compared to treatment with PREG plasma. PE plasma signifi cantly increased O 2 .generation when compared to treatment with PREG plasma (130±3 vs. 26±2 Arbitrary Units (A.U.), p<0.001), that was inhibited by mAbLOX-1 or apocynin (65±3 and 63±2 A.U., respectively p<0.001). Furthermore, ONOOincreased LOX-1 protein expression (p<0.01). In preeclampsia, LOX-1 receptor and NADPH oxidase may play a role in O 2 .and subsequently ONOOgeneration in response to plasma, ultimately resulting in vascular dysfunction. LOX-1 receptor antagonism may be a potential therapeutic target in PE. Clonogenic Endothelial Progenitor Cells Are Decreased in Women with Preeclampsia. Carol Lin, 1 Augustine Rajakumar, *1,2 Vivek Verma, 2 Nina Markovic, 2,3 Roberta B Ness, 2,3 Daniel Plymire, 2 Carl A Hubel. * We asked if numbers of early outgrowth EPC colony-forming units (CFUs) derived from maternal blood are decreased in women with preeclampsia compared to normal pregnancy. Methods: Primigravid nonsmokers with normal pregnancy (NL, n=10) or preeclampsia (PE, n=10) and singleton gestation were studied during the 3rd trimester. Patients with chronic hypertension, other metabolic disorders, or acute infl ammatory conditions were excluded. Groups did not differ by race, prepregnancy body mass index or gestational age at time of venipuncture. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from maternal blood by Ficoll density centrifugation. To eliminate mature circulating endothelial cells, PBMCs were pre-plated on fi bronectin-coated 6-well plates (5x10 6 cells/well) in Endocult Medium (StemCell Technologies). After 48 hours, nonadherent cells were recollected and 1 million cells replated into fi bronectin-coated 24-well plates. CFUs were manually counted 72 hours later in a minimum of 4 wells/patient. Groups were compared by Mann-Whitney U test. The endothelial lineage of CFUs was confi rmed by co-immunostaining with DiI-labeled acetylated LDL and FITC-labeled Ulex europaeus lectin. Results: Median EPC-CFU counts were half normal in preeclampsia [PE 2.9 (interquartile range 0.0 to 3.8), NL 5.8 (3.2 to 9.5), p=0.041]. Scatterplot shows average number of CFUs per well for each patient. Conclusions: Numbers of circulating, clonogenic EPCs are decreased in women with preeclampsia; this defi cit may be a factor in the pathogenesis of the disease. Funded in part by the PA Dept. of Health and by NIH R21HD49453, MO1RR00056 and PO1HD30367. Prepregnant Low Plasma Volume Interferes with the Cardiac Adaptation to Pregnancy. Silvia Andrietti, 1,3 Arnold Kruse, 1 Simone Sep, 1 Maurizio Marco Anceschi, 3 Marc Spaanderman, 2 Louis Peeters. Univ Hosp Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands; UMC St. Radboud, Nijmegen, Netherlands; 3 Ob-Gyn, Univ La Sapienza, Rome, Italy. Background: Formerly preeclamptic women with a subnormal plasma volume (LPV) have a 3 times higher chance to develop recurrent hypertensive disorder in their next pregnancy as compared to their counterparts with a normal plasma volume (NPV) (BJOG, 2003; 110:1001) . In this study we tested the hypothesis that LPV have a reduced cardiac capacity to adapt to pregnancy. In 12 LPV (PV < 45 mL. [kg lean body mass] -1 ), 26 NPV (PV > 52 mL) and in 9 parous controls (CONTR), we measured the following echocardiographic parameters along with blood pressures at least 5 months post partum, at days 5 (baseline) and 18 of the menstrual cycle and again at pregnancy weeks 5 and 7 in their next pregnancy: Left atrial diameter (LAD), left ventricle enddiastolic -(EDV) and endsystolic volumes, left ventricle mass (LVM), ejection fraction (EF), heart rate (HR), stroke volume, cardiac output, E/A ratio (defi ned as the ratio between the peak mitral fl ow in early diastole [E] and during atrial contraction [A]), diastolic -(DBP), systolic -(SBP), mean arterial pressure (MAP), pulse pressure (PP) and global compliance (GC, defi ned as the ratio of SV and PP). All participants were normotensive (no medication) and seemingly healthy. Groups were compared with each other by means of the Mann-Whitney-U Test, Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test or Friedman One-Way ANOVA, whenever appropriate. Data are presented as median (IQR). Results: Baseline parameters in LPV differed from those in NPV only by a lower GC (see table) . However, the response to pregnancy in the LPV group differed from that in both NPV and CONTR by a rise in LAD to 39 (4) mm (p = 0.017) and HR to 74 (14) bpm, (p = 0.033), and a delayed decrease in DBP. The difference in cardiac adaptation to pregnancy between LPV and NPV suggest impaired diastolic cardiac function and a higher cardiovascular sympathetic tone in LPV relative to NPV and therefore, supports our hypothesis. Ira Bernstein, *1 Adrienne Schonberg, 1 Robert Shapiro, 2 Beth Bouchard, 3 Alan Segal. 4 1 OB/GYN, Univ of VT, Burlington, VT, USA; 2 Neurology, Univ of VT, Burlington, VT, USA; 3 Biochemistry, Univ of VT, Burlington, VT, USA; 4 Medicine, Univ of VT, Burlington, VT, USA. BACKGROUND: The diagnostic criteria for preeclampsia require 24 hour urinary protein levels of at least 300 mg in the second half of pregnancy. As part of a study of prepregnancy physiology that might contribute to the development of preeclampsia we characterized 24 hour urine profi les in nulligravid women prior to and then during the course of their fi rst pregnancy. METHODS: We examined 50 healthy young normotensive women during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle (MC). Thirteen of these women were studied again at 11-16 weeks of subsequent pregnancies (EP) and 6 of these women have been studied at 30-34 weeks (LP) for a total of 69 collections. None of these women received a clinical diagnosis of hypertension or preeclampsia. Collections were performed during inpatient stays in our General Clinical Research Center after 3 days of dietary control. During the hospital stay we measured oral intake, controlling calories, and 24 hour urinary volume, protein, creatinine clearance and sodium. Twenty four hour protein was measured using the VITROS UPRO Slides kit (Ortho Diagnostics, Raritan, NJ). Data is expressed as mean + standard deviation. RESULTS: Subjects were 29.4 + 4.7 years old with a BMI of 22.8 + 3.7 kg/m 2 at prepregnant studies. Urinary volumes were MC: 2,439 + 1,014, EP: 2,591 + 890 and LP 4,309 + 1,688 mL. The mean 24 hour urinary protein during MC studies was 251 + 163 mg. The majority of results were above the normal limit (150 mg) for nonpregnant 24 hour urinary protein (70%, 35/50). The mean 24 hour urine protein at EP was 296 + 109 mg (range 84-477 mg): LP was 592 + 242 mg (range 301-882). Seventy four percent (14/19) of pregnancy results exceeded 300 mg/24 hours. The mean creatinine clearance prior to pregnancy was 114 + 20 mL/min (range 73-171). Mean prepregnancy levels of urinary sodium were 47 + 52 mEq/24 hours. CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated "abnormal" 24 hour urinary protein concentrations in a majority of healthy normotensive nulligravidas and subjects studied during fi rst pregnancies. These results, obtained from commercial analysis under highly supervised conditions, suggest that the current threshold for 24 hour urine protein employed in the diagnosis of preeclampsia may need reevaluation. Supported by NIH RO-1 HL71944. Objective: Endoglin, a co-receptor for transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 and β3, is expressed in the human placenta where it plays a role in regulating early events of trophoblast differentiation. Recent evidence has indicated that in preeclamptic placentae endoglin expression is elevated and this is associated with high circulatory levels of its soluble form. Since preeclampsia may be the result of impaired oxygenation, we examined the effect of oxygen on endoglin expression using physiological and pathological models of placental hypoxia. Since TGFβ3 expression in the placenta is regulated by oxygen, we also examined the effect of TGFβ1 and TGFβ3 on endoglin expression. Methods: Human placental tissue from fi rst trimester and from discordant dichorionic and monochorionic twins (n=10) and age matched normal twins (n=5) were used as physiological and pathological models of placental hypoxia. In all twins the discordancy was above 25% and absence of end diastolic velocity was documented in the growth-restricted twin. Endoglin mRNA expression was measured by quantitative PCR analysis. Protein expression was measured by Western Blot analysis using endoglin antibodies. Villous explants (5-8 wks) were used to test the effect of both oxygen and TGFβ1 and TGFβ3 on endoglin expression. Results: Immunoblot analysis indicated that endoglin expression was high at 5-7 wks of gestation, when oxygen tension is low and decreased after 10 wks when oxygen tension increases. Real-time PCR showed signifi cantly increased endoglin transcripts in IUGR discordant twins compared to their normal cotwins and to control non-discordant twins. Consistent with the mRNA fi ndings, we observed that protein levels of both membrane and soluble endoglin were higher in the IUGR twin placentae relative to both the control co-twin and the normal twins.Exposure of villous explants to low oxygen (3% O 2 ) resulted in elevated expression of endoglin compared to standard conditions (20% O 2 ). Moreover, addition of TGF β1 and TGFβ3 to villous explants also increased the expression of both membrane and soluble endoglin compared to nontreated explants. Introduction: Gp96, the heat shock protein 90 precursor or endoplasmic reticulum counterpart of Hsp90 has been shown to be induced by a variety of stress conditions and to function as a molecular chaperone. Its role in innate and adaptive immunity is of particular relevance to preeclampsia, since abnormal activation of of the immune system has also been suggested to be responsible for the etiology of pre-eclampsia. We have here used both proteomic technologies and the traditional methods of western blot and immunohistochemistry to examine the relevance of placental Gp96 in preeclampsia. Objective: Our objective was to examine localization of Gp96 in the placenta and its alteration in preeclampsia using 2DE and western blot. Methods: Villous tissue from normal and preeclamptic patients was lysed at 4ºC in lysis buffer (2% CHAPS, 20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 200 uM AEBSF and protease inhibitor). The lysate was centrifuged at 20,000xg at 4ºC for 5 min and the supernatant was used for all experiments. 2DE analysis (n=3) was carried out to detect proteins altered in preeclampsia and then identifi ed by LC-MS. Western blot (n=6) and immunohistochemistry (n=6) was carried out using anti-Gp96 antibody. Results: 2DE analysis showed that intensity of protein spot number 48 was over 6 fold higher in preeclampsia. LC-MS identifi ed 5 peptides that matched Gp96 in a database search using Mascot software. Immunoblot analyses for Gp96 also demonstrated signifi cantly greater amounts of the protein in the preeclamptic group as compared to normotensive (p<0.05) confi rming the 2D fi nding. Immunostaining of the placental tissue localized Gp96 predominantly to the extravillous trophoblasts (EVT) and ST layer. Overall, intense staining was observed in the EVT in all the placentae. There was a distinct trend towards increased staining in the ST layer and endothelium of the preeclamptic group as against the normal. Stromal staining was weak in all samples. Conclusions: Data presented here shows that Gp96 expression is signifi cantly (p<0.05) increased in preeclampsia. The roles of Gp96 in protein homeostasis and cell differentiation have not been well studied. As a general rule Gp96 is induced during ischemic injury and Hsp90 is induced as a result of the oxidative stress resulting from reperfusion following ischemia both in the brain and kidney. It remains to be seen whether such an association exists in preeclampsia. Objective: Soluble VEGF receptor, sFlt has been implicated in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. Previous data suggest that maternal mononuclear cells are an important extra-placental source of circulating sFlt in women with preeclampsia (PE). The present study quantifi ed the ability of placental explants from normotensive pregnant (NP) and PE women to produce sFlt under hypoxic and nonhypoxic tissue culture conditions. We also tested the hypothesis that multiple isoforms of sFlt would be present both in the conditioned medium and plasma. Methods: The diagnosis of PE was based on the criteria of the Working Group Report on High Blood Pressure in Pregnancy (2003). Placental villous explants (NP, n=4 and PE, n=5) were exposed to 21% oxygen or 2% oxygen under tissue culture conditions for 24 hrs. Soluble Flt in the conditioned media was purifi ed using heparin-agarose and was subjected to Western blot analysis using four different Flt and sFlt antibodies (sc-316, Santa Cruz; V4262, Sigma; 36-1100, Zymed; AF321, R&D Systems). Similar studies were carried out using plasma samples (n=4 each of NP and PE). Additionally immunoprecipitation followed by ELISA (R&D Systems) and Western analysis were carried out using plasma samples (n=6) selected based on their elevated sFlt concentration. We employed Flt-1, VEGFR-2 and sFlt antibodies to investigate the protein-protein interaction between these receptors. .7 pg/ml respectively). In women with diabetes, the levels were highest at T1 but declined at T2 and T3 (T1: 181.4 ± 12.3 pg/ml, T2: 131.9 ± 9.6 pg/ml, T3:127.0 ± 18.1 pg/ml). However, at all three visits these levels were signifi cantly lower among women with diabetes in comparison to the control group (p= .001). In contrast, plasma sFlt-1 levels progressively increased over time in controls (T1: 478.9 ± 17.8 pg/ml, T2: 570.8 ± 24.5 pg/ml, T3: 791.9 ± 22.9) as well as in women with diabetes (T1: 1018.8 ± 48.8 pg/ml, T2: 1713.6 ± 41.7 pg/ml, T3: 2039.7± 34.0 pg/ml). The levels in later group were signifi cantly higher during all three time periods (p<.001). CONCLUSION: This is the fi rst study to show prospectively that the angiogenic peptide VEGF is signifi cantly reduced in diabetics as early as mid pregnancy. These reduced levels are the result of a signifi cant elevation in its soluble receptor (sFlt-1) leading to an increasing decrement in the ratio of VEGF and sFlt-1 as the pregnancy progresses. This suggests that the diabetic state of abnormal glucose metabolism and its known role as an oxidative stressor can signifi cantly alter these two peptides. VEGF and sFlt-1 may be of value as markers of the degree of oxidative stress and glucose homeostasis in diabetic pregnancies. Objectives: Stem cells have remarkable regenerative potential; many adult tissues harbor cells with extensive plasticity. We hypothesized that, in addition to endogenous stem cells restricted to an endometrial cell fate, human endometrium contains stem cells with the ability to differentiate to nonendometrial cell types. Here we demonstrate pluripotent stem cells in human endometrium by inducing in vitro chondrogenic differentiation. Methods: Proliferative endometrium was initially prepared as standard for endometrial stromal cell culture including fi ltering through a 73 um sieve, cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS and 1% Antibiotic/Antimycotic to confl uence. After the second passage, cells were centrifuged and transferred to 15 ml conical tubes. Six cell pellets were cultured in phenol red free DMEM, 10% charcoal stripped calf serum, and 1% Antibiotic/Antimycotic and another six in chondrogenic induction media containing L-Ascorbic Acid, Dexamethasone, and TGF ß2. Cultures were maintained for 3-21 days. Myometrial and tubal cells served as negative controls. Cell pellets were then analyzed for articular cartilage markers by staining with Alcian Blue and Toluidine Blue to identify sulfated glycosaminoglycans. Immunohistochemistry was performed for Type II Collagen. Samples were compared to control cell pellets cultured without chondrogenic agents. Results: After 7 days, endometrial stromal cell pellet cultures treated with chondrogenic media demonstrated approximately 1% cells with distinctive chondrocyte features. These cells stained brightly with Toluidine Blue and extracellularly with Alcian Blue, both specifi c for the sulfated glycosaminoglycans secreted by articular chondrocytes. Collagen II expression, characteristic of articular chondrocytes, was demonstrated by immunohistochemistry in the cytoplasmic region of these cells. Cells cultured without induction agents were unable to form a pellet, dispersed in media and did not express sulfated glycosaminoglycans or Collagen II. Nor were any of the chondrocyte markers expressed after culturing myometrium or tubal epithelium with or without the induction agents. Conclusions: This is the fi rst demonstration of in vitro pluripotent potential of putative adult human endometrial stem cells by inducing differentiation along a chondrogenic pathway. Endometrium may serve as a reservoir for stem cells with considerable plasticity. Objective: To assess the effects of BMT on long-term fertility following CTx, and to test if donor BM-derived oocytes are misidentifi ed CD45 + cells. Methods: Adult female mice (129/Sv, FVB) were given CTx, followed by BMT 1 wk later using coat color-mismatched (C57BL/6) females as donors. After housing with C57BL/6 males, the number of successful pregnancies was recorded. For donor cell tracking, BM from germline-specifi c GFP-transgenic mice was injected into CTx-treated wild-type recipients. Immune (CD45 + ) cells were sorted from blood and analyzed for germline marker expression. Results: All (10/10) non-treated females achieved 5, and 80% achieved 6, pregnancies over the 7-mo trial. Mice given CTx without BMT became infertile, with the majority (10/13) achieving 3 or less, and none achieving 6, pregnancies. In mice receiving BMT 1 wk after CTx, one was sterilized. However, 90% (9/10) achieved at least 4, 80% achieved 5, and 70% achieved 6, pregnancies over the 7-mo trial. All offspring (n=325) produced by the transplanted females were from the recipient germline, although donor cell tracking showed that donorderived (GFP + ) immature oocytes were present in recipient females. Finally, in contrast to the previously reported co-expression of germline markers by these GFP + oocytes, CD45 + cells did not express germline markers. Conclusions: BMT rescues fertility in CTx-treated adult female mice. Although donor BM-derived immature oocytes (which are not misidentifi ed CD45 + cells) are generated after BMT, all offspring produced by these females are recipientderived. These data support the existence of stem cells in BM with germline potential, but indicate that oocytes formed by BM-derived cells rarely, if at all, become competent for ovulation and fertilization. Nonetheless, BMT rescues long-term fertility in CTx-treated females, through mechanisms that involve revival of a small cohort of existing oocytes or a reactivation of host oogenesis. Support: NIH R37-AG012279, R01-AG024999. are clonogenic and form teratomas, c) differentiate into cells derived from the germ layers and d) changes in MHC antigens prior to after differentiation. Methods: AEC from term fetal membranes were used (n=15). a) mRNA/ protein expression of pluripotent cell markers was assessed by RT-PCR and immunocytochemistry, respectively. b) AEC (20 cells/cm 2 ) treated with or without growth factors were tested for clonal expansion. SCID mice testes injected with AEC were monitored for teratoma formation. c) AEC were cultured with supplements to induce differentiation. d) Percentage of cells presenting MHC Class IA and II antigens assessed by FACS. Results: a) Native, term AEC expressed mRNA and/or protein of pluripotent stem cell markers including Oct-4, Sox-2, Nanog. b) AEC formed large clonal colonies. EGF+FGF (10ng/ml each) stimulated proliferation signifi cantly compared to controls in DMEM:F12 or cells stimulated with EGF, Activin A or FGF alone (p<0.0001). Teratomas were absent in SCID mice testes 10weeks post injection. c) Native AEC differentiated into hepatic, pancreatic (endodermal), myocytic, adipocytic, cardiomyocytic, osteocytic (mesodermal), neural and glial (neuroectodermal) cells as shown by phenotypic, electron microscopic and/or mRNA, protein, FACS analyses for markers specifi c for each cell type. d) Less than 2% of native undifferentiated AEC contained MHC Class IA and II antigens. Upon differentiation into cardiomyocytic, hepatic or pancreatic cells MHC Class II remained suppressed (<14%). Conclusions: Term AEC display the properties of pluripotent stem cells but importantly, do not form teratomas, unlike pluripotent embryonic stem cells. Suppression of MHC Class II antigens following differentiation suggests that rejection after transplantion may be minimal. Term amnion, a tissue that is normally discarded at birth, may be a novel, less controversial, highly abundant and easily accessible source of stem cells for regenerative and reparative medicine. The trophectoderm and later the trophoblast are essential for survival of the embryo because it mediates implantation and ultimately becomes the placenta. During embryo development a number of growth factors infl uence the maternal environment. At the blastocyst stage high concentrations of IGF-1 or insulin, characteristic of maternal hyperinsulinemia, lead to extensive apoptosis and a signifi cant down-regulation of IGF-1R. The down-regulation of IGF-1R at this developmental stage, as a result of elevated IGF-1 or insulin, is responsible for decreased glucose uptake and increased apoptosis that results in poor pregnancy outcomes in mice. Moreover, this process may account for the increase in pregnancy loss in the insulin resistant patient population. Our objective was to discover the mechanisms responsible for the increased apoptosis, decreased glucose transport and poor pregnancy outcomes using a TS cell model. In addition, we hypothesize that dysfunction of AMPK activity may play a role in this process. We found that down-regulating the expression of IGF-1R with siRNA in TS cells resulted in decreased expression of P-AMPK and P-ACC (n=6). The effi ciency of transfection with the siRNA in reducing IGF-1R content was confi rmed by Western blotting. Furthermore, employing small interference RNA directed against IGF-1R caused a 48% decrease in glucose uptake that was shown to be insulin dependent and increased apoptosis by 40% (n=3). The effect of down-regulation of IGF-1R on P-AMPK, P-ACC, apoptosis and glucose uptake was reversed with treatment of the AMPKactivator, 5'-aminoimidazole-4carboxamide-1-β-D-ribofuranoside (AICAR) (250μM for 2 hours) and/or Phenformin (5mM for 2 hours) (n=3). AICAR stimulation of AMPK increased insulin-stimulated glucose up-take by over a 100% (p<0.01). Inhibition of AMPK activity by compound C (125μM) negated the anti-apoptotic effects of AICAR. Conclusion: These results suggest that down regulation of the IGF-1R leads to decreased AMPK activity. This kinase activity appears to be necessary and suffi cient for the stimulation of glucose transport and maintenance of cellular survival in TS cells experiencing an apoptotic response to hyperinsulinemia. Peripubertal Hyperinsulinemia Up-Regulates Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase/Protein Kinase B Pathway in Rat Ovaries. Shilla Chakrabarty, Manubai Nagamani. * Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. Objective: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is associated with insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia. PCOS patients with hyperinsulinemia have profound peripheral insulin resistance, but retain sensitivity to insulin in the ovary. The cause of this paradox is little known. Because insulin and insulin receptors are widely present in the ovary, and insulin modulates ovulation and ovarian steroidogenesis, we evaluated the regulation of insulin signaling pathways in ovaries of rats with peripubertal hyperinsulinemia. Methods: We induced experimental hyperinsulinemia in newly weaned female rats by infusing insulin (0.14 IU/day) for 4 weeks via subcutaneously implanted Alzet minipumps. We infused Control animals with normal saline. At autopsy, (rat age 56 days), the ovaries were quickly removed, and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for protein extraction, or fi xed in Bouin's fl uid for histological and immunohistochemical studies. Protein extracts from whole ovaries were used to study the effects of hyperinsulinemia on the Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase/ Protein Kinase B (PI3-kinase) pathway necessary for initiation of glucose transport, and on Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK/ERK1/2) pathway used for producing the mitogenic effects of insulin. Results: In comparison to Control, peripubertal hyperinsulinemia remarkably up-regulated total protein kinase B (Akt), and enhanced Akt serine and theronine phosphorylation in rat ovaries. Phosphorylation, and therefore inactivation of glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) was also markedly increased, suggesting that glycogen synthesis was inhibited by hyperinsulinemia. Phosphorylation of Raf, however, was not affected, suggesting that hyperinsulinemia did not modulate the Ras/Ref/MEK/ERK pathway in the ovaries. However, the activity of Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) protein, a lipid phosphatase and a major negative regulator of the PI3 kinase/Akt signaling pathway, was markedly down regulated by hyperinsulinemia. Conclusion: These fi ndings, along with our observations of estrus acyclicity, hyperandrogenism, and ovarian changes similar to those seen in women with PCOS, namely, thecal and interfollicular stromal proliferation, and premature lutenization of ovarian follicles, suggest that the ovarian PI-3 kinase pathway may be involved in the development of PCO-related ovarian dysfunction in peripubertal hyperinsulinemia. Ovulate on Metformin Therapy. Richard S Legro, *1 Sandra A Carson, *1 Michael P Diamond, *1 William D Schlaff, *1 Bruce R Carr, *1 Michael P Steinkampf, *1 Christos Coutifaris, *1 Peter G McGovern, *1 Linda C Giudice, *1 Phyllis C Leppert, *1 Nicholas A Cataldo, *1 Gabriel Gosman, 1 John E Nestler, 1 Kathy G Ewens, 2 Richard S Spieman, 2 Huiman X Barnhart, 1 Evan R Myers. 1 Research. a) Objective: We hypothesized that genetic variation in the estrogen receptor, in LKB1 involved in hepatic glucose homeostasis and metformin action, and CYP genes (2D6/2C9) involved in steroid metabolism would predict ovulatory response. b) Methods: We examined polymorphisms in these genes related to drug action in a substudy of women (N = 311) who participated in our multicenter trial, Pregnancy in Polycystic Ovary Syndrome, of clomiphene (CC), metformin(MET), and the combination in infertile women with PCOS. Generalized estimating equations were used for analysis of ovulation rate to account for correlation of multiple ovulation cycles within a subject. We used stepwise regression with an alpha level of 0.1 in selecting baseline risk factors for ovulation. c) Results: We found no signifi cant effect between SNPs from the ER or CYP genes and ovulation, but we noted a signifi cant negative effect of genotypes containing the 2 allele from a SNP in the LKB1 gene in the MET arm, which approached signifi cance in the same trend in the CC arm. Other factors in the Objective: Women with PCOS exhibit increased leukocyte sensitivity characterized by increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation in response to a dietary carbohydrate trigger. We evaluated the status of leukocytic ROS generation in the fasting state in women with PCOS compared to ovulatory controls, and the relationship between fasting ROS generation and circulating LH and androgens. Methods: Fourteen women with PCOS (7 lean, 7 obese) between ages 18-40 yrs, diagnosed on the basis of oligo-or amenorrhea and hyperandrogenemia, and 12 ovulatory controls (6 lean, 6 obese) of similar age were selected for study. Subjects with diabetes, infl ammatory illnesses or other endocrinopathies were excluded. ROS generation was measured by chemiluminescence in leukocytes isolated from fasting blood samples. Serum LH and androgens were measured by RIA. Insulin sensitivity was derived by IS OGTT . Results: There were no signifi cant differences in age and body mass index between the women with PCOS and weight-matched controls. Lean women with PCOS exhibited a signifi cantly lower IS OGTT compared to lean controls (5.4±0.4 vs. 8.0±1.3, p<0.03). As expected, a signifi cantly (p<0.002) lower IS OGTT was also evident in obese women with PCOS (3.5±0.6) and obese controls ( The decidualization of endometrial stromal cells to decidual cells is essential for a week old embryo to successfully implant into the uterine endometrium, form a placenta and for the pregnancy to be maintained. To induce decidualization we used the epigenetic mechanism of DNA methylation. DNA methylation silences genes but if the methylation of a gene is inhibited then that gene will be up-regulated. Objective To determine whether alteration in DNA methylation can result in decidualization of human endometrial stromal cells. Methods The methylation inhibitor, AZA (5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine) was given as a 15uM treatment to a human endometrial stromal cell-line, HESC. As a control the HESC cells were given MPA-mix (medroxyprogesterone acetate /estradiol /dibutyryl cAMP) the ovarian hormone initiators and sustainers of decidualization. RT-PCR was used to evaluate the changes in gene expression specifi cally for PRL, IGFBP-1, FKHR, TIMP3, CNR1. Results When HESC cells were treated with AZA the two decidualization indicators showed decidualization, i.e. the change in morphology and the change in gene expression. AZA altered the morphology of stromal cells from fi broblast-like to rounder, decidualized cells, and when these cells were compared with the morphology of stromal cells treated with MPA-mix both morphologies appeared similar. During decidualization the marker genes prolactin and insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) are up-regulated (along with many other genes) from virtually no expression. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR showed that the prolactin and IGFBP-1 genes were up-regulated many fold by 15uM AZA treatment over twelve days. When 15uM AZA was combined with the MPA-mix and given to HESC cells for twelve days there was a 1.5 -2 fold increase in expression in fi ve decidualization marker genes (PRL, IGFBP-1, FKHR, TIMP3, CNR1) compared with the MPA-mix only treatment. Conclusion Both the indicators of decidualization, i.e. the change in morphology and the up-regulation of prolactin and IGFBP-1, show that decidualization is epigenetically regulated. Smoking-related fetal growth restriction may be due in part to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) exposure. Prepregnancy injections of two PAHs, benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) and dimethylbenzanthracene (DMBA), cause IUGR in mice and histological changes in the placental labyrinth. In this study we assessed fetoplacental vascularity in offspring of PAH-exposed mice using micro-computed tomography (microCT), a high resolution 3D X-ray imaging technique. Methods: Female mice were injected once a week during weeks 1-3 and 7-9 with either a BaP-DMBA mix (2mg/kg) or corn oil vehicle (4 mothers/grp). One week post last injection females were mated, with no further injections given during pregnancy. The fetoplacental vasculature was perfused with radioopaque contrast agent at day 15.5 of gestation and scanned using microCT. Data reconstruction produced 3D images and generated geometric models of the lumen surface, excluding capillaries. Results: Fetuses from treated mice were growth restricted 22% by weight, yet placental weight was unchanged. Signifi cant decreases were observed in umbilical artery and vein diameters (14% and 18%), total observed arterial vascular surface area (19%) and total observed arterial vascular volume (20%). Conclusions: Changes in fetoplacental arterial and venous, but not capillary, vessels caused by pre-pregnancy PAH exposure were quantifi able by microCT. Reduced umbilical diameters suggest reduced fetoplacental perfusion. Thus, fetal growth restriction due to pre-pregnancy PAH exposure may be due in part to impaired placental function. Introduction The novel glycolipid α-C-galactosylceramide (α-C-GalCer) has selective ability to activate DC, NK and NKT cells to produce IFN-γ and IL-12 leading to type-I responses. We have shown that a high ratio of CD8 + effector T cells and CD4 + CD25 + Foxp3 + regulatory T cells (Tregs) predicts improved prognosis in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) patients (Sato et.al PNAS) . We tested the ability of α-C-GalCer in regulating host adaptive immune responses and achieving durable tumor immunity. In our murine OVA expressing syngeneic ovarian tumor model (H-2K b + MOSEC-OVA), naïve TCR transgenic CD8 + (OT-1) and CD4 + (OT-II) T cells specifi c for OVA were adoptively transferred (2 X 10 6 ) in age matched tumor (20 X 10 6 MOSEC-OVA) bearing female C57BL6, IL12 -/and CD1d -/mice. Each group was vaccinated (1ug α-C GalCer + 5ug OVA protein) and harvested at various time points with fi ndings confi rmed in repeat experiments. The relative numbers of CD4 + , CD8 + and Treg T cells were enumerated in spleen, lymph nodes and peritoneal cavity. Effector function was assessed by in-vivo CTL and in-vitro intracytoplasmic cytokines expression. Protection and survival from tumor challenge were plotted using Kaplan-Meier and analyzed by log-rank. The α-C-GalCer effi ciently enhances the clonal expansion of OT-1, OT-II and endogenous H-K b /SIINFEKL specifi c CD8 + T cells (>100 fold, P <0.0001). The induced CD8 + T cell clonal expansion was largely due to proliferation (CFSE dilution) and also attributable to increased survival (decreased T cell apoptosis). This expansion was associated with robust CD8 + T cell differentiation and maturation due to endogenous IL-12 production and was alsodependent on CD1d presentation. The α-C-GalCer induced IL-12 production also reduced the tumor associated Tregs in the peritoneal cavity (P <0.004) that correlated with increased survival of tumor bearing host in the immunized group (P <0.003). Conclusions α-C-GalCer promotes antigen specific clonal expansion and effector differentiation of CD8 + and CD4 + T cells. It also reduces frequency of Tregs in EOC microenvironment with improved survival providing a strong rationale for its use as an adjuvant EOC immunotherapy. Background/Objective: Preeclampsia is characterised by hypertension, proteinuria, and dysregulated angiogenesis. Soluble Flt-1 (sFlt-1) and endoglin (sEng) are elevated in preeclampsia and their co-administration to rats elicits severe preeclampsia-like symptoms. Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and its metabolite, carbon monoxide (CO) exerts protective effects in several organs against oxidative stimuli. As HO-1 is down regulated in preeclampsia we investigated the role of HO-1 in the regulation of sFlt-1 and sEng. Results: Adenoviral overexpression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) induced a three-fold increase plasma sFlt-1 levels in mice. VEGFmediated sFlt release required VEGF receptor-2 activation as SU1498 blocked its production. Endothelial cells overexpressing HO-1 or pre-treated with carbon monoxide (CO)-releasing molecule (CORM-2) or CO gas decreased the basal and VEGF-and interferon-γ (INF-γ) induced sFlt-1 release; CO inhibited VEGF-induced sFlt-1 by inhibiting VEGFR-2 phosphorylation. Ttreatment of villous explants or endothelial cells with the HO inhibitor, tin protoporphyrin-IX potentiated VEGF and INF-γ induced sFlt-1 expression, as did siRNA knockdown of HO-1. Consistent with these fi ndings, levels of sFlt-1 in plasma and tissue lysates of HO-1-defi cient mice were signifi cantly higher than wild-type mice. sEng release was greatly elevated in preeclamptic placental explants and administration of AdHO-1 signifi cantly decreased the basal, IFN-γ and TNF-α induced sEng from endothelial cells while siRNA to HO-1 increased basal sEng and potentiated cytokine-induced production. Interestingly, Vitamin C and E had no effect on sFlt-1 or sEng release or HO-1 protein expression consistent their lack of effi cacy in preeclampsia, whereas, statins inhibited sFlt-1 release from endothelial cells and explants and upregulated HO-1. Conclusion: This study conclusively establishes HO-1/CO pathway as a negative regulator of cytokine-induced sFlt-1 and sEng release. As elevated levels of sFlt-1 and sEng are associated with the clinical symptoms of preeclampsia, these fi ndings provide compelling evidence for a protective role of HO-1 in pregnancy and identify a novel target for the treatment of preeclampsia. Objective: Evaluate corn-based staple foods (tortillas and masa fl our) for fumonisin mycotoxin (FB) contamination. Background: Fusarium spps are fungi that infect corn plants and grain stocks worldwide. Fusarium spps produce mycotoxins (FB1, FB2, others), which interfere with mammalian folic acid receptor (FAr) activity. Consumption of fumonisin mycotoxin contaminated food is linked to increased risk of neural tube defects (NTDs). Fumonisin contamination may be a common but underappreciated cause of FA insuffi ciency and subsequent NTDs. Hispanic women may be at increased risk of folic acid dietary defi ciency because of FB consumption as well as having an increased frequency of the MTHFR 677T polymorphism, low folic acid food intake, and lack of multivitamin supplementation. Methods: We obtained 38 samples of corn-based tortillas and masa fl our in geographically and ethnically diverse grocery stores and restaurants in Los Angeles, San Diego, and Tijuana, Mexico. Retail sources were diverse and not limited to Hispanic neighborhoods. HPLC analysis for fumonisins and related substances was performed at the USDA Toxicology and Mycotoxin Research Unit in Athens, Georgia. Results: Testing demonstrated the presence of FB1, 2, 3 and the hydrolyzed form of FB1 in 38/38 samples. Average FB1 levels were 160 ng/g +/-204ng/g. Average total fumonisin levels were 414ng/g +/-524 ng/g. Levels of fumonisins differed by geographic site (highest in Hispanic neighborhoods and Tijuana, Mexico). Conclusion: Fumonisin mycotoxin contamination of corn-based staple foods available in diverse southern California neighborhoods is common. FB mycotoxins are linked to both outbreak and endemic occurrences of NTDs among Hispanic-Americans and other populations. With the levels of contamination found, a 60kg woman could exceed the WHO recommendations (for non-pregnant adults) by eating 2-4 tortillas daily. Fumonisin food contamination may constitute a preventable cause of NTDs in populations at risk. Calculations of the attributable fractions of NTDs caused by mycotoxin contamination, in conjunction with other factors, may be used to inform public and personal health strategies to reduce risks of NTDs and other sequelae of folic acid insuffi ciency. Huberdina PM Smedts, 1 Jeanne H de Vries, 2 Maryam Rakhshandehroo, 1 Mark F Wildhagen, 1 Anna C Verkleij-Hagoort, 1 Eric AP Steegers, *1 Regine PM Steegers-Theunissen. 1, 3, 4, 5 1 Obstetrics and Gynecology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 2 Human Nutrition and Epidemiology, Wageningen University, Wageningen, Netherlands; 3 Epidemiology and Biostatistics; 4 Pediatric Cardiology; 5 Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. BACKGROUND:Maternal hyperhomocysteinemia is a risk factor for a child with a congenital heart defect (CHD). This may indicate an increased intrauterine exposure to oxidative stress or reduced antioxidant defence or both during embryonic cardiac development. OBJECTIVE:To investigate associations between the maternal dietary intake of the antioxidants vitamin A and E, maternal hyperhomocysteinemia and CHD risk in the offspring. A case-control family study was conducted in 192 mothers of a child with CHD and in 216 mothers of a healthy child. Mothers fi lled out a general and food frequency questionnaire at 17 months post partum as a proxy of the periconceptional dietary intake. Pregnant or lactating mothers, or those who changed their diet compared to the periconceptional diet were excluded for analysis. Intakes are presented as geometric means (P5-P95). Logistic regression analyses were performed and odds ratios (OR) with 95% confi dence intervals (95% CI) were calculated. RESULTS:The dietary intake of vitamin A in case-and control mothers of 486 (169-1381) and 480 (192-1422) μg/day, respectively, were comparable and not associated with CHD risk. Control-mothers reported a lower dietary intake of vitamin E compared to case-mothers, 11.8 (7.3-19.1) and 12.5 (7.8-19.2) mg/day, respectively (p=0.02). The dietary intakes of vitamin A and E were not signifi cantly different within and between hyper-and normohomocysteinemic case-and control-mothers. A signifi cant trend was shown towards a risk reduction by lower intakes of vitamin E (p=0.02). Periconceptional folic acid or multivitamin supplemented mothers who had a low dietary intake of vitamin E (9.3-11.0 mg/day) demonstrated a nearly 60% reduced CHD risk, OR 0.41(0.18-0.93). CONCLUSIONS:For the fi rst time a teratogenic effect of a maternal dietary vitamin E intake in the upper level is suggested. Moreover, a low dietary vitamin E intake in addition to vitamin supplement use reduces CHD risk. Studies should be performed to investigate the benefi cial and teratogenic effects of natural and synthetic antioxidants on reproductive outcome. Objective: To investigate whether a short or long interpregnancy interval (IPI) is associated with major maternal morbidity in women who attempt vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC). Methods: We performed a multicenter record-based retrospective cohort study of pregnant women with at least one prior cesarean between 1996 and 2000. Trained research staff collected data on demographics, medical and obstetric history, prenatal and intrapartum course, delivery and maternal outcomes. This planned secondary analysis included all patients that attempted VBAC. We performed bivariate and multivariable logistic regression analyses to evaluate the association between long or short IPI and four primary maternal outcomes, including: (1) uterine rupture, (2) a composite major morbidity variable (including rupture, bladder or bowel injury, and uterine artery laceration), (3) blood transfusion and (4) postpartum fever. We evaluated short IPI with cutoffs at <6, <12 and <18 months between prior delivery and conception, and defi ned long IPI as >60 months. Results: Of 13331 VBAC attempts, 128 cases (0.9%) of uterine rupture occurred. There were 286 (2.2%), 1395 (10.5%), 3136 (23.5%) and 2631 (19.7%) women with an IPI <6, <12, <18 and >60 months, respectively. An IPI <6 months was associated with an increased risk for uterine rupture, major morbidity, and blood transfusion. Risks were also increased with an IPI<12 months, but odds ratios were smaller and statistically nonsignifi cant. Uterine rupture risk was highest in women with a short IPI and gestational diabetes (GDM), but there is low precision for this fi nding due to the small case number. A long IPI was associated with an increased risk of fever (odds ratio 1.2, 95%CI 1.1-1.4). Conclusions: Short IPI is a risk factor for uterine rupture and other major morbid events in VBAC candidates. The length of IPI should be considered when counseling women about the risks and benefi ts of VBAC. Avoiding a short IPI may reduce risk associated with VBAC. Simcox, 1 Phillip Bennett, *2 TG Teoh, 3 Andrew H Shennan. 1 1 Division of Reproduction and Development, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; 2 Parturition Research Group, IRDB, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom; 3 Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. Objective To determine the effects of cervical scanning and cervical stitches in preventing preterm birth (PTB) in women at high risk. Methods A randomised controlled trial recruited 250 women at high risk of PTB from 8 centres in the UK. Randomisation was stratifi ed for gestational age at previous PTB. 126 women were randomised to 'traditional' management whereby a cervical suture was offered based on a history of cervical insuffi ciency. 119 women were randomised to 'scanning' management with a suture inserted if the cervical length was ≤20mm measured by transvaginal ultrasound prior to 24 weeks. Primary outcome was spontaneous PTB<34 weeks. Data on 245 women available at submission is reported. Past obstetric history was comparable; with 85 v 80 previous PTB and 79 v 79 previous second trimester losses in the traditional management group v scanning group respectively. In the 119 women allocated to scanning, 39 (33%) with a cervix that shortened to ≤20mm received an ultrasound indicated suture. This compared with 25 of 126 (20%) women in the traditional arm, who received an elective suture based on history alone (RR 1.7 95% CI 1.1-2.6). There was no difference in the rate of delivery <34 weeks between the two groups (ultrasound group 15/119 v traditional group 16/126 (RR 1.0 95% CI 0.5-2.0). All interventions were numerically more likely in women scanned including hospital admissions, bed rest, steroid administration, and tocolysis, and signifi cantly so for progesterone (RR 1.6 CI 1.1-2.3). In women at high risk of PTB, offering ultrasound surveillance of cervical length and cerclage for those with a short cervix does not alter the risk of PTB prior to 34 weeks when compared with offering a suture electively based on a history suggestive of cervical insuffi ciency. Furthermore, those women who are offered ultrasound surveillance are almost twice as likely to be offered a suture. Other interventions may also be more likely to be offered to the group whom are scanned with no translation to an improvement in gestational age at delivery. These data do not suggest any benefi t in replacing ultrasound surveillance with historical indications for suture placement. This work was funded by Tommy's the baby charity. BACKGROUND: Leptin, a hormone produced by adipose tissue normally acts as a satiety signal in the hypothalamus. Leptin is also produced by the placenta and is thought to serve as a placental and fetal growth factor. Maternal food restriction (MFR) during pregnancy results in reduced maternal and newborn plasma leptin levels. To assess the etiology of reduced leptin, we sought to determine leptin expression in the adipose tissue and placenta of MFR dams. METHODS: Control dams (n=6) received ad libitum food whereas study dams were 50% food restricted (MFR, n=6) from pregnancy days 10 to 16. At E16, dams were sacrifi ced and maternal retroperitoneal adipose tissue and placentas were collected. Adipose tissue leptin protein expression was determined by Western Blot, and placental leptin mRNA expression was determined by realtime RT-PCR, normalized to β-actin. Plasma leptin levels were determined by radioimmunoassay. Results are reported as mean ± SE. RESULTS: At E16, MFR dams weighed signifi cantly less than Control dams (255±6 vs 289±8 g, p<0.01) and had signifi cantly decreased plasma leptin levels (0.71±0.13 vs 1.39± 018 ng/ml, p<0.05). Maternal adipose tissue leptin expression was signifi cantly reduced in MFR as compared to Control dams (577±100 vs 1208±119 AU, p<0.01). Conversely, placental leptin mRNA expression was signifi cantly elevated in MFR pregnancies (2.4±0.06 fold, p<0.01). CONCLUSION: MFR rat dams demonstrate decreased plasma leptin levels primarily due to decreased leptin production by adipose tissue. Paradoxically, placental leptin expression is increased in response to MFR, potentially serving as a compensatory mechanism to augment feto-placental growth during a period of severe nutrient stress. (weeks 20, 30, 36) and 4 mo postpartum. Results: Pregnancy raised hypoxic ventilatory sensitivity 3-fold, resting ventilation, and arterial O 2 saturation (S a O 2 ) in both groups. Ancestry, as identifi ed using 81 genetic markers, correlated with respiratory pattern such that greater Andean ancestry was associated with higher respiratory frequency and lower tidal volume. Pregnancy increased total and plasma volume ∼40% in both groups without changing red cell mass; hence, hemoglobin fell. The hemoglobin decline was compensated for by the rise in ventilation (V E ) and S a O 2 with the result that arterial O 2 content (C a O 2 ) was maintained at or near nonpregnant levels in both groups. Birth weights were similar for the babies born to the Andean and European women but after adjusting for variation in gestational age, maternal height and parity, Andeans weighed 209 gm more than Europeans. Babies with greater ponderal indices were born to Andean women with higher V E at pregnancy weeks 20, 30 and 36 (R 2 = 0.27, 0.30 and 0.25 respectively, all p<0.05). Week 20 V E also correlated with infant birth weight (R 2 = 0.15, p<0.05) in the Andean, but not the European women. Conclusions: We concluded that while maternal V E was important, some factor other than higher C a O 2 was responsible for protecting Andeans from altitude-associated reductions in fetal growth. Adrenomedullin (ADM) is reported to relax mesenteric artery and these responses are elevated with pregnancy. In this study, we assessed the effect of ADM on uterine artery (UA), its mechanisms and the infl uence of pregnancy and female sex steroids on the receptors and functional effects of ADM. OBJECTIVE: To determine: 1) whether ADM relaxes UA; 2) mechanisms of ADM-induced relaxation; 3) whether pregnancy or female sex steroids have any infl uence on receptors or relaxant effects of ADM. METHODS: Rats used were either non-pregnant (NP), pregnant (P) on day 18, overiectomized (Ovx), Ovx + implanted with estradiol-17b (E 2 -2 mg/kg, 21 day release) or progesterone (P 4 -20 mg/kg, 21-day release) or placebo pellets (Ovx). UA was used for isometric tension and mRNA analysis of ADM receptor components, receptor activity-modifying protein (RAMP) 2 or RAMP 3 . RESULTS: ADM relaxed UA from both NP and P rats with pD 2 value of 6.8 ± 0.1 and 6.9 ± 0.1, respectively. But, the E max of ADM was greater in P (70 ± 3%) compared to NP (52 ± 4%) groups. E 2 treatment to Ovx rats increased the sensitivity (pD 2-= 7.2 ± 0.3 vs 6.8 ± 0.3) while E max was not different (79 ± 8% vs 77 ± 14%) and P 4 reduced E max to 38 ± 9%. RAMP 3 but not RAMP 2 mRNA was increased in pregnancy. E 2 increased mRNA of both RAMP 2 and RAMP 3 while P 4 had no effect. Combined E 2 and P 4 increased mRNA of RAMP 3 , but not RAMP 2 . Mechanisms of ADM-induced relaxation were studied in UA in P rats. ADM 22-52 shifted the dose-response curve of ADM to the right and E max values were 7 ± 0.1, 60 ± 8% (control) and 6.4 ± 0.4, 42 ± 9%. CGRP 8-37 was more potent in inhibiting ADM-induced relaxation (E max : 57 ± 10% vs 13 ± 4%). Denudation of endothelium reduced E max of ADM from 59 ± 5% to 27 ± 6%. L-NAME, a nitric oxide (NO) synthase inhibitor or ODQ, a guanylate cyclase inhibitor, reduced the E max of ADM from 60 ± 8% to 30 ± 8% (L-NAME), 21 ± 5% (ODQ), respectively. Moreover, K + -channel blocker, TEA, inhibited ADM-induced relaxation (E max from 66 ± 8% to 17 ± 7%). CONCLUSION: 1) Pregnancy and E 2 increases ADM -induced relaxation of UA, 2) pregnancy increases mRNA of RAMP 3 while E 2 increases both RAMP 2 (AM 1 ) and RAMP 3 (AM 2 ); 3) Mechanism of ADM-induced relaxation of UA is endothelium-dependent, NO-cGMP pathway -mediated, through opening of K Ca -channels. Objective. Vascular remodeling during pregnancy involves profound structural and functional modifi cations to the uterine circulation. While the mechanisms responsible for these changes remain unknown, this remodeling facilitates the dramatic increase in uterine blood fl ow that is essential to normal pregnancy outcome. The objective of this study was to use a single gravid-horn model to differentiate between the local and systemic infl uences of placentation and fetal development on uterine vascular structural remodeling during pregnancy in the rat. Study design. Sprague-Dawley rats (N=34) underwent unilateral uterine horn ligation to create animals with single uterine horn pregnancies. Uteri were harvested on day 20 of gestation. The vascular morphology of the mesometrial area of the uterus (pregnant and non-pregnant horns) was evaluated, accompanied by specifi c measurements of the main uterine artery (e.g., length, diameter). In view of the known adaptive changes that occur in the smaller uterine resistance arteries during pregnancy, arcuate arteries were further evaluated by isolated-vessel distensibility studies using standard videomicroscopy techniques. Results. Signifi cant differences in structural remodeling were observed between the pregnant and non-pregnant uterine horns. The mesometrial arcade area was 7.8-times greater (1790 ± 290 vs 230 ± 73 mm 2 , p<0.001) in the pregnant horn, uterine artery length was 2.5-times greater (103 ± 9 vs 41 ± 7 mm, p<0.001), and its non-pressurized inner diameter was 43% larger (219 ± 44 vs 153 ± 34 um, p<0.001). In addition to increases in caliber, arcuate arteries in the pregnant horn also demonstrated a 3-to 4-fold increase in distensibility coeffi cients (p<0.001) and a 15% increase in overall distensibility (p<0.01). Values are mean ± SD. Conclusions. In summary, the single-horn pregnancy model is useful for differentiating local vs systemic infl uences on vascular remodeling in the pregnant uterus. Our data clearly demonstrate that local infl uences play the dominant role in expansive uterine vascular remodeling that is essential for normal outcome. These local infl uences affect both the cellular (mitotic) and the acellular (matrix) components of the remodeled vasculature. Why Do Vitamins C and E Not Prevent Pre-Eclampsia? Investigations into the Role of Oxidative Stress, Endothelial and Placental Dysfunction in the Disease. Lucy C Chappell, 1 Frank J Kelly, 2 Richard J Naftalin, 3 Beverley J Hunt, 4 Annette L Briley, 1 Paul T Seed, 1 Andrew H Shennan, 1 Lucilla Poston. *1 1 Maternal and Fetal Research Unit, King's College London School of Medicine, London, United Kingdom; 2 Pharmaceutical Science Research Division, KCL, London, United Kingdom; 3 Cardiovascular Division, KCL, London, United Kingdom; 4 Department of Haematology, Guy's King's and St Thomas' School of Medicine, London, United Kingdom. Objective: Recent trials (Poston et al 2006, Rumbold et al 2006) showing that vitamins C and E do not prevent pre-eclampsia may challenge a role for oxidative stress in this disorder. We have now investigated plasma indices of oxidative stress, endothelial and placental dysfunction from women who took part in the UK Vitamins in Pre-eclampsia Trial. Methods: Blood samples were taken in a subgroup of 192 women at randomisation and 20, 30 and 36 weeks' gestation, 41 of whom developed pre-eclampsia. Analytes were measured by standard laboratory techniques. Results: Despite higher plasma triglyceride levels in those with subsequent pre-eclampsia, there was no difference in malondialdehyde concentrations and oxidised LDL antibodies were decreased (p=0.042 vs. normal outcome). However, plasma ascorbate concentrations in women with subsequent preeclampsia were lower {p<0.05), whilst plasma uric acid concentrations were increased, as was agonist stimulated superoxide production from isolated neutrophils (both p<0.05) and glucose-dependent mercaptoethanol production (p<0·001), an indicator of glutathione turnover. Supplemented women demonstrated a signifi cant (p< 0.001) decrease in plasma γ-tocopherol ( Figure  1 ), a potent antioxidant with anti-infl ammatory properties. No difference was observed in plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI)-1/PAI-2 ratio, considered an indicator of endothelial and placental dysfunction. Conclusion: This study shows equivocal evidence for overt oxidative stress in the maternal circulation prior to clinical manifestations of the disease. The striking decrease in γ-tocopherol in supplemented women raises important questions about the antioxidant regime used, relevant to all trials using αtocopherol. The Infl ammatory Cytokines Induce Interleukin-11 Expression in Human Decidual Cells; Implications for Preeclampsia. Chih-Feng F Yen, 1,2,3 Murat Basar, 1 Lynn Buchwalder, 1 Hakan Cakmak, 1 Umit A Kayisli, 1 Aydin Arici, *1 Frederick Schatz, *1 Charles J Lockwood. * 1 1 Ob, Gyn & Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA; 2 Ob & Gyn, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taiwan, Taiwan; 3 Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, Chang Gung University, Taiwan, Taiwan. Objective: Preeclampsia (PE) is associated with an aberrant maternal immune response with restricted trophoblast invasion of fi rst trimester decidua that leads to impaired spiral artery remodeling. Interleukin-11 (IL-11) mediates decidualization, placentation and infl ammation. The pro-infl ammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and thrombin are involved in the pathogenesis of PE. We hypothesized that these cytokines may induce IL-11 expression in fi rst trimester decidual cells (FTDC). Methods: Immunohistochemistry and HSCORE were used to evaluateIL-11 levels in preeclamptic (n=4) versus normal decidua (n=4). Cultured FTDCs (n=8) were treated with estradiol (E2) or E2 + medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), to mimic the gestational hormonal milieu, +/-IL-1β, TNF-α, or thrombin. IL-11 levels in conditioned media were measured by ELISA. IL-11 mRNA levels were determined by quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR). Statistical signifi cance was examined using Student's t-test and ANOVA followed by post hoc test. Results: IL-11 was markedly higher in decidual cells of preeclamptic versus normal specimens (HSCORE: 152.5±11.6 and 78.3±19.2, respectively; P<0.05). In comparison to FTDC cultured with E2 as a baseline, IL-11 secretion was induced by IL-1β and thrombin (168.5 ± 57.4-and 21.9 ± 5.3-fold, respectively; P < 0.05), whereas the effect was blunted by MPA (68.7 ± 22.3-fold and 12.3 ± 2.8-fold, respectively; P < 0.05). MPA totally inhibited the TNF-α-induced IL-11 secretion (16-fold before adding MPA vs. 1-fold after, of baseline). Corresponding effects on IL-11 mRNA levels were demonstrated by qRT-PCR. Conclusions: IL-11 induced by pro-infl ammatory cytokines in FTDC may play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of PE. Since a progestin was shown to protect against preterm delivery in a clinical trial, inhibition of cytokine-enhanced IL-11 expression in FTDC by MPA may mimic such protective effects. Guller, *1 Yuehong Ma, 1 Stefano Di Santo, 2 Graciela Krikun, *1 Antoine Malek, 2 Henning Schneider. *2 1 OB/ GYN, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA; 2 OB/GYN, Inselspital, Berne, Switzerland. INTRODUCTION: Microparticles (MPs) shed from placenta to maternal blood are implicated in the pathophysiology of preeclampsia (PE). The protein composition of MPs remains largely unelucidated. Placental production of the anti-fi brinolytic factor plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), and the anti-angiogenic factor soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase (sFlt-1), are suggested to dysregulate hemostasis and angiogenesis in PE. The function of PAI-2, the "placental PAI", remains unelucidated. Our objective was to determine whether placental MPs released during dual (maternal and fetal) perfusion and by cultures of syncytiotrophoblasts (SCTs) contain PAIs and sFlt-1. Dual perfusion of human term placentas (n=5) was carried out for 7 h. Perfusate was recirculated on both maternal and fetal sides, the media was replaced at 1 and 3 h, and samples of maternal perfusate were taken at 1, 3 and 7 h. Conditioned media were obtained from SCTs cultured for 48 h (n=3). MPs were collected from maternal perfusate and conditioned media by centrifugation, and proteins were solubilized by treatment with Triton X-100 detergent. Levels of PAI-1, PAI-2, and sFlt-1 were evaluated by ELISA. RESULTS: Between 1 and 7h of perfusion the level of PAI-1 in MPs from maternal perfusate increased from 1.2±0.6 to10.2.±3.8 pg/g tissue/min (P<0.05). PAI-2 levels in MPs were 557±255 and 933±385 at 1 and 7h, respectively. PAI-1 and PAI-2 levels in the soluble fraction of maternal perfusate were equal, suggesting "preferential packaging" of PAI-2 in MPs. sFlt-1 levels in MPs were 2.4±0.8 and 1.3±.0.4 at 1 and 7h of perfusion. The level of PAI-1, PAI-2, and sFlt-1 in MPs from cultures of SCTs were 26.6.± 3.8, 27.8±1.7, and 2.0±0.1 pg/μg protein, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: 1) MPs in maternal perfusate contain PAI-1, PAI-2, and sFlt-1. 2) MP PAI-2 levels were 50-fold higher than PAI-1 and sFlt-1, indicating preferential sequestration. 3) PAI-1 MP levels increased during perfusion, refl ecting placental stress previously noted by our group. 4) The presence of these proteins in MPs from cultured SCTs indicates a syncytial origin during perfusion. This study suggests that MPs are a source of proteins that promote aberrant patterns of fi brinolysis and angiogenesis in PE. Supported in part by NIH Grant HD33909. Previous studies in neuronal cells have shown that CREB protein is a target for calcium /calmodulin (CaM) dependent protein kinase, leading to phosphorylation of CREB on its activator site serine 133 , a marker for CREBmediated transcription. We have also shown that hypoxia results in increased phosphorylation of CREB protein at Ser 133 in the cortical neuronal nuclei mediating gene expression including that of the pro-apoptotic bax. The present study tests the hypothesis that inhibition of NOS by N-nitro-Larginine methyl ester (L-NAME) will prevent the hypoxia-induced increased phosphorylation of CREB (p-CREB) protein in neuronal nuclei of the guinea pig fetus during gestation. 32 guinea pig fetuses at 35 and 60 days gestation were assigned to normoxic (Nx, n=6), hypoxic (Hx, n=6) and hypoxic pretreated with nitric oxide synthase inhibitor (Hx+L-NAME, 30mg/kg i.p., n=4) groups. Hypoxia in the fetuses was induced by exposing the pregnant guinea pigs to a FiO 2 of 0.07 for 60 min. Fetal cortical nuclei were isolated. Hypoxia was documented by levels of ATP and Phosphocreatine. Nuclear proteins were immunoblotted with antip-CREB antibody. Density (ODxmm 2 ) of Ser 133 p-CREB protein in 35d was 61.6±2.2 in the Nx compared to 98.8±3.7 in Hx (p<0.05) and 75.7±2.7 in the Hx-L-NAME group. Density of Ser 133 p-CREB protein in 60d was 107.7±9.2 in the Nx compared to 273.3±9.4 in the Hx (p<0.05) and 171.2±11.9 in the Hx-L-NAME group. The data show that NOS inhibition attenuates the hypoxia-induced increase in CREB protein phosphorylation in cortical nuclei of preterm and term fetuses. CREB phosphorylation was higher in term gestation compared to preterm. We conclude that the hypoxia-induced increase in CREB phosphorylation is NO-mediated. Increased phosphorylation of CREB protein at term indicates a high rate of ongoing programmed cell death in the fetal brain due to synaptic innervation and pruning at term as compared to preterm. We propose that NO-mediated increase in intranuclear Ca 2+ during hypoxia leads to increased activation of CaM kinase IV resulting in increased phosphorylation of CREB that triggers transcription of the apoptotic gene Bax. (NIH-HD 20337, NIH-HD 38079 and St. Christopher's Foundation for Children). Altered Expression of Regulators of Caspase Activity within Trophoblast of Normal and Pre-Eclamptic Pregnancies. Alexander E Heazell, Hilary R Buttle, Ian P Crocker, Philip N Baker. * Divison of Human Development, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. Background: Apoptosis within the villous trophoblast is increased within pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia (PE), this is associated with an increase in the expression and activity of caspases 3 and 8. Caspase activity is negatively regulated by inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (IAPs). The intrinsic apoptotic pathway is activated following cell damage, resulting in increased mitochondrial permeability, releasing factors into the cytosol. Two of these, smac and omi, inhibit the action of IAPs, increasing caspase activity. We hypothesized that the increased apoptosis and caspase activity in PE would be associated with an imbalance between smac / omi and IAPs. Objectives: This study was designed to assess the expression and localisation of smac, omi and IAPs (XIAP and survivin) in placentae of normal pregnancy and PE. Methods: 5 random placental biopsies were taken immediately after delivery of 8 normal pregnancies and 8 with PE. The tissue was homogenised, and Western Blotting performed on the lysate. The presence of smac, omi, XIAP or survivin was assessed using densitometry compared to myosin light chain and β-actin. Immunohistochemistry was undertaken on fi xed samples. Results: In normal pregnancies, smac immunostaining was evident in syncytiotrophoblast (ST), cytotrophoblast (CT) and endothelial cell cytoplasm. Smac was signifi cantly elevated in PE compared to normal pregnancies ( Ratio median 0.72, Interquartile Range (IQR) 0.52-0.83 vs 0.48, 0.29-0.66 p<0.05) this was associated with increased staining in ST cytoplasm. We could not detect omi using western blotting, although weak immunostaining was present in ST cytoplasm. There was no alteration in XIAP expression (Median 0.20, p>0.05) . XIAP localized to ST cytoplasm, with weak immunostaining in CT cytoplasm. The expression of survivin was not altered in PE. Unlike XIAP, survivin not only localized to ST and CT cytoplasm, but also nuclei of mitotic CT. Conclusions: There is an alteration in the balance of smac and IAPs in the the ST of pregnancies complicated by PE. Increased expression of smac in the presence of normal levels of XIAP and survivin can induce apoptosis and increase caspase activity. Therefore, the observed imbalance may be important in the increased placental caspase activity and apoptosis observed in PE. Supported by an SGI Studentship and Tommy's -the baby charity. Bum-Yong Kang, Shan Zhu, Shenghui Su, Helen H Kay, * Stephen CM Tsoi. * Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA. Objective: HELLP syndrome is a unique variant of severe preeclampsia characterized by hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet count. Identifi cation of differential gene expression profi ling in HELLP placentas may be a critical step leading to the elucidation of molecular mechanisms and biomarkers development of HELLP syndrome. Transcriptome analysis of HELLP placentas still remains uninvestigated. This study aimed to identify differentially expressed genes in HELLP placentas. Methods: Total RNA was extracted from HELLP (n=2) and non-preeclampsia placentas (n=2). cDNAs were synthesized from pooled mRNAs (1.0 μg from each sample) using suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH). 288 positive clones from each subtracted cDNA library were selected for single pass sequencing. The differential expression of selected genes was further validated by either semi quantitative RT PCR or real-time quantitative PCR. Results: Forty-three were unique clones. Among them, nine HELLP syndrome induced genes were pregnancy specifi c beta-1-glycoprotein 4, PSG4; heat shock protein 90kDa beta, HSP90B1; zinc fi nger protein 326, ZNF326; tissue factor pathway inhibitor 2, TFPI2; glycoprotein hormones alpha polypeptide, CGA; eukaryotic translation elongation factor 1 alpha 1, EEF1A1; PHD fi nger protein 17,PHF17; annexin A1, ANXA1; and SAM and SH3 domain containing 1, SASH1; and eight HELLP syndrome suppressed genes were serpin peptidase inhibitor, SERPINE2; single-stranded DNA binding protein 1, SSBP1; keratin 8, KRT8; keratin 6A, KRT6A; adipose differentiation-related protein, ADFP; adiponectin receptor 1, ADIPOR1; Kruppel-like factor 4, KLF4; and DEAD (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp) box polypeptide 3, X-linked, DDX3X. Conclusions: This study represents the fi rst systematic molecular profi ling of HELLP syndrome placentas. ANXA1, HSP90B1and PHF17 have been related to apoptosis in cancer. These can be candidate genes for further understanding the apoptotic pathway related to HELLP syndrome. The soluble protein products related to PSG4, TFPI2, SERPINE2, EGFL6 can develop into blood biomarkers to detect the onset of HELLP syndrome. Therefore, further investigation of these differentially regulated genes from HELLP placentas could shed light on the etiology and pathogenesis of HELLP syndrome and help develop genetic markers for early diagnosis and possibly therapeutic targets. Marilyn J Cipolla, * Lisa Vitullo, Anna G Euser. Neurology, Ob/Gyn and Pharmacology, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA. Objective: Eclampsia is thought to be similar to hypertensive encephalopathy in which an acute elevation in blood pressure causes autoregulatory breakthrough, hyperperfusion and brain edema. We previously reported that while the pressure of breakthrough was similar between nonpregnant and late-pregnant (LP) rats, only LP animals developed edema. In the present study, we investigated how acute hypertension affects blood-brain barrier (BBB) permeability and cerebral blood fl ow (CBF) in LP rats, primary mechanisms by which brain edema forms. Methods: In vivo models of BBB permeability and CBF were used in LP (d19-20) rats that were either normotensive (111±1 mmHg; n=8) or hypertensive by infusion of phenylephrine to raise mean arterial pressure (163±2 mmHg; n=8). Permeability was determined by clearance of Evan's blue dye (2%) into the brain tissue, measured by a fl uorescent spectrophotometer after fl ushing the vasculature with saline and homogenization of the brain tissue. CBF was similarly measured by infusion of 15μm fl uorescent microspheres and calculated based on the fl ow rate and fl uorescence intensity of a reference sample for each animal. BBB permeability and CBF were determined in the anterior and posterior regions of the brain. Animals were ventilated to control blood gases within normal (PO 2 >100mmHg, PCO 2 =35-45mmHg). Results: Acute hypertension increased CBF in both the anterior and posterior regions of the brain from 63±6 to 292±39 mL/min/100g tissue (p<0.01) and 65±6 to 277±35 mL/min/100g tissue (p<0.01), respectively. While hypertension increased BBB permeability in both regions, the increase in permeability was considerably greater in the posterior region. Permeability increased 308% in the anterior region from 341±221 to 1390±323 counts/g tissue (p<0.05) and 590% in the posterior region from 390±133 to 2687±453 counts/g tissue (p<0.05). Conclusions: These data demonstrate that acute hypertension causes signifi cant hyperperfusion of the brain during pregnancy that is similar between the anterior and posterior regions. However, permeability was signifi cantly greater in the posterior region, suggesting that changes in permeability are not related to changes in CBF. The increased permeability in the posterior region also suggests differential tight junction expression in the BBB that may relate to the propensity for edema to form in that area during eclampsia. IL8 Promotes Trophoblast Cell Invasion In Vitro. Leandro G Oliveira, 1 Gendie E Lash, 1 Harry A Otun, 1 Barbara A Innes, 1 Katsuhiko Naruse, 1 Roger F Searle, 2 Stephen C Robson, *1 Judith N Bulmer. 3 1 SARS, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom; 2 MED, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom; 3 CALS, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom. Background: During early pregnancy extravillous trophoblast cells (EVT) invade decidua as far as the inner third of myometrium. This is a tightly regulated process involving decidua derived cytokines and chemokines. Recent studies have suggested a role for IL8 in this process; the source within decidua and mechanisms of action are largely unknown. Hypotheses: 1) IL8 is secreted by decidual cells in early human pregnancy. 2) IL8 stimulates EVT invasion in vitro via a mechanism dependent on increased protease activity. Methods: CD8+ T lymphocytes, total decidual and uterine natural killer (uNK) cells prepared by enzymatic disaggregation were positively selected using an immunomagnetic technique (8-10 and 12-14 weeks gestation; n=5 both groups). CD8+ cells were incubated with phytohaemagglutinin (PHA-P; 10mg/ml) for 24h. Total decidual and uNK cells were cultured for 24h in the absence of PHA-P. Supernatants were harvested and IL8 protein levels determined by ELISA. Immunohistochemistry for IL8 receptors (CXCR1 and CXCR2) was performed on fi rst trimester placental bed biopsies. Matrigel invasion assays were performed with placental explants (8-10 weeks) for 6 days under the following conditions: medium alone, IL8 (0.1, 1 and 10 mg/ml), IL8 neutralizing antibody (nAB) and IL8 10 mg/ml + IL8 nAB. Each experiment was performed in triplicate (n=7). At the end of the invasion assay the medium was harvested and levels of secreted MMP-2 and MMP9 determined by gelatin zymography. Results: High levels of IL8 protein were detected in total decidual cell (8-10w 117.7 ± 66.2 μg/ml; 12-14w 219.6 ± 120.6 μg/ml), uNK (8-10w 11.7 ± 3.3 μg/ml; 12-14w 40.6 ± 25.9 μg/ml) and decidual CD8+ T lymphocytes (8-10w 160.2 ± 72.1 μg/ml; 12-14w 195.3 ± 130.3 μg/ml) supernatants. CXCR1 and CXCR 2 were expressed by interstitial, endovascular and intramural EVT. IL8 increased EVT invasion (0.1 ng/mL (P<0.02) and 10 ng/mL (P<0.03)) compared to controls. No difference in levels of secreted MMP-2 and MMP-9 was observed under any of the experimental conditions. Conclusion: CD8+ T Lymphocytes and uNK cells are both sources of IL-8 in early human pregnancy decidua and receptors for this chemokine are present on EVT cells. IL8 increases EVT invasion in vitro through mechanisms that do not involve altered MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity. Trophoblast Stem Cells Induce IFN Production by LAK Cells in Part by NKG2D. Joan K Riley, 1 Leon N Carayannopoulos, 2 Jennifer L Barks, 2 Wayne M Yokoyama, 2 Kelle H Moley. *1 1 Obstetrics and Gynecology; 2 Internal Medicine, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA. Uterine natural killer (uNK) cells are the predominant lymphocyte found in the gravid uteri. Studies conducted in mice have demonstrated that interferon gamma (IFNγ) is the critical molecule derived from uNK cells that is required for the remodeling of uterine spiral arteries by trophoblast cells and for optimal decidualization. Objective: Investigate the mechanism(s) underlying uNK cell activation leading to the production of trophic factors required for successful implantation. Methods/Results: We established an in vitro system to model trophoblast-NK cell interactions. Trophoblast stem (TS) cells were derived from murine C57BL/6 blastocysts. We found by fl ow cytometry or confocal microscopy that both TS cells and blastocysts express RAE-1. RAE-1 is a ligand for NKG2D, an activating receptor expressed on NK cells. In mice there are three NKG2D ligands RAE-1, MULT1 and H60 of these only RAE-1 is expressed on the blastocysts and TS cells. NKG2D activation by its ligands is known to lead to IFNγ production. We cocultured splenic NK cells that were propagated in IL-2 (LAK cells) with TS cells and found that the TS cells induced IFNγ production (maximal response=350 pg/ml) by LAK cells as determined by ELISA. All experiments described herein were performed three times. We also differentiated TS cells into trophoblast giant cells and found they also induced IFNγ production by LAK cells. DAP10 and DAP12 are adapter molecules that transduce signals via NKG2D and other NK cell activating receptors. IFNγ production by LAK cells derived from DAP10xDAP12 double knockout mice was reduced by approximately 50% (150 pg/ml) when cultured with TS cells as compared to controls. Thus IFNγ produced in this system occurs by DAP10/DAP12 dependent and independent mechanisms. To determine whether the DAP10/DAP12 dependent pathway of IFNγ production was due to the interaction of NKG2D with RAE-1 we performed a ligand blocking experiment. LAK cells were preincubated with soluble MULT1 and then cocultured with TS cells. Preincubation of the LAK cells with MULT1 lead to a complete block in the DAP10/12 dependent mode of IFNγ production. Conclusion: Activation of NKG2D by RAE-1 is responsible for the DAP10/DAP12 dependent mechanism of IFNγ production in this TS-NK cell coculture system. Studies to determine the in vivo relevance of these fi ndings with respect to IFNγ production by uNK cells are ongoing. Effects of Low Molecular Weight Heparin on Trophoblast Invasiveness. Nicoletta Di Simone, Maria Clara D' Alessio, Fiorella Di Nicuolo, Roberta Castellani, Silvia D'Ippolito, Alessandro Caruso. (SPON: Irene Cetin) . Obstetrics and Gynecology, Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy. Objective: The purpose of this study was to investigate the in vitro ability of low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) to affect trophoblast invasiveness. Although the mechanisms of placental invasion are not elucidated, it is reported that matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and the tissues inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are related to this invasion. Moreover, heparinbinding-EGF (HB-EGF) has been found to be important in early implantation and defi cient HB-EGF signalling during placental development could impair trophoblast functions. Therefore, we investigated if LMWH might regulate trophoblast invasiveness, placental production of MMPs, TIMPs, and HB-EGF expression. Since there is evidence that antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) may directly inhibit the trophoblast invasion, we investigated if IgG aPL might affect placental expression of HB-EGF, and then if LMWH might be able to restore HB-EGF expression. Methods: We used trophoblast cells obtained from spontaneous abortions and choriocarcinoma cells. Cell cultures were performed for 24 hrs in medium containing LMWH (0.1-10 IU/ml) and/or IgG anti-b2-glycoprotein I (25-100 μg/ml). The invasive potential of trophoblast cells was examined using a membrane invasion culture system. The determination of MMP-2 and TIMP-1 and -2 in cell culture supernatants after treatment with LMWH was performed by ELISA. Expression of TIMPs, MMP-2, and HB-EGF was studied by Western blot analysis and by Real-Time PCR. Results: LMWH signifi cantly increased trophoblast cells invasiveness and enhanced both pro-MMP-2 and its active form. LMWH effects were also indirect, inducing a signifi cant decrease in TIMPs protein expressions. Treatment of trophoblast cells with LMWH, resulted in stimulation of HB-EGF as protein and mRNA levels. Finally we found that anti-b2-glycoprotein I reduced the placental expression of HB-EGF, and heparin restored the protein expression. Conclusions: Our results indicate that heparin is able to regulate several proteins involved in trophoblast invasiveness. The increase in HB-EGF might be able to induce the stimulation of MMPs, which promote trophoblast invasiveness. We would like to suggest that the decline in TIMPs expression, induced by LMWH, could remove the inhibitory infl uence on MMPs activity. These data suggest a role for LMWH on trophoblast proteins playing a central role in placental invasion. Objectives: Despite its widespread expression, the precise biological role of the bifunctional cross-linking enzyme tissue transglutaminase (tTG) is unclear. We have previously demonstrated strong reactivity at the syncytial microvillous membrane (MVM). Using a proteomic approach, here we demonstrate a role for tTG in trophoblast in the processing of membrane and cytoskeletal material destined to be shed from the placenta prior to clearance by the maternal immune system. Methods: In order to identify tTG substrates in the MVM, membrane vesicles were prepared and labelled with biotinylated acyl donor or acceptor probes. Biotinylated species were selected on an avidin affi nity matrix and identifi ed by LC-MSMS of tryptic peptides. To test the hypothesis that material shed from terminally differentiated syncytiotrophoblast may be cross-linked by tTG, primary cytotrophoblasts were cultured, and the material shed from the monolayer cultures between 18-66h was isolated by differential centrifugation. The competitive substrate inhibitor monodansylcadaverine or cystamine, an active site inhibitor of tTG were added to the cultures to examine the role of tTG in shedding. The most abundant tTG substrates identifi ed in the MVM were cytoskeletal (actin, tubulin, cytokeratin) and membrane-associated (annexins, integrins, placental alkaline phosphatase, transferrin receptor) proteins. Syncytial microparticles shed from the trophoblast cultures were found to contain abundant tTG protein and cross-linking activity. A substantial fraction of actin in the shed particles was in the form of covalent polymeric aggregates, in contrast to cellular actin, which dissociated completely into monomer in SDS-PAGE. When cells were cultured in the presence of transglutaminase inhibitors, actin in particulate material shed into the culture medium remained exclusively in monomeric form. Conclusions: These results suggest that transglutaminase-mediated crosslinking may stabilize the particulate material shed from the placenta, a process that likely contributes to the low maternal immune reaction to high quantities of fetal antigen. Objective: The extent to which conceptus immune rejection in pregnancy is avoided by failure to activate immune recognition, as opposed to protection by active immune tolerance, is not clear. This study utilized T-cell transgenic mouse models with ovalbumin (OVA) as a model paternal antigen to investigate the occurrence, kinetics and location of paternal antigen priming in pregnancy, and to evaluate whether presence of paternal antigen-reactive cytotoxic T-cells is consistent with viable pregnancy. Methods: Act-mOVA male mice constitutively expressing OVA were mated to B6 females, to generate OVA+ conceptuses in OVA-defi cient mothers. Pregnant mice received CFSE-labelled OVA-reactive OT-1 T cells on gestation day (gd) 1, 4, 7, 11 or 15 . OT-1 cell proliferation and CD69 expression were quantifi ed to gauge OVA antigen processing and presentation at 3 days after transfer. Additional B6 females mated with Act-mOVA males were given CD8+ OT-1 cells on gd 1 and pregnancy outcome was assessed at gd 18. Results: OT-1 cells given on gd 1 showed marked activation and proliferation in the para-aortic lymph nodes draining the uterus. OT-1 cells given on gd 4 displayed very little activation or proliferation in any lymphoid tissues. From gd 7, OT-1 cell activation and proliferation increased in the para-aortic nodes, and over the course of pregnancy from gd 11 onwards, progressively spread to peripheral sites including the mesenteric and cervical nodes and the spleen. Administration of OT-1 cells on gd 1 did not adversely affect litter size, resorption rates or fetal and placental weights on gd 18. Conclusion: Paternal antigens associated with both semen and the conceptus actively prime the maternal immune system, with the response becoming strong and systemic by mid-late gestation. This provides a mechanism whereby semen provides the initial priming event for paternal antigen recognition, and the placenta sustains this response after implantation, potentially maximising systemic antigen deposition by shedding trophoblast microparticles. Failure of paternal antigen-reactive cytotoxic T-cells to adversely affect pregnancy is consistent with a role for active maternal tolerance in preventing fetal rejection. Exploiting this model will allow investigation of the events underpinning establishment and maintenance of the maternal immune tolerance facilitating pregnancy success. Michelle Norton, Manjula Santhanakrishnan, Peyman Bizargity, Elizabeth A Bonney. * OB/GYN, University of Vermont College of Medicine, Burington, VT, USA. Background: Our understanding of pregnancy's infl uence on maternal cellmediated immunity is incomplete. While pregnant, mice can reject male skin grafts, yet do not abort their male pups. To determine underlying mechanisms, we have begun to study transgenic mice whose CD8 T cells are exclusively specifi c for the male antigen H-Y. Objective: To observe the level of CD8 T cells in the spleen of pregnant H-Y specifi c T cell receptor (TCR) transgenic mice. Methods: Female C57BL/6, rag-1 -/-, CD8+ Vβ8.3+ anti-H-Y TCR transgenic mice (Matahari) were used unmated (UM) or underwent mating with samestrain males and euthanized 8-18 days post coitus. Harvested spleen was used to prepare single cell suspensions that were enumerated, incubated with antibodies to CD8, Vβ8.3 TCR, and CD44 and analyzed by fl ow cytometry to determine the percentage and number of CD8+ Vβ8.3+ cells and their expression of CD44. The averages obtained for groups of mice from each gestational day were compared to that in UM mice by ANOVA, with signifi cance set at p<0.05. Results: Matahari mice, as compared to non-transgenic mice (NT), have similar litter sizes (Matahari, 5.8±1.6 pups, n=14 vs. NT, 5.3±2.7, n=27 p=0.47) , and deliver similar proportions of male pups (Matahari, 0.49±0.22 vs. NT, 0.47±0.28, p=0.78) . When we assessed the numbers of CD8+ Vβ8.3+ cells in Matahari spleen during pregnancy, we found that on Day 8 there was a signifi cant increase compared to UM females (6.98±2.92x10 5 n=3 vs. 3.59±1.58x10 5 n=9 p= 0.024). This was followed by a signifi cant decrease in these cells on Day 10 (0.77±0.79 x10 5 n=4 p= 0.0067). By day 14 the numbers had increased to UM levels (4.34±0.56x10 5 n=6 p=0.29). On day 18 the numbers again greatly increased (10.34±3.51x10 5 n=4 p=0.0004). Multiparous mice also had more CD8+ Vβ8.3+ cells than UM females (9.74±5.48x10 5 cells n=3 p=0.0037). The proportion of CD8+ Vβ8.3+ cells that were positive for the activation and memory marker CD44 did not decrease in pregnancy. However, in multiparous mice the percentage of CD8+ Vβ8.3+ cells that were also CD44+ was signifi cantly higher than in UM mice, (84.5±15.1 vs. 61± 9.9 p=0.01). Background: Coagulation factors like thrombin, are important regulators of infl ammation, aberrant vascular development, and angiogenesis in various systems including the female reproductive system. However, the molecular mechanisms by which these factors exert multiple pathologic effects remain unclear. The endothelial layer represents a physical barrier that controls coagulation and allows selective passage of soluble molecules and circulating cells across the vessel wall into the tissue. These functions are infl uenced by the surrounding environment. The current study utilized microchip gene arrays coupled to a network analysis program to discern the interaction between molecules upregulated by thrombin in human endometrial endothelial cells. The results were confi rmed by quantitative RT-PCR as well as by ELISAs for several endpoints. Methods: Cultured human endometrial endothelial cells were treated +/-2.5 U thrombin and analyzed by Affymatrix microchip arrays, quantitative RT-PCR and ELISAs. Interrelated network analysis was carried out with the Ingenuity Pathways Analysis Program (Redwood City, CA) Results: Thrombin exposure of endometrial endothelial cells resulted in a 357 fold induction of E-selectin a 70 fold induction of VCAM 1, a 35 fold induction of CSF2, and a 19 fold induction of ICAM 1. In addition, thrombin upregulated the expression of CCL20 (MIP3a) by a 2 log-fold. Following computerized network merging, it was observed that the activation of these proteins interconnected pathways involving cell-cell interaction and infl ammation and control by ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation. It is interesting therefore that ubiquitin D was also upregulated by 186 fold after thrombin exposure. All endpoints showed similar upregulation by quantitative RT-PCR or by protein analysis. Conclusion: We posit that pathologic levels of thrombin activate endometrial endothelial cells resulting in infl ammatory disease for both the pregnant and non pregnant endometrium. This occurs by the upregulation of E-selectin, VCAM, ICAM, CSF2, CCL20 and ubiquitin D. Computerized analysis of our data demonstrates a link of infl ammatory and apoptotic signaling pathways that include blood leukocyte recruitment, adhesion, rolling, binding, migration, infi ltration, extravasation, chemotaxis and protein degradation. endometrium from women treated with asoprisnil displayed features of both progesterone antagonism and agonist effects. IHC analyses demonstrated an up-regulation of ERα and PR expression in epithelial and stromal compartments in the functional and basal layers. There were no safety concerns identifi ed. Summary: Asoprisnil administration resulted in a rapid reduction of menstrual blood loss over a short period of treatment in women with treatment resistant HMB without organic cause. Mechanisms of treatment effect remain to be determined. and Pre-Eclampsia. Ivan A Penna, Frederick Schatz, * Charles Lockwood, * Hugh S Taylor. * Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. OBJECTIVE: CAPN5 is member of the calpain-like cystein proteases that have been implicated in differentiation and apoptosis. We conducted a microarray screen that identifi ed CAPN5 as target of HOXA10 transcriptional control in endometrium. Here we demonstrate regulated CAPN5 expression in endometrium, 3rd trimester decidua and demonstrate aberrant regulation in endometriosis and decidua of women with pre-eclampsia METHODS: Ten endometrial biopsies were obtained from fertile controls. Histologically confi rmed biopsies of endometriosis were obtained from 10 women at laparoscopy. Five 3rd trimester decidual samples from controls, and fi ve 3rd trimester decidual samples from women with pre-eclampsia. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used to identify CAPN5 protein expression. H-SCORES were determined by 2 evaluators blinded to the study groups. The human endometrial stromal cell line, HESC,and the epithelial cell line, Ishikawa were transfected in quadruplicate with either pcDNA/HOXA10, HOXA10 siRNA or respective controls. RNA was isolated and qRT-PCR was performed. Statistical analysis was performed using Mann-Whitney test for H-SCORE and ANOVA with Bonferroni pos-test for qRT-PCR. RESULTS: CAPN5 was expressed in endometrial stromal and glandular cells throughout the menstrual cycle. CAPN5 expression was decreased in endometriotic stromal and glandular cells to 50% of that seen in control endometrium (p<0.05).CAPN 5 was also expressed in decidua obtained from pre-eclamptics at higher levels than controls (p<0.05). The regulatory relationship between HOXA10 and CAPN5 was established by transient transfection analysis. CAPN5 gene expression increased 11-fold (p<0.05) after pcDNA/HOXA10 transfection of HESC, and decreased 23-fold (p<0.05) after HOXA10 siRNA treatment. CONCLUSION: CAPN5 is expressed in normal endometrium, upregulated in decidua of women with pre-eclampsia and decreased in endometriosis. CAPN5 expression is regulated by HOXA10. CAPN5 is a regulatory molecule potentially involved in the pathogenesis of endometriosis and pre-eclampsia. Decreased CAPN5 in endometriosis may lead to reduced apoptosis and contribute to the increased proliferative potential of this disease; similarly increased CAILPAIN5 in pre-eclampsia, leading to increased apoptosis, may contribute to pathogenesis of this disease. (Supported by NIH36887) Aromatase expression is enhanced in eutopical endometrium and endometriotic lesions of women with endometriosis. Induction of aromatase may be mediated by increased cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2). Recently, we demonstrated that progesterone receptor isoforms PR-A and PR-B serve an anti-infl ammatory role by antagonizing NF-κB activation and COX-2 expression. We also found that PR-C isoform, which antagonizes PR-B function, is upregulated by infl ammatory mediators. While estrogen receptor α (ERα) has been suggested to mediate progression of endometriosis, a potential anti-infl ammatory role of ERβ has been suggested. We, postulate that PR-C and ERβ may play opposing roles in the pathogenesis. Here, we examined the tissue-and stage-specifi c expression levels of ERβ relative to ERα and PR-C relative to total PR in association with aromatase and COX-2 expression in endometriosis. Biopsies of eutopical endometrium (EE), endometriosis implants (EI), visually normal peritoneum and endometrioma cyst capsules (EC) were obtained from endometriosis patients (n=13). Endometrial and peritoneal biopsies were obtained from control women undergoing tubal sterilization (n=8). Using quantitative (q)RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry, we observed that aromatase expression in EE was increased as compared to control tissues. Aromatase expression in EI was markedly increased as compared to EE. Red implants revealed the highest aromatase expression. Importantly, expression levels of COX-2 mirrored aromatase in all tissues examined. ERβ expression in EI was higher than EE and control endometrium, while the highest levels of ERβ mRNA were detected in EC. ERβ was expressed in both stromal and epithelial components of the implants. Although expression of the three PR isoforms was detected in all tissues, the levels of PR-C relative to total PR mRNA were increased in EI and EC as compared to EE and control endometrium.We suggest that PR-C and ERβ may be upregulated by the infl ammatory response associated with endometriosis. While increased PR-C may enhance the pathogenesis of this disease, upregulation of ERβ may play an anti-infl ammatory and opposing role in its progression. Supported by NIH 5-R01-DK31206. Background: A phenotype of progesterone resistance in endometriosis is suggested by the unresponsiveness of many women to progestin-based treatment of pain associated with this disorder. An endometrium that is inhospitable to implantation in women with endometriosis may be consequent to an abnormal response to progesterone during the critical window of implantation. Methods: Endometrial biopsies were obtained from 21 subjects with laparoscopically staged and histologically confi rmed moderate-severe stage endometriosis and from 21 subjects without endometriosis. Each endometrial sample was histologically dated as proliferative, early secretory (ESE) or mid secretory (MSE), processed to biotinylated cRNA and hybridized to a GeneChip Array (HG U133 Plus 2.0, Affymetrix). Data were analyzed by bioinformatics approaches and validated using semi-quantitative real time PCR. Results: Principal component analysis revealed molecular dysregulation of the proliferative-to-secretory transition in the endometrium of women with endometriosis. The ESE showed striking enrichment in DNA synthesis and cell cycle related genes. Coherent dysregulation of multiple genes involved in the cell cycle pathway in ESE of women with endometriosis suggested an altered response to progesterone (P)-mediated attenuation of proliferation during this phase. Differentially expressed genes possibly involved in the inadequate response to P-mediated endometrial transition include the transcription factor FOXO1A, the anti-apoptotic genes BCL2 and survivin, and members of the EGFR pathway (MIG6, TOB1, ERBB2). Expression profi ling of genes known to be P-mediated in secretory phase endometrium confi rmed the observation of P-resistance in endometriosis, with 34 genes showing signifi cant dysregulation in the ESE. During the window of implantation, 15 progesterone-mediated genes, including MUC1, osteopontin and IGFBP1, were dysregulated in the MSE of women with endometriosis. Conclusions: Collectively, these results provide compelling molecular evidence for progesterone resistance of the eutopic endometrium in women with endometriosis. Objective: ERbeta is expressed at strikingly higher levels in endometriosis compared with eutopic endometrium. Thus, we investigated the role of methylation of the ERbeta gene promoter in differential expression of ERbeta in stromal cells of endometriosis vs. eutopic endometrium. Methods: We used primary stromal cells in culture from ovarian endometrioma walls (n=8) and eutopic endometrium from disease-free women (n=8) to conduct methylation and gene expression studies. Transcript levels were determined by real-time PCR. DNA was demethylated using treatment with the methyltransferase inhibitor 5-Aza-CdR. Methylation status of the ERbeta gene was assessed by bisulfi te modifi cation followed by sequencing. Results: ERalpha mRNA were somewhat lower(approximately 3-fold, P<0.001) in endometriotic stromal cells as compared to endometrial stromal cells, whereas ERbeta mRNA was strikingly higher(approximately 36fold, P<0.001) in endometriotic stromal cells, but lower or nearly absent in endometrial stromal cells. PR-B and total PR mRNA levels in endometriotic stromal cells were also signifi cantly lower than in endometrial stromal cells ( P<0.001). Because the extent of differential expression was the highest for ERbeta, we pursued to determine its regulation via promoter methylation. We identifi ed an approximately 500-bp classical CpG island (-170/+330) within the promoter regulatory region of the ERbeta gene. There was a statistically signifi cant (t-test, P<0.01) difference in the methylation status within this CpG island. This region was heavily methylated in untreated endometrial stromal cells that express lower level of ERbeta and largely unmethylated in endometriotic stromal cells that express higher level of ERbeta mRNA. Treatment with the methyltransferase inhibitor 5-Aza-CdR increased ERbeta mRNA levels signifi cantly in both endometrial stromal cells and endometriotic stromal cells (t-test, P<0.05). Conclusions: This is the fi rst demonstration of a methylation-dependent mechanism responsible for upregulation of ERbeta expression in endometriosis. Taken together, methylation status of a critical CpG island at the promoter of the ERbeta gene may be the primary regulator of ERbeta expression in endometriotic stromal cells vs. its downregulation or nearly absence in eutopic endometrial stromal cells. Support: Grant support was provided by the NIH grant R01-HD38691. Mice and during Normal Pregnancy, Parturition, and the Puerperium. Cecilia K Wieslander, Spyridon I Marinis, Peter G Drewes, Patrick Keller, Ruth A Word. * Obstetrics and Gynecology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. Objectives: Previously, we demonstrated that a burst of elastic fi ber synthesis and assembly occurs in the postpartum vaginal wall. In this investigation, we quantifi ed the severity of prolapse in Fbln5 KO mice as a function of age and determined the expression of matrix metalloproteases in the vaginal wall of knockout and nonpregnant, pregnant and postpartum wild type mice. Methods: Mouse pelvic organ prolapse quantifi cation (MOPQ) scoring was conducted on 15 WT, 61 heterozygotes, and 68 Fbln5 -/virginal female mice. Vaginal tissues were collected from 14 NP WT mice, 105 WT mice at various time points during pregnancy and postpartum, and 5 NP Fbln-5 KO mice with advanced stage prolapse. Expression of MMP-2, -9, and -12 was determined by real time PCR, and MMP enzyme activities were quantifi ed using a fl uorescent labeled peptide and gelatin zymography. ANOVA, Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA on ranks, and Bonferroni t-test were used to compare groups, using nulliparous nonpregnant mouse vagina as controls.Results: In Fbln5 knockout mice, prolapse was not present until 3-4 months of age and prolapse severity increased as a function of age such that by 6 months, > 91% experienced Stage 3 prolapse even in the absence of vaginal delivery. MMP-2 and MMP-9 mRNA increased >10-fold 12 -24 h postpartum returning to normal levels by 48 h -1 week pp. Like mRNA levels, both pro-and active MMP-2 and MMP-9 enzyme activities were increased signifi cantly in vaginal tissues from postpartum animals (48 h). Further, both proand active MMP-2 and MMP-9 enzyme activities were increased signifi cantly in vaginal tissues from nonpregnant Fbln-5 KO mice (P < 0.05). Conclusions: The extracellular matrix of the vaginal muscularis undergoes dynamic changes during pregnancy, parturition, and the puerperium. The results are consistent with the hypothesis that continuous elastic fi ber renewal is important in the supportive structures of the female pelvic fl oor and that increased elastase activity in the postpartum vaginal wall is counterbalanced by increased elastic fi ber synthesis. The data also suggest that Fbln-5/elastic fi bers play not only an important structural role, but are also important in regulation of MMP activity in connective tissues of the pelvic fl oor. 594 still remains unclear. In former studies we could show an inhibition of OTR mRNA and protein expression in human myometrial cells after incubation with RLX. By showing that IL-1ß downregulates OTR in human myometrial cells while stimulating the cyclooxygenase (COX) system and therewith contractile prostaglandins, the purpose of the present study was to investigate RLX´s infl uence on cyclooxygenase-1 and -2 (COX) in human myometrial and decidual cells. Methods: Primary cultures of human myometrium and decidua (n=8) from pregnant women undergoing elective caesarean section at term were incubated with different concentrations of RLX [0-100 ng/ml], infection-associated molecules (LPS, cytokines), OT, COX inhibitors and their combinations for different time periods [0-24 h] . The expression of COX-1 and COX-2 was measured by Western blot and real-time PCR. Results: RLX signifi cantly stimulated COX-1 and COX-2 expression on mRNA and protein levels more than 2-fold leading to an enhancement of contractile prostaglandins. Conclusion: This is the fi rst time an effect of RLX on the COX system is described in human cells of pregnant myometrium and decidua. This contraction supporting effect already seen in former studies with IL-1ß stimulation stands in controversy to RLX triggered down regulation of the OTR showing once more the complexity of intracellular mechanisms leading to uterine contractions and birth. Length. William W Hurd, * Shawn G Gibbs, Kari A Rudinski. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wright State University, Dayton, OH, USA. Objective: To determine if stretching and subsequent shortening of myometrial strips from pregnant women alters production of prostaglandins PGF 2α and PGI 2 . Methods: The concentrations of PGF 2α and 6-ketoPGF 1α (a stable metabolite of PGI 2 ) were measured in the contraction baths of 50 myometrial strips obtained at cesarean delivery from 5 pregnant women at term not in labor. Fluid was collected after 2 hours of stretching, and after the strip lengths were decreased by 4%, 6%, or 8%. Control strips were maintained without tension throughout the experiments. PG concentration (pg/mg tissue) was measured for each strip in triplicate by competitive enzyme immunoassay and compared by Kruskal-Wallis analysis. Results: Stretching myometrial strips (Str) increased production of 6-KetoPG 1α by 76%, but had little effect on PGF 2α . Shortening strips had little effect on 6-Keto PGF 1α production, but increased production of PGF 2α up to 158%. Conclusion: Stretching myometrial strips from pregnant women at term increases synthesis of PGI 2 while shortening strips increases synthesis of PGF 2α . Differential PG synthesis related to myometrial stretching and shortening could explain in part uterine quiescence during gestation and increased contractility during parturition. OBJECTIVE: To assess relative quantifi cation of prostaglanidin E2 receptor isoforms EP3-II, III, and VI in lower uterine segment myometrium in the non-pregnant state and three states of term pregnancy: non-labor, spontaneous labor, and induced labor. STUDY DESIGN: Lower uterine segment myometrial samples were obtained at time of cesarean delivery (n=18) or hysterectomy (n=9). Labor was defi ned as regular uterine contractions resulting in cervical change. Parturients were stratifi ed as either having spontaneous labor (n=4) or induced labor (n=5) based on the use of labor induction agent (pitocin=1, foley=2, dinoprostone insert=2). Relative quantifi cation for EP3 isoforms II, III, and VI was performed using real-time RT-PCR. Stastistical analysis was performed using non-parametric tests. RESULTS: All three EP3 isoforms were expressed in lower uterine segment myometrium. There were differences in all three EP3 isoforms amongst the four groups (EP3-II, P=0.006, EP3-III, P=0.033, EP3-VI, P=0.006). There was a signifi cant increase in EP3-VI expression in non-laboring pregnant tissue when compared to the non-pregnant state (11.9 fold, P=0.024). When compared to spontaneous labor, non-laboring pregnant subjects had signifi cantly increased expression in EP3-II (3.8 fold, P=0.005) and EP3-VI (5.3 fold, P=0.020). Non-laboring subjects demonstrated signifi cantly increased levels of all three isoforms when compared to induced subjects [EP3-II (9.3 fold, P=0.003), EP3-III (5.6 fold, P=0.004), P=0.003) . Spontaneously laboring subjects also demonstrated signifi cantly increased levels of all three isoforms when compared to induced subjects [EP3-II (2.5 fold (P=0.014), EP3-III (3.0 fold (P=0.05), EP3-VI (8.1 fold (P=0.05). CONCLUSIONS: In human parturition, lower-uterine segment EP3 receptor isoforms-II, III, and VI are involved in maintaining lower uterine segment tone. Decreased expression of these isoforms is common to both induced and spontaneous labor. However, the profound decrease in EP3 gene expression in induced labor suggests modifi cation in EP3 receptor activity is more critical in this pathway to parturition. Uterus and Cervix. Peta L Grigsby, Andy C Hinton, Brad A Pitzer, Diane E Brockman, Leslie Myatt. * OB/GYN, Uni of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA. Introduction: Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) appears to play a role in the biochemical and structural changes that facilitate uterine activation and stimulation and cervical ripening for labor. The effects of PGE2 are mediated through specifi c G protein coupled contractile and relaxatory receptors (EP1-4). The hormonal mechansims that regulate the expression of these receptors in the uterus and cervix are yet to be elucidated, but may involve the steroid hormone progesterone. The aim of this study was to determine the expression of the PGE 2 receptor isoforms in pregnant rat uterus and cervix during RU486 induced labor and with progesterone supplementation following ovariectomy. Methods: Labor was induced in pregnant rats by injection with RU486 (10mg/ kg IP; n=5) or vehicle (n=6) on day 16 of gestation. A second group were ovariectomized (OVX) on day 16 and subsequently received daily injections of progesterone (P4, 2.5mg/day SQ; n=5) for 48 h. A surgical control group was included (n=5). Uteri (myo+endo) and cervical tissues were collected on day 18 of gestation. Total RNA was extracted from the uterus and cervical samples using the Trizol® method. Quatitative real-time PCR for EP1-4 was performed using Taqman® Gene Expression Assay kits. Target gene mRNA abundance was calculated from a standard curve and normalized to βactin. Results: There were no signifi cant differences in EP1-4 expression in the uterus associated with RU486 induced labor. However, EP1 and EP2 mRNA expression increased in the cervix after RU486 treatment, while EP3 and EP4 remained unchanged. OVX plus P4 supplement signifi cantly increased EP1, EP2 and EP4 in the uterus, with no effect on EP3. In contrast, OVX plus P4 treatment upregulated the expression of EP3 in the cervix, yet had no effect on EP1, EP2 or EP4 levels. Conclusions: PGE2 receptor expression in the uterus did not change after RU486 induced labor, whereas, cervical EP1 and EP2 were elevated. The upregulation of relaxatory receptors in the uterus after P4 treatment is consistent with a quiescent phenotype during pregnancy to accommodate the growing fetus. Additionally, increased EP3 may aid the cervix in remaining tightly closed during this time. The lack of coordination in receptor expression between the uterus and cervix with labor and after P4 treatment may indicate differential regulatory mechanisms associated with the PGE2 receptors between these tissues. Myometrium during Pregnancy. Mandeep S Kandola, 1 Shankari Arulkumaran, 1 Richard J Wilson, 2 Bryan E Hoffman, 2 David P Brooks, 2 Phillip R Bennett. *1 1 Parturtion Research Group, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom; 2 GlaxoSmithKline, Harlow/King of Prussia, United Kingdom. Inhibition of the action of prostaglandin E2 may be a fruitful strategy in preventing preterm delivery. We have therefore studied the expression pattern of the prostaglandin E2 receptors EP-1, -2, -3 and -4 in human upper and lower segment myometrium at term. Immunohistochemical studies were undertaken to compare the expression of EPs between upper and lower segment myometrium taken before and after labour. Positive controls were CHO cells transfected with expression vectors for each EP. Immunohistochemistry did not show any signifi cant differences in expression of EPs between upper and lower segment. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated expression of EP1 was principally cytoplasmic prelabour, but nuclear postlabour. Western blot analysis showed no overall changes in expression of EP1. Immunohistochemistry showed a marked reduction in expression and nuclear localization of EP2 in post-labour, compared to pre-labour samples. Western blot analysis EP-2 was detected in pre-labour but not in post-labour samples. There are nine known isoforms of EP-3. RT-PCR using primers specifi c for each isoform showed expression for all in both upper and lower segment. Expression of EP3-V, EP3-VII and EP3-IX at mRNA level increased in post-labour tissues by 2-5-and 6-fold respectively. Immunohistochemistry showed a marked increase in EP-3 expression in both upper and lower segments with expression remaining cytoplasmic post-labour. Western blot analysis demonstrated an increase in expression of EP3-V with labour, and high levels of EP3-VII and EP3-IX both pre and post-labour. Immunohistochemistry showed a tendency for decreased expression of EP-4 associated with labour. Western analysis of EP-4 showed no differences in overall expression. In organ bath studies an EP-3 receptor antagonist led to a 2 fold reduction in spontaneous myometrial contractility, and inhibited the increase in contractility stimulated by PGE2. These data suggest that, as part of the change of the myometrium to a contractile phenotype there is down regulation of the relaxatory EP-2 and EP-4 and that the principal EP mediating the action of exogenous PGE2 in contracting myometrium is EP3. The role of nuclear translocation of EP-1 requires further study. Taken together these data suggest that antagonists of EP-3 may be useful in prevention of uterine contractions. The Role of Prostaglandin E 2 Receptors in Human Myometrium during Pregnancy. Shankari Arulkumaran, 1 Mandeep Kandola, 1 Richard J Wilson, 2 David P Brooks, 3 Phillip R Bennett. *1 1 Imperial College Parturition Research Group, IRDB Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, United Kingdom; 2 Rheumatoid Arthritis Biology, GlaxoSmithKline, Stevenage, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom; 3 Cardiovascular and Urogenital Diseases CEDD, GlaxoSmithKline, King of Prussia, PA, USA. Human myometrial strips established in culture will usually begin contracting after approximately one hour. The mechanism for this is poorly understood. We have previously shown that stretch upregulates prostaglandin synthesis and have therefore hypothesized that spontaneous contractions occur because of stretch -related prostaglandin synthesis. Experiments were performed using 5x2 mm human pre-labour, lower uterine segment myometrial strips in a DMT Myograph 800MS in oxygenated Kreb's solution, with ADI Powerlab software. In initial experiments, myometrial strips were subjected to stretch force between 0 and 12g. Spontaneous contractions required stretch force. The number of strips attaining spontaneous contractions was greatest at a force of 5-6g. Increasing tension above 6g reduced spontaneous contractility. Incubation of strips with acetyl salicylic acid (ASA) an inhibitor of both COX-1 and COX-2 for one hour prior to the experiment led to a 3-fold reduction in peak tension and total work done. Incubation of ASA pre-treated strips with PGE 2 (at any concentration between 10 -10 to 10 -6 ) returned peak tension and overall work done per contraction to normal values, but also increased contraction rate, leading to an overall increase in total work done when compared to (ASA and PGE 2 non-treated) controls. Addition of the EP-3 antagonist L-798106 prior to the experiment led to a 2-fold reduction in peak tension and therefore a reduction in total work done. Furthermore, incubation of EP-3 antagonist L-798106 pre-treated strips with PGE 2 (at any concentration between 10 -10 to 10 -6 ) inhibited peak tension and overall work done per contraction similar to that in non-treated controls. These data suggest that stretch and synthesis of prostaglandins is essential for spontaneous contractility in human myometrial strips. Since the reduction in contractility caused by ASA was greater than that caused by L-798106, it is likely that prostaglandin E2 plays an important but not exclusive role. However, it does show that PGE 2 acts predominantly via EP-3 receptors, thus providing support for the concept that antagonism of the EP-3 receptor may be a suitable strategy for pharmacological tocolysis. Progesterone Is Required for the Maintenance of Relaxin Receptors (Lgr7) in the Myometrium of Late Pregnant Rats. Lenka A Vodstrcil, 1,2 Laura J Parry, 1 Stephen J Lye, *3 Mary E Wlodek, *2 Oksana Shynlova. 3 1 Zoology, Univ of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; 2 Physiology, Univ of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; 3 Samuel Lunenfeld Res Institute, Mt Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. Serum levels of the ovarian hormone relaxin are elevated during the second half of rat pregnancy. Relaxin as well as progesterone (P4) may be required to maintain myometrial quiescence in pregnant rodents. The actions of relaxin are mediated by a leucine-rich repeat containing G-protein coupled receptor, Lgr7 (RXFP1). Myometrial Lgr7 gene expression is highest in early-to midgestation in the rat and decreases at term. The factors that regulate Lgr7 are poorly understood. Progestin, in the presence or absence of relaxin, stimulates Lgr7 expression in human endometrial stromal cells. Maternal P4 levels peak between days 15-19 in pregnant rats and then decrease at term. Therefore, we hypothesized that blocking the action of P4 in late pregnancy will decrease Lgr7 in the myometrium. Conversely, progesterone administration will produce the opposite effect. OBJECTIVE: This study tested the effect of early progesterone withdrawal and progesterone administration (to maintain plasma hormone levels) on the expression of Lgr7 in the myometrium. METHODS: Rats were treated with the P4 receptor antagonist, RU486, or vehicle on day 19 of gestation and myometrial tissue was collected 24 h later. Pregnant rats received daily subcutaneous injections of either P4 or vehicle starting on day 20 gestation. Myometrial tissue was collected on days 21, 22 or 23 (during labor) in the vehicle-treated group or days 21, 22, 23, or 24 in the P4-treated group. Total RNA was extracted from the myometrial samples and analyzed using quantitative real-time PCR. RESULTS: Administration of RU486 on day 19 caused the onset of preterm labor within 24 h and resulted in a signifi cant decrease in myometrial Lgr7 gene expression. In contrast, daily injections of exogenous P4 had no signifi cant effect on Lgr7 expression. CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with RU486, to induce preterm withdrawal of P4, down-regulated Lgr7 gene expression in the myometrium. This demonstrates an important role for progesterone in maintaining Lgr7 expression in late pregnant rats, thereby preventing premature onset of delivery. Prolonging the length of gestation with progesterone had no signifi cant effect on Lgr7 expression. This suggests that the decrease in Lgr7 at term is due to progesterone-independent mechanisms. The Role of Protein Kinase C in Mediating Responsiveness to Oxytocin in Uterine Strips from Pregnant and Non-Pregnant Rats. Patrice L Arthur, 1 Bryan F Mitchell, *2 Michael J Taggart. 1 1 Maternal and Fetal Health, St. Mary's Hospital, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom; 2 Department of Obstetrics and Gyneacology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. Background: Stimulation of uterine activity is modulated by G-protein coupled receptors such as the oxytocin (OT) receptor (OTR). These receptors are coupled to membrane phospholipase C and activate the inositol trisphosphate and protein kinase C (PKC) pathways. We hypothesized that manipulation of PKC activity would infl uence uterine activity in the rat. Further, we hypothesized that the role of PKC in regulation of uterine contractility would change at the time of uterine activation. Methods: Uterine muscle strips were obtained from non-pregnant (NP) and pregnant Sprague Dawley rats during relative uterine quiescence (d18) and at term just prior to labour onset (d21). Quantitative real time RT-PCR was used to assess mRNA for OTR and FP markers of uterine activation in the day 21 samples. Contractile responses to OT (5 nmol/L) were assessed using myography before and after in vitro treatment with the PKC agonist, 12,13-phorbol dibutyrate (PDBu; 10 -9 to 10 -6 mol/L) or the antagonist bisindolylmaleimide (Bis-1: 10 -9 to 10 -6 mol/L). The effects of the PKC agonist or antagonist were calculated as the percentage of the contractile activity in the presence of the drug compared to the pre-treatment control. Results: PDBu-treated strips showed a concentration-dependent and signifi cant decrease in uterine contractility. Maximal suppression was to 34.1 ± 11.4% in the NP group (mean ± SEM; n=5), 10.3 ± 6% in the d18 animals (n=5) and to 12.3 ± 12.5% in the d21 group (n=5; all signifi cant at P ≤ 0.01) compared to control. Maximal inhibition in all groups occurred at 1 uM (2-way ANOVA and post-hoc Bonferroni). There was no signifi cant change in uterine contractility in response to OT in strips that were treated with BIS. The uterine mRNA levels for OTR and FP signifi cantly increased (P<0.05) from d18 to d21 (1.7 ± .06 to 18.1 ± 5.9 and 2.0 ± 0.4 to 8.7 ± 2.4 respectively). Conclusion: These data suggest a role for PKC isotypes, once activated, in limiting OT responsiveness in rat myometrium. Since the PKC inhibitor BIS had no effect in any of the animals we suggest that there was no basal PKCmediated mechanism infl uencing the uterine response to OT. Future studies using more specifi c PKC isotype inhibitors will elucidate in detail the role of PKC in OT responsiveness. Effects of Potassium Channel Blockade on Nifedipine-Induced Relaxation of Pregnant Human Myometrial Contractility. Audrey T Moynihan, 1,2 Terry J Smith, 2 John J Morrison. *1 1 Obstetrics and Gynaecology, National University of Ireland, Galway, Galway, Ireland; 2 National Centre for Biomemdical Engineering Science, National University of Ireland, Galway, Galway, Ireland. OBJECTIVE:Potassium channels are key components involved in regulating the levels of intracellular calcium in the myometrium, and therefore present themselves as key targets for tocolytic therapy for the treatment and prevention of preterm labour. The aim of this study was to investigate the roles of TEA and IbTX on the effects of nifedipine in pregnant non-labouring human myometrium to ascertain if the inhibition of smooth muscle contraction by nifedipine was mediated wholly or in part by the BK Ca channel. METHODS: Biopsies of human myometrium were obtained at elective cesarean section (n=24). Dissected myometrial strips suspended under isometric conditions, undergoing spontaneous and oxytocin-induced contractions, were exposed to either TEA/IbTX followed by cumulative additions of nifedipine (1 nmol/L -10 μmol/L). Control strips were run simultaneously. Integrals of contractile activity were measured using the PowerLab hardware unit and Chart v3.6 software. Data were analysed using one-way ANOVA followed by post hoc analysis. RESULTS: Nifedipine exerted a potent and cumulative inhibitory effect on oxytocin-induced contractions in human myometrium in vitro, in comparison to control measurements (P< 0.05, n=6) . Incubation of strips with TEA or IbTX, prior to addition of nifedipine signifi cantly attenuated the relaxant effect exerted by nifedipine (P<0.05, n=6) at bath concentrations of 1 nmol/L, 10 nmol/L, 100 nmol/L and 1 μmol/L (P < 0.05). Similar results were obtained in the spontaneous model, where both TEA and IbTX had a signifi cantly antagonistic effect on nifedipine-induced relaxation of the myometrium. This study has shown for the fi rst time that nifedipine acts through the BK Ca channel. This suggests that K + channel conductance and particularly the BK Ca channel plays a role in the potent relaxant effect of nifedipine, hitherto presumed to act solely through L-gated calcium channels. Local and Systemic Regulation of the Relaxin Receptor (Lgr7) in the Myometrium of Pregnant Rats. Lenka A Vodstrcil, 1,2 Laura J Parry, 1 Stephen J Lye, *3 Mary E Wlodek, *2 Oksana Shynlova. 3 1 Zoology, Univ of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; 2 Physiology, Univ of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; 3 Samuel Lunenfeld Res Institute, Mt Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. During pregnancy, the peptide hormone relaxin is thought to contribute to the maintenance of uterine quiescence by reducing the contractile activity of myometrial smooth muscle cells. The relaxin receptor is a leucine-rich repeat containing G-protein coupled receptor, Lgr7 (RXFP1). In mice, Lgr7 is localized to the myometrium, with a signifi cant decrease in Lgr7 expression at term. Recent reports also suggest that the ligand itself may down-regulate its own receptor in the murine uterus. To date, no physiological studies have investigated the potential effects of the fetal-placental unit on Lgr7 expression in the myometrium. OBJECTIVE: To establish the temporal pattern of myometrial Lgr7 gene expression in rats throughout gestation, and to investigate the infl uence of the presence or absence of fetal-placental units on these receptors by comparing the gravid and non-gravid horns of unilaterally pregnant rats. METHODS: Myometrium was collected from pregnant Wistar Kyoto rats at different stages of gestation, as well as post-partum and non-pregnant rats. The second experiment used myometrium collected mid-to late-gestation from rats that had undergone unilateral ovarian tubal ligation prior to mating to isolate both gravid and empty uterine horns. Total RNA was isolated for analysis using quantitative real-time PCR. RESULTS: Myometrial Lgr7 gene expression did not change in early-to mid-gestation but was signifi cantly reduced in late pregnancy between days 21-23. After birth, there was a dramatic increase in Lgr7 so that receptor expression returned to non-pregnant levels. Analysis of myometrium from unilaterally pregnant rats demonstrated no change in Lgr7 gene expression in the gravid myometrium compared with the normal gestational profi le. But there was an increase in Lgr7 gene expression in the non-gravid horn at all stages examined. CONCLUSIONS: These data show a down-regulation in myometrial Lgr7 gene expression in late pregnancy, which coincides with high circulating levels of relaxin. The decrease in myometrial Lgr7 may be necessary to reduce smooth muscle responsiveness to circulating relaxin, thereby activating contractilerelated proteins. The decrease in Lgr7 is regulated, in part, by the presence of fetal-placental units whether through endocrine and/or stretch mechanisms. Patrice L Arthur, 1 Bryan F Mitchell, *2 Michael J Taggart. 1 1 Maternal and Fetal Health, St. Mary's Hospital, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom; 2 Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. Background: G-protein coupled receptor agonists such as oxytocin (OT) can stimulate contractile activity through the phospholipase C -inositol trisphosphate pathways. However, they can also increase the force generated by a given Ca 2+ concentration through a process referred to as Ca 2+ -sensitization. The Rho-associated kinase (ROK) pathway is an important mediator of Ca 2+sensitization in vascular smooth muscle. We have hypothesized that ROK plays a role in regulating myometrial contractility and that this process is augmented at the time of uterine activation. Methods: Uterine muscle strips were obtained from non-pregnant (NP) and from pregnant rats during relative uterine quiescence (d18) and after uterine activation (d21). Quantitative real time RT-PCR was used to assess mRNA for OTR and FP markers of uterine activation. Uterine contractile responses to OT (5 nmol/L) were assessed using myography before and after in vitro treatment with the ROK antagonist H-1152 10 -7 to 10 -5 mol/L. The effect of this drug was calculated as the percentage of the contractile activity in the presence of the drug compared to the pre-treatment control. Results: H-1152 caused a concentration-dependent and signifi cant (P< 0.05), suppression of the response to OT in the NP (to 26.1 ± 3.5%; n=5), d18 (to 61.32 ±3.8 %; n=5) and in the d21 group (to 42.36 ± 12%; n=5) compared to control. There was a signifi cant gestation-dependent effect only between the NP and d18 samples (multiple ANOVA and post-hoc Bonferroni). The uterine mRNA levels for OTR and FP signifi cantly increased (P<0.05) from d18 to d21. Conclusion: The ROK antagonist H-1152 caused a signifi cant decrease in uterine response to OT in all groups. However, there appeared to be reduced ROK activity in the samples obtained at d18 compared to NP. This may suggest that the components of the ROK pathway are down-regulated, or blocked by an intrinsic inhibitor within the myometrium. We suggest that the diminished activity of the ROK pathway has important implications in helping to maintain uterine quiescence through pregnancy. Surprisingly restoration of Ca 2+ -sensitization through the ROK pathway did not seem to occur at d21. Further experiments with animals in spontaneous labour may elucidate the role of ROK at this time. its major receptor, α5ß1 integrin, is important for fi bronectin matrix assembly and strong intercellular cohesion. Integrin receptors are integral components of focal adhesions. These ECM-binding, heterodimeric, transmembrane receptors are composed of α and ß subunits, and the composition of some of these heterodimeric receptors is very specifi c, for example, α5 integrin partners solely with ß1 integrin in cell membranes to form a fi bronectin receptor. The mRNA expression of α5 integrin increased throughout quiescence in rat myometrium and a decrease in expression was then observed at labour (relative to late pregnancy), and a further decrease was observed 1 day postpartum (Williams et al., 2005) . While integrins have been reported to be expressed in nonpregnant human myometrium no data is available on human myometrial integrin expression during pregnancy and labour. Methods: Myometrial biopsies were obtained at elective and emergency caesarean section and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Following RNA (n=6 pregnant at-term and n=6 labouring human myometrium) and protein isolation (n=3 pregnant at-term and n=3 labouring myometrium), real time RT-PCR and western blotting were performed. Results: Real time RT-PCR and western analysis demonstrated expression of α5 integrin in the both the pregnant at-term and labouring human myometrium. The expression of α5 Integrin mRNA signifi cantly decreased (4-fold, p=0.000) in the labouring myometrium samples in comparison to the pregnant at term samples. α5 Integrin protein expression also decreased in the human myometrium biopsies at labour. Conclusion: α5 integrin expression was observed in human pregnant and labouring myometrium. The expression of α5 Integrin mRNA and protein decreased at labour in comparison to the pregnant at-term human myometrium. α5 integrin expression may decrease after myometrial contractions occur at labour, when uterine growth is no longer necessary. Upregulation of PAR-1 and PAR-4 Expression in Human Myometrium at Labour. Margaret O'Brien, 1 John J Morrison, *1,2 Terry J Smith. 1 1 National Centre for Biomedical and Engineering Science, National University of Ireland, Galway, Galway, Ireland; 2 Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, National University of Ireland, Galway, Galway, Ireland. Objective: The myometrium is transformed from a state of relative quiescence during pregnancy, to one of maximal contractile activity at the time of labour. Thrombin has been reported to stimulate myometrial contractility (Elovitz et al., 2000) through its' interaction with the protease activated receptor, PAR-1 (O'Sullivan et al., 2004) . It also interacts with its other receptors, PAR-2, 3 and 4 in other tissue including smooth muscle. Thrombin is activated from the inactive zymogen, prothombin and converts fi brinogen to fi brin during blood clotting. There is an increase in prothrombin fragments and thrombin anti-thrombin complexes during pregnancy (Brenner et al., 2004) . We have previously reported the expression of PAR-1, 2, 3 and 4 in human myometrium (O'Brien et al., 2004) . PAR-1 expression increased 10 fold in the rat during pregnancy relative to the non-pregnant state (Shintani et al., 2000) . The aim of this study was to investigate the expression of prothrombin, fi brinogen and the quantitative expression of PAR 1 and 4, in pregnant at-term and labouring human myometrium. Methods: Myometrial biopsies were obtained at elective and emergency caesarean section and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Following RNA (n=6 pregnant at-term, n=6 labouring human myometrium) and protein isolation (n=3 pregnant at-term, n=3 labouring human myometrium), real time RT-PCR and western blotting were performed. Results: PAR-4 mRNA expression signifi cantly increased (10-fold, p=0.022) in the labouring myometrium samples in comparison to the pregnant at term samples. PAR-1 mRNA expression also increased (8.96 fold), though not signifi cantly, (p=0.054). PAR-1 and PAR-4 protein expression increased in the 3 labouring samples relative to the pregnant at-term myometrial samples. Fibrinogen expression was observed during pregnancy and labour, with α and β being the predominant isoforms. Prothrombin expression was also evident by RT-PCR and western blotting during pregnancy and labour although there was no signifi cant difference in prothrombin protein expression between the two gestation states. Conclusion: Prothrombin and fi brinogen expression was observed during pregnancy and labour. PAR-1 and PAR-4 mRNA and protein expression increased at labour suggesting a role for these thrombin receptors in human myometrium at labour. Unmasked by Forskolin. Yolande Cordeaux, Hannah Missfelder-Lobos, D Stephen Charnock-Jones, * Gordon CS Smith. * Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom. Introduction: Several lines of evidence suggest that 5-HT may be important in controlling uterine contraction. Few studies have addressed the effects of 5-HT or selective agonists on human myometrium. Studies in vascular smooth muscle have demonstrated that in order to observe some of the effects of 5-HT, activation of adenylyl cyclase is required. There have been no such studies in human myometrium. We have therefore investigated the effect of 5-HT in this tissue, in the presence and absence of forskolin. Methods: This study was approved by the Local Ethics Committee. All participants gave their informed written consent. Myometrial biopsies were taken from non-labouring patients undergoing elective cesarean section. Myometrial strips were stimulated with 50mM KCl and then incubated in Kreb's solution containing vehicle or 1μM forskolin. Strips were incubated with increasing doses of 5-HT (10nM to 10μM), every 20mins. Isometric tension was recorded, and "area under the curve" (AUC) calculated, using Powerlab® software Chart 5.2.2 Results: A reduction in contractions occurred within 20mins of forskolin addition. Compared to contractions in the preceding 20mins, AUC values were reduced to 51±5% (mean±s.e.) in forskolin-treated strips, but were 86±4% (mean±s.e.) in control strips. In the absence of forskolin, 5-HT did not signifi cantly increase contractions (AUC value with 10μM 5-HT = 0±14% over basal, n=6, P=0.57, paired t-test). In the presence of forskolin, 5-HT caused a signifi cant increase in contractions (pEC 50 = 7. 04±0.17, n=7) . AUC values at the maximally effective dose of 5-HT were 222±107 % over basal (P<0.05, paired t-test). Conclusion: We show that functional responses to 5-HT in human myometrial strips were only observed in the presence of forskolin. The stimulatory effect of agonists may be missed if they are not examined in tissue with different states of activation and relaxation. This fi nding has profound implications for previous negative studies of stimulatory agonists in vitro. Missfelder-Lobos, D Stephen Charnock-Jones, * Gordon Smith. * Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom. Introduction: Human myometrium is exposed to 5-hydroxtryptamine (5-HT) from mast cells within the uterus and following release of 5-HT on platelet aggregation. These effects could potentially be modulated by drug treatment and this may be clinically important in preterm labor, abruption and post-partum hemorrhage. However, there has been no systematic study of the pharmacology of 5-HT receptors in human myometrium, to our knowledge. Methods: Myometrial strips were obtained from women undergoing elective cesarean section (with appropriate consent and ethical approval) and allowed to equilibrate in Kreb's solution for 90mins. A standard contraction was obtained to 50mM KCl and spontaneous contractions were inhibited by 1 μM forskolin. Cumulative concentration response curves (CCRCs) to selective agonists were compared with time and vehicle controls. CCRCs in the presence of selective antagonists were compared with time and vehicle controls. Isometric tension was recorded and analysed using Powerlab® software Chart 5.2.2. Molecular characterization was performed using Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry Results: The non-selective 5-HT 2 receptor agonist, α-methyl-5HT, induced a dose dependent stimulation of contractions (pEC 50 = 7.29±0.19, n=5, maximal contractions; 547±318% over basal) (mean ± s.e). The selective 5HT 2B agonist BW723C86 and 5HT 2C agonist Ro 600175 were without signifi cant effect except at concentrations well in excess of their known specifi city for these receptors. The 5HT 2A selective antagonist, ketanserin, caused a parallel shift in the CCRC to α-methyl-5HT (pK B = 8.50±0.13, n=6) but had no effect on the response to oxytocin (pEC 50 s, with and without 1μM ketanserin; 7.45±0.03 and 7.54±0.03, n=3 ). The selective 5HT 2B antagonist SB204741 and 5HT 2C antagonist RS102221 had no effect on the response to α-methyl-5HT (pEC 50 s; 7.38±0.06 (n=3) and 7.23±0.10 (n=4) respectively. pEC 50 with vehicle: 7.41±0.15, n=4). Western blot using a 5HT 2A selective antibody confi rmed a protein of appropriate molecular weight (56kDa) and immunohistochemisty localized this to myometrial cells. Conclusions: Myometrium from pregnant women at term expresses functional 5-HT 2A receptors. This receptor is a currently unexploited target for novel drug therapy in the clinical control of myometrial contraction. Objective G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) control all aspects of the contractile process. It follows that molecules which regulate the activity of GPCRs are potential therapeutic targets for controlling pre-term labour. One class of such molecules is the Regulators of G protein Signalling (RGS) which are the focus of our study. Initial analysis has demonstrated RGS2 and RGS5 to predominate within the myometrium [1] . We present data to demonstrate that by a simple single residue mutation we can modulate the activity of these two proteins. A previous study isolated an RGS4 S30C mutant which displayed enhanced GTPase activity for specifi c Gα subunits. The residue at position 30 appears to determine the specifi city that this enhanced activity demonstrates for the Gα subunits. Analysis of the sequences of RGS2 shows it to contain a homologous serine at position 30 whereas RGS5 contains a proline. Using site-direct mutagenesis we have generated a series of mutations within RGS2/RGS5 and have evaluated their activity within cells. Continuing from our work with RGS4 we mutated the residues at position 30 within RGS2/RGS5 to include cysteine, phenylalanine and lysine residues. For RGS2 we included a proline mutation. RGS5 however, natively contains a proline at this position which we converted to a serine. All mutant RGS2 and RGS5 constructs were then evaluated for Gα-specifi c changes in GTPase activity. Manipulation of RGS2 did not affect its ability to modulate Gα signalling, probably due to its ability to function in a GTPase-independent method. Conversion of the proline residue within RGS5 to serine reduces RGS5s activity by approximately 5-fold. Mutations to cysteine, phenyalanine or lysine demonstrate Gα subunit specifi c enhancements or reductions in signalling. Mutational analysis of RGS2 and RGS5 has revealed potential differential activities for these RGS proteins within smooth muscle. RGS2 appears to function in a GTPase-independent manner while RGS5 displays varying activities to different Gα subunits. These results should enable a much clear defi nition of the role these RGS proteins play in the contractile process. Reference [1] Zervou et al.,  Myometrial ULTR Cells. Dean Zaragoza, David M Olson. * Perinatal Research Centre, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. Introduction: The action of prostaglandin F 2α (PGF 2α ), a potent uterotonic stimulant that is associated with labour at term and preterm, is mediated by its receptor, FP. Myometrial FP mRNA levels fall during pregnancy and rise again at term, but the regulation of these events is poorly understood. We previously found that both PGF 2α and the phorbol ester, TPA, which mimics diacylglycerol (DAG) activation of protein kinase C (PKC), surprisingly downregulate FP mRNA expression in cultured ULTR cells. Since binding of PGF 2α to its receptor increases DAG levels, we hypothesized that both PGF 2α and TPA activate PKC through a classical mechanism that translocates PKC to the cell membrane to mediate its effects. Methods: Near confluent cultured human myometrial ULTR cells were pretreated +/-the N-terminal myristoylated peptide PKC inhibitor (20-28, 10 μM) for 1h and then treated +/-PGF 2α (1 μM) or TPA (100 ng/mL) for 6h. Cells were either visualized for localization of conventional PKC isoforms (α,β, and γ) by immunofl uorescence, extracted for cytosolic protein and analyzed for PKC activity by ELISA, or extracted for total RNA and analyzed for FP mRNA by real time RT-PCR. Results: At 6h, PGF 2α decreased FP mRNA levels from 1.02±0.06 normalized units in control cells to 0.74±0.03 in treated cells (N=3, p<0.05) . Pretreatment with 20-28 (10 μM) prevented this downregulation (1.06±0.02 in control/(20-28) treated cells vs. 1.09±0.06 in PGF 2α / (20-28) treated cells, N=3, p=0.68). There was a tendency for both PGF 2α and TPA treatment to decrease calcium and phosphotidylserine dependant cytosolic PKC activity compared to control cells but only the TPA effect was signifi cant (control: 1.96±0.06, PGF 2α : 1.39±0.24, TPA: 1.28±0.11, N=5-6, p<0.01). Importantly, the observed decrease in cytosolic PKC activity coincided with an increase in cell membrane localization for the conventional PKC isoforms. Conclusions: We conclude that TPA and PGF 2α induced down regulation of FP mRNA levels requires activation of PKC through translocation from the cytosol to the cell membrane. These data suggest a paradoxical negative feedback mechanism whereby the increasing levels of PGF 2α at labour down regulate expression of FP through DAG activation of the PKC pathway, thereby decreasing myometrial sensitivity to PGF 2α . Supported by CIHR. Stretch-Activated Potassium Channels in Human Myometrium. Jennifer N Tichenor, Eric T Hansen, Iain Buxton. * Pharmacology, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV, USA. a) OBJECTIVE: The objective of this research is to determine the role of the stretch-activated potassium (SAK) channels in the human myometrium in order to discover new therapeutic targets for the treatment of preterm labor. Potassium channels that are activated by membrane stretch may contribute to the quiescence of smooth muscle cells in organs that undergo distention, such as the uterus, and have also been found to regulate responses to nitrergic stimulation. We therefore investigated the expression of TREK and TRAAK in human pregnant and non-pregnant myometrium at both an mRNA and protein level. b) METHODS: We have employed the methods of semi-quantitative, relative RT-PCR as well as Western Blot in order to determine the mRNA and protein levels of expression of the SAK channels from both pregnant and non-pregnant human myometrial samples. c) RESULTS: We show for the first time that TRAAK is present in uterine smooth muscle. We also show that TREK-1 but not TREK-2 is expressed in human myometrium. Comparison of TREK-1 expression from non-pregnant hysterectomy samples as compared to pregnant cesarean-section samples, each normalized to their respective 18S controls, suggests an up-regulation of TREK-1 channel transcript during pregnancy. Additionally, using Western blot methods, we show that TRAAK protein levels may be up-regulated during pregnancy when comparing pregnant to non-pregnant protein levels. d) CONCLUSIONS: The up-regulation of these channels during pregnancy fi ts with the hypothesis that these channels may be acting to maintain the relative quiescence of the uterine smooth muscle during pregnancy. This mechanism may be improperly regulated in preterm labor, making these as well as functional studies of critical importance to the eventual aim of elucidating a therapeutic target for the prevention and/or treatment of preterm labor. Ca sensitization is a physiological phenomenon during which smooth muscle produces more contraction at given level of intracellular Ca. While the effect is well characterized in vascular smooth muscles, its contribution to uterine contraction is less certain. Rho-associated kinase(ROK) and protein kinase C (PKC) were shown to mediate Ca-sensitizing effect of agonists in a number of is smooth muscles. Objective:This study was designed to elucidate the effect of PKC and ROK on [Ca 2+ ] I , force and their relationship in myometrium from term pregnant women. Methods: The isometric force and [Ca 2+ ] I were measured simultaneously in fura-2 loaded myometrial strips using spectrofl uorometer equipped with force transducer. The uterine contractile responses were recorded with force transducer using organ bath. Results: The PKC activator phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate (PDBu) produced sustained uterine contraction in time and dose dependent manner with a maximal effect at 10 -6 M PDBu after 2hrs incubation. At the same time, no signifi cant effect of PDBu on basal level of [Ca 2+ ] I was observed. The effect was also seen in Ca-free media and when intracellular Ca was "clamped" with BAPTA. PKC inhibitor GF109203X and ROK inhibitor Y27632 both added at the peak of 10 -7 M oxytocin-induced contraction reduced the contraction without affecting the [Ca 2+ ] I level. Addition of one inhibitor after the other one (Y27632 after GF109203X or visa versa) didn't result in further decrease of the contraction. Likewise these inhibitors added at 10 -5 M at the plateau of the 50mM KCl-induced contraction had similar effect on the contraction with no effect on the [Ca 2+ ] I. Again the subsequent addition of one inhibitor over the other didn't yield in additional decrease of the contraction. Relatively specifi c PKCα inhibitor Go6976 and PKCβ specifi c inhibitor both at 10 -5 M, added at the peak of KCl-induced contraction produced 15-20% inhibition of the contraction. Conclusion: We suggest that both PKC (possibly α and β isoforms) and ROK can regulate uterine contraction through Ca-sensitizing mechanism. Since the effect wasn't additive, it is likely that PKC and ROK affect the same down-stream mechanism (possibly myosin light chain phosphatase) to regulate uterine contractile responses to various stimuli (Supported by NIH R55 HD45802). Oxytocin-induced release of Ca 2+ ions from sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) and sensitisation of contractile proteins to Ca 2+ mediate the oxytocin-induced potentiation of myometrial contractions. Objective: We investigated the mechanism of action of oxytocin using pharmacological tools to manipulate the excitation contraction coupling. Method: Samples were obtained from women undergoing Caesarean Section with the approval from the Local Ethics Committee. Strips were mounted in an organ bath (AD Instruments, UK) and stable spontaneous contractions were recorded for 40-60 min before addition of oxytocin. Myometrial contractility was measured as 30 min time integral of contractions before and after addition of drugs. Results: Prolonged (60-120 min) application of oxytocin (0.1 -100 nM) produced a two-component effect. At the beginning of oxytocin application, there was an early component, a tetanus-like contraction which lasted 5-15 min. This was followed by a late component of long-lasting augmentation of phasic contractions. A phospholipase C inhibitor U73122 (10 -30 uM) substantially decreased spontaneous contractions, partially inhibited the early component but failed to abolish the late component of the oxytocin effect. Disabling the SR Ca store using thapsigargin abolished the initial component but did not change the late component. An IP 3 receptor and store-operated Ca channels inhibitor, 2-aminoethyldiphenyl borate (2-APB) signifi cantly decreased spontaneous contractions and both components of the oxytocin-induced potentiation of contractions. A Rho-kinase inhibitor Y27632 decrease spontaneous contractions, had no effect on the early component and substantially, although not completely, inhibited the second component of the oxytocin effect. Conclusions: Based on these results, we propose that the early component of the oxytocin effect is due to the IP 3 -mediated Ca 2+ release from the SR. This early component wears off as soon as the released Ca 2+ is removed from the cytoplasm. The late component of the oxytocin effect manifests itself as potentiated phasic contractions and lasts as long as oxytocin is present. Rhokinase is involved in oxytocin-induced potentiation of phasic contractions, but is not the only mechanism responsible. Since 2-APB affected both components, the store activated Ca channels might be involved in the late component of oxytocin-induced potentiation of myometrial contractility. Objective: To characterise the response to bradykinin (BK) using selective B 1 and B 2 receptor agonists and antagonists in isolated myometrial arteries from healthy pregnant women. Methods: Arteries (200-400μm) dissected from myometrial biopsies were mounted on a wire myograph. Dose response curves to BK, a B 2 receptor agonist and Lys-des-Arg 9 -bradykinin (LDABK), a B 1 receptor agonist (10 -11 -10 -6 M) were constructed in the presence and absence of selective B 1 (des-arg 10 -HOE 140) and B 2 (HOE 140) receptor antagonists (10 -6 M) (n=6). Experiments were repeated in the presence of cyclohexamide (70μM) to investigate post-isolation induction of the receptors (n=9). Umbilical vein studies were used to confi rm the effi cacy of the drugs used. B 1 and B 2 receptors were immunolocalised using goat polyclonal antibodies. Results: Arteries pre-constricted with the thromboxane mimetic U46619 exhibited concentration-dependent relaxation to BK (EC 50 =3.44x10 -9 M). The B 1 receptor antagonist had no effect on BK-induced relaxation however the B 2 receptor antagonist signifi cantly inhibited the effects of BK (p= <0.0001). The B 1 receptor agonist LDABK produced a biphasic response with vasorelaxation at low doses (10 -11 -10 -8 M) and vasoconstriction at higher doses (10 -8 -10 -6 M). The response observed using LDABK was not inhibited by either B 1 or B 2 receptor antagonists. Both antagonists were effi cacious in the umbilical vein. Cyclohexamide blocked the effect of LDABK in some vessels but not in others and had no effect on BK B 2 -induced relaxation. Immunohistochemistry studies demonstrated strong immunolocalisation of the B 2 but not B 1 receptor to the endothelium of vessels, including those used for myography that responded to LDABK. In addition, B 1 receptor immunolocalisation was observed in areas where trophoblast invasion had occurred. This was confi rmed by positive staining for cytokeratin. Summary: BK-mediated relaxation of myometrial arteries is via activation of B 2 receptors on endothelial cells. However, an additional pathway is present that can be activated by the B 1 receptor agonist LDABK. This involves a non B 1 /B 2 receptor mechanism that can be up-regulated in vitro. Association of B 1 immunoreactivity with trophoblasts may suggest an additional role of BK in mediating trophoblast invasion of the myometrium. Preterm labour is associated with signifi cant adverse neonatal outcomes, and may have lifelong consequences for health. Efforts to suppress uterine contractions are hampered by incomplete understanding of mechanisms involved. Ca 2+ infl ux and membrane potential (MP) are critical determinants of contraction. We have previously shown that activation of β-adrenoceptors in sheep myometrium induces large hyperpolarization that is inhibited by blockade of ATP-sensitive K + (K ATP ) channels. We investigated the mechanisms further studying: 1) channel function in isolated myocytes, 2) tension, Ca 2+ and MP in myometrial strips, and 3) uterine electrical and contractile activities in ewes in labour. Hyperpolarizations (15 mV, n=20) evoked in myometrial strips by salbutamol (SAL, 10-300 nM) were blocked by glibenclamide (GLI, 1 μM, n=16) and PNU-37883A (10 μM) but not by iberiotoxin (IbTx, 60 nM). SAL prominently activated BK Ca channels in myocytes and caused a leftward shift of the activation curve that was similar to raising intracellular [Ca 2+ ] (n=12). Similar results were obtained in term (not in labour) human myometrium. Western blot analysis revealed KIR6.1, KIR6.2, SUR2A, SUR2B and BK Ca protein in human and sheep myometrium. Blockade of BK Ca channels with IbTx revealed that SAL also activated two channels, a K ATP channel of 62pS and a channel (14 pS) that reversed near -20mV. In strips in the presence of GLI, action potential amplitude was reduced by SAL, and this was blocked by IbTx. In the presence of PNU-37883A, SAL induced a small depolarization. SAL infusion (100 μg/kg/hr) into conscious ewes caused cessation of bursts of EMG activity and contractions. Following 30 min infusion of GLI (1mg/ kg/hr), SAL failed to suppress uterine activity before (n=7) and during normal spontaneous labour (n=3), and following induction of labour preterm (n=5). These results demonstrate a signifi cant activation of K ATP by SAL in pregnant human and sheep myometrium at the single channel and tissue levels, and in the intact ewe. BK Ca channels are also activated, but their main effect is not to cause membrane hyperpolarization. An intriguing action of SAL was the activation of an inward conductance, but its role in the excessive "rebound" uterine activity seen following SAL withdrawal in vivo awaits further investigation. Endothelial and Myometrial Cell Changes in the Human Uterus at Term. Roger Smith, *1 Anthony Leong, 2 Jane E Norman. *3 1 Mothers and Babies Research Centre, Hunter Medical Research Institute, Newcastle, NSW, Australia; 2 Anatomical Pathology, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, NSW, Australia; 3 Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom. This study examined the histology of human term myometrial samples to identify morphological changes that may elucidate the mechanisms that initiate infl ammatory processes at the time of labor. Methods: Lower uterine segment myometrial biopsies obtained from 53 patients at term not in labour and 26 patients in labour. All cases were stained with an anti-macrophage antibody (CD68), anti-CD34 to endothelial cells and anti-Caspase 3 to label apoptotic cells (1:200) , using a strepavidin-peroxidase technique following microwave antigen retrieval. All sections were observed for the following: infl ammatory response, particularly of neutrophilic infi ltration; macrophage infiltration based on immunostaining with anti-CD68 and vascularity of the section based on CD34 immunoexpression by endothelial cells. The neutrophilic infi ltration was scored on a semi-quantitative basis where 0 = no or infrequent neutrophils; 1+ = scattered or 0-5 neutrophils present in a perivascular location; 2+ = moderate or > 5 neutrophils present in a perivascular location; 3+ = neutrophils present in the interstitium and myometrium. The infi ltration of macrophages was scored in an identical manner using CD68 as a marker. Apoptotic cells were assessed by nuclear staining of Caspase 3. Results: The samples showed a variable infl ammatory response of neutrophils and macrophages, mostly localised to perivascular locations with a greater infi ltrate in the samples obtained during labour. In addition, there were prominent changes in the myometrial fi bres including shearing, shrinkage, oedema and particularly apoptosis even in samples obtained from women clinically not in labour. Unexpectedly endothelial cells of thin walled vessels prominent in the biopsies displayed marked biotinylation and the vascular lumen contained fi brin and platelet thrombi as well as desquamated endothelial cells and amniotic squamous cells and mucoid material. Conclusions: These fi ndings suggest that endothelial cell damage and amniotic fl uid embolism are very common at term prior to clinical labour and provide a mechanism by which surfactant protein A and phospholipids present in the amniotic fl uid may access myometrial cells and provoke the infl ammatory response that occurs during parturition. Objective: The family of nuclear factor of activated T-cells isoforms are transcription factors that play a central role in mediating calciumsensitive gene activation. In most resting cells, NFATs are phosphorylated at a cluster of serine residues located in the regulatory domain, covering a nuclear localization signal, thereby retaining NFAT in an inactive conformation in the cytoplasm. Dephosphorylation of NFATs, which allows relocation to the nucleus, is associated with a rise in intracellular calcium and the activation of calcineurin (a phosphatase). In the nucleus NFATs then bind to the promoter regions of target genes, including TrpC1, a putative calcium channel present in human myometrium. Despite the important role NFAT isoforms play in other cell types, little is known about NFAT expression and regulation in human myometrium. The aim of this study was to determine which NFAT isoforms are expressed in human myometrial tissue and cells. Methods: Lower uterine segment myometrial biopsies were obtained with informed written consent from women undergoing elective caesarean at term. Tissues were either snap frozen in liquid nitrogen or primary uterine myocytes were prepared and cultured in medium containing 5% fetal calf serum. NFAT 1-4 gene expression was assessed in tissue and primary cultured cells by and NFAT 3 and NFAT 4 protein expression was measured in cultured cells by Western blot (n = 6). Results: NFAT 3 and NFAT 4 mRNA, but not NFAT 1 and NFAT 2 were detected in human myometrial tissue and primary cells (n = 4-8). NFAT 3 and NFAT 4 protein expression was confi rmed in cultured cells (n = 6). Conclusions: These results indicate a possible role of NFAT 3 and NFAT 4 in the regulation of gene expression of human myometrium of term and suggest that further investigation of NFAT isoforms in human myometrium is warranted. Acknowledgments: Funded by Tommy's the baby charity (registered charity no: 1060508), vacation studentships from the Wellcome Trust and The Physiological Society and a Ph. D studentship from the MRC. Reproduction and Endocrinology, King's College London, London, Greater London, United Kingdom; 2 Division of Basic Medical Sciences, St George's University of London, London, Greater London, United Kingdom. Background: The KCNQ (Kv7) family of potassium channels encode a family of K + channel α-subunits which have been most extensively investigated in cardiomyocytes and the CNS. Little is known about the contribution of KCNQ channels to uterine smooth muscle function, but expression has been noted in both mouse portal vein and rat stomach smooth muscle (Yeung & Greenwood 2005 , Ohaya et al. 2003 . KCNQ proteins can form homomultimers and/or heteromultimers with other members of the family and are regulated by subunits encoded by KCNE genes. The aim of this study was to examine the expression of the 5 KCNQ genes and the 5 KCNE genes i) during the oestrous cycle in mice and ii) in term non-labour (TNL) human myometrial biopsies. Methods: Oestrous cycles were monitored in C57/BL6 mice by daily vaginal smearing and uterine horns dissected at the appropriate time: diestrous (n=5), proestrous (n=5), oestrous (n=6), metestrous (n=6). Human myometrial tissue was obtained with informed consent from women undergoing cesarean section (38-41 weeks) (n=5-6). Total RNA was extracted using Trizol (Invitrogen) and cDNA synthesised for use in (real-time) RT-PCR using Superscript III (Invitrogen). Real-time RT-PCR data was normalised to β-Actin. Results: KCNQ1-5 and KCNE1-5 were detected in mouse myometrium at all stages of the oestrous cycle using RT-PCR. Real-time RT-PCR indicated that KCNQ5 and KCNE3 were the most abundantly expressed genes. KCNQ5 was 429 times more abundant than KCNQ1 (95% CI, 375-4951, p < 0.00001) and KCNE3 was signifi cantly higher than KCNE2 (p < 0.05). KCNE3 was significantly down regulated in metestrous (p = 0.01) whereas KCNE4 was signifi cantly upregulated in proesterous (p = 0.01). KCNQ1, KCNQ2, KCNE1a/b, KCNE2, KCNE3 and KCNE4 mRNA was detected in human myometrium by RT-PCR. Conclusions: The detection of KCNQ and KCNE isoforms in human and mouse myometrium suggests they may play a role in the control of uterine function. The preferential variability in the KCNE subunits KCNE3 and KCNE4, rather than in KCNQ mRNA, suggests that hormonal regulation of channel function is at the level of the regulatory subunit. which have the property of stimulation, propagation, a refractory phase, and pressure production according to the Hodgkin-Huxley relationships and Laplace's Law. Results: Many complex patterns of behavior arise when small changes are made in the anatomy, activation, and location of pacemakers. Vortices and fractal basins of attraction appear (see fi g ) which are characteristic of many systems composed of excitable tissues. Patterns of depolarization emerge which sometimes result in regular, periodic, or quasiperiodic contraction cycles, and which mimic patterns seen in electrohysterographic experiments in humans. In some models, organization develops which is complex and stable, yet does not produce regular waves of contraction pressure or patterns which could be associated with normal labor and orderly cervical dilatation. Other models quickly develop patterns of contractile behavior which, in humans, would be associated with progressive dilatation of the cervix and productive labor. Small adjustments in the numbers or locations of resting cells have dramatic impact on the overall characteristics of the modelled behavior. Bru-Mercier, Anatoly Shmygol, Steven Thornton, * Andrew M Blanks. Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom. Introduction: It is well established by previous works that intercellular communications, through gap-junctions and through paracrine interactions, are important for synchronizing the activity of uterine myocytes. Cultured myometrial cells, often used in current research, are a convenient but not ideal model to study intercellular communications in human myometrium. Objective: To investigate the mechanisms of communication between uterine myocytes in their natural environment. Methods: Myometrial biopsies were taken from patients undergoing Caesarean Section with informed written consent (REC-05/Q2802/107). The slices, 200 μm thick, were cut using a vibroslicer in Krebs solution (4°C) and cultured in SmGM-2 (Cambrex) medium, 5% FCS. Experiments were performed on slices on each day of a total of 9 days in culture. Each slice was loaded with Ca 2+ -sensitive Fluo-4 and imaged at 1 frame/s on a Zeiss LSM 510 META confocal. To study the evolution of the intercellular communication during the culture, we recorded spontaneous activity at 37°C and responses to 100 nM oxytocin (OT). Results: All samples tested (n=11) demonstrated spontaneous contractile activity on the day of isolation. During spontaneous and OT induced contractions increases in fl uorescence were indicative of action potentials (AP) with a fast spike followed by sustained plateau. This AP-like response was lost in culture in association with loss of synchrony. Over time in culture there was a marked decrease in synchrony. Interestingly, agonist mediated responses demonstrated initial calcium transients origination from the interstitial spaces followed by cohesive AP's in myometrial smooth muscle cell (MSMC) bundles. During relaxation desynchronised sub-cellular calcium oscillations were often observed in MSMC bundles. After time in culture and loss of synchrony, some cells demonstrated spontaneous calcium oscillations that were unaffected by agonist.Conclusion: The ultra-thin slices of human myometrium are a powerful experimental model to study myometrial intercellular communications. Initial work demonstrates a previously unrecognized level of complexity in calcium signalling in human myometrium incorporating physical structure, spatio-temporal phenomena, intercellular connections and cellular heterogeneity. This approach provides large amounts of information for the study of different components of myometrial contractions, communication and signalling. Hanover, NH, USA; 2 Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hanover, NH, USA; 3 Surgery, Hanover, NH, USA; 4 Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA. Objective: RNA interference technology has proven broadly useful in obtaining detailed understanding of specifi c gene action on cellular function. We have previously published a method for culturing tissue strips of human myometrium in organ culture such that contractile responses are expressed > 7 days. This work aims to join these techniques to allow extension of siRNA technology to human myometrial contractility at the tissue-level. Methods: Following informed consent, myometrial tissue was obtained from the lower uterine segment of term pregnant women at the time of cesarean delivery. Tissue strips were cultured under tension (400 mg weight) in 5 mL DMEM with 10% FBS. After 24 hours, siRNA (2 nM fi nal concentration) was added using Dharmafect 3 reagent (Dharmacon). Tissue was lysed 48 hours later and equal microgram amounts of protein per sample were analyzed by western blotting with antibodies to GATA-6, beta tubulin, and smooth muscle myosin heavy chain (SM-MHC). Results: We compared expression of the smooth muscle transcription factor GATA-6 after siRNA transfection of GATA-6 siRNA or a scrambled, nontargeting siRNA. Samples were normalized for protein loading to levels of the housekeeping gene beta tubulin. Compared to the negative control siRNA, expression of GATA-6 protein was reduced by 50% after transfection with the GATA-6 siRNA, and a 50% knockdown in expression of the GATA-6 transcriptional target, SM-MHC, was found. Conclusions: Here we demonstrate the ability to knock down expression of a target gene by 50% in human myometrial organ culture. This technology will likely allow systematic assessment of other genes with regard to mechanisms of myometrial contractility, thereby enhancing our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying human labor. As GATA-6 is known to be an important regulator of smooth muscle-specifi c contractile protein genes in human vascular smooth muscle, this technique clearly demonstrates a role for GATA-6 in regulating contractile proteins in uterine smooth muscle. Differential Expression of 20 -Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase (AKR1C1) but Not 5 -Reductase, Type 1 (SRD5A1), Occurs with Human Labor Induction. Richard H Lee, 1 Frank Z Stanczyk, *1 Qing Ji, 2 Andrew Stolz, 2 Wangrong Yang, 1 Thomas M Goodwin. *1 1 Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 2 Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. OBJECTIVE: To determine the relative expression of 20α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (AKR1C1) and 5α-reductase type 1 (SRD5A1) in the myometrium and chorioamniotic membranes in three states of human labor: not in labor, spontaneous labor, induced labor. METHODS: Quantitative real-time RT-PCR was used to compare relative expression of 20α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (AKR1C1) and 5α-reductase type 1 (SRD5A1) in two tissues (myometrium and chorioamniotic membranes) in 23 subjects in three different states of labor: not in labor (n=13), spontaneous labor (n=5), induced labor (n=5). Labor was defi ned as regular uterine contractions that resulted in cervical dilation. Induced labor was defi ned as the need for an induction agent to begin the labor process (pitocin=1, foley=2, dinoprostone insert=2). RESULTS: Expression of 20α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase was signifi cantly higher in the myometrium of spontaneous laboring subjects compared to those not in labor (2.5fold, P=0.034) and induced labor (3.25 fold, P=0.028). Regardless of labor status, there was no difference in 20α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase expression between the groups in the chorioamniotic membranes. Expression of 5α-reductase type 1 was signifi cantly lower in the membranes of both laboring groups when compared to not in labor (spontaneous[0.14 fold, P=0.027]; induced [0.11 fold, P=0.02]). Regardless of labor status, there was no difference in 5αreductase type 1 expression in the myometrium. CONCLUSIONS: Our fi nding of increased expression of 20α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in myometrium is consistent with a process of local progesterone withdrawal associated with spontaneous labor, but not induced labor. Decreased expression of 5α-reductase in membranes of women in labor whether spontaneous or induced suggests that local withdrawal of the metabolically active metabolite 5α-dihydropogesterone is a characteristic of the labor process in general. Our results indicate lower rates of preterm birth and SGA in lean women who report vitamin use before pregnancy. This suggests that multivitamin use in the periconceptional period could be an inexpensive and acceptable intervention to reduce risk of SGA and early preterm birth, especially among non-obese women. Maternal Ribofl avin Intake and Two MTHFR Polymorphisms and the Association with Cleft Lip and/or Palate Offspring. Marijana Vujkovic, 1 Joyce van Meurs, 2 Nahid Yazdanpanah, 2 Andre G Uitterlinden, 2,3 Eric AP Steegers, *1 Regine PM Steegers-Theunissen. 1, 3, 4, 5 1 Obstetrics and Gynecology; 2 Internal Medicine; 3 Epidemiology and Biostatistics; 4 Pediatric Cardiology; 5 Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. BACKGROUND: Ribofl avin is a cofactor of the MTHFR enzyme involved in homocysteine remethylation. An inverse relationship exists between ribofl avin and homocysteine concentrations. Maternal hyperhomocysteinemia is a risk factor for cleft lip and/or palate (CLP) offspring. OBJECTIVE: To investigate associations between maternal dietary ribofl avin intake, use of folic acid or multivitamin supplement, MTHFR C677T and A1298C genotypes, and CLP risk. Methods: A case-control family study was conducted in 141 CLP and 127 control mothers and children. Mothers fi lled out a general and a food frequency questionnaire at 14 months after the index-pregnancy as a proxy of the periconceptional diet. MTHFR C677T and A1298C genotypes were determined in mothers and children. Odds ratios (OR) with 95% confi dence intervals (95% CI) were calculated. RESULTS: We did not fi nd a signifi cant infl uence of dietary ribofl avin intake on the association between the MTHFR C677T and A1298C genotype and CLP risk. However, mothers with MTHFR 1298AC or CC genotypes, who had a low ribofl avin intake and did not use a supplement in the periconceptional period demonstrated a 7-fold increased risk of CLP offspring (Table) . CONCLUSION: Periconceptional ribofl avin supplementation may contribute to the prevention of CLP offspring in particular in nonsupplemented mothers with a low ribofl avin intake and carrying MTHFR 1298AC or CC genotypes. To determine if racial differences in maternal and fetal cord blood leptin concentrations exist between black and white women at the time of cesarean section. Specimens were collected from elective cesarean sections and stored frozen at -20 degrees C prior to assay for leptin by RIA. Maternal venous samples were collected at admission and umbilical vein cord blood samples were collected immediately after cord clamping. We obtained maternal serum from 32 black women and 18 white women. We were also able to obtain umbilical vein serum in 17 black participants and 9 white participants. Maternal weight averaged 88 kilograms in black women and 78 kilograms in white women, but this difference was not statistically signifi cant. Infant birth weights were very similar, averaging 3261 grams in black infants and 3246 grams in white infants. The maternal leptin levels in black women (22.2 +/-2.4ng/ml, Mean +/-SE) were not statistically signifi cantly different from white women (18.4 +/-2.0ng/ml). Infant cord leptin levels in black infants (9.91 +/-2.4ng/ml) were not statistically signifi cantly different than white infants (11.82 +/-3.8ng/ml). The leptin concentrations in maternal and umbilical venous cord samples were within the range reported by other researchers. There was a strong positive correlation between leptin levels and maternal weight in all study groups (p=0.0002). We found no correlation between maternal leptin and cord leptin concentrations amongst the entire study population or according to racial grouping. There was a statistically signifi cant (p=0.014) positive correlation between maternal weight and infant birth weight in white participants, but not in black participants. In contrast to other published data, in white infants there was no relationship between birth weight and cord blood leptin levels. However in black infants, there was a strong correlation between birth weight and cord blood leptin levels (p=0.0026). Maternal serum leptin levels strongly correlate with maternal weight in both racial groups. Leptin levels correlated positively with black infant birth weight but not with white infant birth weight. This differs from previously reported data and may be due to smaller sample size in the white infant subgroup. There do not appear to be racial differences in the concentrations of leptin in maternal serum or umbilical venous cord blood. In altricial species where an early postnatal leptin surge plays a critical role in maturation of brain appetitive centers brain, it is important to determine whether leptin responsible for this key maturational function is of fetal or maternal origin. We asked the question whether there is any correlation between rat serum and milk leptin concentrations on days 7, 14, and 21 of neonatal life in the rat. We also looked at effects of different nutritional restriction regimens. METHODS. Pregnant rats were assigned to control (C) (20% casein; CC) or a restricted (R) (10% casein; RR) isocaloric diet in pregnancy (P) (fi rst letter) and lactation (L) (second letter). A third group received C and R in P and L, (CR). A fourth group received R in P and C in L (RC). At birth litters were adjusted to 12 pups. At 7.00 AM on PND 7, 14 and 21, pups were removed from their mother for 4 h after which mothers received 0.8 U oxytocin (ip); milk was expressed 15 min later. Pup serum was obtained at PND 7, 14 and 21. Milk leptin and pup serum leptin were measured by RIA. Data mean ± SEM; analysis by Pearson correlation. RESULTS. Milk leptin was not correlated with pup serum leptin on any individual group at day 7, 14 and 21 (p>0.05; Fig 1) or when all the groups and days were pooled (p=0.7). For both groups restricted during pregnancy (RR and RC) the highest pup leptin was at day 21, suggesting a delayed peak in leptin in pups undernourished prenatally. CONCLUSION. There is not correlation between milk leptin and pup serum leptin in neonatal rats. However, the normal post-natal rise in leptin was delayed in animals undernourished pre-natally. It is these groups that show obesity if allowed to eat ad libitum postnatally which may be due to altered appetitive control. Pup serum leptin as a function of maternal milk leptin on PND 7, 14 and 21 in the four groups exposed to different diets during P and L as described in the text. Mean ± SEM, n= 5 mothers or litters. OBJECTIVE. Several studies show a surge of leptin (L) around post natal days (PND) 10 to 15 in rats. This surge is correlated with maturation of central nervous mechanisms that regulate appetite in later life. No studies have been conducted on the relationship of serum L and appetitive behavior in the neonatal period in the rat. METHODS. Pregnant rats were assigned to control (C) (20% casein; CC) or a restricted (R) (10% casein; RR) isocaloric diet in pregnancy (P) and lactation (L). Other groups received C and R in P and L, respectively (CR) or R in P and C in L (RC). At birth litters were adjusted to 12 pups. At 7.00 AM on PND 7, 14 and 21, pups were removed from mothers for 4h during which pups did not feed. Pups were weighed when returned to their mothers and again 1h later. At 2 PM pup serum was obtained for L measurement by RIA. Mean ± SEM; analysis by ANOVA and Pearson correlation. RESULTS. There was no correlation (p>0.05) between pup serum L and body weight gain after 1h of feeding (milk intake) on any individual day or when all PND were pooled (Table 1 ). Indeed the tendency of all the correlations was for milk intake to increase in the presence of increased pup serum L. Although food intake in RR was lowest on PND 21, RC was not different from CC. CONCLUSION. There is not correlation between serum L and appetitive behavior in the neonatal period in the rat. Table 1 . Milk intake (weight gain after 1h of feeding) and pup serum L on PND 7, 14 and 21 of progeny exposed to different diets during pregnancy and lactation as described in the text. Mean ± SEM, n = 5 litters. Data not sharing a letter are statistically different at the same age, p<0.05. Scott M Nelson, 1 Dilys F Freeman, 1 Naveed Sattar, 2 Robert Lindsay. 2 (SPON: Jane E Norman). 1 Reproductive & Maternal Medicine, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom; 2 BHF GCRC, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. Objective: Maternal diabetes during pregnancy is associated with characteristic overgrowth of the fetus and increased risk of obesity and type 1 and 2 diabetes in the offspring. While increased maternal glucose appears central to increases in birth weight in type 1, type 2 and gestational diabetes, there has been interest in the potential role of over supply of lipids to the fetus as an additional factor in promoting fetal adiposity. We hypothesised that if upregulation of placental lipid transfer were key in promoting growth in-utero in offspring of type 1 diabetes mothers (OT1DM), fetal cord lipids would be higher and correlate with birth weight and fetal adiposity. Methods: We have assessed cholesterol, high density lipoprotein-cholesterol (HDL-C), triglycerides (TG), very low density lipoprotein-cholesterol (VLDL-C), low density lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL-C) and total non-esterifi ed fatty acids (NEFA) in cord blood in controls and OT1DM. We have exmined the relationship of cord lipids to birth weight and measures of fetal adiposity and more broadly to maternal glycaemia (assessed by HbA1c) and to hormones in cord blood related to fetal carbohydrate metabolism, lipid metabolism and growth (insulin, insulin propeptides, leptin, adiponectin and insulin like growth factor-1). Results: In a total of 140 OT1DM and 48 control offspring, maternal diabetes was associated with lower concentrations of HDL-C (OT1DM 0.62 ± 0.25 mmol/l; control 0.69 ± 0.18 mmol/l; P=0.05) and NEFA (OT1DM 0.18 [0.13 -0.24] mmol/l; control 0.24 [0.18 -0.33] mmol/l; P<0.0001). Cord lipids were unrelated to birthweight in OT1DM. Unexpectedly, IGF-1 was a strong predictor of HDL-C in controls (P=0.002) and OT1DM (p<0.001) and a negative predictor of TG in controls (P<0.001) and OT1DM (P=0.004). HDL-C was also independently determined by leptin in OT1DM (P<0.001), with TG determined by leptin (P=0.024) and insulin (P=0.003) in addition to IGF-1 in OT1DM. Conclusion: Cord lipids, particularly NEFAs, are reduced in OT1DM, however, HDL-C, the principal fetal cholesterol does not correlate with fetal insulin or birthweight in OT1DM, but shows an unexpectedly strong, and novel association with IGF-1. Objective: There are ethnic differences in the incidence and morbidities of type 2 diabetes (T2DM) and gestational diabetes (GDM). Visfatin or Pre-B-cell colony enhancing factor 1 (PBEF1) is a cytokine that has been implicated in T2DM and GDM. Polymorphisms in the visfatin gene have also been associated with T2DM but have not been investigated in GDM. Visfatin is a particularly intriguing candidate gene because it is insulin-mimetic in visceral adipose tissue. Furthermore it is produced in placental membranes and is found in higher concentrations during pregnancy. We performed a candidate gene study to look for associations between visfatin single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and GDM in two populations. Methods: Blood was collected from Caucasian and Asian women who met Coustan-Carpenter criteria for GDM and from ethnically matched non diabetic controls. DNA was extracted and real time PCR (TaqMan Genotyping Assays, Applied Biosystems) was used to screen for three visfatin non-coding SNPs, rs711438, rs6947766 and rs10447822. Genotype and allele frequencies were tested using chi-square contingency tests. Results: Genotype and allele frequencies for the rs711438 SNP are outlined in the table below. Genotype frequencies were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. The other two SNPs (rs6947766 and rs10447822) did not show any association with GDM. In the Caucasian population only, rs711438 genotype frequencies were signifi cantly different in the GDM group (p=0.022). The GDM group showed an excess of the homozygous A genotype (p=0.006). The relative risk for GDM with the AA genotype was 1.9 (1.2-3.1, 95% CI). Conclusion: In this fi rst study to look at visfatin genetic polymorphisms as risk factors for GDM, we have demonstrated an allele that is signifi cantly associated with GDM in a Caucasian population. The lack of association in the Asian population may refl ect either their different mutational history of differences in the role of visceral adiposity between the groups. Future research will aim to fi nd the biological basis for this genetic association and to fi nd other DNA markers which might replace the current, ineffi cient glucola screens and allow more targeted interventions. Recently, several studies have associated the transcription factor 7-like 2 gene (TCF7L2) with increased risk of type 2 diabetes (T2DM) and its progression primarily in Caucasian populations. TCF7L2 is expressed in pancreatic beta-cells and in many other human cell types and is thought to be involved in glucose homeostasis. As risk factors are similar between T2DM and gestational diabetes (GDM) we sought to investigate a possible association of TCF7L2 (rs12255372) with GDM. Study Design: Blood was collected from women who met Coustan-Carpenter criteria for GDM and ethnically matched non diabetic controls. DNA was extracted and a candidate gene association study was performed using real time PCR technology (TaqMan, Applied Biosystems) to screen maternal DNA. Comparisons were made for the rs12255372 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) located in intron 3 of the TCF7L2 gene. Results: Chi square contingency tests were used to analyze genotype and allele frequencies in controls and GDM affected pregnancies. The fi ndings for the rs12255372 SNP are outlined in the table below. Genotype counts showed an excess of homozygotes for the TT allele (p=0.007). TT individuals have an increased risk of GDM with a relative risk of 2.6 and confi dence limits of 1.3-5.3 Conclusion: This is the fi rst study to show that a common polymorphism in the TCF7L2 gene associated with type 2 diabetes is also associated with GDM in Caucasian women. Future research will aim to fi nd the biological basis for this genetic association and to fi nd other DNA markers. These fi ndings may someday allow for a replacement of the current, ineffi cient glucola screens and more targeted interventions. Prenatal glucocorticoid overexposure appears to program adverse effects on blood pressure, metabolism and the HPA axis, while elevated prenatal testosterone exposure is linked to reproductive dysfunction. Objective: Utilizing our newly developed sheep model of maternal obesity, we evaluated its impact on fetal cortisol and testosterone concentrations at midgestation. Methods: Ewes were assigned to a control (C, 100% of NRC recommendations, n=5) or obesogenic (OB, 150% of NRC, n=6) diet from 60 days before to 75 days after conception when ewes were anesthetized. Following collection of maternal jugular and umbilical venous blood, fetuses were euthanized by exsanguination, and ewes were euthanized by an overdose of sodium pentobarbital. Serum was stored at -80ºC until assayed for cortisol and testosterone by RIA (Diagnostic Products, Los Angeles, CA). Results: OB and C ewes increased their body weights by ∼50% and ∼7%, respectively, from diet initiation until necropsy. Fetuses from OB ewes were heavier than those from C ewes (374 ± 10 vs. 268 ± 12 g, P<0.05). Maternal blood concentration of cortisol were greater for OB vs. C ewes (31.8± 5.9 vs. 3.6 ± 0.8 ng/ml; P<0.05), and was greater in the blood of their fetuses ( Objective: It is well known that previous c-section increases both the operative time and the complexity of the surgery for patients undergoing repeat csections. It is also known that surgical procedures on obese patients are often more technically challenging. We sought to explore the relationship between maternal obesity and its affects on patients undergoing repeat c-section when compared to normal weight controls and to obese patients who were undergoing primary c-sections. Study design: We performed a retrospective cohort study of all term patients meeting BMI criteria who were delivered by c-section utilizing regional anesthesia between December 2004 and June 2006. Normal weight patients were defi ned as having a BMI between 18.5 and 24.9. Obese patients were defi ned as having a BMI > 30. Maternal records from a single institution were reviewed. The student's T test was used for statistical analysis. Results: There were 112 obese (54 primary and 58 repeat c-section) and 142 normal weight (85 primary and 57 repeat c-section) patients identifi ed. Patients undergoing repeat c-section had signifi cantly longer incision to delivery times compared to those undergoing primary c-section regardless of BMI. BMI did not contribute to incision to delivery time for patients undergoing primary c-section. However, obese patients undergoing repeat c-section saw a 35% increase in incision to delivery time when compared to normal weight controls (Table) . Obese patients undergoing repeat c-section had an 82% increase in incision to delivery time when compared to obese patients undergoing primary c-section (10.4 vs. 18.9 min). In contrast, normal weight patients saw only a 42% increase in operative time (9.85 vs. 14.0 min). Conclusion: Obesity is associated with a signifi cantly longer incision to delivery time for patients undergoing repeat c-section. This longer incision to delivery interval should be considered when a clinical situation dictates that an obese patient may need to undergo a repeat c-section. Background: Because prior work suggests an association between high insulin concentrations in early pregnancy and excess gestational weight gain, we examined such associations in a well defi ned cohort. Methods: We studied a prospective cohort of 457 women enrolled in the MGH Obstetrical Maternal Study who delivered after 37 weeks´ gestation. Fasting serum samples collected at 16-18 weeks gestation were analyzed to determine insulin levels and homeostasis model assessment (HOMA). We abstracted baseline (fi rst trimester fi rst visit) weights and weight gain from the electronic medical record and classifi ed gain according to Institute of Medicine guidelines. We used simple and multivariable regression to examine associations among these variables. Results: Contrary to others' earlier work, we found in univariate analyses that gestational weight gain was inversely associated with early pregnancy fasting insulin levels (4th quartile: -3.38 lbs, 95% CI -5.61 to -0.95). BMI confounded this association. In multivariable analysis, we found no association between insulin quartile (p .76) or HOMA quartile (p .63) and gestational weight gain, adjusting for BMI, parity, maternal age, white race, and smoking status. In logistic regression, weight gain exceeding IOM guidelines was independently associated with white race (OR 1.85, 1.10-3.12) and overweight (OR 3.57, 2.03-6.28) or obese BMI (OR 2.04, 1.13-3.70), adjusting for age, parity, smoking status and insulin quartile. Conclusion: In our cohort, insulin homeostasis in early pregnancy was not independently related to gestational weight gain. White race and overweight or obese BMI may identify women at increased risk of excessive gain. One hour glucose challenge test (GCT) is an initial refl ection of the metabolic alteration of gestational diabetes. This index value is not currently applied to predict maternal and fetal morbidity associated with gestational diabetes (GDM). Our objective was to test the hypothesis that obstetric morbidity is directly proportional to the screening one hour GCT value in patients with GDM. Demographic, obstetric, and neonatal data from 224 consecutive gestational diabetics who were managed with tight glycemic control (<90 mg/dl fasting and <120 mg/dl 1 hour postprandial) and delivered at the University Hospital were collected. These cases were grouped according to their one hour GCT values. These groups were compared for body mass index (BMI), preterm delivery (PTD), cesarean delivery (CD), birth weight (BW), and neonative intesive care unit (NICU) stay. Data analysis were performed with student t-test and chi square. Mean and percents for one hour GCT and adverse obstetric outcomes are presented in the table. In well controlled gestational diabetics, the degree of one hour glucose values did not indicate adverse obstetric outcome. This demonstrates that strict glycemic control can optimize the outcomes irrespective of the initial GCT value. Objective: To compare the effectiveness of antenatal betamethasone for the prevention of neonatal morbidity and mortality in preterm twin and singleton gestations. Materials and Methods: Case-control study comparing the outcomes of twin and singleton neonates born to women who received betamethasone for risk of preterm delivery in a university-affi liated, community-based tertiary care center between 1997 and 2005. Cases were identifi ed from computerized clinical care and pharmacy databases, and were matched to controls based on gestational age at delivery and neonatal gender. Comparisons were made between the fi rst-born of the twins and singleton controls. Only those women delivering between 24 and 34 weeks' gestation were included. Sixty cases and 60 controls were identifi ed. Results: There were no differences in the twins compared to the singletons in maternal demographics (height, weight, BMI or ethnicity) or gestational age at delivery. There were no differences between the groups in birth weights (1434.5+466.5 vs. 1481.3+573.6g), head circumference at delivery (28.3+2.7 vs. 27.4+3.4 cm), Apgar scores at 1 and 5 minutes, need for mechanical ventilation (49.1% vs. 56.7%), number of days on ventilator (16.9+17.7 vs. 21.6+18.3), or total NICU days (46.8+31.6 vs. 42.0+32.8). Intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) (13.8% vs. 21.0%, p<0.05), necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) (12.1% vs. 16.7%, p<0.05), and neonatal deaths (1.7% vs. 6.7%, p<0.05) occurred more frequently in controls. Conclusions: Differences in the neonatal outcomes of IVH, NEC and neonatal death occurred more frequently in singletons than in twins in this casecontrol investigation evaluating the effectiveness of antenatal betamethasone. There were no differences found in neonatal biometric measures or need for mechanical ventilation for respiratory distress syndrome. Concerns that added maternal plasma volume in multiple gestations could lessen the neonatal benefi ts of antenatal betamethasone were not substantiated. A small sample size confers the possibility of beta-error, and the retrospective nature of this investigation invites the possibility of sampling bias leading to the differences in major adverse outcome measures. Score. John E Deaver, Wayne R Cohen. * Obstetrics and Gynecology, Jamaica Hospital Medical Center, Jamaica, NY, USA. OBJECTIVE: To devise a clinically useful risk score for neonatal brachial plexus injury (BPI) using only variables available to obstetricians before delivery. The goal was a risk score that could be evaluated prospectively to determine whether a meaningful number of these injuries could be prevented without excessively increasing the cesarean section rate. METHODS: A consecutive series of 45 cases of neonatal BPI and 90 controls was studied. Multiple logistic regression coeffi cients were obtained for maternal characteristics and intrapartum variables that infl uenced the odds of BPI. To identify clinically relevant categories, continuous variables were divided into quartiles. The regression coeffi cients were used to devise a risk score for BPI. The score's receiver-operator characteristics (ROC) curve was plotted. RESULTS: Pertinent variables in the risk score were clinically estimated fetal weight (EFW), maternal term body mass index (BMI), pregnancy weight gain, gestational diabetes (GDM), black race, and durations of the deceleration phase and the second stage of labor. The odds ratios for 4 th quartiles of EFW (≥3600 grams), maternal BMI (≥33.3 kg/m 2 ), and pregnancy weight gain (≥18.2 kg) were 4.8 (p<0.001), 2.6 (p=0.07), and 2.8 (p< 0.05), respectively, and for GDM and black race were 2.3 (p= 0.23) and 3.3 (p<0.05). Long second stage labor increased the odds of BPI by 20.1 times (p<0.001) when preceded by a long deceleration phase and by only 2.7 times (p=0.13) otherwise. The risk score was calculated as 1 / (1 + e -x ) where x was calculated from the regression coeffi cients of the pertinent variables listed above. The area under the ROC curve was 0.82. A risk score of 0.72 had sensitivity and specifi city 36% and 99% respectively. The positive predictive value at this score cutoff was 7.3%, assuming a baseline BPI prevalence of 0.25%, the midpoint of literaturereported prevalence range. CONCLUSION: If the risk score were applied to a population of 10,000 births that would otherwise have delivered vaginally with a BPI prevalence of 0.25%, 119 cesarean sections would be necessary to prevent 9 of 25 BPI cases. In other words, a 1.2% rise in the cesarean rate would prevent 36% of BPI cases. This is the fi rst attempt to model multiple factors known before delivery and to examine the interaction of labor components in relation to BPI. We will next determine whether these test characteristics are reproducible when the model is applied to a novel dataset. Incidence of Umbilical Artery pH < 7.0 in Elective Cesarean Section at Term in Women without Medical or Known Fetal Complications. David J Berke, Nicole M Adair, Guillermo J Valenzuela. * Women's Health, Arrowhead Regional Medical Center, Colton, CA, USA. Intrauterine hypoxia has been associated with long-term fetal sequelae. Its detection via nonreassuring electronic fetal monitoring during labor is often postulated to be the cause of any newborn damage found at birth or thereafter. Although there are many reports discussing umbilical cord pH values on newborns during labor and under different clinical conditions, we decided to explore the incidence of newborn pH <7.0 on a group of patients undergoing elective cesarean sections at term, without maternal complications, without fetal malformations detected prior to delivery, and at a gestational age >38 weeks. Material and Methods: Under a protocol approved by the IRB, records of all elective cesarean sections between 4/2004 and 6/2006 were reviewed. Information regarding maternal age, gravidity, parity, antenatal testing on admission (NST), presence of uterine contractions, and umbilical cord gases were obtained. Patients with any medical complications or signifi cant uterine contractions (including cervical change) were excluded. Newborn records were reviewed for any complications. Results: A total of 333 records qualifi ed by meeting all of the criteria. The average umbilical cord pH was 7.24 + 0.08, base defi cit of 3.9 + 2.8. Six patients had pH < 7.0and all of these had base defi cit =<12. All of them had 1 and 5 minute Apgars > 7; one newborn was admitted to NICU (transient tachypnea). In the group with pH >7, there were 16 admissions to NICU, one with seizures. Conclusions: About 2% of normal pregnant patients, without evidence of maternal complications, carry newborns that are acidotic by standard defi nition. However, all of these infants had normal Apgar scores and were discharged home without evidence of any deleterious effect. We speculate that there are factors other than just hypoxia that are necessary to produce fetal damage. Objective: To determine if improvements in neonatal outcome and NICU LOS in infants born to high risk mothers treated with 17-OHPC were independent of gestational age at delivery. Materials and Methods: This is a secondary analysis of data from a multicenter trial of 17-OHPC for prevention of recurrent spontaneous preterm birth. Women with a history of a prior spontaneous preterm delivery were randomized in a 2:1 ratio between 16-20 weeks gestation to receive either weekly injections of 250 mg of 17-OHPC or placebo until delivery or 36 weeks gestation. NICU LOS and estimated cost of hospitalization was compared between groups. A composite measure of neonatal morbidity (1 or more of: RDS, BPD, IVH, ROP, NEC, patent ductus requiring closure, death) was compared between groups. Statistical analysis was performed by Chi-square and Wilcoxon tests. Adjusted statistical analysis was performed with logistic regression and Cox proportional hazard survival regression analysis. Results: A total of 446 live births occurred during the study period. NICU admissions tended to be greater in the placebo group, but this difference did not reach signifi cance (RR=0.76, 95% CI 0.58-1.01). Infants born to 17-OHPC treated mothers had approximately one half the risk of neonatal morbidity compared to those whose mothers received placebo (RR 0.59, 95 % CI 0.37-0.93). NICU LOS was signifi cantly longer for the group of infants whose mothers were treated with placebo (p=0.02). After adjusting for gestational age at delivery, there were no signifi cant differences in NICU LOS or composite neonatal morbidity between treated groups. Objective: Ethnicity has been identifi ed as a risk factor for chorioamnionitis. The purpose of this study was to compare perinatal outcomes among different ethnic groups in the setting of chorioamnionitis. Study Design: A retrospective cohort study was conducted at a single university medical center of all term deliveries occurring from 1980 to 2001 with the diagnosis of chorioamnionitis. Patients of different ethnic backgrounds were compared. Obstetric outcomes examined included mode of delivery, perineal lacerations, maternal blood loss, transfusions, placental abruption, and endomyometritis. Neonatal outcomes, including Apgar scores, umbilical cord gases, meconeum, meconeum aspiration syndrome (MAS), hyperbilirubinemia, sepsis, tachypnea, respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), and admission to neonatal intensive care unit were also assessed. Dichotomous outcomes were compared using chi-square test. Multivariate logistic regression models were created to evaluate obstetric outcomes and complications controlling for potential confounding factors. Results: 1915 patients diagnosed with chorioamnionitis had available ethnic identifi ers: Caucasian 689 (36%), African American 296 (15%), Latina 238 (12%), and Asian 692 (36%). In multivariate analyses, ethnicity was associated with difference in endometritis, 3rd/4th degree laceration, Apgar < 7 at fi ve minutes, meconeum, and hyperbilirubinemia. (Table 1) Conclusions: In addition to ethnicity being a risk factor for development of chorioamnionitis, our study demonstrates that different ethnic groups are at risk for increased adverse perinatal outcomes in the setting of chorioamnionitis. Results: Nineteen CCAMs were identifi ed at a mean gestational age of 24 0/7 weeks, ±6 weeks. There was one fetus with hydrops (5%), and this was the only neonatal death (5%). Postnatal imaging confi rming the presence of a lung mass in all cases. Outcomes are summarized in Table 1 . NICU admission was more likely for infants with macrocystic/mixed type than microcystic lesions (p=.06), as well as for those with mediastinal shift (p=.14). Surgical therapy was required more often for infants with macrocystic/mixed type (p=.01), as well as for fetuses demonstrating a mediastinal shift (p=.05). Classifi cation of lesion as microcystic or macrocystic/mixed type did not predict likelihood of disappearance (p=.7). Conclusion: CCAM remain a signifi cant source of neonatal morbidity and mortality. Because of high rates of NICU admission, these infants benefi t from delivery in close proximity to a Level III NICU. The prognosis appears to be better for lesions with a microcystic appearance, and for those that do not cause a mediastinal shift. The phenomenon of ultrasonographic "disappearance" was a common fi nding in this series, but seems to be associated with technological limitations of ultrasound rather than with actual resolution of the CCAM lesion. Objective: To determine the effect of active phase arrest on perinatal outcomes in women who subsequently deliver vaginally. Study Design: This is a retrospective cohort study of women with term, singleton, cephalic neonates delivered vaginally at a single institution. Those diagnosed with active phase arrest (APA), no evidence of cervical change for two or more hours with adequate contractions, were compared to other women with vaginal deliveries. The relationship between active phase arrest and perinatal outcomes was evaluated using the chi-square test and multivariate logistic regression models. Results: Of the 335 women with APA, 95 (28%) of these underwent an operative vaginal delivery as compared to the 17% (p<0.001) of women who did not have active phase arrest. In univariate comparisons, women with APA were more likely to experience chorioamnionitis, third or fourth degree perineal lacerations, and postpartum hemorrhage. When controlling for potential confounders, the increase in chorioamnionitis and postpartum hemorrhage remained statistically signifi cant. However, there was no longer an appreciable difference in severe perineal lacerations. The rates of neonatal morbidity were low in both groups, with no statistically signifi cant differences. Conclusion: Women with APA who experience vaginal births have increased rates of postpartum hemorrhage and chorioamnionitis. The effect of APA on perineal lacerations appears to be due to confounding. These fi ndings can be utilized to counsel women considering expectant management in the setting of APA in labor. Results: A total of 14 exposed vaginal deliveries and 14 exposed cesarean deliveries were identifi ed. Maternal thrombophilia (acquired and inherited) was the most common indication for anticoagulant use (64.3%, n=18). Exposed women had longer lengths of stay than unexposed for both vaginal (4.3 ± 4.6 versus 2.5 ± 0.9 days, P=0.05) and cesarean (5.4 ± 3.4 versus 3.7 ± 0.6 days, P=0.01) deliveries. There were no differences in postpartum hemoglobin levels. Postpartum complications (fever, wound complications, hematoma, transfusion) were found in 5 women in the exposed group (17.9%) compared with 5 women in the unexposed group (8.9%), P = 0.23. A complication rate of 66.7% was found among the 3 women who received therapeutic anticoagulation compared with 12% in the women who received prophylactic anticoagulation. Mean time to restart anticoagulants postpartum in those with complications was 8.0 ± 8.0 hours compared with 19.2 ± 8.5 hours in those without complications (P = 0.01). Conclusions: Restarting anticoagulants postpartum is associated with an 18% complication rate, with the majority being postpartum fevers. These complications are associated with earlier resumption of anticoagulants. OBJECTIVES: Puerperal Group A Streptococcal (GAS) sepsis is a rare yet potentially fatal infection. The clinical severity of infection varies widely, from mild endometritis that resolves with antibiotics, to invasive GAS that necessitates intensive care and/or surgery. We hypothesized that clinical and biological markers may be used to predict cases that ultimately require surgical intervention. As an extension to this hypothesis, we aimed to determine the rate of GAS vaginal colonization and to assess whether asymptomatic colonization is associated with subsequent puerperal sepsis and need for surgical intervention. METHODS: 41 cases of puerperal GAS sepsis were identifi ed in two tertiary care centers in Utah from 1991-2006. Cases were stratifi ed based on need for surgical intervention. Characteristics of women who did and did not undergo surgery were compared using Fisher's exact or Chi-square analyses. The rate of GAS incidentally detected by routine Group B Streptococcus (GBS) surveillance cultures was calculated. RESULTS: 17 (41%) required surgery including hysterectomy (N=8) and debridement alone (N=9 weeks ', 17-19 week' or 20-23 weeks' gestation at time of loss. Comparisons for each of these groups were made for the presence of vaginal bleeding, preterm rupture of membranes and placental histology. RESULTS: 266 women were evaluated by the PLES and 30% (n=80) had at least one 2nd trimester PL, for a total of 120 fetal losses. Of these, 75% (n=90) were singletons and 67.8% (n=78) were spontaneous conceptions. Antepartum fetal demise prior to delivery was noted in 20.3% (n=24). Mean maternal age ± SD at loss was 31.5 ± 5.9 years and mean gestational age at loss ± SD was 18.8 ± 2.5 weeks. Table 1 shows the characteristics for each of the gestational age groups. CONCLUSION: PROM is more common at 17-19 weeks' gestation compared with losses occurring in the earlier or later second trimester. Losses at 17-23 weeks' gestation are more likely to be associated with acute infection and chronic infl ammatory lesions compared with losses at 14-16 weeks gestation. There is a trend towards more thrombotic lesions when losses occur in the early second trimester. Previous pre-eclampsia, obesity and pre-existing disease carry an increased risk of preeclampsia and SGA deliveries. Currently we cannot accurately estimate the risk of preeclampsia or SGA in women with several risk factors. The VIP trial provided the opportunity to investigate prediction using sets of risk factors. 1 Objective To develop risk assessment tools for preeclampsia and SGA based on sets of clinical variables drawn from the VIP trial database. Methods 1,687 women with singleton pregnancies, with obesity (BMI>30), chronic hypertension or previous preeclampsia were randomly divided into training (n= 1121) and validation (n=566) sets. Outcomes in the validations set were strictly concealed. Prediction tools were developed on the training set only using logistic regression, with forward variable selection. The outcomes were preeclampsia, preeclampsia delivered < 34 weeks; SGA (< 10 th customised centile), and severe SGA (SGA delivered < 34 weeks/ birthweight < 1 st centile/perinatal death). Prediction tools were developed on the training set using logistic regression with forward variable selection. Predictors used in the fi nal models were: previous PE disease, and gestation, chronic hypertension, maternal age, smoking during pregnancy, parental ethnicity, use of folate and multivitamins, anti-hypertensive therapy, BMI, SBP and DBP. Other variables considered included creatinine levels pre-pregnancy, parity, marital status, highest academic qualifi cation, employment, activity in last week, randomised treatment with antioxidants, use of aspirin, heparin and fragmin, and gestation at trial recruitment. Results Background: Pregnant women are advised to eat a healthy and varied diet, but apart from periconceptual supplementation of folic acid to prevent neural tube defects the decision whether or not to take a multivitamin supplementation is commonly left to the individual. As previously reported, 23% of high risk women participating in the Vitamins in Pre-eclampsia (VIP) trial (UK) were self medicating with commercially available multivitamin preparations at trial entry 1 . Supplementation did not reduce the incidence of pre-eclampsia or preterm birth, but there was a signifi cant increase in birthweight and improved birthweight centiles in the babies of mothers who took supplements (in the placebo arm). As fi nancial constraints become ever more pressing throughout the developed and developing world, simple measures to improve pregnancy outcome and limit resource use should be considered. Methods: Data from the women in the placebo arm of the Vitamins in Preeclampsia trial were analysed, using the arithmetic mean to assess healthcare resource use in those who did and did not take commercially available micronutrient preparations. (1 and 2) of the enzyme 11 β-HSD catalyze the interconversion of active cortisol and inactive cortisone. 11 β-HSD 2 is the predominant isoform in kidney where is thought to regulate cortisol exposure in cells expressing mineralocorticoid receptors. The aim of this study was to compare expression levels of 11 β-HSD 1 and 2 in kidney cortex (KC) and medulla (KM) in sheep exposed antenatally to a single course of GC at 0.55 of gestation. METHODS: Date-mated sheep were randomly assigned to receive a single course of GC [2 maternal IM doses of Betamethasone (0.17 mg/Kg with a maximum of 12 mg) or vehicle 24-h apart] at 80 days gestation. Fetuses were delivered by C-section at either 80 or 135 days gestational age (dGA). KC and KM were obtained from fetuses and adults (0.8-1.5 y). 11 β-HSD 1 and 2 mRNA were measured by Ribonuclease Protection Assay. Data are expressed as Mean±SEM and were analyzed by ANOVA and t test. RESULTS: Relative to actin mRNA, 11 β-HSD 1 mRNA levels were signifi cantly higher than HSD 2 in KC and signifi cantly decreased in KC and KM of GC-exposed fetuses at 80 and 135 dGA. However, in the adult 11 β-HSD 1 expression was not different. In contrast, antenatal Beta did not alter 11 β-HSD 2 expression in either KC or KM at any of the ages studied. CONCLUSION: Our data show that prenatal exposure to a single course of GC at 0.55 gestation has acute and long-term effects on the kidney's ability to metabolize GC. The decrease in 11 β-HSD 1 expression during development suggests that it may play a role in the alterations in renal development known to exist following antenatal GC administration. HL68728, P01 HD04784. . cAEP were evoked before and 4 and 24h after each BM injection using a tone of 500 Hz, 100 dB SPL and 50 ms duration with randomly chosen inter-stimuli intervals of 0.8-1.2sec applied at the maternal abdominal wall for 5 min. cAEP were recorded from the Cz position at the fetal skull and the components P1, N1, P2 and N2 were detected. Results: At 105 dGA, BM treatment induced a latency increase of the P2 and N2 24h after the 2 nd injection (p<0.05) but did not alter amplitudes. At 112 dGA, this delay already occurred 24h after the 1 st injection in the the P2 and N2 (Fig. 1 ). In addition, the N1 was delayed 24h after the 2 nd injection (p<0.05, Fig. 1 ). In parallel, amplitudes of the p2 and n2 decreased 4h after the 1st injection (p<0.05). At 118 dGA, BM did not induce a latency delay. Rather the latencies of all components were decreased 4h after the 1 st and 2 nd BM injection (in tendency or p<0.05). Amplitudes were not altered. Conclusion: BM delayed the cAEP components during the 1 st BM course as in the human fetus. This effect occurred earlier and was more extended during the 2 nd course of BM. Disappearance of the effect during the 3 rd BM course suggests programming of glucocorticoid resistance. (JSocGynInv 13,2006,731) . Using fetal magnetencephalography we have shown that BM delays the latency of cAEP in the human fetus acutely refl ecting alteration of cortical brain function (JSocGynInv 11,2004,69) . Objective: To examine if BM effects on cAEP persist. Therefore, development of cAEP during late gestation was monitored and chronic BM effects were examined. Methods: Pregnant ewes carrying chronically instrumented fetuses received 3 courses of BM (2x110 μg/kg i.m. 24h apart corresponding to 2x8 mg BM to a 70 kg pregnant woman, n=9) or an equal volume saline (n=6) at 105, 112 and 119 dGA (days gestation, term 150 days). cAEP were induced before each BM course and six days after the last course using a tone of 500 Hz, 100 dB SPL and 50ms duration with randomly chosen inter-stimuli intervals of 0.8-1.2sec applied at the maternal abdominal wall for 5 min. cAEP were recorded from the Cz position at the fetal skull and the components P1, N1, P2 and N2 were detected. Results: cAEP were detected in 7/9 BM and 5/6 saline treated fetuses at 105 dGA and later on in all fetuses. In controls, latency of all components decreased continuously until 125 dGA (p<0.05, Fig. 1 ). Amplitudes of the N1 and P2 started to increase at 125 dGA (p<0.05). Increase of the amplitudes was not affected by BM but developmental decrease of latencies was delayed. The P2 and N2 did not and the P1 and N1 started to decrease at 125 dGA (p<0.05, Fig. 1 ). Compared to controls, latency of all components was delayed at 125 dGA (p<0.05, Fig. 1 ). We detected cAEP in the sheep fetus for the fi rst time and traced their development that is determined by myelination and maturation of neuronal circuits. Development of cAEP and, thus, of cortical brain function is affected by BM. Fig. 1 that are a measure of complex cortical brain function were induced immediately before, 4h and 24h after onset of BM infusion and 6h and 24h after the last UCO using a tone of 500 Hz, 100 dB sound pressure level and 50 ms duration with randomly chosen inter-stimuli intervals of 0.8-1.2sec applied at the maternal abdominal wall for 5 min. cAEP were recorded from the Cz position at the fetal skull. cAEP were averaged from 100ms prior to 500ms after the stimulus and the components P1, N1, and N2 were detected. Results: BM induced a transient delay of all cAEP components 4h after start of infusion that has normalized at 24h, i.e. immediately before UCO. Amplitudes were not altered. In controls, UCO induced a delay of all cAEP components 6h after UCO and all but the P1 24h after UCO (p<0.05, Fig.1 Objective: While antenatal glucocorticoids have well known benefi ts for infants born preterm with enhanced pulmonary maturation, adverse effects on brain development have been reported in several animal studies. We have therefore determined the effects of antenatal glucocorticoids administered at doses used clinically on cerebral protein synthesis during brain development using 13 C-leucine tracer methodology. Methods: Chronically instrumented pregnant sheep at 0.85 gestation received two IM injections of betamethasone at 170 μg/kg maternal weight or saline 24 hours apart together with a continuous infusion of 13 C-leucine to the fetus. Measurements were obtained for fetal plasma leucine enrichment (MPE P ) at steady-state and brain tissue intracellular free (MPE IF ) and protein bound (MPE PB ) leucine enrichment at necropsy, followed by the determination of cerebral fractional synthetic (FSR) and fetal leucine disposal rates (DR leu ). A coeffi cient of variation (CV) was determined for plasma and tissue enrichment measurements to assess the methodological variance using 13 C-leucine tracer technology. The cerebral FSR averaged 112 and 35 %/day when using the MPE IF and MPE P values for the precursor pool measurements, respectively, providing for maximal and minimal values, and with no differences between cortical and cerebellar tissues, nor between the control and the betamethasone animals. The DR leu for both groups averaged 10.2 μmol/min/kg, with no observed changes as a result of glucocorticoid treatment. The CV for the MPE P values averaged 2% while that for the MPE IF and MPE P values averaged 10% with an inverse relationship between the 13 C-leucine enrichment values and the CV values. Conclusions: While cerebral FSR values for the preterm ovine fetus are high and indicate high rates of protein synthesis and degradation, we found no evidence that these are altered by betamethasone as used clinically and thereby do not account for the reported structural alterations in the brain following such therapy. We also found no effect of glucocorticoids on DR leu as a measure of the rate at which leucine is used for protein synthesis and oxidation by the fetal organism, as well as loss across the placenta. Glucocorticoids are known to affect multiple organ systems. It has been proposed that fetal exposure to betamethasone (β) affects the renin-angiotensin system and thus might play a role in the development of hypertension. Our primary purpose in this study was to examine the effects of betamethasone exposure on prorenin (PRC) and active (ARC) renin concentration in plasma and kidney cortex from male sheep at 6 and 18 months of age. Pregnant sheep were randomized to receive 2 doses of 0.17 mg/kg betamethasone or vehicle, given 24 hours apart at 80 and 81 days of gestation. The gestations continued until term. From 9 male offspring, at 6 months of age plasma samples were obtained, and at 18 months plasma and kidney were collected at necropsy. ARC and total renin concentration in plasma and homogenized kidney cortex were measured by RIA of angiotensin I generated by incubation with excess substrate. PRC is the difference between total and active in any sample. Renal cortex was homogenized on ice in saline. Homogenates were centrifuged and frozen at -80 °C and diluted for RIA. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM and were analyzed by t test. In the plasma, at 6 months of age, PRC was signifi cantly lower in the β group than in the untreated group (4.63 ± 0.640 vs. 7.09 ± 0.835; p=0.034). At that age, ARC was similar in both groups. However, ARC was a signifi cantly greater percent of the total plasma renin concentration in the betamethasone group (31.93 ± 4.093 vs. 18.57 ± 2.793; p=0.015). In the plasma, at 18 months, there was no difference in PRC, ARC or percent ARC between β and vehicle-treated groups, but there was an age-related decrease in ARC and PRC. In the homogenized kidneys, at 18 months of age, active and prorenin plasma concentration, and the percent active renin were similar in control and treated groups. Our data suggest that prenatal exposure to betamethasone may alter the processing and the secretion of renin in the offspring at 6 months and this effect seems to disappear at 18 months. There is an age related decline in circulating renin concentration between 6 months and 18 months of age. Supported by grants HL 68727, HD 17644 and HD 47584. Bone Metabolism in Fetuses of Pregnant Women Exposed to Single and Multiple Courses of Corticosteroids. Linda Fonseca, Susan Ramin. * for the NICHD MFMU Network, Bethesda, MD, USA. OBJECTIVE: A single course of antenatal dexamethasone has been associated with suppression of fetal collagen synthesis. The effect of repeated doses of antenatal corticosteroids on fetal bone metabolism is unknown. We sought to determine effect of antenatal corticosteroids on fetal bone metabolism and if effect is dose-dependent. METHODS: Secondary analysis of randomized, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial. Women at < 32 weeks gestation at risk for spontaneous preterm delivery who remained pregnant after an initial course of corticosteroids were randomized to weekly repeat courses of betamethasone or placebo. Umbilical cord blood samples were collected at delivery. Plasma levels of carboxy terminal pro-peptide of type I pro-collagen (PICP) and cross-linked carboxyterminal telopeptide of type I collagen (ICTP) were determined by ELISA to assess rate of bone formation and resorption, respectively. Median values were calculated and comparisons made between groups receiving repeat study courses of betamethasone vs placebo, after fi rst course of steroids, by using Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test. Analysis stratifi ed according to number of repeat antenatal study courses of betamethasone or placebo (1 to 3 vs ≥ 4 courses). RESULTS: 114 women were included in placebo group and 137 in betamethasone group. 41 women in placebo group and 46 in betamethasone group received 1-3 repeat study courses, while 73 and 91 women, respectively received > 4 repeat study courses. Median umbilical cord blood ICTP levels were signifi cantly lower (p = 0.014) in the betamethasone group compared with placebo group. There was no difference between the groups in median PICP levels. In the fetuses exposed to ≥ 4 repeat study courses, there was a signifi cant difference between treatment groups in median ICTP levels (p=0.042) but there was no difference between treatment groups in the fetuses exposed to 1 to 3 repeat study courses (p=0.294). CONCLUSION: Bone resorption but not formation is suppressed in fetuses exposed to multiple courses of antenatal betamethasone. The physiologic impact of this bone resorption is unknown. Up to 4 courses of antenatal betamethasone do not appear to affect fetal bone metabolism. Objective: As the cholinergic system represents one of major effectors of gut motility, maturation of the fetal intestinal cholinergic system may contribute to in utero and newborn meconium passage. Glucocorticoids may accelerate cholinergic maturation, as antenatal glucocorticoid administration to the preterm ovine fetus augments cholinergic-stimulated colonic smooth muscle contractility. In fetal rabbits, intra-gastric administration of betamethasone, a synthetic glucocorticoid, induces preterm meconium passage. To examine the role of glucocorticoids in the maturation of fetal colon cholinergic circuitry, we quantifi ed the expression of three cholinergic markers in the preterm and term ovine fetal colon, during periods when circulating fetal glucocorticoid levels are markedly different. Method: Three cholinergic markers used were: 1. Peripheral choline acetyltransferase (pChAT), 2. Vesicular acetylcholine transporter (VAChAT), and 3. High affi nity choline transporter (CHT-1). Immunostaining to pCHAT and CHT-1 were performed using rabbit polyclonal antiserum generated by one of our group (SL) and antibody to VAChAT was obtained from Sigma. Bouin's solution fi xed, paraffi n sections of preterm (118-120 days) and term (146-147days) ovine fetal distal colonic rings were subjected to immunohistochemsitry by avidin-biotin-perioxidase system and 3, 3'diaminobenzidine (Sigma) as a chromogen. Percent of myenteric ganglia expressing cholinergic markers were determined by examining sections under microscope. Results: The percent of myenteric ganglia expressing cholinergic markers in term fetuses (pCHAT: 40%, VAChAT: 27%, and CHT-1: 64%) was signifi cantly (p<0.05) higher than those observed in preterm fetuses (pCHAT: 22%, VAChAT: 14% and CHT-1: 48%). Conclusion: The marked increases observed in cholinergic markers in myenteric ganglia in fetal distal colon at term is possibly mediated by effects of endogenous glucocorticoid, levels of which peak at term. We speculate that glucocorticoids are the physiological hormones that regulate enteric cholinergic neural circuitry system, similar to their actions in central nervous system regions. Objective: Exposure to high levels of glucocorticoids (GC) in the perinatal period has been shown to induce hypertension later in life. The Renin-Angtiotensin-System (RAS) has a central role in fetal kidney development and in the regulation of blood pressure. The aim of this study was to further evaluate the acute and long term effects of a single-course of GC at 80 days gestation (dGA) on the expression of ACE1 and ACE2 in the kidney cortex (KC) and to assess whether gender-related differences are further affected by GC exposure. Methods: Date-mated sheep were randomly assigned to receive a single course of GC [2 maternal IM doses of Beta (0.17 mg/Kg with a maximum of 12 mg) or vehicle 24-h apart] at 80 dGA. One group was delivered by C-section at 24h, another at 135 dGA and a third one allowed to deliver at term and euthanized at 0.8-1.5 yr of age. KC were obtained from fetuses and adults and Results: Relative to controls, maternal dexamethasone treatment showed increased vascular wall thickness and reduced elastin density in the fetal femoral artery and descending aorta but not in the carotid artery (Fig. 1) . Dexamethasone also increased the total expression of smooth muscle actin and nitrotyrosine in fetal femoral vessels only (Fig. 2) . Conclusion: Antenatal glucocorticoid therapy induces regional changes in structure and oxidative stress in the fetal vasculature. Objective: Our objective was to compare the 24-hour time courses for secretion of cortisol (F) and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) in midtrimester whole HFA glands when stimulated by either adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) or corticotrophin releasing hormone (CRH). Methods: Cells harvested from several midtrimester whole HFA glands were incubated in 96 well plates (approx. 280 x 10 3 cells/well). After three days incubation, each culture was supplemented with control medium, medium plus 10nM ACTH, or medium plus 10nM CRH, n = 6 wells per condition. The time points analyzed were 1, 3, 6, 12, and 24 hrs. Concentrations of F and DHEA were determined by enzyme immunoassays. Results: DHEA production was signifi cantly higher than controls in both ACTH and CRH stimulated cells beginning at the initial time point ( Figure  1 ). F secretion by HFA cells stimulated with ACTH was signifi cantly higher than control by the six hour time point. F secretion in cells stimulated with CRH was similar to control until the 24 hour time point (Figure 2) The ratio of DHEA to F produced rose up to 12 hrs and was signifi cantly higher in the ACTH and CRH stimulated cells versus control until the 24 hour time point at which time the ratios were reduced to control levels (not shown). Objective: While the inner fetal zone (FZ) of the midgestation human fetal adrenal (HFA) produces dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, a precursor of placental estrogen, the function of the outer defi nitive zone (DZ) is less clear. We have proposed that the DZ phenotype is that of a pool of progenitor cells, many of which are mitotically active. The adrenal gland is one of the most vascularized organs in the fetus and undergoes rapid growth during midgestation. Recently we studied expression and ACTH regulation of an important family of vascular endothelial cell-specifi c angiogenic factors, angiopoietin-1 and -2 (Ang1 and Ang2) in the HFA. Ang2 was predominantly localized in the periphery of the gland. Ang2 expression has been shown to be restricted to sites of vascular remodeling. In this study, therefore, we tested the hypothesis that the periphery of the HFA is a site of angiogenesis. Methods: Midgestation HFA's (16-23wk) were used. Proliferating endothelial cells were detected by double immunofl uorescence with the endothelial cell markers, CD31 and Ulex lectin, and a proliferation marker, Ki67. Zonal differential expression of Ang1, Ang2, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and basic fi broblast growth factor (bFGF) was investigated by laser-capture microdissection and real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qPCR). Regulation of Ang1, Ang2, and VEGF mRNA was studied by qPCR in isolated HFA cells. Results: 1) Double immunostaining demonstrated that proliferating endothelial cells were limited at the DZ and DZ/FZ border. 2) Ang2 mRNA was primarily localized in the DZ whereas Ang1 mRNA was primarily in the FZ (Ang2/Ang1 mRNA ratios: 9.3 ± 2.3, DZ; 1.2 ± 0.2, FZ; mean ± SE, p < 0.05, n = 5). VEGF and bFGF mRNA levels were also higher in the DZ. 3) Among locally-produced growth factors implicated in HFA development, bFGF (10 ng/ml) induced Ang2 mRNA by 4-fold in both zones (FZ: p < 0.01; DZ: p < 0.05, at 24h), but not Ang1 nor VEGF mRNA. Conclusions: These results suggest that angiogenesis occurs at the periphery of the HFA. As Ang2 renders endothelial cells responsive to angiogenic stimuli such as VEGF and bFGF, predominant expression of these factors by the DZ further supports this notion. The zonal differential expression of Ang2 may be explained, in part, by the parallel pattern of bFGF expression. Objective: Rapid growth of the human fetal adrenal gland (HFA) at midgestation is supported by an active proliferative drive observed in the periphery of the gland, i.e., the defi nitive zone (DZ). Before the third trimester, DZ cells are not capable of producing steroids while they exhibit numerous mitotic fi gures. Our recent fi nding of DZ cell-selective proliferative effects of midkine (MK), a heparin-binding growth factor, provides insight into the mechanisms by which DZ cells maintain their proliferative phenotype in vivo. MK binds to and signals through several proteoglycans. We hypothesized that an MK receptor that has DZ-specifi c expression may be involved in the DZ-selective mitogenic effects of MK. In this study, we investigated the expression and localization of putative MK receptors in the HFA. Methods: HFA's (16-23wk) were used. Expression of transcripts encoding putative MK receptors was examined by RT-PCR. Immunocytochemical studies were performed to localize the receptors. Zonal differential mRNA expression was evaluated by laser-capture microdissection (LCM) and real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qPCR). ACTH regulation of the receptors of interest was further studied by qPCR in isolated HFA cells. Results: Among the receptors implicated in MK signaling, protein-tyrosine phosphatase ζ and anaplastic lymphoma kinase were not expressed in midgestation HFA's. Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) was expressed; however, signifi cant immunoreactive LRP was only seen in the capsule, not in cortical cells. Syndecan-3 and -4 (SDC3 and SDC4), heparan sulfate proteoglycans, were expressed in the HFA. SDC4 was localized abundantly on cortical cell membranes throughout the gland. In contrast, immunoreactive SDC3 was limited to the DZ. The zonal differential expression of SDC3 mRNA was further confi rmed by LCM and qRTPCR. However, addition of ACTH did not change SDC3 mRNA in isolated DZ cells. Conclusions: With its DZ-specifi c localization, SDC3 may be a receptor that mediates DZ-selective mitogenic effects of MK. SDC3 also is an important coreceptor for basic fi broblast growth factor, a known potent growth factor for adrenocortical cells. Taken together, SDC3 may play a role in maintaining the proliferative phenotype of the DZ. We have recently found that this may due in part to corresponding increases in signal transduction following stimulation. Furthermore these ontogenic changes in signal transduction are prevented by hypothalamic-pituitary disconnection (HPD), which also impedes the cortisol surge. This led us to hypothesize that cortisol may be involved in mediating changes in pituitary responsiveness to AVP. To further investigate this, we infused late gestation HPD fetuses with cortisol (HPD + R) and examined pituitary responsiveness in vitro. HPD was performed at around 120 days of gestation (dGA), and a 3 day cortisol infusion (1.2 μg/kg/min) was initiated on 135-137 dGA (Control HPD fetuses were not cortisol infused). Pituitaries were then immediately dissected, dispersed and plated at 2.0 × 10 5 cells per well in 48 wells plates. After 48h, cells were stimulated with 100nM AVP for 2h, and the medium collected for ACTH analysis. Plasma cortisol concentrations increased rapidly within the fi rst 6h following infusion (5.2 ± 1.7 to 29.7 ± 4.9 ng/ml), but did increase further. In non-infused fetuses, cortisol concentrations were 4.8 ± 0.6 ng/ml at 72h. Cells from HPD + R fetuses secreted signifi cantly more ACTH than those from HPD fetuses (% increases from baseline were 45.5 ± 9.3 and 17.7 ± 3.7 respectively). For reference, increases in cells from sham/control fetuses are around 60%. These fi ndings support the idea that cortisol plays a role in mediating pituitary responsiveness to AVP stimulation in the late gestation fetus. Racial disparities exist such that African American women and their newborns are at highest risk for adverse pregnancy outcomes, particularly preterm delivery and low birthweight. Data from several experimental models are suggestive that excessive cortisol synthesis or transplacental passage to the fetus may play a role in prematurity, growth retardation, and even adverse health conditions in postnatal life. We sought to determine if evidence exists for increased intrauterine exposure of African American infants to cortisol in otherwise uncomplicated pregnancies. Methods: Maternal serum was collected at admission for elective term cesarean section deliveries from 23 African American (AA) women and 14 non-Hispanic Caucasian (white) women; umbilical venous serum also was collected at delivery from their singleton infants. We measured total cortisol levels in these maternal and umbilical cord samples by RIA. : Gestational age at delivery and birthweights of the 2 groups were similar. Cortisol levels in the AA women ( 27.6 +/-1.3 ug/dl) were slightly lower than those in the white women (29.7 +/-2.3 ug/dl). Umbilical venous serum cortisol levels in the AA infants (6.9 +/-0.5 ug/dl) were 23% higher than in the white infants (5.6 +/-0.9 ug/dl). In addition, the maternal/umbilical venous cortisol ratio in the white pregnancies (6.8 +/-0.9) was 50% higher (P= 0.016) than that of the AA pregnancies (4.5 +/-0.4). Such a disparity is consistent with a signifi cantly increased transplacental passage of maternal cortisol to the fetal vasculature or increased synthesis in the fetal adrenal in the AA pregnancies. Conclusions: We found evidence suggestive of increased exposure of the fetoplacental unit to cortisol in pregnancies of AA women. The altered maternal to fetal ratio of cortisol in AA pregnancies could result from decreased levels or activity of placental 11 hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2, which serves to inactivate cortisol by conversion to cortisone, or increased 11 hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1, which mainly converts cortisone to cortisol. An alternate explanation would be increased fetal adrenal cortisol synthesis in the AA pregnancies. Increased levels of cortisol in the feto-placental unit in AA pregnancies could contribute to the racial disparities in pregnancy outcomes. Approx 70-80% cytosine rings in dinucleotide sequence CG are methylated (ME). ME CGs program genome expression by silencing genes in gene and tissue specifi c patterns. ME patterns are generated during development by ME and deME reactions. Disruption of gene ME is involved in cancer and other diseases. Hypothesis: During gestation pluripotent cells differentiate into terminal phenotypes characterized by a restricted gene expression repertoire. We hypothesized that global gene ME increases with gestation. We also hypothesized that 50% global MNR would decrease global ME. We determined 1) changes in global ME in fetal (F) sheep liver (L) in the 2nd half of gestation and 2) if 50% global maternal nutrient restriction (MNR) alters global ME. Methods: Control fed (CF, n = 12, 100% NRC requirements) or NR (n= 11, 50% NRC requirements) diets began at 28 days gestation (dG). 8 CF and 6 NR ewes were necropsied at 78 dG and 4 CF and 5 NR ewes at 135 dG. F L (left lobe) was fl ash frozen in liquid N,stored at -80°C, DNA extracted and 5-methylcytosine in CG dinucleotides quantifi ed by nearest-neighbor analysis [3] . Data (M + SEM) analyzed by two way ANOVA. Results: F body and L wts for 78dG CF and NR were 272 ± 11 and 16.6 ± 1.0g vs. 211 ± 11 and 13.4 ± 0.9g, respectively. F body and L wts for 135dG CF and NR groups were 5358 ± 286 and 143.2 ± 10.2 vs. 5197 ± 174 and 157 ± 5.0g, respectively. Global ME was 53.5 + 2.9 and 59.6 + 3.4% in CF and NR respectively (ns) at 78 dG and 83.5 + 2.53% and 74.8 + 3.26% at 135 dG in CF and NR respectively (p = 0.08). Global ME increased between 78 and 135 dG in CF and NR (p < 0.05 Methods: RNA was isolated from lung tissue from 80, 120, 130, and 145day gestation ovine fetuses, and fetuses of ewes in labor (term) as well as one-and seven day old lambs, and real-time PCR was performed. Gene expression was normalized to β-actin expression. Results: The chloride channel ClC2 mRNA showed ∼2-fold greater expression at 80d than at 145d or in one-and seven-day lambs. The mRNA for the other major chloride channel in lung, CFTR, also showed signifi cantly greater expression at 80d than at any other age. ENaC α showed a signifi cant increase in mRNA expression at 145d and at term compared to 80d (∼15-16-fold); its expression decreased postnatally. The water channel aquaporin1 (AQP1) mRNA expression increased ∼9-fold from 80d to a peak at term. AQP5 mRNA showed signifi cantly greater expression at all gestational ages compared with 80d, peaking at 145d. There were increases of ∼300-fold at 145d, ∼170-fold at term, and ∼120-150 fold postnatally as compared to 80d. Conclusions: Gene expression followed expected patterns based on the role of the channels in lung liquid movement. Lung fl uid secretion is driven by a chloride gradient. Our data, which show that ClC-2 and CFTR mRNA are more highly expressed early in gestation, suggest a possible role in the establishment of the chloride gradient. In contrast, reabsorption of fl uid depends on the establishment of a sodium gradient. Water then follows sodium passively, paracellularly or through aquaporins. ENaC α was expressed more abundantly late in fetal life, consistent with its accepted role in fl uid reabsorption. AQP1 and AQP5 were also expressed more abundantly late in gestation than at 80d or postnatally, suggesting a possible role in the reabsorption of luminal water across the lung epithelium. Objective: Maternal food restriction (MFR) during pregnancy causes IUGR offspring that when fed ad libitum from birth demonstrate catch-up growth by 3 weeks. Asymmetric growth is characteristic of IUGR and autocrine secretion of the growth factor IGF-1 may play a role in tissue specifi c growth. Despite reduced relative hepatic size at birth, liver size normalizes by 3 wks of age. We therefore sought to determine whether IGF-1 and IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) are differentially expressed in IUGR liver and whether these changes were age dependent. Methods: Control Sprague Dawley dams (n=6) received ad libitum food, study dams (MFR, n=5) were 50% food-restricted from pregnancy day 10 to 21 resulting in IUGR newborns. At birth litter size was culled to 4 males and 4 females. All pups were nursed by dams fed ad libitum and were weaned to ad libitum feed. Plasma along with liver and kidney and were collected at gestational day 20 (E20), day 1 and 3 weeks. Plasma levels of IGF-1 were measured by RIA and IGF-1 and IGF-1R mRNA levels were quantifi ed by Real-time PCR. Results: Plasma IGF-1 was decreased in IUGR offspring at day 1(% of control: 89.8%, p<0.01) but not at 3 weeks. Conversely, in IUGR liver, IGF-1R mRNA was not different at E20 and day 1 but subsequently decreased at 3 weeks (66.4%, p<0.05). In contrast, IUGR kidney IGF-1R mRNA was signifi cantly increased at E20 (188.1%, p<0.05), though no difference was evident at day 1 and 3 weeks of age. No change was seen in IUGR liver or kidney IGF-1 mRNA levels at E20, day 1 and 3 weeks. Conclusion: IUGR alters IGF-1R mRNA levels in an organ and age specifi c manner. We speculate that IUGR alterations to the IGF system at critical periods of organ development may contribute to newborn catch-up growth and the later development of the metabolic syndrome. BACKGROUND: The discovery of cell-free fetal DNA in maternal plasma has opened up new possibilities for noninvasive prenatal diagnosis. However, the use of maternal plasma fetal DNA for the direct detection of fetal chromosomal aneuploidies has not been reported. We postulate that the aneuploidy status of a fetus could be revealed by an epigenetic allelic ratio approach, i.e., by analyzing the allelic ratio of a single-base variation present within DNA molecules exhibiting a placental-specifi c epigenetic signature in maternal plasma. METHODS: Placental-derived fetal-specifi c unmethylated maspin promoter sequences on human chromosome 18 were detectable in placental-maternal DNA mixtures and in maternal plasma by bisulfi te modifi cation followed by methylation-specifi c PCR (MSP) and primer extension. The ratios between the extension products of the 2 alleles were calculated for heterozygous placentas, placental-maternal blood cell DNA mixtures, and maternal plasma samples. Background:Associations between the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) C677T and A1298C polymorphisms, involved in the homocysteine pathway, and the occurrence of congenital heart defects (CHD) are contradictory. The frequencies of these functional polymorphisms vary between populations, which may explain some of the discrepancies. Objective: To determine associations between MTHFR C677T and MTHFR A1298C polymorphisms in mothers, fathers and their children, the periconceptional maternal intake of folate and ribofl avin via food and supplements, and the risk of CHD. Methods:A case-control family study comprising 230 parents with a CHD child and 251 control parents with an unaffected child was conducted in the European population of the Netherlands. Approximately 17 months after the index-pregnancy, standardized questionnaires on periconceptional maternal use of folate and ribofl avin supplements and a validated food frequency questionnaire on current maternal dietary intake were fi lled out. Mothers, fathers and children were genotyped for the MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphisms using (Polymerase Chain Reaction)-Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism. The data were analyzed by logistic regression analysis using the dominant model. OBJECTIVES: Increasing evidence shows effects of infl ammatory cytokines in the mechanism of infection-and non-infection-induced preterm labor. The cytokines are produced by activated maternal polymorphonuclear leukocytes and monocytes infi ltrating the decidual and fetal membranes. Intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) is an important adhesion molecule that plays a key role in the tight adhesion between leukocytes and vascular endothelium. ICAM-1 is expressed by the human amnion and this expression is elevated with preterm labor and delivery. ICAM-1 shows genetic polymorphisms at codons 469 (K469E). Polymorphisms of this gene was studied in other infl ammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, chronic pancreaitis and so on. The object of this study was to investigate the association between the K469E polymorphism of the ICAM-1 gene and preterm delivery in Korean population. METHODS: The ICAM-1 K469E polymorphism was genotyped using sequencing analysis in 94 women with preterm delivery and 153 controls who had delivered at least two normal term babies. hs-CRP was assessed in all pateints except in emergent situations. RESULTS: The distribution of genotype frequencies of the preterm group was signifi cantly different from that of the controls. (7) preparations, yielding results in ≤2 weeks in 60%. Indications were: advanced maternal age (51), abnormal ultrasound (13), abnormality in previous child (10), other positive family history (5), abnormal serum screen result (3), marker identifi cation (2), apparently balanced chromosomal translocation on karyotype (1), prior pregnancy loss (4), parental concern (3) (some had more than one indication). There were 64 normal results and 3 abnormalities (3.8%) (1 trisomy 21, 1 identifi cation of a marker chromosome's origin, 1 deletion at a translocation breakpoint) and 1 pseudomosaic that arose in cell culture. There were 10 CNVs (12.5%), all inherited. There was no MCC. Conclusions: Array CGH testing yields highly accurate results on CVS and AF in ≤ 2 weeks. Further larger-scale studies should assess whether array CGH can replace karyotyping and FISH for rapid and expanded prenatal detection of chromosomal imbalances. Background: Maternal hyperhomocysteinemia increases the risk of having a child with a congenital heart defect (CHD). This might be caused by derangements in vitamin B12 transport and metabolism. Objective: To investigate associations between polymorphisms in the vitamin B12 transporter gene transcobalamin 2 (TCN2) and the methionine synthase reductase (MTRR) gene, involved in homocysteine remethylation, the maternal vitamin B12 intake and CHDs. Methods: In the Netherlands a case-control family study was performed in 230 children with a CHD and both parents, and in 251 healthy children and both parents. At 17 months after the index-pregnancy the mothers fi lled out a general and a food frequency questionnaire covering the current dietary intake and refl ecting the periconceptional diet. Blood samples were taken from all families. TCN2 C776G and MTRR A66G genotypes were determined in DNA samples with a Taqman allelic discrimination assay. Non-European families (n = 95) were excluded. Data were analysed with transmission disequilibrium tests and logistic regression analyses. Results: All genotype frequencies were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (P > 0.05). Allele transmissions were not signifi cantly distorted. The TCN2 and MTRR genotypes of mothers, fathers and children were not signifi cantly associated with CHD (Table) . No signifi cant interactions were observed between these polymorphisms in mothers or children and a low maternal periconceptional vitamin B12 intake and/or no use of a vitamin supplement, and CHD risk. The TCN2 C776G and MTRR A66G polymorphisms are not associated with CHD. It is unlikely that interactions between these polymorphisms and maternal vitamin B12 intake are involved in the pathogenesis of CHD. Polymorphisms and CHD risk OR (95% CI) Mothers Fathers Children MTRR 66 GG 1.0 (0.6-1.6) 1.5 (0.9-2.6) 1.5 (0.9-2.5) AG 0.9 (0.6-1.4) 1.2 (0.7-2.0) 1.2 (0.8-2.0) AA 1.0 (Reference) TCN2 776 GG 0.8 (0.6-1.3) 1.0 (0.6-1.8) 0.9 (0.5-1.5) CG 0.9 (0.5-1.5) 1.1 (0.7-1.6) 0.9 (0.6-1. Background: Several studies have reported associations between hyperhomocysteinemia, polymorphisms in the 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene, and cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CLP) and congenital heart defect (CHD) risk. However, findings have been inconsistent. Methods: A meta-analysis was performed of published studies until September 2006 to investigate these associations in both mothers and children. Homocysteine data were provided in two CLP and three CHD studies, and MTHFR polymorphisms were reported in ten CLP and eight CHD studies. Data were analyzed using the random effects model in the Cochrane Review Manager. The pooled odds ratio (OR) of maternal hyperhomocysteinemia was 2.3 (95% CI 0.4-11.9) for CLP, and 4.4 (2.6-7.3) for CHDs. The MTHFR C677T polymorphism and CLP showed pooled ORs of 1.2 (0.9-1.5) in mothers and 1.0 (0.9-1.2) in children, whereas these estimates for the MTHFR A1298C polymorphism were 1.0 (0.7-1.2) in mothers and 0.9 (0.6-1.2) in children. The MTHFR C677T polymorphism in CHD studies demonstrated a pooled OR of 1.0 (0.8-1.3) for mothers and 1.1 (0.9-1.5) for children. Two studies investigating the association between maternal MTHFR A1298C polymorphism and CHDs demonstrated a pooled OR of 1.2 (0.8-1.8). Only one CHD study reported an OR of 1.3 (0.8-2.1) for this polymorphism in children. This meta-analysis demonstrates that maternal hyperhomocysteinemia is a risk factor for CHDs. The MTHFR polymorphisms C677T and A1298C in both the mother and the child are not independently associated with CLP or CHDs. Large studies should be performed to investigate the interactions between maternal hyperhomocysteinemia and other B-vitamin related polymorphisms, and the risk of CLP and CHDs. Autism is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder and characterized by pervasive impairments in social interactions, defi cits in verbal and non-verbal communication, exploratory and repetitive behavior. The exact cause(s) of autism and timing of autistic development are not known. However, it is becoming evident that both environmental and genetic factors may contribute to autism in children. Recent studies show that autism may result from valproate therapy or maternal alcohol consumption during pregnancy. It is not completely clear however, how exposure to valproate or alcohol during pregnancy may cause autism in the children! Adhesion molecules such as cadherins and integrins play important role in the brain development, and changes in the expression levels of these adhesion molecules are shown to disturb the normal development of the brain. Therefore, we examined the effects of valproate and alcohol on the expression levels of N-cadherin and β 1 integrin subunit in the neuron-like PC12 cells to understand whether exposure to these compounds during pregnancy may disturb brain development by altering the cellular signaling via these receptors. Both mRNA and protein levels of these receptor subunits were examined in PC12 cells at different times of culture in absence or presence of valproate or alcohol. Cultures were also supplemented with low or high concentrations of nerve growth factor (NGF) that is known to differentiate PC12 cells. Results show that both valproate and alcohol infl uence expression levels of N-cadherin and integrin subunit β 1 in PC12 cells in a NGF independent manner. Therefore, maternal exposure to valproate or alcohol during pregnancy may impair the brain development by changing cellular signaling mediated by adhesion molecules. Supported by a grant from NIH (NIH/NCRR P20 RR017701). Autism is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by pervasive impairments in social interactions, deficits in verbal and non-verbal communication, and exploratory behavior. Exact cause of autism is not known, however both genetic and environmental factors seem to play signifi cant role in the development of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD). Recent studies report that exposure to Valproate, thalidomide or alcohol during pregnancy may cause autism in children. The mechanism of this phenomenon is barely known. In the present investigation Boyden Chamber assays were conducted to examine the migratory behavior of dissociated neurons isolated from gestation days 18 rat fetal cerebral cortices. Effects of extra cellular matrix protein laminin, and RGD peptides were tested on the migration of neurons. Both low and higher concentrations of sodium valproate and alcohol (ethanol) on the migratory behavior of neurons were studied in the presence of laminin. Migration of neurons were enhanced by Laminin and reduced by RGD peptide. Alcohol or valproate changed migration of neurons in a dose dependent manner. Results suggest that laminin binding integrin receptors are involved in the migration of dissociated neurons isolated from gestation day 18 rat cerebral cortices. Changes in the migratory behavior of neurons in the presence of valproate or alcohol in vitro indicate that maternal exposure to these teratogens during second trimester of pregnancy may alter the positioning of neurons causing ASD. Maternal exposure to alcohol results in wide range of abnormalities in the offspring. Studies to examine the effects of alcohol on the developing fetus report both genotype and time dependent changes in the fetal weights. Placental weight is also reported to change due to the gestational alcohol-exposure. These studies however used constant and higher doses of maternal alcohol exposure on the weight of organs which might not allow the mothers and fetuses to adapt to the alcohol's toxic effects. Therefore in the present investigation, increasing concentrations of alcohol in the isocaloric protein fortifi ed diet was used to determine if gradual increase in the alcohol would prevent the adverse effects of alcohol. Long-Evans rats were given protein fortifi ed diet with 2.2% alcohol during gestation days 6 and 7, 4.5% alcohol during gestation days 8 to 10 followed by 6.7% alcohol until sacrifi ce. Control animals obtained the diet with no alcohol. Appropriate amounts of Maltose dextran was added to ensure the control and alcohol diet to be isocaloric. On gestation days 18 or 20 morning control and alcohol-exposed mothers were anesthetized with isofl urane, weighed and dissected to obtain the fetuses and placentas. Fetal and placental weights were determined. ANOVA test was used to determine changes in the weights due to gestational alcohol. Signifi cant drops in mothers and fetal weights due to alcohol exposure were observed. Placental weights, in contrary, were increased in the alcohol exposed groups. Results suggest that exposure to increasing concentrations of alcohol during pregnancy starting even with a lower dose in the fi rst trimester may not prevent alcohol's toxic effects on the mother and fetus. Supported by a grant from NIH (NIH/NCRR P20 RR017701). Objective: As in stress-induced adult defecation, in utero meconium passage requires participation of CRF and CRF receptors in fetal colon motility responses. CRF mediates its biological actions through CRF-receptor type 1 (CRF-R1; colon motility stimulatory) and CRF-receptor type 2 (CRF-R2; colon motility inhibitory). We sought to localize the CRF-R1 and R2 receptors in ovine fetal distal colon to address their contribution to stress-induced meconium passage. Method: The distal colon was dissected from ovine fetuses (n=4 for each age) at very preterm (VPT: 118-120 d), preterm (PT: 130-132 d), near term (NT: 140-142 d) and term (T:146-147 d) and contents fl ushed with ice-cold phosphate buffered saline. Segments of 4 cm were prepared and colonic rings (3-4 mm) cut at both end of segments, fi xed in Bouin's solution and paraffi n embedded. Sections were processed for immunostaining with rabbit polyclonal antibodies specifi c to CRF-R1 (generously provided by J. Rose) and CRF-R2 (1:200-1:400 Abcam) by avidin-biotin-peroxidase system. Double immunofl uorescence and laser confocal analyses were performed to ascertain the neuronal localization of CRF-receptors. Percent of myenteric and submucosal ganglia immunostained were counted and intensity of immunostaining in circular smooth muscle layer was analyzed using Image Pro-plus software. Results: CRF-R1 and CRF-R2 antibody strongly immunostained longitudinal and circular smooth muscle layers in the distal colonic segments at all four gestational ages. A marked decrease (p<0.0001) in CRF-R2 immunostaining occurred in circular muscle at term compared to very preterm (IOD: 9.3±1.4 vs 44.2±4.5). CRF-R1 though not CRF-R2 stained neuronal somas in the myenteric and submucosal ganglia. Percent of ganglia expressing CRF-R1 receptor signifi cantly and markedly increased at term in both myenteric ( Objective: Angiotensin I (Ang I) and II are present in the placenta and the uteroplacental unit possesses all components of the Renin-angiotensin system (RAS) necessary for their generation. Altered placental Ang II receptor-1 (AT1) expression has been considered playing a role in enhanced oxidative stress and increased vasoconstriction in pregnancy-complicated disorders such as preeclampsia and IUGR. However, the pathways of Ang II generation and its receptors AT1 and AT2 regulation in placental vessel smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) have not been studied. In the present work, we used a collagen gel contraction model to investigate the role of Ang II and its receptor regulation in placental VSMC contractility. Methods: VSMCs were generated from tertiary chorionic plate vessels from placentas delivered by normal pregnant women. Type-1 collagen was prepared from rat-tail tendons. Placental VSMC/type-1 collagen gels were incubated with placental conditioned medium (CM). Captopril (an ACE inhibitor) and chymostatin (a chymase inhibitor) were used to study effects of ACE and non-ACE on Ang II generation. Losartan (an AT1 receptor blocker) and PD123319 (an AT2 receptor blocker) were used to study specifi c AT1 and AT2 receptor regulation, respectively. Protein expressions for AT1 and AT2 were determined by Western blot analysis. Results: 1) chymostatin but not captopril signifi cantly blocked placental VSMC/ collagen gel contraction induced by placental CM, p<0.01; 2) PD123319, but not losartan, also markedly attenuated placental VSMC/collagen gel contraction, p<0.01. The inhibitory effects are in a dose-dependent manner for both chymostatin and PD123319; and 3) AT1 protein was strongly expressed in VSMCs, but the expression level was not affected when cells were stimulated with placental CM. In contrast, AT2 protein was weakly expressed in control cells, but upregulated upon stimulation. Conclusions: Our results suggest that chymase, a non-ACE Ang II generating enzyme, rather than ACE may play a dominant role in controlling Ang II generation in the human placenta. AT2 receptor may be more responsible for regulating Ang II induced contractility in placental VSMCs. These results provide new insights into control of Ang II generation and Ang II receptor regulation in the placental vasculature. weeks gestational age). After enzymatic disaggregation CD56+ uNK cells were positively selected (>95% purity) using an immunomagnetic technique. uNK cells were cultured for 48 hours and supernatants (SNs) harvested. Invasion assays were performed with placental explants (8-10 weeks gestation) on Matrigel coated 8μm inserts in the presence of uNK cell SNs ± anti-TGFβ1, anti-TNFα or anti-IFNγ. After 6 days culture medium was harvested for analysis of MMP2, MMP9 and uPA protein levels by gelatin or casein/plasminogen zymography. Inserts were stained, mounted on glass slides and the whole of the fi lter counted. Data are shown as invasion index relative to control for each experiment; mean±SEM. Results: uNK cell SNs from 8-10 weeks gestation had no effect on EVT invasion. uNK cell SNs from 12-14 weeks gestation stimulated EVT invasion (control 1.0±0.0, uNK 2.7±0.5; P=0.04). Each of the neutralising antibodies partially attenuated the effect of the uNK cell SNs on EVT invasion (anti-TGFβ1 2.2±0.8, anti-TNFα 1.7±0.6, anti-IFNγ 1.3±0.5) with no statistical difference compared with controls. There was no difference in MMP2 or uPA levels under any of the conditions tested. MMP9 levels were increased in the presence of uNK cell SNs. Conclusions: Although uNK cell SNs from 8-10 week samples had no effect on EVT invasion SNs from 12-14 week samples stimulated EVT invasion via a mechanism partially dependent on increased MMP9 levels. uNK derived TGFβ1, TNFα and IFNγ do not appear to be signifi cantly involved in this process. uNK cells may play a role in maintenance of EVT invasion in vivo. The family of VICKZ RNA binding proteins can localize RNAs to the leading edge of migrating cells. VICKZ expression is associated with cell invasion and metastasis in several types of neoplasms. Its expression in normal human development and placentation is largely unknown. Our objective was to determine the expression pattern of VICKZ proteins in normal and abnormal placentation. The expression of VICKZ was examined using immunohistochemistry with a pan VICKZ antibody. Serial sections were examined with a cytokeratin antibody to identify trophoblasts. Normal fi rst, second and third trimester placental tissue sections were studied. Placental tissue sections taken from pathological conditions including: complete and partial hydatidiform mole, preeclampsia, placenta accreta following a previous cesarean section, placenta accreta with no previous uterine injury and ectopic pregnancies were examined. A speciman from a normal non-pregnant uterus was included in the study. RESULTS: VICKZ was found to be highly expressed in extravillous trophoblasts of fi rst trimester placenta. Its expression was down regulated in third trimester. Similar fi ndings were observed in pathological sections of fi rst trimester (ectopic, complete and partial mole) where expression was high in extravillous trophoblasts. In third trimester pathological samples (preeclampsia and accreta) expression was down regulated. Cytokeratin immunohistochemistry confi rmed the presence of trophoblsts in these samples. We also observed expression of VICKZ in the glandular epithelium of the non-pregnant uterus. CONCLUSION: The temporal and cell specific regulation of VICKZ expression in the placenta and its expression in fi rst trimester placenta, suggests that VICKZ expression may play a role in regulating invasion of extravillous trophoblasts. We conclude that VICKZ may have an important role in the process of normal as well as abnormal placentation. Heparanase Is Activated at the Leading Front of Cytotrophoblast Invasion at the Human Feto-Maternal Interface. Ronit Haimov-Kochman, *1 Shira Natanson-Yaron, 1 Caryn Greenfi eld, 1 Debra Goldman-Wohl, 1 Cytotrophoblasts (CTBs) produce two heparanase isoforms. The full-length 65kDa proheparanase undergoes proteolytic processing yielding an active 50 kDa enzyme heterodimer. Recently, the protease that cleaves proheparanase has been identifi ed as cathepsin L that exists in both lysosomal and secreted forms. We sought to determine the distribution of heparanase isoenzymes and cathepsin L in the human implantation site. Methods Heparanase isoforms and cathepsin L were immunolocalized on cultured 1 st trimester placental villi and basal plate of 2 nd trimester placenta. The heparanase proenzyme and the active isoform were detected using antilinker (anti-CTKL) and 733pAb, respectively. An affi nity-purifi ed cathepsin L IgG (R&D Systems, Inc) raised against the recombinant protein, with less than 1% cross-reactivity with other cathepsins was used to immunodetect cathepsin L. Results HLA-G-positive CTB columns of 2 nd trimester villous placenta expressed both active heparanase and cathepsin L. Likewise, HLA-G-positive CTBs of placental villi invading the Matrigel were immuno-reactive with both active heparanase and cathepsin L but lack the expression of proheparanase. Proheparanase was exclusively detected at the villous stroma. The human implantation site showed reactivity with both heparanase isoenzymes and cathepsin L. Interestingly, differential expression of heparanase isoforms was detected along the invasive front of CTBs in the decidua. Active heparanase and cathepsin L were co-localized at HLA-G-positive extravillous CTBs interstitially invading the decidua whereas CTBs lingering behind expressed only the relatively inactive isoform of heparanase. Conclusion The proteolytic activation of heparanase by cathepsin L provides an attractive means by which heparanase-mediated cleavage of decidual HS is regulated and invasion of CTSs enhanced. Our data show that the most leading fronts of CTB invasion express cathepsin L that potentially depletes the reservoir of tissue proheparanase and enhances the activation of heparanase. Objectives: During invasion into the maternal decidua, cytotrophoblasts (CT) undergo a phenotypical shift possibly modulated by oxygen. We used a double tissue culture system with fi rst trimester villous explants on term amnion to study cell column (CC) formation, phenotypical changes, apoptosis and proliferation of CTs in different oxygen conditions during invasion. Methods: First trimester chorionic villi (5 to 9 weeks gestation, n=16) were collected after surgical termination of pregnancies and fetal membranes were obtained from elective term C-sections (n=6). Villous explants were placed on the mesenchymal side of amnion pieces and cultured in DMEM/F12. Explants were exposed to 20% O 2 or 2.5% O 2 for up to 8 days. Histology (HE) and immunohistochemistry (cytokeratin 7 and 18, Mib-1, M30, GLUT1, MMP3, CA9, Hif 2α) were performed. After 3 days, invading CTs had crossed the spongy layer and reached the compact layer of the amnion. In 2.5% O 2 CT showed more proliferation (Mib-1) and less apoptosis (M30). In both oxygen conditions, apoptosis of CTs was more pronounced in villi than in invading CTs. In 20% O 2 , more CCs were generated (# CC) which invaded deeper into the mesenchyme (depth CC). Meanwhile, the size of the CCs (size CC) was larger compared to 2.5% O 2 . In both conditions, we noted Glut 1 expression in the apical microvilli of the syncytiotrophoblast, in the CTs and in the amnion epithelium. Hif 2α expression was most dominant in the syncytiotrophoblast, villous stroma and in invading CTs, but negative in the CCs, whereas CA9 was only expressed in the villous stroma. The table contains descriptive statistics and p values. Conclusions: This model of CT invasion nicely mimics the in vivo situation of invasion. The differential CC formation of early fi rst trimester villi is consistent with a direct effect of oxygen on the invasion of CTs in that period of pregnancy. Whether late fi rst trimester explants respond similarly to different oxygen conditions remains to be determined. Characterization of Numb Expression in the Human Placenta. Introduction: Numb is a multifunctional protein involved in cell differentiation and proliferation associated with neurogenesis. This protein has four alternative splicing isoforms with distinct functions. Numb null mice have incidentally been noted to display defects in placental formation, suggesting Numb may play a role in placental development. However, the expression of Numb in the human placenta or on the presence of its isoforms are unknown Objective: To examine the expression and localization of Numb in human EVT cell line and placental tissue. Methods: Numb transcripts were examined by RT-PCR with three sets of primers, in which the amplifi ed fragment included (1) the sequence coding Nterminal phophotyrosine binding (PTB) domain region only, (2) a proline-rich C-terminal region (PRR) only and, (3) both PTB and PRR respectively in HTR8/SVneo and human placenta. Numb protein expression were also assessed with Western blot analysis. The localization of Numb protein in the human placenta was examined with immunohistochemistry(IHC). Vimentin and cytokeratin proteins were used as cell markers for decidual and EVT at the maternal-fetal interface respectively. Results: Two fragments with sizes of 316 and 283 bp were detected by PCR using a primer located in nucleotides coding for PTB domain. The fragments of 428 and 284 bp were amplifi ed with a primer designed from the PRR region. The PCR analysis with primer designed to amplify the fragments including both PTB domain and PRR regions showed 1188, 1155, 1044 and 1011 bp products, confi rming that all 4 Numb isoforms are expressed in the EVT cell line and human placenta. Western blot analysis revealed the presence of 71 and 72 kDa numb proteins in both the cell line and placental tissue. Numb immunosignals in scatter cytotrophoblasts and stromal cells were observed in placental villi at the 1st and 3rd trimester with IHC. At the maternal-fetal interface at 1st trimester, both decidual and EVT displayed strong Numb immunoreactivity. We have demonstrated for the fi rst time, that the four numb isoforms are present in a human EVT cell line and placentae. Numb protein is localized to cytotrophoblasts and EVT. These results suggest that Numb may be involved in placental development, more specifi cally in trophoblast invasion. These fi ndings suggest that HB-EGF cleavage to the secreted form under hypoxic condtions is unlikely due to ADAM activity. This will be confi rmed by gel zymography to determine differential activity between hypoxic and normoxic conditions. Supported by National Institutes of Health grant to REL (HD37500). Background: Invasion of uterine decidua, myometrium and spiral arteries by extravillous trophoblast (EVT) is crucial for healthy pregnancy and decidual leukocytes may be involved in control of this process. T cells account for fewer than 20% of leukocytes in fi rst trimester human decidua, although they account for a higher proportion in the third trimester. We have previously demonstrated that supernatants produced by decidual CD8 + lymphocytes (8-12 weeks gestational age) stimulate invasion of EVT from fi rst trimester placental explants. The mechanism underlying this stimulation of invasion is not known. Hypothesis: Supernatants produced by decidual CD8 + T lymphocytes stimulate EVT invasion via an increase in protease activity. Methods: Decidua was obtained with informed consent from women undergoing termination of healthy pregnancy (8-10 and 12-14 weeks gestational age, n=10 both groups). After enzymatic disaggregation CD8 + T lymphocytes were positively selected (>95% CD8 + ) using an immunomagnetic technique. Isolated cells were incubated with phytohaemagglutinin (PHA)-P (10mg/ ml) and supernatants harvested after 24 hours. Decidual CD8 + lymphocyte supernatants (33% vol/vol in DMEM-F12 containing 10% FBS) were cultured with placental tissue explants of the same gestational age on Matrigel in fl at bottom wells. After 6 days of incubation supernatants were harvested from the placental explants and MMP-2, MMP-9 and uPA activities were determined by gelatin or casein/plasminogen gel zymography. Results: Although EVT invasion was increased by decidual CD8 + T lymphocyte supernatants, levels of MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity were decreased in explants cultured with decidual CD8 + T lymphocyte supernatants when compared with the PHA-P control in the 8-10 weeks gestation group (P=0.047 and P=0.047, respectively). A trend towards the same effect was seen for MMP-9 at 12-14 weeks gestation, but was not statistically signifi cant (P=0.09). uPA activity was not affected by culture in decidual CD8 + supernatants in either gestational age group. Conclusion: Decidual CD8 + T lymphocytes can regulate the invasive capacity of EVT in vitro. We speculate that this regulatory effect involves mechanisms independent of protease activity. Of those very few that are, some have been associated with physiologic function; others with disease. The placenta is unique in its expression of a small number of functional retroviral sequences that encode expressed proteins. Syncytin is one example. It is expressed in at high levels in cytotrophoblast cells and has a role in syncytialization to syncytiotrophoblast. Human pregnancy is marked by an early and sustained rise in reproductive hormone secretion. In this study, we use a cell line representing cytotrophoblast (JEG3) to examine the effects of the reproductive steroid, estradiol, on well-described (HERV-W, HERV-F) and novel (HERV-E) placental HERV families. METHODS: HERV-expression was assessed using a novel sequence-based RT-PCR method that detects both qualitative and quantitative characteristics of alterations in HERV family gene transcription. Amplifi cation of DNA from estradiol exposed (10 -6 M, 10 -7 M, and 10 -8 M; 0-48 hours) and non-exposed JEG3 cells was subjected to amplifi cation by degenerate HERV family-specifi c primers. Sequencing of amplifi ed products allowed quantifi cation of the proportion of products that coded for specifi c HERV family subtypes. RESULTS: HERV-W subtype expression (including expression of syncytin) was markedly affected by estradiol exposure, while HERF-FRD expression (syncytin 2) was unaffected by treatment. HERV-E products are newly described to be expressed in the placenta; one interesting subtype (localized to chromosome 17) exhibited transcriptional upregulation with estradiol exposure. CONCLUSIONS: Reproductive steroid exposures typical of the human menstrual cycle and human pregnancy modulate the expression of functional and novel, potentially functional endogenous retroviral genes. Further exploration of these effects may provide insight into the physiologic or pathologic role of the placental HERV-E subtypes. Introduction: Preeclampsia and IUGR have been linked to improper trophoblast migration that impairs maternal spiral artery transformation minimizing vessel dilation and therefore restricting blood fl ow to the developing fetus. Endothelial cells are thought to play an essential role in directing trophoblast migration and transformation, although the mechanism by which this occurs is not fully understood. We have developed a novel in vitro system that evaluates endothelial-trophoblast interaction and signaling in a three-dimensional environment. Methods: An immortalized human endometrial endothelial cell line (HEEC) (Krikun et al., 2004) and fi rst trimester trophoblast cell line HTR-8 were used. Matrigel Basement Membrane Matrix was used for endothelial differentiation into vessel-like structures. Trophoblast migration and transformation was monitored using cell membrane linker dye and OpenLab Image Analysis software. Cytokine and chemokine production was determined using a Beadlyte Multiplex Assay with detection and analysis using the Luminex 100 IS. Results: Upon differentiation in matrigel, endothelial cells undergo a shift in cytokine production characterized by an increased secretion of chemokines. First trimester trophoblast cells migrate toward the differentiated endothelium, and reach it within 4 to 8 hours. Complete replacement of the endothelium is seen by 48 hours. The transformed tubes maintain structure and remain functional for several weeks allowing for further co-culture studies. Conclusion: We report the characterization of a novel three-dimensional in vitro system of trophoblast-endothelium cell interaction. We found signifi cant changes in the phenotype (i.e. cytokine expression and response to LPS) of endothelial cells upon differentiation in matrigel as compared to the monolayer culture. These changes may be necessary for the endothelium to direct trophoblast migration. Furthermore, this model represents an ideal co-culture system to evaluate the role of additional cell types, e.g. immune cells, involved in the process of spiral artery transformation. The Previously, we have demonstrated that Δ 9 -tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), in physiologically relevant concentrations, inhibited the growth and tight transcriptional control of the BeWo trophoblast cell. We sought to fi nd the receptor that mediated this effect and thus treated BeWo cells with up to 30μM THC in the presence and absence of the CB1-, CB2-and VR1-specifi c antagonists, SR141716A, SR144528 and capsazepine. The results showed that the 40% reduction in cell number after 48 hr treatment with 30 μM THC was only abrogated with SR144528 and not by either SR141716A or capsazepine. Interestingly, capsazepine alone caused a 35% reduction in cell number at 48 hr that was not further enhanced by the presence of THC. These data suggested the presence of a functional CB2 and VR1 receptor, but not a functional CB1 receptor in BeWo cells. RT-PCR with gene specifi c primers confi rmed the presence of transcripts for CB2 and VR1 receptors but not for the CB1 receptor, supporting this conclusion. Although THC caused a 1.7-fold increase in the levels of the transcriptional regulator HDAC3, both VR1 and CB2 antagonists prevented this effect, suggesting that HDAC3 expression and BeWo cell proliferation are causally linked. The inhibitory effect of capsazepine alone on BeWo cell proliferation suggests that BeWo cells make or respond to an endogenous cannabinoid through the VR1 receptor that promotes cell growth/survival. These data imply that the regulation of trophoblast growth and function in response to exo-(and presumably) endo-cannabinoids involves not only the cannabinoid receptors but also the vanilloid receptors. Background and Objective: Homeobox genes (HOX) are a family of regulatory genes. They play a critical role in the regulation of cellular differentiation. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of HOX genes A2, A4, 9, C6 in human placenta. Material and Methods: HOX genes mRNA expression was assessed in fresh tissue of human placenta from 12 consecutive placentas of thrombophilic pregnancy (TP) and from 10 human placenta following a normal term birth at the Univ Florence. RNA amplifi cation was assessed by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction assay and measured quantitatively. mRNA was successfully extracted in all cases. Results: Expression of HOX-A2, HOX-A4, HOX-A9 and HOX-C6 genes were detected resp in 66%, 50%, 91%, 100% of the placentas from TP, and resp. in 50%, 20%, 90%, and 90% of the normal placentas. HOX-A2 expression showed signifi cant correlation between placentas from TP and the mean of normal placentas (P=0,05 Kruskal-Wallis test), whereas no correlation was found in expression of HOX-A4, HOX-A9 and HOX-C6 genes between placentas from TP and the mean from the normal placentas. Conclusion:The presence of HOX genes and the correlation of HOX-A2 gene expression levels between placentas from TP and normal placentas support the hypothesis that this genes may be involved in the regulation of cellular differentiation. Resistin Role on Glucose Transport of Human Placenta. Nicoletta Di Simone, Marco D'Asta, Fiorella Di Nicuolo, Silvia D'Ippolito, Roberta Castellani, Alessandro Caruso. (SPON: Irene Cetin). Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Catholic University of Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy. Objective Resistin is a recently discovered hormone associated with insulin resistance. The increase in serum resistin levels in the third trimester of pregnancy might contribute to the decreased insulin sensitivity in the latter half of pregnancy, which may relate to the development of postprandial hyperglycemia. Glucose transport across the human placenta takes place via GLUT-1 glucose transporters embedded in both microvillous and basal membranes of the syncytial barrier. The aim of this study was to determine resistin role on placental glucose uptake and on GLUT-1 protein regulation, through an induction of MAPK activation. BeWo choriocarcinoma cells were cultured in a medium containing resistin (0-100 ng/ml). The immunofl uorescence analysis of the BeWo cells was performed by incubating cells with anti-GLUT-1 antibody. Glucose uptake was measured using [ 3 H]-2-deoxy glucose (2-DG). The expression of GLUT-1, total Extracellular signal-Regulated kinase 1-2 (ERK) or phospho-ERK (pERK) were studied by Western Blot analysis and by Real-Time RT-PCR. Quantitative determination of ERK activity was performed by an Enzyme Immunometric Assay (EIA) kit. The immunofl uorescence analysis of the BeWo cells revealed a positive GLUT-1 staining in intracellular membrane fractions. Treatment with resistin (10ng/ml) led to a stimulation of 2-DG uptake, while higher concentrations signifi cantly impair basal glucose uptake. Western Blot analysis showed a signifi cant increase of GLUT-1 expression at dose of 10ng/ml. The western blot analysis showed the increase in pERK 1-2 after 20-30 minutes only at 10ng/ml, while total ERK1-2 expression was not affected by the treatment. This data were confi rmed by real-time RT-PCR. The EIA assay of ERK activity showed the maximal increased of ERK 1-2 phosphorylation in Bewo cells treated with resistin (10 ng/ml) after 20min of treatment with a decrease at 60min. Conclusions The present study provided the fi rst evidence that resistin can modulate trophoblast glucose transport. We have demonstrated that resistin causes activation of ERK1-2 pathway in trophoblast cells. Their activation stimulated GLUT-1 synthesis and resulted in increase of placental glucose uptake. High resistin levels (50-100 ng/ml) seem to be able to impair GLUT-1 expression and glucose uptake, refl ecting a complex interaction of this adipocytokine with placental functions. Introduction: The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a key component in a signaling pathway that regulates cell growth. In the placenta mTOR is proposed as a growth signaling sensor and some downstream effects have been demonstrated. The active form of mTOR is phosphorylated (pmTOR) and this is thought to be regulated by the serine/threonine kinase Akt. Neither expression of pmTOR nor its regulation have been examined in the placenta. The objectives of this study were to examine pmTOR expression and localization and to elucidate the mechanism by which mTOR is activated in the human placenta. Methods: Placental tissue was collected immediately following delivery from normotensive (n=8) and severe preeclamptic (PE, n=6) patients. Villous tissue was sectioned, immunostained with p.mTOR primary antibody (1:50) using VectaStain Elite ABC kit and counterstained with hematoxylin (n=3/group). Villous tissue was homogenized in lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors and centrifuged at 20,000xg for 5 min to remove cell debris. mTOR protein was immunoprecipitated from the supernatant using the mTOR specifi c antibody. An in vitro kinase assay using 1mg recombinant active Akt was performed at 30 o C for 30 min. The kinase assay product and total placental protein were separated on SDS-PAGE, probed with the pmTOR primary antibody (1:500) and detected using enhanced chemiluminescence. in IUGR. EL and LPL expression was unaltered in diabetic placentas. Placental EL, but not LPL, expression levels were negatively correlated with maternal pre-gestational BMI. EL is the predominant TLG family member in the human placenta present at both interfaces. EL and LPL are dysregulated in IUGR but not in diabetes. (Jubilee Fund 10053, 10896, 11165) Hypothesis.The WFS1 gene,encoding a transmembrane endoglycosidase H-sensitive glycoprotein of the endoplasmic reticulum called wolframin,is mutated Wolfram syndrome,defi ned by the association of diabete mellitus,optic atrophy,and further organ abnormalities.It has been demonstrated that Wfs1 is normally up-regulated during insulin secretion,whereas disruption of the Wfs1 gene in mice,causes progressive beta-cell loss within the pancreas and impaired stimulus-secretion coupling in insulin secretion.The physiological function of this protein remains unknown.Human placenta is unique in many aspects of its growth and differentiation,including the requirement to invade another organ,the uterus,for survival.Due to the correlation between Wfs1 mutation and diabetes,we investigated immunohistochemical expression of wolframin in human placenta throughout pregnancy in normal and diabetes. MethodsPlacenta samples at I trimester of pregnancy were from patients with spontaneus miscarriage(n.15).A total of 60 samples were from patients undergoing voluntary pregnancy termination:n.15 from normal patients and n.15 from diabetic patients.The specimens were immediately fi xed in formalin for ihc.Results.In normal placenta, wolframin was localized, at strong level of expression, in the cytoplasm of CT and endothelial cells during the I trimester. In the III trimester,wolframin was present at moderate level of expression, in the cytoplasm of CTcells and in endothelial cells inside placental villi.In diabetes,the wolframin expression was strongly reduced in the III trimester. Moreover,this protein was localized almost exclusively in the stroma of placental villi.Conclusion.The pattern of expression of wolframin in normal placenta through gestation, suggests that this protein may be required to sustain normal rates of CT cell proliferation during the I trimester of gestation.The decrease of wolframin expression in diabetic placenta may hypothesize that this protein is directly regulated by insulin concentration also in the placenta, suggesting that this protein physiologically maintain the glucose homeostasis in this organ. MFR increases maternal plasma glucocorticoids (GC) and thus programming effects may result from increased fetal GC exposure. In the rat, placental 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11β-HSD1) converts inactive 11dehydrocorticosterone into active corticosterone, thus potentiating transfer of maternal steroids to the fetus; 11β-HSD2 does the opposite and acts as the physiological feto-placental "barrier" to maternal glucocorticoid. The placental labyrinth zone is the major site of maternal-fetal exchange whereas the basal zone is the primary site of placental hormone synthesis. We determined the impact of maternal food restriction (MFR) on placental expression of 11β-HSD isoforms in the two placental zones. METHODS: Control dams (n=12) received ad libitum food whereas study dams were food restricted (MFR, n=12) from pregnancy day 10. At E16 and E20, placentas were separated into basal and labyrinth zones, and mRNA expression of glucocorticoid receptor, and 11β-HSD1 and 11β-HSD2 enzymes were determined using real time RT-PCR. Data was normalized to β-actin and values are shown as mean fold difference ±SE. RESULTS: At E16, expression of 11β-HSD1 was signifi cantly reduced in the basal zone of MFR placentas (0.47±0.3 fold, p<0.01), though no signifi cant change was seen in the labyrinth zone. At E20, expression of 11β-HSD2 was reduced in basal zone but not in labyrinth zone in MFR placentas. There was no effect of MFR on placental expression of 11β-HSD2 at E16, or 11β-HSD1 at E20. The glucocorticoid receptor was similarly expressed in the basal and labyrinth zone at both E16 and E20 in MFR and Control placentas. CONCLUSION: Decreased expression of placental 11β-HSD1 in the E16 basal zone reduces the capacity of conversion of inactive to active GC. This may serve as an important barrier, reducing transplacental transfer of excess steroids to the fetus during MFR. Conversely, decreased 11BHSD-2 expression in the basal zone at E20 may increase exposure of the fetus to maternal GC near term. These results suggest that GC-induced programming effects of MFR may occur in late gestation (i.e., following E16). To test the hypothesis that maternal protein restriction triggers gene expression changes, we measured these in the mouse placenta. METHODS: We exposed pregnant FVB⁄NJ mice from embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5) to E17.5, to an isocaloric diet containing 50% less protein than normal chow (10% vs. 20% protein content). Following RNA extraction, we used the Affymetrix Mouse 430A_2.0 array to measure gene expression changes. We observed 244 probe sets, corresponding to 235 genes, regulated by protein restriction (p < 0.001). Ninety-one genes were up-regulated and 153 were down-regulated. We functionally annotated the regulated genes, and examined over-represented functional categories. RESULTS: Among the up-and down-regulated genes, we observed several over-represented functional categories. Up-regulated genes included those involved in apoptosis, negative regulators of cell growth, negative regulators of cell metabolism and genes related to epigenetic control. Down-regulated genes included those involved in nucleotide metabolism. CONCLUSIONS: Microarray analysis has allowed us to describe the genetic response to maternal protein deprivation in the mouse placenta. Apoptosisrelated genes, negative regulators of cell growth and metabolism, and genes involved in epigenesis were up-regulated. This suggests a mechanism through which maternal protein deprivation contributes to growth restriction and long-term epigenetic changes in stressed tissues and organs. (Supported by USPHS HD-3807). Results: Immunoreactivity was found in both syncytiotrophoblast (ST) apical membrane (AM) and in ST cytoplasm (CP) ( Table 1) . Conclusion: While the functions of placental leptin remain to be precisely determined, MNR results in signifi cant decreases in leptin and its receptor at 165 dG suggesting a reduction in function by decreased nutrient availability at this gestational age. Myostatin is a member of the TGF-ß superfamily and has diverse biological functions. Metabolism and regulation of glucose uptake are key actions of myostatin in skeletal muscle. OBJECTIVE: To examine the effects of myostatin treatments on glucose uptake by a placental cell line, (BeWo), in which myostatin has been identifi ed. METHODS: BeWo cells were seeded at densities of 0.5x10 5 cells/well in 24 well plates in DMEM:HAMsF 12 [1:1] , supplemented with 10% FCS, 1% Penicillin/ Streptomycin and 1% Glutamax. Following 24hrs, 48hrs, 72hrs and 96hrs of incubation, cells were treated with [1μCi/ml 2-Deoxy-d- [1-14 C] ] glucose in Tyrode solution and 0.2nM, 0.4nM, 4nM and 40nM of recombinant human myostatin and/or follistatin for 20min, at 37 O C, in a humidifi ed incubator maintained at 5% CO 2 . After incubation, cells were lysed and radioactivity was measured in a liquid scintillation analyser and normalised with protein concentration per well. RESULTS: Myostatin inhibited glucose uptake in a concentration dependent manner following 24hrs of seeding (P<0.01, n=4 for each treatment). Follistatin is a functional inhibitor of myostatin. Following treatment with 40nM myostatin and various concentrations of follistatin, the decrease in glucose uptake that occurs with myostatin treatment alone was reversed (0.4nM follistatin treatment, P<0.05, n=4 for each treatment). Follistatin treatment alone increased glucose uptake (0.4nM and 4nM, P<0.001, 40nM P<0.05; n=4 for each treatment). Interestingly irrespective of treatment, glucose uptake declined as cells proliferated and greater cell densities were achieved (P<0.001). Data were compared only between treatments and controls at each individual time point. CONCLUSIONS: These fi ndings implicate a possible metabolic role of myostatin and follistatin on nutrient uptake in the feto-placental-maternal units. Altered myostatin actions in the placenta may have implications in pregnancies complicated by placental insuffi ciencies, in particular intra-uterine growth restriction (IUGR), preterm birth and pre-eclampsia and offers a potential therapeutic target. Yali Xiong, 1 Dan Liebermann, 2 Eli J Holtzman, 3 Barbara Hoffman, 2 Enrique Hernandez, 1 Ossie Geifman-Holtzman. 1 To examine the biologic behaviour of telomeres via the activity of telomerase in pregnant patients with preeclampsia STUDY DESIGN: Placenta tissue samples from 20 patients with pre-eclamspia in the third trimester of pregnancy (study group) and 20 healthy pregnancies (control group) were freshly collected and preserved in RNAlater reagent. Total RNA was isolated from placenta tissue and reversely transcribed to c-DNA. Specifi c probe for real-time PCR was designed according to the sequence of the full length c-DNA of telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT). The mRNA level of TERT was detected with a probe-specifi c real-time quantitative PCR assay using the RT products as templates. ß-actin was applied as a reference gene when Cp values were obtained during the real-time polymerase chain reaction to determine the relative expressional levels of TERT. Telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) expression was present in the placentas of both pre-eclamptic and normal pregnancies. The mRNA level of TERT was 70% higher in the placentas of pre-eclamptic patients than in the normal placentas (N=20, p<0.05). This increased expression of TERT refl ects on increased telomerase activity. CONCLUSION: Increased mRNA level of TERT indicates a higher activity of telomerase in pre-eclampsia than in normal pregnancies which stands for increased cell activity and proliferation. This fi nding may suggest that cells obtained from placenta with pre-eclampsia are more likely to demonstrate dysfunctional proliferation rather than programmed cell death, apoptosis. Recruitment of Macrophages and Dendritic Cells into the Decidua and Their Role in the Pathogenesis of Preeclampsia. S Joseph Huang, 1 Chie-Pein Chen, 2 Frederick Schatz, *1 Vikki M Abrahams, 1 Charles J Lockwood. *1 1 Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University, Hew Haven, CT, USA; 2 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. Objective: Cytotrophoblast (CT) invade decidua embedded with low levels of macrophages (Macs) and dendritic cells (DCs). Both Macs and DCs mediate innate immunity, adaptive immunity and promote immune tolerance. An imbalance between defense against pathogens and tolerance of the semiallogeneic embryo in the decidua promotes preeclampsia (PE). PE is associated with a restricted CT invasion and impaired spiral artery remodeling. We hypothesize that pro-infl ammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) and interleukin-1beta (IL-1β) dysregulate traffi cking and activation of decidual Macs and DCs by targeting decidual cells to synthesize and secrete relevant chemokines and colony stimulating factors (CSFs). The resulting infl ux of Macs and DCs impairs CT invasion. Methods: Immunostaining was used to localize Macs, DCs, chemokines and CSFs in normal versus PE decidua. Leukocyte-free fi rst trimester decidual cells were treated with E 2 and MPA +/-1 ng/ml TNF-α or IL-1β for 6 hrs. Total RNA was extracted for microarray analysis and real time RT-PCR. Western blotting and ELISA measured protein levels in conditioned media. Results: These results extend our previous observation for Macs by revealing that compared to normal decidua, the preeclamptic decidua basalis also contains a dense infi ltration of DCs (n=8, p < 0.05). Expression of an array of Mac-and DC-recruiting chemokines as well as potent Mac and DC activators, M-CSF and GM-CSF, were enhanced in the preeclamptic decidua (n=8, p < 0.05). In cultured fi rst trimester decidual cells, TNF-α and IL-1β markedly up-regulated the expression of CCL2, CCL4, CCL5, CCL7, CCL20, CXCL8, M-CSF and GM-CSF (5-to 3800-fold, n=3, p < 0.05). Conclusions: These results support the pivotal roles played by TNF-α-and IL-1β-induced chemokines and CSFs in recruiting and activating Macs and DCs at the implantation site of patients destined to develop PE. The Characteristic Changes in the Endothelial Function by Administration of L-Arginine Plus Folic Acid in Preeclampsia. Yoshikatsu Suzuki, 1 Tamao Yamamoto, 1 Nobuhiro Suzumori, 1 Mayumi Sugiura, 1 Hidetaka Izumi. *2 1 Obstetric and Gynecology, Nagoya City University Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan; 2 Obstetric and Gynecology, Izumi Women Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan. It was found that the reduced action of nitric oxide (NO) was seen in nitroglycerin treated rabbit, since the increased production of superoxide might change the function of endothelial NO synthase. The administration of L-arginine plus folic acid might improve the reduced action of NO due to an increase in the concentration of L-arginine in the endothelium and inhibition of oxidization of tetrahydrobiopterin by folic acid. In this study, we investigated the characteristic changes in endothelial function by the administration of L-arginine and folic acid in preeclamptic women compared with normotensive pregnant women. Ten nonpregnant women, ten normotensive healthy pregnant women, ten normotensive pregnant women at high risk group of preeclampsia (previous preeclampsia and complicated by hypertension or diabetes) were participated. Preeclampsia was diagnosed according to pregnancy-induced hypertension criteria as Japan Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology. In four groups, L-arginine (3g/day) plus folic acid (10 mg/day) was administrated and fl ow mediated vasodilatation (FMD) of brachial arteries by hyperemia was observed on 48 hour after the administration. In non-pregnant, high risk pregnant and preeclamptic women, FMD was lower than that of normotensive pregnant women. By the administration, in nonpregnant women and high risk pregnant women, the FMD was increased and restored similar level of normal pregnant women, while it was not changed in preeclamptic women. It was concluded that the supplementation might prevent preeclampsia due to restoring or enhancing reduced endothelial function. During pregnancy, the uterine artery (UA) shows increased vasodilation in response to a number of agonists, which in turn contributes to the increase in blood fl ow necessary to meet the needs of the growing fetus. Recent reports suggest that the circulating levels of VEGF are elevated signifi cantly in both the placenta and circulation of patients with preeclampsia. Excessive VEGF has been considered as a key factor in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia, but the mechanisms remains controversial. Our previous studies have shown that in ovine uterine artery endothelial cells (UAEC, passage 4) from nonpregnant (NP-) and pregnant (P) late term ewes, ATP continuously induced [Ca 2+ ]i oscillation and multiple [Ca 2+ ] i bursts and associated NO production in individual cells over 30 min, and this response is greater in P-UAEC vs NP-UAEC. In this study, we examined whether pre-exposure to VEGF has any effect on this ATP-induced Ca 2+ responses and associated NO production. We have found that VEGF (10ng/ml) pretreatment does indeed inhibit the multiple Ca 2+ bursts seen in P-UAEC on subsequent challenge with 100 uM ATP to the level more typical of NP-UAEC without pretreatment, while the less responsive NP-UAEC was not effected by VEGF pretreatment. In order to move more closely to the in vivo situation, we further examined the effect of VEGF on ATP-induced Ca 2+ and NO production in intact uterine artery endothelium (UAE) on the vessel surface. Using fl uorescent microscopy we simultaneously monitored NO production (DAF as probe) and [Ca 2+ ] i (fura 2 as indicator) in individual endothelial cells of intact UA from ewes. Consistent with UAEC, ATP (100 uM) stimulated more NO in P-UAE > NP-UAE. ATP not only induced a rapid initial robust Ca 2+ peak but the number of subsequent bursts over 30 minutes was P-UA > NP-UA. VEGF (10 ng/ml) alone stimulated much smaller increase in [Ca 2+ ] i and NO production compared to ATP, but pretreatment with VEGF for 30 min signifi cant inhibited subsequent ATP-induced [Ca 2+ ] i response and NO production; this inhibition was more signifi cant in P-UAE than NP-UAE. Conclusions: VEGF pretreatment inhibits ATP-induced Ca 2+ response and subsequent NO production. These data further validate the UAEC as a valuable cell model and suggest a novel mechanism for how VEGF may contribute to endothelial dysfunction in preeclampsia in vivo. Supported by NIH H050578, HL64601, HL079020, HL 49210, and HD38843. Objective: Maternal smoking is associated with a variety of adverse pregnancy outcomes, nevertheless paradoxically women who smoke during pregnancy have a reduced risk of preeclampsia. Since for this "protective" effect the biologic mechanism is unknown, we examined whether nicotine and its major metabolite cotinine might affect placental secretion of soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase (sFlt1) and soluble endoglin (sEng), both antiangiogenic proteins recently related to preeclampsia. Indeed, excess circulating sFlt1 and sEng of placental origin seems to contribute to the widespread endothelial dysfunction leading to preeclampsia. Placentas were collected at the time of elective cesarian sections at term of uncomplicated pregnancies. After their purifi cation, trophoblast cells were cultured for 24h with medium alone (control), or with CoCl 2 (chemical hypoxia) 10 μM, or in presence of increasing concentrations (from 10 -11 to 10 -6 M) of nicotine or cotinine. In the culture medium sFlt1 and sEng secretion was assayed by ELISA. Results: As expected, CoCl 2 signifi cantly increased both sFlt1 and sEng secretion by trophoblast cells. Conversely, in the same cells all tested doses of nicotine and cotinine were able to signifi cantly decrease both sFlt1 and sEng production. Conclusions: We demonstrated the ability for nicotine and cotinine to decrease placental secretion of sFlt1 and sEng. This effect could contribute to explain the paradoxical "protective" effect of maternal smoking on preeclampsia. Restriction (IUGR). V Cozzi, 1 C Garlanda, 2 M Nebuloni, 3 V Maina, 2 S Calabrese, 1 A Martinelli, 1 G Pardi, 1 Irene Cetin. *1 1 IRCCS F Policlinico, Mangiagalli, Regina Elena, Inst Obst Gyn, Milan, Italy; 2 Res Lab Imm Infl , Inst Humanitas, Milan, Italy; 3 Pathol Unit Sacco, Dept Clin Sciences, Milan, Italy. Hypothesis: Endothelial dysfunction typical of preeeclampsia (PE) is the result of an excessive maternal infl ammatory response to pregnancy. PE can occur alone or together with IUGR. PTX3 is increased in myocardial infarction and correlates with disease activity. We have investigated PTX3 in maternal and placental compartments in PE and IUGR pregnancies. Methods: Maternal blood samples were collected during the III trimester in 33 PE, 24 IUGR and 31 normal pregnancies. Plasma PTX-3 was determined by ELISA. Pattern and site of expression of PTX3 was studied by immunohistochemistry (IHC) on placenta, decidual bed and maternal peritoneum of normal and complicated pregnancies collected at the time of cesarean section. Results: IUGR and PE mothers were signifi cantly older and had signifi cantly higher BMI than normal pregnancies. PE and IUGR pregnancies delivered earlier because of fetal or maternal indications; their fetal and placental weights were signifi cantly lower than normal pregnancies. PE and IUGR pregnancies showed signifi cantly higher maternal PTX3 levels vs normal pregnancies (19.6±23.1 and 7.8±12.4 vs 2.8±2.3 ng/ml; p<0.001 and p<0.05, respectively). IUGR showed signifi cantly lower levels than PE (p<0.05). Dividing the PE group for clinical severity in mild PE (n=11), severe pure PE (n= 10) and PE complicated by IUGR (n=12), severe pure PE revealed higher levels than the other groups though not signifi cantly different. However, severe pure PE PTX3 levels were signifi cantly higher than pure IUGR (24.1±32.2 vs 7.8±12.4 ng/ml; p<0.05). IHC on placenta and decidual bed biopsies showed similar expression in pathologic and normal cases. Maternal peritoneum expressed a signifi cantly higher signal in the endothelium of PE vs normal pregnancies. Conclusion: We report elevated maternal levels of PTX3 in PE and IUGR pregnancies with higher PTX3 levels in pure severe PE compared to the pure IUGR phenotype. PTX3 increase may represent the expression of endothelial systemic damage on the maternal side, typical of PE, rather than of endothelial local damage on the feto-maternal interface, as suggested by ICH showing high expression on the PE endothelial peritoneum but no differences in decidua and placenta immunostaining. Activated TGF Signaling Regulates sFlt-1 Expression in IUGR Pregnancies. Ori Nevo, Jing Xu, Isabella Caniggia. * Ob/Gyn, Mount Sinai Hospital, SLRI, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. Background: Elevated sFlt-1 expression found in preeclamptic and IUGR pregnancies have been implicated in the development of the maternal endothelial dysfunction typical of preeclampsia. However, little is known about the mechanisms that control sFlt-1 expression. Recently, we demonstrated that during normal placentation, oxygen is a critical regulator of sFlt-1 expression. In addition, we reported that preeclampsia is associated with placental hypoxia and altered TGFβ signaling. Thus, it is plausible that additional factors beside oxygen, such as transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) molecules, may contribute to the high levels of sFlt-1. Since sFlt-1 expression is elevated in severe IUGR placentae, the objectives of the present study were: 1) to examine the expression/activation of Smad2 and 3 (R-Smad) and inhibitory Smad7 (I-Smad) in normal and IUGR pregnancies; and 2) to explore the possibility that TGFβ1/3 signaling via Smads regulate sFlt-1 expression. Methods: Early onset (28-33 wks, n=13) severe IUGR with abnormal umbilical and uterine artery Doppler and age-matched normal control placental tissues were collected. First trimester villous explants and BeWo and JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cell lines were cultured in standard conditions in the presence or absence of TGFβ1 or TGFβ3 (5ng/mL) for 24 hours. Message levels of sFlt-1 were measured by quantitative real-time PCR using specifi c TaqMan primers and probe. Protein expression of sFlt-1 was measured by Western blot using a polyclonal antibody against sFlt-1. In addition, protein lysates from placental tissues, explants and cell lines were analyzed with antibodies that recognize human Smad2/3, Smad7, phospho-Smad2 and phospho-Smad3. Results: Phosphorylated Smad2 but not Smad3 was markedly increased in severe IUGR placentae compared to control tissue, while a decreased in inhibitory Smad7 content was observed in IUGR placentae. Exposure of both villous explants and BeWo cells to TGFβ1 and TGFβ3 resulted in increased protein expression of phospho-Smad2 and 3, which was associated with a signifi cant increase in sFlt-1 mRNA and protein levels. In contrast, JEG-3 cells responded to TGFβ treatment only by increasing phospho-Smad2, but not phospho-Smad3 or sFlt-1 mRNA and protein. Conclusion: These data suggest that an activation of the TGFβ signaling pathway may in part be responsible for the increased sFlt-1 expression found in both preeclampsia and severe IUGR pregnancies. (Supported by CIHR and OWH/IGH). Objective: sFlt-1 has been implicated in the etiology of preeclampsia, and over-expression of sFlt-1 in rodents results in a preeclampsia-like condition. Our objective was to determine if fetal programming of adult blood pressure is altered in a previously characterized mouse model of preeclampsia induced by sFlt-1. Methods: As previously established, CD-1 mothers at day 8 of gestation were injected with an adenovirus carrying Flt (1-3) [AdFlt (1-3); 10 9 PFU] or with an adenovirus carrying mFc as control (10 9 PFU). The resulting pups were followed until 3 or 6 months of age (average life span 1.5 years), at which time blood pressure (BP) catheters were inserted through the left carotid artery into the aortic arch and connected to a telemetric transmitter. BP was recorded continuously for 6 days in the conscious unrestrained offspring. One-way ANOVA followed by Newman-Keuls post hoc test were used for statistical analysis (p<0.05). Results: At 3 months of age, mean BP was signifi cantly higher during the fi rst 3 days of measurement in the offspring born to sFlt-1-treated mothers (D1: 138.93±2.57 and D3:119.05±1.52mmHg) compared with the control (D1:124.62±4.20 and D3:109.94±2.4mmHg). However, mean BP at 6 months of age was signifi cantly and consistently higher during the entire measurement period in offspring born to sFlt-1-treated mothers (D1: 146.33±4.98 and D6:136.54±2.17mmHg) compared with 6 moths old offspring born to mFctreated mother (D1:120.76±2.88 and D6:113.54±2.17mmHg). In addition, in the offspring born to sFlt-1-treated mother, BP in 6 month's old offspring was signifi cantly higher than in 3 month' s old. However, there was no signifi cant difference in BP at 3 and 6 months in the offspring born to mFc-treated mother. Conclusions: Over-expression of sFlt-1 in the mother leads to hypertension in the offspring later in life. Moreover, the hypertension worsens with age. Our fi ndings highlight the role of the intrauterine environment in the developmental origin of adult disease, and the impact of preeclampsia on future health of the offspring. Fetal Growth Restriction in a Subsequent Pregnancy. Simone Sep, 1,2 Luc Smits, 1 Marc Spaanderman, 3 Martin Prins, 1 Louis Peeters. *2 1 Epidemiology, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands; 2 Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands; 3 Obstetrics and Gynecology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Objective: Former preeclamptics have a 20-25% risk of recurrent disease in a next pregnancy. In this study we developed prediction models to forecast individual recurrence risk in women with a history of severe preeclampsia (PE) and/or HELLP syndrome (delivery <34 weeks). We measured a wide range of cardiovascular, hemostatic, immunologic, and metabolic variables in 150 women with a recent history (6-12 months earlier) of severe PE or HELLP syndrome, and who completed a subsequent ongoing pregnancy. Using the pre-pregnant data and the outcome data of the next pregnancy, we developed models to predict recurrent PE/HELLP and severe FGR (birth weight < 1500 g) in that next pregnancy using binary logistic regression analysis. By Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis, we assessed the predictive capacity of the obtained models. Results: Severe PE/HELLP syndrome recurred in 11 (7%), and severe FGR occurred in 7 (5%) next pregnancies. The models predicting these two outcomes (models I and II, resp.) included the following variables: pre-pregnant HDLcholesterol I, II , mean arterial pressure (MAP) I, II , vena cava collapsibility index II , and the circulating level of ALAT liver-enzymes II . The discriminating capacities of the models are illustrated in the fi gures below. Conclusion: The two multi-variable prediction models, developed for women with a history of severe PE/HELLP identifi ed, with clinically relevant predictive capacity, those women at increased risk for severe recurrent disease, and those at increased risk for severe FGR in their next pregnancy. Prospective evaluation of the performance of the models in an independent population of former preeclamptics is needed to assess external validity. The Neutrophil Products, Myeloperoxidase and Matrix Metalloproteinase 8, Are Increased in Systemic Vasculature of Preeclamptic Women. Juhi Shukla, Sonya Washington, Scott W Walsh. * OBGYN, Physiology, Virginia Commonwealth Univ, Richmond, VA, USA. Neutrophils infi ltrate systemic vascular tissue in women with preeclampsia. Neutrophils produce reactive oxygen species, infl ammatory cytokines, and other compounds that can be toxic to tissue. For example, myeloperoxidase (MPO) could cause oxidative stress by producing hypochlorous acid, and matrix metalloproteinase 8 (MMP8) could cause a loss of cell integrity by degrading collagen. HYPOTHESIS: Systemic vascular tissue of preeclamptic women will have a signifi cant presence of MPO and MMP8 as a result of neutrophil infi ltration. METHODS: Subcutaneous fat, which is highly vascularized, was obtained at abdominal surgery from 4 normal non-pregnant (NNP), 5 normal pregnant (NP) and 5 preeclamptic (PE) women. Formalin fi xed, paraffi n embedded 8 μm sections of fat biopsies were stained using immunohistochemistry with specifi c antibodies for MPO and MMP8. Data were evaluated for intensity of vessel staining by visual score (0-4), density of staining using image analysis software, and % vessels with neutrophil staining, diffuse staining and vascular smooth muscle staining. Resistancesized vessels (10-200 μm) were evaluated. RESULTS: Intensity of vessel staining assessed by visual score was signifi cantly greater for PE than NP or NNP (Fig) . Density measurements were highly correlated with visual score for both MPO and MMP8 (r = 0.98, r = 0.99 Objective: Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa) is higher in preeclampsia and is proposed to be a mediator of infl ammatory processes associated with endothelial dysfunction. TNFa is also elevated in obese nonpregnant individuals. Little is known about the relationship between obesity and TNFa in preeclampsia. We asked if increased TNFa explains the increased frequency of preeclampsia with obesity. Hypotheses: TNFa is 1)higher in obese than lean 2)higher in preeclamptic than control 3)higher in obese control than lean control 4)higher in lean preeclamptic than obese control 5)higher in obese preeclamptic than lean preeclamptic participants. Methods: Nested case-control study of lean (prepregnancy BMI 19-24.9 kg/m 2 ) and obese (prepregnancy BMI≥ 30 kg/m 2 ) nulliparous uncomplicated control and preeclamptic women. Total TNFa was measured by ELISA in EDTA plasma samples collected at admission for delivery. Analyses included univariate ANOVA and general linear modeling with Bonferroni adjustment for multiple comparisons; signifi cance accepted at p<0.05. Results: Gestational age was lower in preeclamptic than control participants (p<0.0001), but no different between lean and obese control (p=0.81) or between lean and obese preeclamptic participants (p=0.71). By design, there was no difference in BMI between lean preeclamptic and lean control participants (p=0.87), or between obese preeclamptic and obese controls (p=0.59). There was no difference in TNFa by BMI (p=0.27). TNFa was higher in preeclamptic than control participants (p=0.012). TNFa was not higher in obese control than lean control (p=1.0), was higher in lean preeclamptic than obese control (p=.04), was not higher in obese preeclamptic than lean preeclamptic participants (p=.31). There was no interaction between diagnosis and BMI (p=0.09). (Table) Conclusions: As in previous studies, TNFa was higher in preeclamptic than control participants. However, our hypothesis that TNFa would be higher in obese than lean preeclamptic women was not supported. Increased TNFa does not explain the increased frequency of preeclampsia in obesity. Objective: Alterations in the maternal circulating concentrations of the antiangiogenic factors soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt1) and endoglin and the angiogenic growth factor placental growth factor (PlGF) have been shown to precede the development of preeclampsia by weeks to months in healthy low-risk women. The objective of this study was to investigate whether similar alterations occur in women at high-risk of developing preeclampsia including women with chronic hypertension, diabetes, multifetal gestation, and previous preeclampsia. CONCLUSIONS: Early pregnancy plasma volume is strongly associated with prepregnancy plasma volume. Two acylcarnitines C5OH and C14 were higher in IUGR pregnancies. Conversely six acylcarnitines were elevated in preeclampsia. Grouping of the analytes(C4 + C5; C6 + 8 + 81 +10 + 101 +102; C12 + 121 + 14 + 141 + 142 + 16 + 161 + 18 + 181 + 182) suggest that during preeclampsia the activity of the long chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase is reduced. However, lower carnitine acylcarnitine translocase or carnitine palmitoyl transferase II activity cannot be ruled out. The limitations of the study include the small sample size and the large number of analytes. The changes in acylcarnitine concentrations in preeclampsia refl ect increases of up to 205%, but they remain very low compared to those observed in newborns with inborn errors of metabolism. There may be an impairment in the β-oxidation of long chain fatty acids during preeclampsia but not during IUGR pregnancies. Background: Preeclampsia (PE) is associated with abnormal placentation, particularly in cases of fetal growth restriction. Placenta derived proteins are secreted into maternal blood and many circulating biomolecules are known to be altered in placental insuffi ciency. We used Difference in Gel Electrophoresis (DIGE) to identify sets of plasma proteins that may serve as biomarkers. Objective: To identify differentially expressed proteins in maternal plasma prior to the onset of PE alone or PE with small for gestational age babies (PE+SGA) compared to uncomplicated pregnancies. Study Design: As part of the SCOPE (Screening for Pregnancy Endpoints) study, maternal plasma was collected at 20weeks' gestation and biobanked. A nested case-control study of PE alone (n=8), PE+SGA (n=6) and healthy controls (n=8) was conducted. Plasma was depleted by using a MARS immunoaffi nity column (Agilent) for the six most abundant proteins. Pooled plasma from all cases and controls was used for the internal standard (I.S.). Depleted plasma from each case, control and the I.S. was labeled with fl uorescent dyes Cy3, Cy5 and Cy2, respectively. Labeled plasma from a case, a control and the I.S. were focused together at pH 4-7, then separated on 8-16% Tris HCl Criterion gels (Biorad). Gels were analyzed by DeCyder v6.5 software (GE) for differential protein expression. Statistical analyses included Student's t-and Mann Whitney-tests. False positives were eliminated by applying a false discovery rate (FDR) correction. Nearest shrunken centroid classifi cation was also used. Results: In the PE+SGA group, 16 proteins were increased 1.4-10.7 fold (p=0.03 to 0.0003) and two were 1.4 and 2.1 fold decreased compared to healthy controls. In the PE alone group no proteins were found to be signifi cantly different compared to controls. Identifi cation of proteins by mass spectrometry is currently in progress. Conclusions: A set of 18 differentially expressed plasma proteins were identifi ed in women at week 20 of pregnancy who later developed PE+SGA. This fi nding highlights the importance of reduced technical variability of 2D-DIGE compared to standard methods for differential expression studies in complex mixtures such as plasma. Objective To determine the accuracy of prepregnancy body mass index (BMI) in predicting pre-eclampsia. Design Systematic review and bivariate meta-analysis to estimate sensitivity and specifi city. Data sources Medline, Embase, Cochrane Library, MEDION, manual searching of reference lists of review articles and eligible primary articles, and contact with experts. Review methods Reviewers independently selected studies, and extracted data on study characteristics, quality and accuracy. Language restrictions were not applied. Pooled sensitivities and specifi cities with 95% confi dence intervals and a summary Receiver Operating Characteristic (sROC) curve were estimated using the bivariate method for meta-analysis. The potential value of BMI was assessed by combining its predictive capacity for different prevalences of preeclampsia and the therapeutic effectiveness (relative risk 0.90) of aspirin. Results 36 studies, testing 1,699,244 pregnant women (60,621 pre-eclamptic cases), met the selection criteria. The median incidence of pre-eclampsia was 3.9% (IQR 1.4-6.8). The area under the curve was 0.64 with 93% of heterogeneity explained due to threshold differences. Pooled estimates for all studies with a BMI ≥25, were 47% (95% CI 33-61) for sensitivity and 73% (95% CI 64-83) for specifi city. For a BMI ≥35 these estimates were 21% (95% CI 14-28) and 93% (95% CI 91-96), respectively. At the upper IQR prevalence limit of 6.8% the positive predictive value of a BMI ≥35 was 18%, whereas at the lower limit of 1.4% this was 4.1%. The number needed to treat to prevent one case of pre-eclampsia without measuring BMI in low risk women was 714 without testing whereas it was 34 at BMI ≥35 among high risk women. Conclusion A simple non-invasive inexpensive ubiquitous measurement such as BMI can help classify risk of pre-eclampsia in pregnant woman and to tailor their treatment. With high specifi city BMI, when normal, will help rule out the risk of pre-eclampsia. When abnormal, decisions for further test, monitoring or treatment can be easily made taking into account the BMI level. A bivariate meta-analysis of sensitivity and specifi city was conducted when appropriate. The potential value of Doppler was assessed by combining its predictive capacity for different prevalences of PET and FGR and the therapeutic effectiveness of aspirin. Results There were 74 studies, testing 78,133 women (2,396 cases) for PET and 60 studies testing 40,637 women (4,067 cases) for FGR. For PET, a high resistance index or notching showed the best pooled sensitivity (80%, 95% CI 66-94; pooled specifi city 82%, 95% CI 74-91) and the best sROC curve, while pulsatility index with notching showed the best pooled specifi city (99%, 95% CI 98-99; pooled sensitivity 22%, 95% CI 16-28). For FGR, resistance index with notching showed the best sROC curve (pooled sensitivity 40%, 95% CI 20-61; pooled specifi city 91%, 95% CI 87-95), while the best specifi city was achieved by pulsatility index with notching (99%, 95% CI 98-99; sensitivity 12%, 95% CI 8-18). The accuracy did not show variation in clinically relevant subgroups. Numbers of patients needed to be treated (with aspirin therapy) to reduce PET or FGR were much lower with testing than without. Conclusion Uterine artery Doppler assessment, an increased resistance index or presence of notching in particular, is a useful test to predict PET but has a limited role in the prediction of FGR. Doppler assessment combined with preventive treatment such as aspirin can be useful in high risk women in particular. These studies suggest that EP obesity and LP obesity are each independently associated with the development of PEC. The signifi cant interaction between medical co-morbidities and EP obesity suggests that pre-existing pathways in the mother may be mechanistically involved in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. Studies to evaluate the mechanism by which obesity modifi es PEC disease risk is warranted in order to advance prevention strategies. Kristiina Parviainen, 1 James M Roberts. * Objective: Pregnancy-associated plasma protein A (PAPP-A) is a metalloprotease that cleaves insulin-like growth factor binding protein 4, releasing insulin-like growth factor. PAPP-A production occurs in many organs, including the placenta, with serum concentration increasing up to 100-fold in pregnancy. Low PAPP-A concentrations in early pregnancy are associated with adverse pregnancy outcome including aneuploidy and preeclampsia. Outside of pregnancy, PAPP-A is identifi ed in unstable atherosclerotic plaques and predicts adverse outcome in acute coronary syndrome. Some investigators also report higher PAPP-A late in pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia. The association of preeclampsia and cardiovascular disease may suggest a pathophysiologic role for PAPP-A in both diseases. We hypothesized that, among a population of pregnant women with pregestational hypertension, those who developed superimposed preeclampsia (SPE) would have elevated serum PAPP-A concentrations compared with those who did not (CHTN). The specifi city of PAPP-A as a marker for acute coronary events, rather than for chronic disease, led us to further hypothesize that these differences would be most pronounced during clinically evident disease. Medicine, University of VT, Burlington, VT, USA. BACKGROUND: Preeclampsia is associated with reduced maternal plasma volume and elevated serum uric acid concentrations. As part of a broader project evaluating pre-pregnancy phenotypes at risk for preeclampsia we sought to determine whether uric acid concentrations are inversely related to maternal plasma volume prior to pregnancy. METHODS: We examined 50 healthy, non-smoking, nulligravid women during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle to determine plasma volume. Studies were conducted following 3 days of dietary control and an overnight fast. Plasma volume was estimated employing Evans blue dilution. We measured fasting serum uric acid, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine (Cr), and 24 hour urinary sodium, volume and creatinine clearance. Data is expressed as mean + standard deviation. RESULTS: Subjects were 29.4 + 4.8 years old with a BMI of 22.8 + 3.7 kg/m 2 . Urinary volumes were 2,439 + 1,014 mL and urinary excretion of sodium was 47 + 52 mEq/24 hours. The mean concentration of uric acid was 4.1 + 1.0 mg/ dL (range 2.1-6.2). We identifi ed no signifi cant association of plasma volume (corrected for BMI) with uric acid concentration (r=0.01, p=0.93). Uric acid concentration were likewise not associated with serum concentration of BUN (r= -0.05, p=0.75), Cr (r= 0.23, p=0.12), 24 hour urinary volume (r= -0.10, p=0.48), 24 hour urinary sodium (r= -0.23, p=0.11) or creatinine clearance (r= -0.18, p=0.26). We did identify a signifi cant association of maternal BMI with serum uric acid concentration (r=0.29, p=0.04). CONCLUSIONS: Plasma volume corrected for body mass index is not associated with serum uric acid concentrations prior to a fi rst pregnancy. There is evidence that uric acid concentration is associated with maternal BMI. Overall we observed a wide range of values for serum uric acid (3 fold difference). Maternal BMI accounts for approximately 8% of the variance in uric acid concentration. In contrast to prior reports during pregnancy, we found no association of renal function with serum uric acid concentration. Supported by NIH RO-1 HL71944. Hyperuricemia without Proteinuria Is Associated with Adverse Fetal Outcomes in Women with Gestational Hypertension. James M Roberts, *1 NICHD MFMU Network. 2 1 Magee-Womens Research Institute; 2 Bethesda, MD, USA. Hypothesis Gestational hypertension is of greater severity when accompanied by proteinuria (preeclampsia). Proteinuria was chosen historically as one of the fi rst fi ndings accompanying eclampsia (Chesley. Clinical Obstetrics & Gynecology, 27, 81, 1984) rather than for its ability to defi ne severity. In prior work we found that hyperuricemia was at least as effective as proteinuria to identify adverse outcomes as defi ned by preterm birth and SGA in low risk women with gestational hypertension (Roberts et al. Hypertension 46, 1263 , 2005 ). In the current study we tested the hypothesis that hyperuricemia with gestational hypertension and no proteinuria (HU) would be associated with similar adverse fetal outcomes as hypertension with proteinuria without hyperuricemia (HP) in women at high risk for preeclampsia. Methods This is a secondary analysis of data of women with prior preeclampsia from the NICHD MFMU trial of aspirin (ASA) to prevent preeclampsia in high-risk pregnancies. Normal women (NNN) were defi ned as women with a normal blood pressure, normal uric acid and no proteinuria. ASA did not reduce the risk of preeclampsia and did not affect plasma uric acid concentration in preliminary studies. Thus all women from the trial were included in this analysis. Data analysis was by Fisher's Exact test and log binomial and linear regression. There were 34 HP, 16 HU women and 131 NNN women. Race, smoking, BMI, maternal age, marital and educational status were not different in HP and HU women compared with NNN women. When compared with NNN, the frequency of preterm birth was greater in HP and in HU, and the frequency of birth weight < 5th centile was greater in HU but not HP women. When HU and HP women were compared, preterm birth (p=0.3) and birth weight < 5th centile (p=0.10) did not differ. When examined as a continuous variable and compared with NNN, the weeks of gestation at delivery for HU were less (36.3 vs. 38.4, p=0.0006) but did not differ for HP (37.8, p=0.18), and HU was less than HP (p = 0.03).  In women with previous preeclampsia who have gestational hypertension, elevated uric acid even without proteinuria appears to be associated with the adverse outcomes of preterm birth and SGA as commonly as in women with proteinuria without elevated uric acid. Obesity is a known risk factor for preeclampsia. We sought to identify early pregnancy prognostic biomarkers for preeclampsia in a cohort of obese pregnant women. Blood samples were obtained from primiparous, obese women (BMI > 30 kg.m -2 ) taken prior to randomization into the Vitamins in Pregnancy trial between 14 .0 -21 .6 weeks gestation. Plasma samples were spiked with internal standard (succinic d 4 acid), derivatised to induce volatility and thermal stability and analysed using GCxGC-TOF-MS. A reference database of metabolite peaks was constructed and for matched metabolites the response ratio was calculated. Univariate methods were employed for data analysis. For the analysed samples (45 preeclampsia / 39 matched controls) ROC areas were calculated together with the univariate signifi cance of each peak, determined using the Wilcoxon rank sum test. Using thresholds of ROC area > 0.75 and p < 0.01, some individual peaks were identifi ed as being signifi cantly different between cases and controls (outwith Bonferroni correction). One metabolite peak (peak 185), identifi ed as 2-hydroxybutanoic acid was of particular interest ( Figure 1 . Area under ROC curve vs p value) and given its well-known role in lipid metabolism, may prove a useful quantitative biomarker of preeclampsia risk in the obese patient. For the fi rst time, we have chemically identifi ed a biomarker for preeclampsia in obese women in the 2nd trimester of pregnancy. These results will be compared with our earlier data [1] Introduction: Increasing evidence suggests that in vitro fertilization and culture may not be completely benign. Cases of Angelman and Beckwith Wiedeman Syndromes, due to aberrant genomic imprinting and abnormalities in growth and development, such as low birth weight, have been described after culture in vitro. This study was conducted to explore the effect of the method of fertilization on the expression of imprinted and methylation genes in mouse preimplantation embryos using microarray technology. Material and methods: CF-1 mice were superovulated with PmSG and hCG. Females were then bred to B6D2F1/J males (IVC group) and zygotes collected the following morning or oocytes were subjected to in vitro fertilization (IVF group). The resulting embryos were cultured to blastocyst stage in Whitten's medium under 5% CO 2 in air. Expanded blastocysts of similar morphology were harvested. Five embryo equivalents of total RNA were amplifi ed, fragmented, labeled and hybridized to Affymetrix mouse 430 2.0 Chip. Each treatment was repeated 4 times. The pair-wise comparison was conducted between IVF and IVC groups to identify specifi c imprinted and methylation genes with signifi cant differences. Results: Seventy fi ve imprinted genes and 65 methylation genes were identifi ed on the mouse 430 2.0 Chip. Only 2 imprinted genes (2.6%) and 8 methylation genes (12.3%) show a statistical difference in expression after IVF compared to IVC embryos, as shown in the table below. Conclusions: The method of fertilization exerts an additional effect on the gene expression level of several imprinted and methylation genes. Overall, there is a down regulation of all the statistically different genes after IVF. Interestingly, Ube3a expression is reduced relative to embryos fertilized in vivo. As Ube3a is associated with Angelman Syndrome, this fi nding needs to be further investigated. Fetal ovaries of 23-24 wk gestation contain a nearly pure population of PF. 9 mm 3 ovarian pieces were subcutaneously grafted to SCID mice with matrigel. After 2 wks, the animals (n=52) received either 200 mg/kg cyclophosphamide (Cy) or the vehicle, and were sacrifi ced at 12-72h post-injection (n=6-7/group). Xenografts were serially sectioned and PF numbers/mm 2 (PFD)were determined. Results: While the PFD remained steady from 12-72h post injection in the controls, follicle numbers sharply declined until 48h post chemo injection. Interestingly, PFD increased at 72h (fi g). To ascertain that this recovery in PFD is not due to regeneration of PF from pre-existing fetal mitotic oogonia, we stained adjacent sections for mouse vasa homologue (MVH) and a mitosis marker phosphohistone-H3. The number of cells staining with both markers/mm 2 was compared to the staining in sections from a 22-year old female. Both had very few cells doubly-staining, ruling out the possibility of regeneration from mitotic germ cells. In fetal xenografts we also observed MVH positive germ cells migrating well in to the matrigel matrix encapsulating the grafts. Conclusions: Primordial follicle regeneration may be induced in "mature" fetal ovarian tissue subjected to genotoxic stress such as chemotherapy. If these observations are confi rmed in postnatal tissue, the mechanism of recovery of ovarian function following chemotherapy-induced ovarian failure can be explained. The fi nding of germ cell migration from xenografts deserves further investigation. Introduction: It is well documented that cigarette smoking is associated with a number of adverse obstetrical outcomes yet 15-20% of all pregnant women smoke. In human populations there is evidence that in utero exposure to cigarette smoke has long-term consequences on the fertility of the female offspring. We have shown that fetal and neonatal exposure to nicotine results in impaired fertility in adulthood and propose that this is due to altered ovarian angiogenesis. The ovary is a unique structure as it is one of the few adult tissues that continually undergo angiogenic processes. Numerous studies have demonstrated that normal vessel formation is essential for follicular and luteal development, and any alteration in ovarian angiogenesis can have a signifi cant infl uence on reproduction. Objective: To determine if reduced fertility in adult rats exposed to nicotine during fetal and neonatal development can be attributed to altered ovarian angiogenesis. Methods: Maternal rats were exposed to nicotine (1mg/kg/d) for 2 weeks prior to mating until weaning. Ovaries were collected from saline and nicotine treated rats at PND1, at 4, 16 and 32 weeks of age and fi xed in 10% neutral buffered formalin. Immunohistochemistry was performed for CD31 as a marker for vessel endothelial cells and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). For measurements of vascularization, microvessel density (MVD; the total count of microvessels per optical fi eld) and total vascular area (TVA; the total area occupied by microvessels per optical fi eld) were quantifi ed. VEGF staining was quantifi ed as the percentage of immunopositive ovarian tissue in 6 different fi elds of view. Results: At PND1, there was no difference in MVD or TVA in ovaries from saline or nicotine treated dams. Similarly, no change was seen in VEGF expression at PND1. However, by postnatal week 4, there was a signifi cant decrease in MVD, TVA and VEGF expression in ovaries from nicotine-treated dams, as compared to saline-treated controls. At postnatal weeks 16 and 32, ovaries from offspring from nicotine-treated dams continued to have reduced blood vessel density and ovarian VEGF expression. Conclusion: The results from this study suggest that one mechanism by which maternal cigarette smoke may impair the fertility of the female offspring is through alteration of ovarian angiogenesis. Elkins, Chandrasekhar Yallampalli. * Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. Intermedin (IMD) is a recently discovered peptide which belongs to calcitonin/ CGRP peptide family. Analysis of Intermedin expression profi le has shown that transcripts of Intermedin and its receptor complexes are expressed in ovarian granulose cells suggesting that Intermedin may play a role in the regulation of ovarian function. Further, our recent studies using IMD antagonist, IMD 17-47 , showed decreases in placental and fetal growth as well as apoptotic changes in IMD 17-47 infused rat placenta. Therefore, we hypothesize that IMD may be involved in regulating sex steroid hormone synthesis in rat pregnancy. OBJECTIVES: 1) To determine the effect of IMD 17-47 infusion on plasma levels of estradiol (E 2 ) and progesterone (P 4 )in day 9 pregnant rats and 2) to assess the IMD 17-47 induced changes on the expression of enzymes involved in ovarian steroidogenisis in the ovaries collected from rats infused with IMD 17-47 and the controls. METHODS: Sprague Dawley rats were used in this study. Osmotic minipumps containing vehicle alone or IMD 17-47 (200 μg/day) were inserted s.c. in rats on day 3 of gestation and sacrifi ced on day 9 (n = 5). Blood samples were collected in tubes containing aprotinin and spun at 600 X g for 10min at 4 0 C. Plasma collected was stored at -80 0 C until used for Radioimmunoassay to analyze estradiol and progesterone levels. Total RNA was isolated from ovaries using TRIzol reagent and processed for RT-PCR of various steroidogenic enzymes and the results are expressed relative to 18S mRNA. RESULTS: Our results demonstrate that, 1) IMD antagonist caused a signifi cant decline in the levels of both estradiol and progesterone (p<0.05), 2) IMD 17-47 infusion caused a signifi cant increase in the mRNA levels of StAR, but has no effect on the levels of SCP2 mRNA and; 3) IMD 17-47 caused a signifi cant increase (P< 0.05) in the mRNA levels of p450scc, p450c17 (CYP17), p450arom, 20b-HSD, 3b-HSD and 17b-HSD. 
