a04749790046e0d572aa9496dd513a54063c29c5
Network resilience
Xueming  Liu Daqing  Li Manqing  Ma Boleslaw K Szymanski Eugene  Stanley Jianxi  Gao 

Huazhong University of Science and Technology Beihang University Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Boston University Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 
Many systems on our planet are known to shift abruptly and irreversibly from one state to another when they are forced across a "tipping point," such as mass extinctions in ecological networks, cascading failures in infrastructure systems, and social convention changes in human and animal networks. Such a regime shift demonstrates a system's resilience that characterizes the ability of a system to adjust its activity to retain its basic functionality in the face of internal disturbances or external environmental changes. In the past 50 years, attention was almost exclusively given to low dimensional systems and calibration of their resilience functions and indicators of early warning signals without considerations for the interactions between the components. Only in recent years, taking advantages of the network theory and lavish real data sets, network scientists have directed their interest to the real-world complex networked multidimensional systems and their resilience function and early warning indicators. This report is devoted to a comprehensive review of resilience function and regime shift of complex systems in different domains, such as ecology, biology, social systems and infrastructure. We cover the related research about empirical observations, experimental studies, mathematical modeling, and theoretical analysis. We also discuss some ambiguous definitions, such as robustness, resilience, and stability. The nature and the world in which we live are filled with changes and crisises [1, 2, 3, 4] . Examples are the climate change [5] , the global pandemic of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) that are changing the world [6] , the catastrophe in east Africa caused by the infestation by desert locusts [7] , and the 2019-2020 bushfire in Australia that burned through some 10 million hectares of land, with thousands of people displaced, and countless animals killed by the raging fires [8, 9] . In addition, these threats and crisises are not independent but related with one another. For example, the Australia bushfire and locust swarms are linked to the oscillations of the Indian Ocean Dipole, which is one aspect of the growing of the global climate change [10, 11] . How the nature or societies response to such threats and crisises is defined by their resilience, which characterizes the ability of a system to adjust its activity to retain its basic functionality in the face of internal disturbances or external changes [12] . Resilience is a defining property that is universally presenting in perhaps all dynamical systems. Just like the bird Phoenix from the ancient Greek mythology, which was cyclically reborn of its own ashes, the resilience in nature makes people witness an incredible renewal of forests. As shown in Fig. 1 , regeneration of the Australian forests happens, despite the fires still blazing there. However, not every system has the same resilience resulting in strong ability for self-renewal. Damaged by the same Australians fires, the water, electricity network, the communication network, the transport and supply chains have been hit hard and the slow recovery times highlight a lack of resiliency in these systems [8] . Depending on the forms and strengths of perturbations, and the inherent resilience [4, 12] , dynamical systems may exhibit different responses to various perturbations. (1) The system may maintain its original state without any adverse effects. For example, in the Internet network, routers choose the paths for sending packages based on the routing tables that keep track of how effective any path through the network is [13] . If some links fail due to malfunction or overload, then the Internet will dynamically reroute packages to maintain its functionality. (2) The system may lose some of its function but recovery after some time. For instance, the 2003 electricity blackout [14] affected much of Italy and caused scenes of chaos: 110 trains were canceled, with 30,000 people stranded on trains in the railway network, and all flights in Italy were also canceled. However, after several hours, electricity was restored gradually in most places, and people's daily life went back to normal. (3) The system may go to another attractor, and do not come back to the original state. In ecology, climate change or human pollution [15] may cause an ecological system to cross a tipping point and lead the system to transfer from one attractor to another undesired attractor, from which it would be very hard to go back to the original state. Due to the diversity and complexity in the system's response to perturbations, the concept of resilience is multifaceted [16] . There are more than 70 definitions for resilience in scientific literatures [17] . Some of them generally spam multiple disciplines and some are proposed for specific systems. For instances, Holling [4] used the notion of "resilience" to characterize the degree to which a system can endure perturbations without collapsing or being carried into some new and qualitatively different state. Haimes [18] points out two essential elements of resilience: the ability to withstand presence of errors, and after a perturbation recover to the original stable state. Bruneau et al. [19] conceptualizes seismic resilience as the ability of both physical and social systems to withstand earthquake-generated forces and demands and to cope with earthquake impacts through situation assessment, rapid response, and active recovery strategies [20] . Generally, these definitions vary between three extremes: system resilience (or called ecological resilience) that focus on the magnitude of the change or perturbation that a system can endure without shifting into another stable state [4] , engineering resilience, which is defined by the recovery rate [21, 22] , and adaptive resilience that characterizes the capacity of social-ecological systems to adapt or transform in response to unfamiliar, unexpected and extreme shocks [23, 24] . Most definitions are trying to achieve a balance between these three flavors of resilience. During the past five decades, it has been a term increasingly employed throughout science and engineering, which makes resilience a multidisciplinary concept [16, 25] . Due to the often unknown intrinsic dynamics in large scale systems and the limitation on analytic tools, most of the studies have been concentrated on low-dimensional systems or time series data analysis without modelling [26, 27, 28, 29, 30] . In the studies with dynamical models, the resilience behaviour is usually captured by a one-dimensional (or low-dimensional) nonlinear dynamic equation dx/dt = f (β, x), where the functional form of f (β, x) shows the system's dynamics, and the parameter β represent the environmental conditions [31] . The rule of stability of motion [32] requires that f (β, x 0 ) = 0 and ∂ f /∂x| x=x 0 < 0, so one could get the resilience function x(β), which represents the possible states of the system as a function of β. As shown in Fig. 2 , at some critical point β c , the resilience function may undergo a bifurcation or become non-analytic, indicating that the system loses its resilience by experiencing a sudden transition to a different, often undesirable, fixed point of equation. However, such one-dimensional approach rules out its application to many real systems that are usually multi-dimensional. One solution is to lift (or embed) the nonlinear dynamics into a higher dimensional space Figure 2 : Network resilience in one-dimensional systems. A, The system exhibits a single stable fixed point for β > β c (blue) and two (or more) stable fixed points otherwise. B, Resilience function with a first order transition from the desired (blue) state to the undesired (red) state. C, Resilience function with a stable solution for β < β c and no solution above β c . Figure from [12] . where its evolution is approximately linear [33] . Such lifting can be achieved by changing the focus from "dynamics of states" to the "dynamics of observables" [34] . A set of scalar observables can measure a system's state, and there are different choices for the observations. If one could find a set of observables whose dynamics appear to be governed by a linear evolution law, then the resilience in nonlinear dynamical systems could be determined entirely by the spectrum of the evolution operator [35] . The two primary candidates for the study of dynamical systems via operators are the Koopman operator [36] and the Perron-Frobenius operator [37] , which are dual to each other under appropriate function space. The Perron-Frobenius operator represents a picture of "dynamics of densities", in which it is hard to compute invariant densities, while Koopman operator presents a "dynamics of observables", which are more suitable to physical experiments. Thus, Koopman operator is more widely used in analyzing the system's dynamics, which is a linear operator, generalizing linear mode analysis from linear systems to nonlinear systems [34, 38] . Such a linearizing method may cause the system to simplify by shedding its nonlinear nature, but it requires to compute the eigenfunctions of the Koopman operator [38] , which limits this method usefulness to extremely large systems. Extracting the resilience function of the complex systems requires the accurate wiring diagram of the system and a description of the nonlinear dynamics that governs the interactions between the components. The emergence of network science provides powerful tools to characterize the structure of large-scale complex networks [39, 40, 41, 42] , such as the Internet [43] , power grids [44, 45] , genome-scale gene regulatory networks [46] and metabolic networks [47] . The nontrivial topology of real-world networks have been uncovered and characterized in the past two decades [48] . In addition, the accumulations of massive data and rapid development of computational methods make it possible to identify and predict the exact forms of dynamic models directly from empirical data [49, 50, 51, 52] . These two prerequisites make it possible for us to develop analytic tools for the resilience of large-scale complex networks. Recently, Gao et al. [12] developed a set of analytical tools for identifying the natural control and state parameters of a large-scale complex system, helping derive effective one-dimensional dynamic [53] that accurately predicts the critical point (tipping point) where the system loses its ability to recover. The proposed analytical framework allows us to systematically separate the roles of the system's dynamics and topology. Although the critical point depends only on the system's intrinsic dynamics, three topological characteristics: density, heterogeneity, and symmetry can enhance or diminish a system's resilience. The dimension-deduction method [12] has been applied to a class of bipartite mutualistic networked systems in ecology, arriving at a twodimensional system that captures the essential mutualistic interactions in the original large-scale system [54] . Based on the theoretical tools for both lowdimensional and large-scale networks above, and the advanced data analyzing techniques [55] , studies on the resilience in real networks from various fields, ranging from the natural to man-made world, have been carried out. The goal of this article is to review the advances on the resilience in real networks. To achieve this we discuss a series of topics that are essential to understanding of the resilience of networks, such as alternative stable states (bistability) [56] , regime shifts [57] and early warning signals [58] . We illustrate these topics according to their application scenarios in ecology, biology, as well as in social and infrastructural systems. • Ecological network resilience: In ecology, species extinction/co-existence is a critical issue attracting lots of attentions. Plenty of studies have been carried out to predict the thresholds and tipping points at which certain species go extinct. These studies are used to focus on the analytical solutions of low-dimensional systems or the numerical simulations of high dimensional systems. Recently, there are more studies on the analytical prediction of resilience in high-dimensional systems. • Biological network resilience: In biology, many living systems exhibit drastic state shifts in response to small changes in environmental parameters, leading to diseases or apoptosis. We will review the recent studies on predicting tipping points and discovering early-warning signals in organisms, which could help prevent or delay the onset of diseases. • Social network resilience: Behavior of social groups of humans and social animals are likely to exhibit tipping points. We first make distinction between cultural and survival resilience. Then, we summarize the concepts behind tipping points and show that they arise in both types of resilience. We also show instances in which they are likely to occur in human and animal societies. Studying tipping pints may open up new lines of inquiry in behavioral ecology and generate novel questions, methods, and approaches to human and animal behavior. • Infrastructural network resilience: Most infrastructural network systems are considered as recoverable due to effective human interventions. The traditional concept of "engineering resilience" measures the time it takes for a system to recover or the relative change in its recovery back to equilibrium after a disturbance. Very recently, a few groups are studying the system resilience and prediction of the tipping points in engineering systems. For example, in transportation systems, certain traffic congestions may be avoided if we could give effective early-warnings. Resilience problems are ubiquitous, with wide applications to many other disciplines besides the four domains discussed above, such as environmental science, computer science, management science, economics, political science, business administration, and phycology [25] . For instance, the extensively studied psychological resilience has multiple definitions with adversary and positive adaptation being two core concepts, which characterize the ability to mentally or emotionally cope with a crisis [59] . For business and economic systems, resilience is defined as their capacity to survive, adapt and grow in the face of change and uncertainty related to disturbances, whether they are caused by resource stresses, societal stresses, or acute events [60] . Furthermore, the topics related to resilience, such as alternative stable states, also exist in other disciplines. In material science, for example, most types of solid matter have a single stable solid state for a particular set of conditions. Yet Yang et al. [61] describe a material composed of a polymer impregnated with a super-cooled salt solution, termed as sal-gel, that assumes two distinct but stable and reversible solid states under the same conditions for a range of temperatures. Besides the various definitions of resilience itself, there are conceptual overlaps between resilience and other concepts, such as robustness and stability, which we will discuss in this review to demonstrate that these are distinct concepts. The advances reviewed here will advance the readers' understanding of the complex systems surrounding us, and enable the readers to design more resilient infrastructure or social systems. The structure and function of the ecological systems assembled by the interacting species are subjected to internal or external perturbations, such as human-induced pressures and environmental changes [4, 28, 62, 63, 64, 65] . These ecological systems need to respond to such perturbations by adjusting their activities to retain their basic functionality. Unfortunately, due to climate change and increasing human activity, even a small perturbation may cause an ecosystem to cross the tipping point and reach an unexpected domain of attraction. This transition between states uncover the alternative stable states [66, 28] or phase shifts [67, 68, 69] . The ability to predict the tipping point of the alternative stable state and the phase shift is crucial for ecosystem management. Though both terms show the changes in the ecosystem in response to disturbances, they represent different characteristics change in dynamical systems. As shown in Fig. 3 : 1) alternative stable states implies at least two different stable equilibria can occur at the same parameter values (i.e., environment) over at least some of the range, where hysteresis [70] often appears; 2) a phase shift has but a single state (albeit changing at the threshold) under all parameter values. Transitions between states are changes from the dramatic qualitative changes in the former case, while simple quantitative changes in the latter. Thus, before predicting the state of such a dynamical behavior, an important question remains about the landscape of the system whether it "has a single valley or multiple ones separated by hills and watersheds" [31] . If the former, the dynamical system has a unique The state in an ecosystem response linearly to the changes in conditions; (B) A continuous and gradual "phase shift" from "upper" to "lower" mutually exclusive states as the background environmental parameter increases; (C) A limiting case of sudden regime shift between two mutually exclusive states; (D) A sudden catastrophic shift between multiple stable states in a hysteretic system with different threshold for forward and backward shifts. Source: Figure is modified from [71] . attractor, to which the system will always evolve from all initial conditions following any disturbance, showing no correlations to the past states. If the latter, the state to which the system settles depends on the initial conditions; the system may return to the original state under small perturbations, but evolve into another attractor following large perturbations. Whether alternative stable states exist in nature has been the subject of a historical debate [72, 73, 74, 75] . The debate regarding what constitutes evidence for alternative stable states arose because there are two different contexts in which the term "alternative stable states" is used in the ecological literature [56] . One excludes the effect of environmental change and regards the environment as fixed in some sense [76, 77] . Another focuses on the effect of environmental change on the state of communities or ecosystems [31] . For example, Connell et al. [78] suggest that alternative stable states do not exist in systems untouched by humans, while Dublin et al. [79] and Sinclair et al. [80] point out that human being is a part of the dynamics of systems. Here we would not tread on the question of whether the human is or is not natural parts of ecosystems, but just observe that human does change the states of ecosystems [81] . Much of the literature over the last 50 years have shown increasing empirical support of alternative stable states gathered by ecologists [72, 31, 79, 82, 66, 73, 83, 28, 56, 84, 85, 86, 65] , since 1960s [87] . Transitions among stable states are used to describ many ecosystems, including semi-arid rangelands [82] , lakes [73] , coral reefs [28] , and forests [88] . Moreover, plenty of theoretical models have been proposed to account for the alternative stable states in ecosystems. Next, we will review the mathematical models of multiple stable states. Plenty of theoretical models [31] have demonstrated the behaviors of complex ecological systems with multiple stable states. From the modeling perspective, alternative stable states might occur through state variables shifts [56] . Thinking about the shift between alternative stable states is aided by the ball-in-cup analogy outlined in Fig. 4 . All conceivable states of the system can be represented by a surface, with the actual state of the system (for example, the abundance of all populations) as a ball residing on it. The movement of the ball can be anticipated from the nature of the surface: the ball always rolls downhill without external intervention. In the most straightforward representation of alternative stable states, the surface has two basins, with the ball residing in one of them. Valleys or dips on the surface represent domains of attraction for a state. The question is, how does the ball move from one basin to the other? There are two ways: either move the ball (Fig. 4 , left) or alter the landscape upon which it sits (Fig. 4 , right). The first of these requires substantial perturbation to the state variables (for example, population densities). The latter envisions a change to the parameters governing interactions within the ecosystem, such as birth rates, death rates, carrying capacity, migration, or per capita predation, which can be changed by human interventions or natural disasters. Simple theoretical analyses predict multiple stable states for 1) single species dynamics via the Allee effect, 2) two-species competitive interactions characterized by unstable coexistence, 3) some predator-prey interactions, and 4) some systems combining predation and competition [66] . The theoretical models of multiple stable states are usually represented by a system of dynamical equations characterizing the evolution of the species' states. If the equation describing the transformation of the state in the ecosystem is nonlinear, there may be multiple stable states with all species present; If the system of equations governing the species is linear, then only one stable state exists with all the species present. Yet, there may exist other stable states with some of the species absent [87] . For perturbations to state variables, state shifts have most often been achieved experimentally by species removal or addition [72, 89] . For example, overfishing is a classic case in which a new interior community state may arise simply through changes to the size of the fish population [56] . Two species Lotka-Volterra competition is a case where the interior coexistence equilibrium may be unstable, and alternative states arise through the extinction of one population [89, 76] . The parameter changes [28, 84] may alter the location of a single equilibrium point, or may transiently result in destabilization of the current state, permitting the system to reach an alternative, locally stable equilibrium point, which may or may not exist before the parameter perturbation. These results support the notion that complex ecosystems maintain multiple stable states. In the following, we will review four sample models with multiple stable states in low-dimensional ecosystems. Grazing ecosystems. Suppose there is only one population of herbivores with a constant density, H, in a grazing ecosystem [31] , and they are sustained by vegetation whose biomass is V. The growth rate of the vegetation is G(V) that is a function of V in the absence of grazing. The herbivores consume the vegetation at a net rate C(V) = Hc(V), where c(V) denotes the consumption rate per capita. As the biomass V increases, G(V) first increases to a peak value and then decreases due to the competition on the resources. When G(V) decreases to zero, the biomass V reaches its maximum value K. The per capita consumption function c(V) increases with V when V is low; and saturates to some constant V 0 due to the limited intake capacity and digestion rate of the herbivore. The maximum biomass K of vegetation and the saturate value V 0 of herbivores are crucial factors for the final equilibrium point. Define α = V 0 /K whose value determines how many stable states that a grazing ecosystem has. Functions G(V) and C(V) could have different explicit forms. Among them, the best known form of G(V) is the logistic function G(V) = rV(1 − V/K), where r is a specific growth rate describing how quickly V approaches the equilibrium, and C(V) is the "Type III" consumption function C(V) = βHV 2 /(V 2 0 + V 2 ) [90] . Then the overall grazing model is (2.1) Introducing the rescaled variables X = V/K, τ = rt and γ = βH/rH, the equation above takes the form (2.2) If parameter value α < 1/3 √ 3, the system shows three equilibria: the low and high biomass equilibria are stable, and intermediate biomass equilibrium is unstable. Near the resilience thresholds H c2 as shown in Fig. 5 , a small increase in stocking rate may move the system from the high biomass equilibrium to the low biomass equilibrium. A minimal model. In an ecosystem, the dynamical changes of its state usually show a hysteresis transition, such as desertification and lake eutrophication. As shown in Fig. 6 , if the system is on the upper branch, once the control parameter exceeds the threshold T 2, it will collapse into a stable state in the lower branch. If one tries to restore the state in the lower branch into a state in the upper branch, the control parameter has to be lower than another threshold T 1 that is much smaller than T 2. The following minimal model describes the change over time of such "unwanted" ecosystem property x [28] : where x is the state variable, and r is the control parameter. The parameter a represents an environmental H H c1 H c2 V K Figure 5 : The equilibrium biomass V as a function of the density, H, of herbivores with α = 0.08. There are two resilience thresholds, H c1 and H c2 , in the system. For H between the two thresholds, an unstable state (green dash-dotted line) and two stable states appear, and the system may move to the low or high equilibrium, depending on whether the initial value of V lies below or above the dash-dotted "breakpoint" curve. Source: Figure is modified from [31] . factor that promotes x, and parameter b is the decay rate of x. For r = 0, the model has one single equilibrium at x = a/b. Otherwise, the last term representing the Hill function can cause alternative stable states. The exponent p determines the steepness of the switch occurring around the threshold h, and the higher p is, the stronger the hysteresis is as measured by the distance between thresholds. Coral reef model. After experiencing mass diseaseinduced mortality of the herbivorous urchin Diadema antillanrum in 1983 and two framework-building species of coral, the health of reefs in the Caribbean have been heavily negatively affected, showing a phase change from coral-to algal-dominated state. Numby et al. [91] discover multiple stable states and hysteresis by using a three-state analytical model with corals, macroalgae and short algal turfs. Let the coverage of corals, algal turfs and macroalgae be denoted as C, T and M, respectively. Assuming that the sum T + M + C is constant and equal to one, the dynamics of the reef can be described by two equations: where T can be expressed as 1 − M − C. The term −aMC means that macroalgae can overgrow corals, and γMT captures the phenomenon that macroalgae col- State T2 T1 Figure 6 : The hysteresis in an ecosystem. If the stable state is at the upper branch and the control parameter slightly exceeds the threshold T 2, the system will collapse rapidly to the lower branch, which is what we usually want to avoid in the real world. If the system is in a lower equilibrium branch, and we want to restore it back into a higher equilibrium, then we need to decrease the control parameter to the value smaller than the threshold T 1. Source: Figure is modified from [28] . onize dead coral by spreading vegetatively over algal turfs. Coral naturally dies at a rate of dC, and Algal turfs arise when macroalgae are grazed (gM/(M + T )). Besides, coral recruit to and overgrow algal turfs at the combined rate r. Figure 7 shows the phase plane of trajectories of the system from a given initial state to its equilibrium states, which reveals all the possible stable and unstable equilibrium of the system. A vegetation-algae model. In shallow lakes, algal growth increases the enrichment of turbidity, while vegetation harms turbidity. Such feedbacks between algal, vegetation, and turbidity result in multiple stable . Equilibrium covers are represented by black circles. Trajectories of system states are represented by the lines beginning at different initial covers (red circles) and tending towards stable (denoted by subscript 's') rather than unstable (denoted by subscript 'u') equilibria. The parameters are set to a = 0.1, r = 1, γ = 0.8 and d = 0.44 [92] . Source: Figure is modified from [91] . states. Scientists employ the multiple stable state models to understand the transition of states in shallow temperate lakes, showing the regime shift between clearwater states that are dominated by vegetation and turbid states dominated by algae [93, 73] . Among the proposed models [93] , a vegetation-algae model (also called vegetation-turbidity model) [73] captures the interactions between the growth of planktonic algae (A) and abundance of vegetation (V), illustrating the potential for alternative equilibria in shallow lakes: where r is the maximum intrinsic growth rate of algal turfs (A), and parameter c is a competition coefficient. The algal growth increases with the nutrient level (N) and decreases with the abundance of vegetation (V) in simple Monod relations, with h N and h V denoting the half-saturation constants. Note that Monod function is a particular case of Hill function [94] with the power exponent being 1. Vegetation abundance in a shallow lake declines with algal biomass in a sigmoidal way, with h A denoting a half-saturation constant. The Hill coefficient of p shapes the relation between vegetation abundance and algal biomass. A high value of p causes change shape to approach a step function representing the disappearance of vegetation from a shallow lake of homogeneous depth around critical algal biomass where turbidity makes the average depth of the lake unsuitable for plant growth [73] . In the shallow lakes, the equilibrium density of algal changes following the nutrient level changes, showing a catastrophic fold as shown in Fig. 8A . The algal biomass has three equilibria in a certain range of the nutrient levels, where one is unstable, and two are stable. In constrast, in deeper lakes, the vegetation abundance gradually declines as turbidity increases (Fig. 8B ) [93, 73] . This indicates that the multiple stable states arising from the interactions captured by this model are limited to shallow lakes. stable states There are more theoretical studies on multiple stable states than empirical studies. However, moving from theory to practice is not straightforward. While the meaning of stability and equilibrium points are very clearcut in theory, it is not so in nature [70] . Nature ecosystems with alternative stable states are expected to exhibit four key attributes [95] : 1) abrupt state shifts in time series data, 2) sharp spatial boundaries between contrasting states or habitat units, 3) multimodal frequency distribution(s) of key variable(s) with each mode corresponding to an alternative stable ecosystem state, and 4) a hysteretic response to a changing environment [71] . Despite the difficulties, the accumulated body of empirical evidence with multiple stable states shows that such states exist in natural ecosystems [72, 72] . In the following, we will review several other empirical examples of ecosystems [81] where multiple stable states have been postulated to exist. Shallow Lakes. The existence of qualitative differences in the state of lakes has long been recognized [81] . Shallow lakes can have two alternative equilibria: a clear state dominated by aquatic vegetation, and a turbid state characterized by high algal biomass [96, 73, 97] . Many ecological mechanisms are probably involved, and each of these states is relatively stable due to interactions among nutrients, the types of vegetation, and light penetration. The observed trends are: 1) rising nutrient level increases turbidity, 2) vegetation reduces and also depends on turbidity, and 3) light penetration limit the growth of vegetation below certain depth. In the clearwater state that is dominated by macrophytes, vegetation can stabilize such state in shallow lakes up to relatively high nutrient loadings [96, 73] . Once a system has switched to a turbid state dominated by phytoplankton, the system stays in such a state unless it receives a substantial nutrient reduction, which enables recolonization by plants. Scheffer et al. [73] review evidence for the shift in shallow temperate lakes between clearwater, macrophyte-dominated states, and turbid, phytoplankton-dominated states. Transitions between states can be mediated by trophic relationships where fish and nutrients are the primary drivers [81] . On one hand, the transition from a turbid to a clear state can be accomplished by decreasing stocks of planktivorous fish, which decreases the predation on herbivorous zooplankton. Consequently, populations of herbivorous zooplankton increase, leading to an increase in herbivory and a reduction in phytoplankton biomass. Besides, increased light penetration and available nutrients result in the establishment of vegetation [96] . On the other hand, shifts from the clear to turbid state can result from overgrazing of benthic vegetation by fish or waterfowl [96] . Also, the points where these two shifts happen are not the same, forming a hysteresis phase transition, as shown in Fig. 9 . Figure 9 : Shallow lakes are often shown to respond non-linearly to eutrophication (blue dashed) and in many cases hysteresis have been assumed (orange dotted). Hysteresis is a nonlinear behavior where the state of a lake does not only depend on its present input but also on the prior state. As a result, two stable states could occur given the same conditions. Source: Figure from [97, 98] . Coral Reefs in marine ecosystems. Multiple stable states not only exist in the shallow lakes but also appear in other aquatic systems, such as coral reefs, soft sediments, subtidal hard substrate communities, and rocky shores in marine ecosystems. Among those coral reefs are the most well-known and best-documented cases [70] . Coral-dominated and macroalgae-dominated states have long been discovered on reefs [99, 68, 100] . Nevertheless, whether they can be called alternative stable states has been a highly effective controversial topic. For example, Dudgeon et al. [86] propose that the data from fossil and modern reefs support the phaseshift hypothesis with single stable states. Moreover, most studies on the transition from coral-dominated to algal-dominated states do not distinguish between simple quantitative changes and dramatic qualitative changes associated with multiple stable states and hysteresis [70] . Mumby et al. [91] use a mechanistic model of the ecosystem to discover multiple stable states and verify it with Hughes' empirical data, and point out that both theoretical model and empirical data are far more consistent with multiple attractors than the competing hypothesis of only a single, coral attractor [101] . Multiple stable states in ecological systems occur when self-reinforcing feedback generate multiple stable equilibria under a given set of conditions [102, 103] . In the coral-dominated state, a decline in coral cover liberates new space for algal colonization. Once maximum levels of grazing have been reached, further increases in the grazable area reduce the mean intensity of grazing and increase the chance that a patch of macroalgae will establish itself, ungrazed, from the algal turf. The resulting rise in macroalgal cover will reduce the availability of coral settlement space and will increase the frequency and intensity of coral-algal interactions. The resulting diminishing of coral recruitment will reduce the growth rate of corals and will cause limited mortality. This in turn will further reduce the intensity of grazing, thereby reinforcing the increase in macroalgae [91] , leading to a stable macroalgae-dominated state, as shown in Wetlands. Each wetland is exposed to variations in soils, landscape, climate, water regime and chemistry, vegetation, and human disturbance. Multiple stable states appear due to the interactions between plants, animals, and environmental changes. For example, due to nonlinear and coupled ecological, hydrological, and geomorphological feedbacks, multiple stable states are established in different kinds of coastal tidal wetlands: marshes, mangroves, deltas, seagrasses [71] . We show the global distribution of these four kinds of wetlands in Fig 16. In salt marshes, evidence from field observa- tions has documented possible occurrences of alternative stable states: bare sediment state, vegetated state, and states with distinct marsh vegetation communities [105, 106, 107, 108] . For example, multimodal frequency distributions, abrupt state shifts, and hysteric response make it likely that the system will persist in the new state rather than return to the prior state. This was also empirically observed in a case of pronounced elevation distribution changes in areas that shifted from bare flats to vegetated marshes in 1931−1992 in the Western Scheldt estuary [109] . In freshwater marshes and deltas, feedbacks between sedimentation and vegetation might form alternative stable ecosystem states. For example, after flooding disturbance, only plants with roots longer than a threshold could survive, so the persisting root length is related to sedimentation [110] . In mangrove systems, one mechanism of forming multiple stable states has been identified in the field: runaway sedimentation. Sediment may be preferentially deposited in large amounts. For example, the presence of mangrove biomass could promote sudden depositions during cyclones, hurricanes, or tsunamis [111, 112] , and local sedimentation. In seagrass meadows, the vegetated state could persist due to positive feedbacks: vegetation could decrease water turbidity, enabling the submerged seagrass plants to intercept enough light to perform photosynthesis, which stabilizes the bottom and reduce sediment resuspension [113] . In contrast, when the water depth increases, the vegetated stable state of a seagrass meadow can quickly and abruptly shift to a bare sediments state [114] . Rangelands and woodlands. On North American rangelands, lower successional stable states occur in sagebrush and other shrub-dominated vegetation types in the Great Basin. Laycock [82] pointed out that counter to the single stable state (climax) assumption, if a vegetation type is in a stable lower successional state, it usually does not respond to change in grazing or even removal of grazing, which is vital for the management of the ecosystem. While on savanna rangelands, Walker [115] and Ludwig et al. [116] identify alternative stable states as either woody/grass coverage or woody thicket. The transition between these states is often triggered by grazing pressures that remove either drought-tolerant or perennial grasses [116, 115] . If grazing pressures are high, the perennial grass abundance is decreased, leading to an increased abundance of woody plants. Once the woody community is established, fires burn less frequently, and the woody community persists for decades. As we mentioned earlier, human intervention is a significant cause of multiple stable states in ecosystems. For example, the woodlands of the Serengeti-Mara ecosystem in East Africa present multiple stable states as a result of elephant and human-induced fire: without other external perturbations, such as fire, elephants were unable to cause the vegetation to transition from woodland to grassland. Once a fire changes, the vegetation from woodland to grassland, and elephants can hold it in the grassland state [79] . Related to multiple stable states (or alternative stable states), a crucial feature called resilience has been attracting considerable attention. Resilience defines the ability of a system to retain its basic functionality when internal change or external perturbations occur. In 1973, Holling [4] introduced the notion "resilience" to characterize the degree to which a system can endure perturbations without collapse or shifting into some new stable states. Since then, different authors used "resilience" in different ways, leading to a great deal of confusion about this term. As shown from Fig 4, Beisner et al. [56] associated resilience with the features of the basin that act to retain the states of species (the location of the ball). These features are the steepness of the slope and the width of the basin. From one point of view, steepness of the sides of the basin affects the return time of the ball to the lowest point in the basin, and the rate, at which a system returns to a single steady or cyclic state following a perturbation. This point of view is taken by "engineering resilience" defined by Holling et al. [117] . Engineering resilience focuses on the behavior of a system when it remains within the stable domain that contains this steady-state [117] , which means that it concentrates on stability near an equilibrium steady state. From the other point of view, the width of the basin could also affect the movement of the ball, and the ball can only move out of a basin if it undergoes sufficiently large perturbations. The size of the perturbation to state variables affect the likelihood of the ball to escape from a basin. This point of view was assumed by "ecological resilience" [21] . Ecological resilience emphasizes conditions far from any equilibrium steady state, where instabilities can flip a system into another regime of behavior. Engineering resilience is probably the most frequently invoked meaning or definition of resilience [118, 119] . It assumes that the system is in equilibrium before disturbances are introduced and the resilience is defined in terms of the stability of a system near its steady-state. Hence the resilience denotes the system's ability to recover back its pre-perturbed steadystate [120] . The concept of engineering resilience measures the time it takes for a system to recover or the relative change in its recovery back to equilibrium after a disturbance. For example, the resilience triangle paradigm based on lost functionality and recovery time has been used to quantify system's resilience [121, 122] . Rose [123] used the time-dependent aspects of recovery in the definition of dynamic resilience. Ouyang et al. [124] assessed the resilience of interdependent infrastructure systems during a period consisting of a damage propagation stage and recovery stage. In the psychological literature, engineering resilience has been used to characterize an individual's capacity to rebound or 'bounce back' to their original state following stressful experiences [125, 126, 127, 128] . In natural systems, resilience has been used in the explanation of equilibrium states in water column disturbances in microbiology, dynamic restoration of coastal dunes, and the restoration of critical ecosystem services [129, 130, 131] . Figure 12 : Schematic diagram of a resilience triangle. The system functionality degrades after the crisis, but it recovers gradually to return to its level before the crisis in the long run. The recovery will be rapid for a system with a high resilience but slow in case of a low resilience. A resilience triangle is the area of degradation in quality of recovery. Source: Figure from Ecological resilience, or system resilience, quantifies a system's ability to absorb a disturbance without changing its structure, identity, and functions [23] . It focuses on the magnitude of the disturbance that a system can withstand without shifting to another regimes [118] . Hence, the corresponding system simultaneously monitors and reorganizes the processes that govern the system's behavior to accommodate or resist the disturbance [23] . Note that this term implies the potential existence of multiple stable states. If the perturbation is small, the system could go back to the pre-perturbation state. However, if a shock perpetuates changes in conditions that exceed some intrinsic threshold, the system changes regimes such that the structure or function of the system is fundamentally different. Moreover, when a threshold is crossed, the return is difficult [133, 134, 135] . For example, many ecological systems may undergo abrupt transitions to alternative regimes [28, 136] . Such transitions are often irreversible and widespread in human health [137] , the economy [138] and the environment [31] . In the psychological literature, ecological resilience has been recognized as an individual's capacity to be robust, demonstrating confidence in one's strengths and abilities, and being stoical, resourceful, and determined as one navigates through key challenges across and within one's life [139, 140] . In ecology and biology, ecological resilience illustrates the resistant bacteria responses to water column disturbances in microbiology [129] , the strong responses of receptors and mechanisms in biology [141] , the permanence of farm systems in ecology [142] . The concept of ecological resilience implies the need for predicting the critical points ( or "tipping points"), at which the system loses its resilience, and to uncover the mechanisms underlying such critical transitions. In short, engineering resilience focuses on efficiency, constancy, and predictability, while ecological resilience focuses on persistence, change, and unpredictability [21, 81] . They are alternative paradigms characterizing two different fundamental aspects of a system's ability to maintain its functionality. Engineering resilience is most useful for a system that exists near a single or global equilibrium condition. In the traditions of engineering, systems are designed with a single operating objective, which is usually associated with a single steady-state [144] . It means that we can always repair the system that can return to its regular operation even under large perturbations. Resilience in the fields such as engineering, physics, control system design, or material engineering means engineering resilience [81] . For a system that contains multiple stable states, ecological resilience is a more meaningful measure for ecological systems. In ecology, resilience has been defined as "a measure of the persistence of systems and of their ability to absorb change and disturbance and still maintain the same relationships between populations or state variables" [145] . Note that there are some other studies about engineer resilience in ecological systems. Once the disturbances exceed a tipping point, the system will shift into another regime. Next, we will review works on both empirical and theoretical analysis and predictions on phase shifts in ecosystems. Many ecosystems are exposed to internal and external perturbations. The perturbations can be gradual changes in climate, nutrients or toxic chemicals loading, habitat fragmentation or biotic exploitation, and even precipitating events, such as hurricane and earthquakes [28] . The responses of ecosystems to perturbations are nontrivial: 1) for the same perturbation, different ecosystems show different types of responses, which mainly includes "phase shift" and "multiple stable states"; 2) for the same ecosystem, it responds differently to different perturbations and may even differ its response to the repetition of the same perturbation due to the existence of multiple stable states. stable states When external conditions change gradually, even linearly, with time [146] , the state of some highly resilient ecosystems may respond in a linear way to such trends, as shown in Fig. 3A . For example, in the coral reef system, there is a simple linear relationship between coral and fishing [147, 101] . A more common and complex relationship between the states of an ecosystem and conditions is nonlinear: a continuous and gradual "phase shift" from "upper" to "lower" mutually exclusive states as the background environmental parameter increases (Fig. 3B ) [71] . Both in the linear and smooth nonlinear cases, there is only one single equilibrium state, and the ecosystem could return to the former state by reversing the control parameter to the previous level [101] . Some ecosystems may be quite inert over a specific range of conditions but respond abruptly when the control parameter approach a threshold, showing a sudden shift between two mutually exclusive state (Fig. 3C) . These three types of state transitions are called "phase shift" or "regime shift", which is characterized by dominant populations of an ecological community responding smoothly and continuously along an environmental gradient until a threshold is reached, shifting the community to a new dominant or suite of dominant populations. In any given environment, there is at most one stable state [86] , except in the threshold point where the system shows an abrupt shift and may have more than one attractor in principle. In some cases, the abrupt phase shift may be largely irreversible. For example, some cloud forests were established under a wetter rainfall regime thousands of years previously, and necessary moisture is supplied through condensation of water from clouds intercepted by the canopy. If the trees are cut, this water input stops, and the resulting conditions can be too dry for recovery of the forest [88, 64] . A crucial different situation arises when the ecosystem response curve is 'folded' backward, forming multiple stable states for a specific range of parameters [28, 148] , with the parameter describing an external condition rather than an interactive part of the system, or the change in such condition being very slow relative to the rates of change in the system. Vasilakopoulos et al. [148] provide empirical evidence for the occurrence of a fold bifurcation in an exploited fish population, as shown in Fig. 15 . In such a case, the ecosystem has two alternative stable states, separated by an unstable equilibrium that marks the border between the 'basin of attraction' of the states, showing as the green dashed line in Fig. 3D . When conditions or the control parameter changes gradually, the abrupt shift of states occurs at the critical point. In such a case, the "upper" and "lower" states need not be mutually exclusive, and they could coexist in a specific range of conditions. The two critical points -(1) the ecosystem shifts from "upper" to "lower" states, and (2) the ecosystem shifts from "lower" to "upper" states -are different. If the ecosystem is in a "lower" state, it is difficult to return to the "upper" state. However, the shift can also happen before the critical point, depending on the strength of disturbance and the size of the basin, which together define the resilience of a system [4] . If the disturbance is large enough, the state of an ecosystem may go over the border of the attraction basins and enter another basin even when it did not yet reach the critical point. When the basin is tiny, that is, the system resilience is low, small perturbation could be enough to displace the ball far enough to push it over the hill, resulting in a shift to the alternative stable state. As shown in Fig. 14 , since the size of the basin in which the system's state lies are low near the critical point, the abrupt shift in states may happen even before the critical point F 2 under a large enough perturbation. Note that, although we use the terms 'stable states' and 'equilibria', ecosystems are never stable in the sense that they do not change, and there are always slow trends and fluctuations. Therefore, Scheffer et al. [95] suggest that the words 'regimes' and 'attractors' are more appropriate to show the dynamics. Since the terms "multiple stable states" and "alternative stable states" have been extensively used in literature, we also will use these terms while keeping in mind that they refer to a kind of relative dynamic balance rather than stable state excluding dynamics. Figure 14 : External conditions affect the resilience of multi-stable ecosystems to perturbation. The stability landscapes depict the equilibria and their basins of attraction at five different conditions. Stable equilibria correspond to valleys; the unstable middle section of the folded equilibrium curve corresponds to a hill. If the size of the attraction basin is small, resilience is small and even a moderate perturbation may bring the system into the alternative basin of attraction. Source: Figure from Both phase shift and multiple stable states are underlying mechanisms to explain the catastrophic shifts in complex systems. Abrupt shifts with alternative stable states are usually related to bifurcation, as Fig. 3(d) shows, while phase shifts are not. This makes it is difficult to collect empirical data showing bifurcations under the same conditions. Thus it is not straightforward to differentiate phase shifts from multiple stable states. Fortunately, despite the requirement of extensive time series containing many shifts [149] , there are several approaches to infer whether or not alternative attractors are involved in a shift [95] . 1) Based on the principle that all attractor shifts imply a phase in which the system is speeding up as it is diverging from a repeller, a statistical approach [150] could be used; 2) Another approach compares the fit of contrasting models with and without attractor shifts [151, 152] , or computes the proba-bility distribution of a bifurcation parameter [151] . Especially, for some colonization events, such as in marine fouling communities [72] , which once established, can be very persistent and hard to replace until the cohort dies of old age. Unless the new state can persist through more generations by strengthening itself [153] , it seems inappropriate to relate to such shifts as alternative stable states [95] . Note that although "regime shift" and "alternative stable states" are different as discussed above, they both can be underlying mechanisms behind abrupt phase transitions. Since for some of those, there is no apparent evidence to show whether they are related to alternative stable states or regime shift, various literature uses them without marking such distinction [154, 155, 156] . In the following review of critical transitions, we would not distinguish between them either. The shift from one state to another may result from either a 'threshold' or 'sledgehammer' effect [157] . A state shift caused by a sledgehammer effect, such as the clearing of a forest using a bulldozer, usually comes as a result of our expectation. By contrast, the critical threshold is reached as incremental changes accumulate and the threshold value generally is not known in advance, so that state shifts resulting from threshold effects is usually not anticipated. In other words, undesired shifts between ecosystem states are caused by the combination of the magnitudes of external forces and the internal resilience of the system. A sudden dramatic change is not necessary to be caused by a sudden sizeable external disturbance. When the system is close to the tipping point, even a tiny incremental change in conditions can trigger a tremendous shift, such as the legendary straw that breaks the camel's back and tipping over of an overloaded boat when too many people move to one side [95] . Abrupt phase transitions in ecosystems are increasingly common as a consequence of human activities that erode internal resilience, for example, through resource exploitation, pollution, landuse change, possible climatic impact and altered disturbance regimes [64, 68, 158] . Next we will show three typical examples of catastrophic shifts in ecosystems. Fire in Australia. In Australia, overhunting and use of fire by humans some 30,000 to 40,000 years ago removed large marsupial herbivores, which resulted in an ecosystem of fire and fire-dominated plants expanded and irreversibly switched the ecosystem from a more productive state, dependent on rapid nutrient cycling, to a less productive state, with slower nutrient cycling [159, 64] . Another cause leading to the erosion of re-silience in ecosystem is global warming [160] , which is a result of the exhaust of excessive carbon dioxide.The increasing temperatures are modifying key physiological, demographic and community-scale process [161] , decreasing the internal resilience in ecosystems. The erosion of internal resilience render ecosystems vulnerable to external disturbances [158] , and triggered by them shifts from one state to another undesired state. Loss of kelp forests. A marine heat wave caused the loss of kelp forests across 2300 km 2 of Australia's Great Southern Reef, forcing a phase shift to seaweed turfs [162] , as shown in Fig. 16 . Before December 2010, kelp forests covered over 70% of shallow rocky reef in the midwest coast of Australia [163] . However, only two years later, by early 2013, extensive surveys found that a 43% (963 km 2 ) loss of kelp forests on the west coast. The previously dense kelp forests had disappeared, and a dramatic increase in the cover of turfforming seaweeds had been found (Fig. 16 ). Wernberg et al. [162] deduced that such phase shift is caused by a extreme heat wave, with the temperatures exceeded a physiological tipping point for kelp forests beginning in 2011, and the new kelp-free state was supported by reinforcing feedback mechanisms. In contrast similar ecosystem changes have not been observed in the southwest coast, since that the heat wave temperatures there remained within the thermal tolerance of kelps [164] . The previous short-term climate changing events, such as the large-scale destruction of kelp forests during the EI Niño Southern Oscillation event of 1982/83 [165] , have mostly recovered as environmental conditions returned back to normal [166] . However there is no signs of kelp forest recovery on the heavily affected reefs in west Australia [161] . What is worse, the current velocity of ocean warming is pushing kelp forests toward the southern edge of the Australian continent [167] . The high risk of local extinction of kelp forests would devastate lucrative fishing and tourism industries worth more $10 billion Australian dollars per year [168] , and endanger thousands of endemic species supported by the kelp forests of Australia's Great Southern Reef. Self-organised patchiness in the arid ecosystem. In an ecosystem, different attracting states can not only exist across different time scales [169, 28, 95] , but also coexist at the same time across different spatial scales, which is usually related to self-organised patchiness and the resource concentration mechanisms involved [170] . The most prominent example is the arid ecosystem [171] , where the self-organised patchiness differs in scale and shape, such as gaps, labyrinths, rings and spots, as shown in Fig. 17 . This patchiness is a result of positive feedback between plant growth and availability of water. A higher vegetation density allows for higher water infiltration into the soil and lower soil evaporation, which could stabilize the vegetation-state. Once the vegetation disappears, bare soil is too hostile for recolonisation [169, 172] . Thus the present state of the vegetation is not only determined by soil-water distributions, but also depends on biomass-water feedbacks that is determined by its history states [170, 173] . More importantly, the vegetation states on some spatial locations may shift abruptly into a bare state, if rainfall decreases beyond a threshold, which contributes to a more homogeneous bare state in the arid ecosystem. However, on the other side, increased rainfall may not recover the spotted vegetation state, since the concentration of soil water under vegetated patches already disappeared. Similar patchiness across different spatial locations and the catastrophic shifts have been observed in nutrient-poor Savanna ecosystems [174, 175, 176] and Peatland ecosystems [177] . In addition to the decreasing rainfall, overgrazing by cattle can also cause catastrophic shifts from a spotted vegetation state into a decertified ecosystem state [178, 116] . Adequate grazing management and patchy crop production to conserve resources in marginally arable lands may help to optimize productivity, thereby preventing such catastrophic shifts [170] . Abrupt shifts can cause substantial losses of ecological and economic resources and require drastic and expensive intervention to restoring a desired state [179, 28] . Studies on the abrupt shifts and tipping points in ecosystems could help understand the failure mechanisms, which is crucial for ecosystem management. Thus, we should not only focus on the prevention of perturbations but also pay attention to sustaining the system in a large stability domain or push the system far away from the tipping points, reducing the risk of unwanted state shifts. Research on regime shifts is often confined to distinct branches of science, reflecting empirical, theoretical [180] , or predictive approaches [29, 181] , which requires an in-depth knowledge of the causal structure of the system or high quality of spatiotemporal data. Hence, the research has generally focused on the analysis of individual types of regime shifts, as discussed above. As humans increase their pressure on the planet, regime shifts are likely to occur more often, and more severely, and more broadly [182, 183, 184, 185 ]. An important question to ask is whether regime shifts interact with one another and if the occurrence of one will increase the likelihood of another or correlate at distant places. All systems on the planet are closely intertwined across three dimensions: organizational levels, space, and time. For example, the excessive use of fertilizers, as an inadvertent result of growing more vegetables on land, could eutrophicate the downstream coastal waters that compromises food production from the ocean [186] , with eutrophication being one of three essential causes (eutrophication, warming, and consumption) for rapid declines in marine biodiversity [187] . A variety of causal pathways connecting regime shifts have been identified, showing that the occurrence of a regime shift may affect the occurrence of another regime shift. For example, eutrophication is often reported as a regime shift preceding hypoxia or dead zones in coastal areas [188] , and hypoxic events have been reported to affect the resilience of coral reefs to warming and other stressors in the tropics [189] . Thus, there are potential interactions between regime shifts across systems, which should not be studied in isolation under the assumption that they are independent systems. Thanks to the accumulation of the empirical data of regime shifts, an open online repository of regime shift syntheses and case studies have been built, which is called the regime shift database [190] . This database currently contains 35 types of regime shifts, more than 300 specific case studies based on a literature review of over 1000 scientific papers, and a set of 75 categorical variables about the i) main drivers of change, ii) impacts on ecosystem services, ecosystem processes and human well-being, iii) land use, ecosystem type and spatialtemporal scale at which each regime shift typically occurs, iv) possible managerial options and v) assessment of the reversibility of the regime shift, the level of uncertainty related to the existence of the regime shift, and its underlying mechanism [182] . These regime shift attributes could be used to fit statistical models to explore the role of cross-scale interactions [185] . For example, drivers include natural and human-induced changes that have been identified as directly or indirectly producing a regime shift [191] . The same driver can induce different regime shifts. Note that drivers, dynamics operate outside the feedback mechanisms of the system, thus they are variables independent of the dynamics of the system. Direct drivers are those that influence the internal processes or create feedbacks underlying a regime shift. Indirect drivers alter one or more direct drivers. By mining the interactions between regime shifts and drivers, a bipartite network is constructed in Ref [182] , and two networks can be projected from it. The first is a network of drivers connected by the regime they caused. The second is a network of regime shifts connected by the drivers they share. These two projected networks are shown in Fig. 18 . The analysis of regimedriver networks demonstrates that reducing the risk of regime shifts requires integrated action on multiple dimensions of global change across scales. Thus, Rocha et al. [185] give a more comprehensive analysis of cascading regime shifts within and across scales. In the regime shift database, each entry provides a literature-based synthesis of the key drivers and feedback underlying the regime shift, as well as impacts on ecosystem services and human well-being, and possible management options. For each regime shift, the database encodes the drivers and underlying feedbacks into a causal loop diagram [192] , which is a signed directed graph consisting of variables connected by arrows denoting causal influence [182] . Rocha et al. [185] use 30 regime shifts, where complete synthesis exists. The causal loop diagrams have been curated to construct coupled regime shift networks shown in Fig 19. The authors merge pairs of regime shift networks using the following three types of connections between them: (i) driver sharing, which is the most common type. The regime shifts connected that way are correlated in time and space, yet they do not have to be independent [182, 193] ; (ii) domino effects, which occur when the feedback processes of one regime shift affect the drivers of another regime shift, creating a one-way dependency [181, 193, 194] ; and (iii) hidden feedbacks, which only show when two regime shift networks are combined to generate new feedbacks that cannot be identified in the separated regime shifts [186] . By analyzing the regime shift networks coupled through these three interaction types, Rocha et al. [185] find that half of the regime shifts may be causally linked at different scales [195] . The regime shift of networks coupled via driver sharing describes the co-occurrence patterns of 77 drivers across the 30 regime shifts analyzed. The drives that the most frequently co-occurred in this case were related to food production, climate change, and urbanization. Regime shifts are more likely to share drivers when they use land similarly. The driver sharing is more likely in dynamics that evolve faster in time when there is a march of spatial scales. The domino effects are not common; evidence of cross-scale interactions for domino effects was only found in time but not in space. Hidden feedback is more likely to occur in the range of decades to centuries and at the national scale. The regime shift networks constructed in Ref. [185] enable researchers to systematically identify potential cascading effects. The cascading effects among regime shifts have also been modeled as a network of tipping elements in Ref. [196] , where each node is one tipping element represented by a time-dependent quantity x(t) that evolves according to the autonomous ordinary equation where r is the control parameter, while coefficients a, b > 0 and x 0 control the position of the system on the x-axis. The interactions between tipping elements are modeled as a directed network of a linearly coupled system of ordinary differential equations where d is the coupling strength and a i j are elements in the adjacency matrix. Such a network captures the cascading effects between tipping elements and has been applied to the Amazon rainforest. Although cascading effects usually mean that the occurrence of one regime shift could trigger the occurrence of another one, not all cascading effects reported in the literature are expected to amplify each other. For example, it has been reported that climate-tipping points can regulate each other and reduce the probability of regime shifts in forests [197, 198] . The study on interactions between regime shifts could help developing methods for early warning signals detections to predict regime shifts. Most of these studies on regime shifts focus on local ecological systems evolving over short time spans [29, 199, 200] . However, there also planetary-scale critical transitions that operate over centuries or millennia [201, 157] , such as the 'Big Five' mass extinctions [202] , the Cambrian explosion [203] , and the most recent transition from the last glacial into the present in-terglacial condition [204, 205] . This transition was a rapid warm-cold-warm fluctuation in climate between 14,300 and 11,000 years ago [205] . The significant biotic changes included the extinction of about half of the species of large-bodied mammals, several species of large birds and reptiles, and a few species of small animals [206] . A vital decrease in local and regional biodiversity occurred as geographic ranges shifted individualistically, which also resulted in novel species assemblages [207] . Another significant change was a global increase in human biomass and spread of modern humans to all continents [208] . The collected evidence of these planetary-scale critical transitions suggests that global-scale state shifts are not the cumulative result of many smaller-scale events that originate in local systems. Instead, they require global-level forcing that emerge on the planetary scale and then percolate downwards to cause changes in local systems [157] . Now the global-scale forcing mechanisms are induced by the human population growth with attendant resource consumption [201] , energy production, and consumption [209] , and climate change [204] , which cumulatively impose much stronger forcing than those active at the last global-scale state shift. Thus, the plausibility of a future planetary state shift seems high, as shown in Fig 20, which highlights the need to predict critical transitions by detecting early warning signs.  Tipping points are critical thresholds in system parameters or state variables at which a tiny perturbation can lead to a qualitative change of the system [196] . Once a tipping point has been crossed, and a critical transition occurs, it is extremely difficult or even impossible for the system to return to its previous state [157] . Thus prediction and prevention of unwanted critical transitions in ecosystems is a crucial challenge in ecology. Critical transitions, or regime shifts, can result from 'fold bifurcations' that shows hysteresis [29] or more complex bifurcations [210] . For the regime shifts in the latter case, there will be no typical early warning signals. In contrast, the regime shifts due to fold bifurcations trigger the general preceding phenomena that can be characterized mathematically. Those include a deceleration in recovery from perturbations ('critical slowing down'), an increase in variance in the pattern of within state fluctuations [29] , an increase in autocorrelation between fluctuations [199] , and an increase in asymmetry of fluctuations and rapid back-and-forth shifts ('flickering') between states [204] .  Predicting the tipping points where critical transition occur is extremely difficult because of the state of the system may show little change before reaching the tipping point [29] . Fortunately, specific generic symptoms may occur in a broad class of systems as they approach a critical point, which can be used for early warning before the catastrophic shift occur. These symptoms arise regardless of differences in the details of each system [211] . Similar signals could indicate disparate phenomena such as the collapse of an over-harvested population at ancient climatic transitions. Critical slowing down. The most important clue that has been suggested as indicator of system getting close to a critical threshold is related to a phenomenon known in dynamical systems theory as 'critical slowing down' [212] . It occurs for a range of bifurcations [29] . At fold bifurcation points, the dominant eigenvalue characterizing the rates of change around the equilibrium becomes zero. This implies that as the system approaches such critical points, it becomes increasingly slow in recovering from small perturbations [213] . Thus, the recovery rate after a small experimental perturbation can be used as an indicator of how close a system is to a bifurcation point, and such perturbation is so small that it introduces no risk of driving the system over the threshold. A straightforward implication of critical slowing down by systematically testing recovery rates is suitable for theoretical models [214] , but impractical or impossible to use for monitoring the most of natural systems. However, almost all real systems are persistently subject to natural perturbations, and certain characteristic changes in the pattern of fluctuations are expected to occur as a bifurcation is approached in such a system. For example, since that slowing down causes the intrinsic rates of change in the system to decrease, the state of the system at any given moment becomes more and more like its past state, thus an increase in autocorrelation in the resulting pattern of fluctuations appear as the system approach the tipping point [215] . Although there are different measurements can be used to quantify such increase [216, 217] , the simplest way is to look at lag-1 autocorrelation [218, 219] , which can be directly interpreted as the slowness of recovery in such natural perturbation regimes [213, 215] . It has been found that there is a marked increase in autocorrelation that builds up long before the critical transition occurs (Fig. 21 ) both in simple models [219] and complex realistic systems [220] . Another possible consequence of critical slowing down in the vicinity of a critical transition is the increased variance in the pattern of fluctuations [222, 29] . Because the critical slowing down could reduce the ability of the system to track the fluctuations [223] , it would increase the standard deviation of the stationary distribution versus input fluctuations. In short, the phe-nomenon of critical slowing down leads to three possible early-warning signals in the dynamics of a system approaching a bifurcation: slower recovery from perturbations, increased autocorrelation, and increased variance [29] . Skewness and flickering. In the vicinity of a catastrophic bifurcation point, the asymmetry of fluctuations may increase [224] . Take the fold bifurcation as an example, and an unstable equilibrium marks the border of the basin of attraction as the system approaches the attractor from one side, as shown in the dashed line in Fig. 6 . As the system approaches the bifurcation, the slope in the basin of attraction (Fig. 4) becomes less steep. Consequently, the system will tend to stay in an unstable point, but not the opposite side of the stable equilibrium [29] , leading to an increase in the skewness of the distribution of states. Besides, the system's state may be moved back and forth between the basins of attraction of two alternative attractors under stochastic forcing, as the border becomes relatively lower when a critical transition is approaching. Such a phenomenon is called flickering [223, 225] , which is another earlywarning signal, and the system may shift permanently to the alternative state if the underlying slow change in conditions persists. Indicators in cyclic and chaotic systems. The earlywarning signs reviewed above exist in systems with underlying attractors corresponding to stable points, but not applicable to cyclic and chaotic systems, where critical transitions are associated with a different class of bifurcation [226] , and the early-warning signs are different in this case. For example, the Hopf bifurcation, which marks the transition from a stable system to an oscillatory system [227] , is signaled by critical slowing down [228] : close to the bifurcation, perturbations lead to long transient oscillations before the system settles to the stable state. Another class of bifurcations is caused by intrinsic oscillations, which bring the system to the border of the basin of attraction of an alternative attractor, and such bifurcation is called basin-boundary collisions [229] . These are usually not associated with particular properties related to stable or unstable points that can be analytically defined. Yet, the dynamics may be expected to change characteristically before collisions occur, such as increased autocorrelation between states, so that oscillations may become 'stretched' [230] . Also, there is the phenomenon of phase locking between coupled oscillators, and alternative attractors are often involved, when the corresponding bifurcations are associated with critical slowing down [231] . For example, rising variance and flickering occur before an epileptic seizure, showing a phenomenon associated with the phase locking of firing in neural cells. Spatial patterns as early-warning signals. Earlywarning signals arise not only in time series but also in some particular spatial patterns in the vicinity of a critical transition. The spatial term here is not limited to physical distances between two elements, such as the habitat patches in a fragment landscape [232, 233] , but also could be used to represent the functional associations or interactions between two entities, such as the connections between two people in the social network or two functionally related financial markets [234, 235] . In many systems, each entity tends to take a similar state of the connected entities. Moreover, the phase transitions in such systems may occur like that in ferromagnetic materials, where individual particles affect each others' spin [211] . When such systems approach the tipping point, the distribution of the states of the entities may change in particular ways, such as a general tendency towards increased spatial coherence [211] , which is measured by cross-correlation among entities. Although many systems have similar early-warning signals, no general spatial patterns are fitting for all systems. It is essential to know which class of system is involved as we interpret spatial patterns. For systems governed by local disturbance, scale-invariant power-law structures that are found for a large-scale parameter range vanish as a critical transition is approached [236] . In systems that have self-organized regular patterns [237] , particular spatial configurations may arise in the vicinity of a critical transition. Take the model of desert vegetation as an example; the nature of pattern changes from maze-like to spots because of a symmetry-breaking instability [170] , as a critical transition to a barren state is neared. The alternative stable states separated by critical thresholds also occur in ecosystems ranging from rangelands to marine systems [82, 99] . They are usually related to hysteresis so that it is difficult for a system to recover once the system reaches state across a tipping point. For instance, as we mentioned earlier, in the arid ecosystem [171] , the recovery from a barren state may require more rain than is needed to preserve the last patches, since in such a case the concentration of soil water under vegetated patches already disappeared. In summary, despite lack of universal early-warning signals, effectively detecting them and taking actions to push the system far away from the tipping points is very important in ecological management. There are plenty of empirical examples of regime shifts with tipping points in ecosystems, and a lot of theoretical models had been proposed to ascribe the underlying mechanisms. Yet, it remains a challenge to predict the tipping points and regime shifts, due to the great complexity of ecological systems, which usually is reflected in the high dimensionality (large number of species and interactions), stochastic and nonlinear nature dynamics, and uncertainty of initial conditions or drivers [238] . Despite this complexity, it is possible to predict regime shifts through resilience indicators, e.g., the statistical measures of some key ecosystem variables [239] . For instance, ecologists have used a combination of models and observations from long-term datasets or short-term experiments to identify early-warning signals before the critical transition occurs [240, 210, 241] . In these models, initial conditions are informed by the first principle and empirical data, the drivers are incrementally or dramatically altered, and the ensuing changes to the system are recorded. For ecosystems with certain types of dynamics, this approach could successfully detect the earlywarning signs. However, some other ecosystems, especially those having multiple attractors or the potential for chaos, exhibit abrupt changes with no advanced warning in the time series [238] . As we mentioned earlier in the section on multiple stable states, simplified models of the system that include the essential components, interactions, and drivers and an element of stochasticity can be constructed [238] . Examples include a minimal model of ecosystem catastrophic shits [28] , the one-dimensional grazing ecosystems model [31] , and the coral reef model [91] . However, these models are built for low-dimensional systems neglecting the interactions between the studied components and other species. Thus, they are not applicable to highdimensional ecosystems. Recently, Gao et al. [12] developed a general analytical framework to map the dynamics in high-dimensional systems into effective one-dimensional system's dynamics. This model can be used to accurately predicts the system's response to diverse perturbations and it also correctly locates the critical points, at which the system loses its resilience. On one hand, by using the proposed dimension-reduction method, the patterns of resilience is found to depend only on the system's intrinsic dynamics, independent of the network topology. On the other hand, although the changes in topology does not alter the critical points, three key structural factors: density, heterogeneity and symmetry, could affect a system's resilience by pushing systems far from the critical points, enabling sustainability under large perturbations. The study of universal resilience patterns in complex networks suggests potential intervention strategies to avoid the loss of resilience, or design principles for optimally resilient systems that can successfully cope with perturbations. In a multi-dimensional system, the dynamics of each component is not only depend on the self-dynamics, but also related to the interactions between the components and its interacting partners [242, 52] . The dynamic equation of a multi-dimensional system consisting of N components (nodes) can be formally written as where x i (t) represents the activity of node i at time t, F(x i ) and G(x i , x j ) show the dynamical rules governing the system's components, and the weighted adjacency matrix A i j captures the rate of interactions between all pairs of components. Similar to one-dimensional systems shown in Fig. 2 , the resilience of multidimensional systems can be captured by calculating the stable fix point of equation (2.8) . However, this point may depend on the changes in any of the N 2 parameters of the adjacency matrix A i j . Moreover, there are maybe different forms of perturbations bringing changes to the adjacency matrix, for example, node/link removal, weight reduction or any combination thereof. It means that the resilience of multi-dimensional systems depends on the network topology and the forms of perturbations. For large-scale multi-dimensional models, it is impossible to predict their resilience by direct calculations on equation (2.8). A framework based on dimension reduction addresses this challenge. In a network, the activity of each node is governed by its nearest neighbours through the interaction term N j=1 A i j G(x i , x j ) of equation (2.8). By using the average nearest-neighbour activity, we could get an effective state x eff of the system: If the adjacency matrix A i j has little correlations, the multi-dimensional problem could be reduced to an effective one-dimensional problem by using the effective state x eff , which is where β eff is the nearest neighbour weighted degree that can be written as Therefore, the N 2 parameters of the microscopic description A i j collapses into a single macroscopic resilience parameter β eff . Any impact on the state of the system caused by the changes in A i j is fully accounted for by the corresponding changes in β eff , indicating that the system's resilience described by equation (2.10) is independent of the network topology A i j , uniquely determined by the system's dynamics F(x i ) and G(x i , x j ). shows that by mapping the multi-dimensional system into β-space, the system's response to diverse perturbations and tipping points can be accurately predicted. Taking the mutualistic networks as an example, their dynamics could be captured by the following equation [12]  where B i is a constant influx due to migration, the second term defines logistic growth [243] , incorporating the Allee effect [244] ; the interaction term captures the symbiotic contribution of x j to x i , which saturates when the populations are large. For simplicity, the six param-eters in equation (2.12) are set as node-independent: Mapping the multi-dimensional equation (2.12) into a one-dimensional dynamics, we could obtain According to the rule of stability of motion, the critical point β c eff can be calculated by the following equations (2.14) In addition, using the equation f (β eff , x eff ) = 0, we could describes β eff in function of x eff as which is the inverse of the desired resilience function. By inverting equation (2.15), i.e., swaping the axes, the resilience function for this system can be graphically obtained, which predicts a bifurcating resilience function, and a transition from a resilient state with a single stable fixed point, x H , to a non-resilient state in which both x H and x L are stable. The critical point of this bifurcation is predicted to be β c eff = 6.79. Such value is fully determined by the dynamics, independent of the network topology A i j . Based on the equivalent one-dimensional model, Zhang et al. [245] derive a new centrality index: resilience centrality, to quantify the ability of nodes to affect the resilience of the system. The resilience centrality of a node is mainly determined by the degree and weighted nearest-neighbor degree of the node. This centrality performs better in prioritizing node's importances in maintaining system's resilience than other centralities, such as degree, betweenness and closeness. The proposed centrality metric enables design of effective strategies to protect real networks, such as mutualistic networks. Take advantages of the mean-field approach in dimensional-reduction, Jiang et al. [246] develop a tool to learn the true steady-state of a small part of the networks, without knowing the full network. Unlike the naive way which subtracts the concerned nodes and isolated them from the other part of the network, the authors use a mean field approximation to account for the impact of the other part of the network, and summarize their impact using a resilience parameter β eff as discussed above. The proposed tool can extract very close approximations to the true steady state dynamics in the full network (Fig. 24 ). In contrast, the state-of-art is the naive approach, which produces completely wrong conclusions. Moreover, most real networks, especially biological and ecological networks, are incomplete, this method can help us infer the true dynamics from these incomplete networks. Similarly, Jiang et al. [247] combine the mean-field theory with combinatorial optimization to infer the topological characteristics, such as degree, from the observed incomplete networks. Take the fact that the mutualistic networks contain two different types of nodes: pollinators and plants into consideration, Jiang et al. [54] point out, a two-dimensional model is necessary to capture the bipartite and mutualistic nature. The authors use letters P and A to denote plants and pollinators, and S P and S A to represent the numbers of plants and pollinators in the network, respectively, and the model is written as the following equation [248, 249]  (2.16) The notation is as follows: P i and A i are the abundances of the ith plant and the ith pollinator, respectively; α is the intrinsic growth rate; β ii and β i j are the parameters affecting intra-specific and interspecific competition respectively. Typically, intra-specific competition is stronger than interspecific competition, that is β ii β i j . The parameters µ P and µ A describe the immigration of plants and pollinators, respectively, and γ quantifies the strength of the mutualistic interaction. By assuming that the decay parameters for all the pollinators have an identical value: κ i ≡ κ, and pollinators die from the mutualistic network one after another as a result of increasingly deteriorating environment, the high-dimensional mutualistic network can be reduced to a dynamical system that contains two coupled ODEs (Ordinary Differential Equations): one for the pollinators and another for the plants, which can be written as (Above) Trajectories of the 5 vertices in the sampled graph G (s) . (Left) Scatter plot that compares steadystate values. Our method achieves near perfect prediction on the observed 5 nodes. The naive method gets all state values wrong, but even more worrying is that a single stable equilibrium bifurcates into two equilibria, and the steady-state depends on initial conditions. In the low state, all species go extinct. Naively simulating the nonlinear coupled ODE on the subgraph is a disaster. where the dynamical variables P eff and A eff are the effective abundances of plants and pollinators, respectively. The parameter α denotes the effective growth rate for the network, β describes the combined effects of intra-specific and interspecific competition, κ is the species decay rate in an averaging sense, and the parameter µ accounts for the migration effects for the species. Two effective mutualistic interaction strengths, γ P and γ A , can be obtained by averaging as: (i) unweighted average, (ii) degree-weighted average, and (iii) eigenvector-based average. Figure 25 shows the ensemble-averaged pollinator and plant abundances in networks obtained by different averaging ways. The reduced model through averaging method (ii) and (iii) has a remarkable predictive power for the tipping point. Jiang et al. [54] use 59 empirical mutualistic networks extracted from real data to show the reduced twodimensional model's power of predicting tipping points where systems lose their resilience. In a system, the resilience is usually reflected by the relationship between the average species abundance and some parameter with variations that reflect the impact on the environment caused by stressors, such as global warming or overuse of pesticides [250, 251, 252] . In mutualistic networks, there are three important parameters related to the system's resilience: (i) f n -the fraction of pollinators that have become extinct because of environmental deterioration; (ii) κ-the average pollinator decay rate; and (iii) f l -the fraction of links destroyed as a result of the death of a fraction f n of pollinators. Jiang et al. [54] calculate the average abundances of plants and pollinators under the variations of these three parameter. The authors find that for resilience functions without tipping points, the abundance variations in twodimensional reduced model through unweighted average are in good agreement with the original systems. For the resilience functions with tipping points, the reduced model through degree or eigenvector weighted average has a remarkable predictive power for tipping points, even in the presence of stochastic disturbances. The final goal of uncovering the underlying mechanisms behind tipping points is to develop biologically viable management/control principles and strategies to remove the tipping point to delay the occurrence of unwanted critical transitions across different scales [239] . These transitions include global ecological state transition at the planetary scale [157] , the shutdown of the thermohaline circulation in the North Atlantic at the regional scale [253] , the switch of shallow lakes from clear to turbid waters and global extinction of species at local scales [96, 199, 254] . Due to the nonlinear nature of ecosystems, it is difficult to control them since controlling nonlinear dynamical networks remains to be an outstanding problem and is currently an active area of research [254, 255] . Especially for the tipping point control problem, Nishikawa et al. [256, 257, 258] investigate how small perturbations can be used to drive the system to the desired attractor. Vidiella et al. [259] demonstrate that in semiarid ecosystems, the phenomenon of an ecological 'ghost,' a long transient phase during which the system maintains its stability, may be exploited to delay or prevent the occurrence of a tipping point [259] . A tipping point transition is the consequence of gradual changes in the system caused by a slow drift in the intrinsic parameters and/or external conditions. The intrinsic parameters include the species decay rate, the mutualistic interaction strength, and the fraction of disappeared nodes and/or links in an ecological network, which could be altered by environmental conditions [239] . Thus these parameters are also called 'environmental parameters', and ecological system states can be controlled by changing these parameters. For instance, a sudden bloom of cyanobacteria in a lake or a reservoir can be devastating because it kills fish on a large scale and poses great toxicity risks for the environment. The effective way to prevent a bloom of cyanobacteria in a lake or a reservoir is to stop or significantly reduce nutrient inflow into the lake [260] . Another example is the  fisheries food web. If we could detect adequate earlywarning signs in time, the regime shifts can be averted by stipulating a rapid reduction in angling and/or introducing gradual restoration of the shoreline [261] . Very recently, Jiang et al. [239] investigate how to manage or control tipping points in real-world complex and nonlinear dynamical networks in ecology by altering the way that species extinction occurs. An example could be replacing massive extinction of all species by gradual extinction of individual species, as the environmental parameter continues to increase, so that the occurrence of global extinction is substantially delayed. The authors focus on a large number of empirical pollinator-plant bipartite networks, whose dynamics are governed by mutualistic interactions [249, 54] . These networks are managed by choosing a 'targeted' species and maintaining its abundance (or keep the decay rate of this species unchanged) as the environmental parameter is increased. The abundance management in such ways can remove the tipping point and delay the occurrence of total extinction, as shown in Fig. 26 . The amount of delay depends on the particular species chosen as the target. All species can be ranked by the amount of delay they induce, which characterize the control efficacy. Their ranking is found to be determined solely by network structure with no relations to the intrinsic network dynamics [263] . In the absence of abundance management, a hysteresis loop arises when attempts to restore the species population are made by improving the environment, i.e., by making the environmental parameter change in the direction opposite to the one that led to an extinction. In such case, in order to revive the species abundances to the original level, the environmental parameter needs to be further away from the tipping point, i.e., the environment needs to be significantly more favourable than before the collapse. However, with abundance management the hysteresis loop disappears and species recovery begins at the point of global extinction. Especially, when the the environmental parameter is the mutualistic interaction strength, species recovery is not possible without the abundance management, but a full recovery can be achieved with it [239] . In addition, the species recovery point can be predicted reasonably well by a two-dimensional reduced model [54] derived under the condition that abundance control/management is present. The management or control strategy to maintain the abundance of certain pollinator species may be realized through the approach of injecting robotic pollinators [264] to expedite recovery [265] , which may help address the devastating problem of relatively sudden disappearances of bee colonies, which are happening currently all over the world. Except these studies on preventing or delaying tipping points, another branch of studies related to resilience management focus on how to recover or rebuild ecosystems that is already in its unwanted state or prone to tipping points [267, 266, 268, 269, 270] . Take the system of coral reefs as an example, which was in a pristine condition in the pre-industrial time period. Now many coral-reef ecosystems have been degraded to resilient assemblages no longer dominated by live coral, and reversing this degradation will require a reduction in human pressures on reefs and improved management Figure 27 : Alternate states in coral reefs in different time period. The condition and composition of the coral-dominated state has changed through time, away from a pristine state (dashed vertical line above "coral"). From the (A) pre-industrial through (B) early industrial to (C) present, when the coral-dominated reef state has become less common, and could become uncommon in the future (D) under a "business as usual" scenario. However, (E) if appropriate policies are implemented, more reefs may be maintained in or shifted back to coral-dominated states, with a reduction of the resilience of the algal-dominated state and increased resilience of the coral-dominated state. Reproduced from Ref. [266] . of ecosystem processes that weaken the degraded condition and promote corals [266] . The resilience of reef states can be expressed as deep or shallow valleys in a stability landscape, as shown in Fig. 27 . Deeper valleys indicate higher levels of resilience, whereas shallow valleys are indicative of low resilience. As natural and anthropogenic drivers have changed reef systems, the coral-dominated state has become less resilient, while the algal-dominated state has become more resilient. If we let the business go as usual without management, very few reefs will be maintained in a coral-dominated state. If appropriate policies are implemented, more reefs can be sustained or returned to a coral-dominated (but non-pristine) state, providing society with critical goods and services. Yet, to recover or rebuild the community composition of coral reefs is very difficult. It require scientists, policy makers, managers and resource users to act collectively to develop long-term commitments to improve reef management. In addition to ap-propriate policies, it is also important to act early, since once a system has crossed a threshold, transition to a new stable state may take many years. Moreover, it has been found that exceptional weather events, such as hurricane, may also create windows of opportunity for phase-shift reversals on coral reefs [266] . If we could restrict fishing [269] , establish networks of herbivore management areas [270] , and take advantages of shocks, it may be easier to rebuild a coral-dominated state in coral reefs. Since all the systems in the planetary scale have become ever more networked and interdependent, due to human interventions, there is a growing need to focus on managing the resilience in ecosystems worldwide. Another thing to bear in mind is that all ecosystems are currently under rapidly changing environment. It is important to embrace the novel conditions and propose realistic goals for resilience management. Thus, adaptive governance [271] has been suggested as a suitable approach. It rests on the assumption that landscapes and seascapes need to be understood and governed as complex social-ecological systems rather than as ecosystems alone. Next we will review literatures on phase transitions in biological networks. In a living organism, there are many biochemical processes, forming various forms of biological networks, such as gene regulatory networks, protein interaction networks, and metabolic networks at the molecular level [47, 272] , cell interaction networks at the cellular level [273] , and disease networks [274] at the phenotypic level. All these biological networks evolve dynamically and may have strong nonlinearity inside. Their responses to internal signals or external perturbations are usually not gradual but show switch-like behaviors [275] . The authors state the biological network shifts from one state to another abruptly, such as cell-fate induction [276] or the onset of diseases or cancer [277] . Such state transitions can be modeled by the stability landscape [28] and analyzed by using the resilience framework from ecology [4] . As discussed in Chapter 2, many abrupt state shifts are usually associated with multiple stable steady states [56] . In the following we will review under what conditions biological networks exhibit multiple stable steady states. Similar to the "multiple stable states" in ecological systems as discussed in Chapter 2, a system-level prop-erty called "bistability" (or, more generally, multistability) universally exists in all biological systems [278] , and it may be of particular relevance to biological systems that switch between discrete, alternative stable states; generate oscillatory responses; or "remember" transitory stimuli [279] . Uncovering the mechanisms underlying "bistability" is crucial for understanding basic cellular and biochemical processes, such as cell cycle progression, cellular differentiation, cellular apoptosis [57] , and the onset of disease and cancer, as well as in the origin of new species [280] . Due to the prevalence and fundamental importance of bistability in biochemical systems, plenty of theoretical and experimental studies have been carried out to uncover what is needed for a signal transduction pathway to exhibit bistability [281, 282, 283] , which is a emergent phenomena in networks of biochemical reactions rather than single molecules or single reactions. In cell signaling [284] , most (or perhaps all) of the biochemical reactions are reversible. For instance, there are DNA methylation and DNA demethylation, and proteins are phosphorylated and dephosphorylated. However, many biological transitions are essentially irreversible, such as cell differentiation [285, 286, 287] , cell cycle, and immune stress response [288] . A crucial question has been raised: how might the reversible reactions lead to practically irreversible changes in cell fate [281] ? Monod and Jacob [289] proposed that the answer lay in the way that gene regulatory systems are wired, where feedback loops are mechanisms required for producing biological bistability and irreversibility. There are different types of signal transduction circuits that could achieve such goal, such as pairs of natural transcriptional repressors wired to inhibit one another [290, 291] , and a positive feedback loop composed by activators sharing the same opposing repressors in gene regulation. For example, let's consider two gene products, P1 and P2, each of which inhibits the other's transcription, thus the system has a stable state with P1 on and P2 off, or an alternative stable state with P1 off and P2 on. Once either stable state has been established, the system could stay in such state until external stimulus push the system to transition to the alternative stable state. Similar behavior presented in positive feedback loops (mutual activation toggle-switch motifs [290] ), the system would toggle back and forth between a state with both A and B off and a state with both A and B on [281] , showing an ability of 'remembering' a transient differentiation stimulus long after the triggering stimulus was removed. Feedback itself alone does not guarantee that a system will be bistable. A bistable system must also have some type of non-linearity within the feedback circuit [281] . That is, the enzymes in the feedback circuit must respond to their upstream regulators in an 'ultrasensitive' manner, which converts continuously varying signals into discrete outputs (ON or OFF responses) [292] . A bistable circuit would always exhibit some degree of hysteresis, indicating that the system has alternative stable states under certain stimulus. The response to stimulus is related to the system's previous state, and it will be harder to flip the system from one state to the other than it is to maintain the system in its flipped state [281] , as shown in Fig. 28A . In such case, the bistable switch is two-way (it can be switch back and forth between ON and OFF states), which are characteristic of metabolic pathways, such as lac operon [290] . If the feedback in a circuit is strong enough, the system may exhibit irreversibility (Fig. 28B) . The system could stay in the the flipped state indefinitely after the triggering stimulus is removed. In such case, the bistable switch is one-way (once flipped, it cannot be turned back), which play major roles in developmental transitions, such as apoptosis. Even feedback regulation has been considered to be a prerequisite for bistable behavior [287, 291] . Yet, it is not a necessary component of switching phenomena. For example, in biochemical reaction networks, the sources of bistability can lurk behind the fine mechanistic details of even a single overall reaction [293, 294, 295] . For example, in protein kinase cascades, bistability and hysteresis can arise solely from a distributive kinetic mechanism of the two-site Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, with no apparent feedback [296] . In summary, epigenetic bistability appears to be at the heart of decisive, irreversible biological state transitions, such as cell differentiation and cell cycle [297, 298, 299, 300] , which arises from feedback loops and ultrasensitivity [297, 280] or particular network topology with a certain range of parameters [294, 301] . Computational modeling and the theory of nonlinear dynamical systems allow one not only to describe the bistability, but also to understand why it occurs [302] . Next we will review two claissical mathematical models developed to show how bistability arises [303, 278, 304, 305] . A simple positive feedback loop (a one-ODE model). As discussed above, a most common mechanism for generating bistability is the existence of positive feedback loops, which directs two mutually exclusive cell states [306, 307] . A positive feedback loop may be formed from one or two signaling proteins [308] , and the simplest form consists of one single signaling protein that can be reversibly switched between an inactive form (A) and an active one (A*). As shown in Fig.  29A , the transition between A and A* that is assumed to be regulated by an external stimulus and the positive feedback between the transition and the stimulus. This process can be modeled by the following ordinary differential equation (ODE) [303] : where the first term represents the basal transcription rate due to external stimulus; the second term denotes effect of the positive feedback that is modeled by a nonlinear Hill equation, with K being the effector concentration needed for half-maximum response and n denoting the Hill coefficient, and the parameter f represents the strength of the feedback; the last term represents the inactivation of A* with a degradation rate k inact . The shape of nonlinear stimulus-response of Eq. 3.1 depends on the value of f (the strength of feedback). When f = 0, it means that there is no feedback in this system, and the response is a monostable smooth Michaelian curve, as shown in Fig. 29B . As the feedback strength f increases, more nonlinearity, or ultrasensitivity, is introduced, and the stimulus-response ac-quires a sigmoidal shape but still monostable shown in Fig. 29C and 29D. If f keeps increasing, the system shows hysteresis and becomes bistable for some values of stimulus, as shown in Fig. 29E . Eventually, the feedback becomes so strong that the system show essentially irreversible response, as shown in Fig. 29F . This simple model has been successfully used to explain the bistability or irreversibility in many biological processes, such as the maturation of Xenopus oocytes [303] , induced osteogenic differentiation in a myogenic subclone [287] , and the white-opaque switch in Candida albicans [309] . A mutually inhibitory network (a two-ODE model). As we mentioned earlier, in addition to positive feedback loops, a double-negative feedback loop, also called mutually inhibitory network, can generate bistability [281] . It consists of two signaling proteins, repressor U and repressor V, which inhibit each other's expression or activation, as shown in Fig. 30A . Given certain stimulus, the system could switch between two distinct states: one state with high expression level of repressor U and low expression level of repressor V, another with low expression level of V and high expression level of U. Its nonlinear dynamics could be captured by the following two-ODE model, which is also called the 'toggle switch' model [278, 310] : where the first terms represent the effect of negative feedback loops, and the second terms denote degradation/dilution of the repressors. In the model, variables U and V represent the concentration of two repressors; parameters α 1 and α 2 respectively represent the maximal production rate of repressors U and V; β and γ are cooperativity coefficients of repressors V and U, respectively; parameters k 1 and k 2 describe the repression strengths, which is determined by the binding rate and dissociation rate of repressions to their promoters; and parameters d 1 and d 2 represent the degradation rates of repressors. The equilibrium solutions of this model can be found by drawing the nullclines (dU/dt = 0 and dV/dt = 0). If the system has balanced rates of synthesis of the two repressors and the cooperativity coefficients β, γ > 1, the nullclines show sigmoidal shapes and intersect at three points, exhibiting bistability with one unstable and two symmetrical stable steady states shown in Fig. 30B . However, if the rates of synthesis are imbalanced, the nullclines will intersect only once, producing a monostable state (Fig. 30C ). The slopes of the bifurcation lines are determined by the cooperativity coefficients β and γ. The size of bistable region increases as the rate of repressor synthesis (α 1 and α 2 ) are increased (Fig. 30D) , and reduced when β and γ are decreased (Fig. 30E ). Note that β and γ represent the degree of cooperativity in the binding. The case β, γ = 1 corresponds to a linear repression and the uncooperative binding of monomers, while β, γ > 1 requires the cooperative binding of two or more repressor proteins [311] that need to form polymer or multiple repressors so as to cooperatively bind to promoters that own more than one operator sites [310] . Thus, cooperative binding is a necessary condition for the double negative feedback loops to show alternative stable states. The mutually inhibitory network have been widely used to describe the bistable phenomenon that exists in the growth and development of organisms. For instance, in mammalian embryonic stem cells, the decision between the epiblast and primitive endoderm fate can be described by a simple mutual repression circuit modulated by FGF/MAPK signaling [312] . The lysogeny-lytic bistable switch in bacteriophage λ can be described by similar models [313, 314, 315, 316] . In addition, such model can be used to engineer artificial gene networks in mammalian cells, and the developed epigenetic circuitry is able to switch between two stable transgene expression states after transient administration of two alternate drugs [317] , enabling precise and timely molecular interventions in gene therapy. Besides the two basic math models reviewed above, plenty of derived models have been proposed to describe the bistability or irreversibility in various biological processes. For example, the bistability in p54 steady states can be explained by a positive feedback loop composed of transcriptional factor p53 and a mi-croRNA, miR-34a, where p53 upregulates the transcription of miR-34a, and in turn the miRNA indirectly upregulates p53 expression via repressing SIRT1, a negative regulator of p53 [318] . Such process can be mod- eled by a two-dimensional ODE model [305] , as shown in Fig. 31 . Martinez et al. [319] build a minimal delaydifferential equation (DDE) model that has a region of bistability, which makes the subtilis biofilms jump from a stable steady state to a growth oscillatory attractor under perturbations. Wang et al. [287] use a bistable switch model to analyze the observed differentiation behavior of human marrow stromal cells. Bala et al. [320] propose a modification to an existing mathematical model of mitosis-promoting factor control in Xenopus oocyte extract, and use MPF as a bifurcation parameter, giving rise to bistability in the MPF activation module. All these theoretical studies of biological bistability advance our understanding of the possible underlying mechanisms behind important cellular processes, such as cell cycle and cell differentiation. Next, we review empirical studies of the bistability in the growth and development of cells. Bistable switches are sufficient to encode more than two cell states without rewiring the circuitry [321] , which has been experimentally found to be at the core of determining the state transitions in cell cycle and cell differentiation. Bistability in cell cycle The cell cycles of embryos in their early stage provide an example of a robust biological oscillator [322] . The sustained oscillations are generated by the interlinked negative and positive feedback loops [323] . In the essential negative feedback loop, the cell-division cycle protein kinase, Cdc2, activates the anaphase-promoting complex (APC), leading to cyclin destruction and Cdc2 inactivation [322] . Under some circumstances, a long negative-feedback loop by itself is sufficient to produce oscillations [324] , However, the negative feedback loop in the Cdc2/APC system alone may produce damped oscillations [322] . Pomerening et al. [322] experimentally show that the positive feedback loops in the Cdc2/APC system. It consists of Cdc2mediated activation of Cdc25 and inactivation of Wee1 and Myt1, which could function as a bistable system [325] by toggling between two discrete alternative sta-ble steady states and showing hysteresis, as shown in Fig. 32 . The introduce of bistability ensures that the Cdc2/APC system produce sustained oscillations without approaching a stable steady-state. Next, we will show how the bistable switches govern mitotic control in cell cycle. Cdc2 (also referred to as Cdk1) and cyclins form a stoichiometric complex and play a key role in the control of the G2/M transition of the cell cycle [326] . The positive feedback in the Cdk1 activation loop and the major Cdk1-counteracting phosphatase, PP2A:B55, feedback regulation work as bistable switches. They generate different thresholds for the transition between different cell-cycle states: interphase and M phase [327, 328] . As shown in Fig. 33 , there are distinct thresholds for mitotic entry and mitotic exit, providing robustness of the M phase state and preventing cells from flipping back to the interphase state in the noisy cellular environment [329] . In addition, the two distinct states: interphase and M phase are created by bistable switches [330, 331] , and they could be stabilized by positive feedback loops without allowing the cell to come to rest in intermediate transitional states [332] . Bistability in cell fate switch Cell fate decision-making is the process that a cell committing to a differentiated state in growth and development undergoes. In this process, the bistable switch mechanism is prevalent in directing two mutually exclusive cell fates [279, 287, 333, 306, 321] . One typical example is the maturation of Xenopus oocytes, where the immature oocyte represents a default fate and the mature oocyte represents an induced fate [334] . At a biochemical level, oocyte maturation is controlled by p42 MAPK and cyclin B/Cdc2, which are known to be organized into positive feedback loops [281, 303] . For example, Mos activates p42 MAPK through the intermediacy of MEK. Once active, p42 MAPK feeds back to promote the accumula- tion of Mos [335] . Such positive feedback loop makes p42 MAPK show an all-or-none, bistable response to progesterone or microinjected Mos [336] . Xiong et al. [303] provides experimental evidence that the p42 MAPK and Cdc2 system with the strong positive feedback loops produce bistability and generate irreversible biochemical response from a transient stimulus [303] . Another example of bistability in cell differentiation that has been experimentally verified is the classic bistable bacteriophage λ switch [337] . This switch is composed of two mutually repressive TFs, CI and Cro, and their expression level determine cell-fate developmental decision-making, as it reproduction infects its host [338] . The expression of CI but not Cro confers lysogenic growth, and the expression of Cro but not CI confers lytic growth [321] . Fang et al. [321] demonstrate experimentally the emergence of two new expression states in the model of bistable switch of the bacteriophage λ. They constructed strains XF204, XF214 and XF224, where the expression level of Cro is reduced in the order XF204 . This reduction quantifies the expression levels of CI and Cro in individual cells of the three strains at different temperatures for more than 20 generations. As shown in Fig. 34 , the typical bistable behavior appears. Cells predominately exist in a low-Cro and high-CI levels (red lines) at a low temperature. They flip to a high-Cro and low-CI level (green lines) at high temperature. Between the two extreme, cells with high-Cro and high-CI levels (black lines) also appear, due to the different speeds of the switching the expression levels of Cro and CI [321] . Besides the experimental studies of cell fate switches in unicellular organism or virus, plenty of studies show that bistability commonly exist in cell differentiation of multicellutar organism. For example, Wang et al. [287] use a human bone marrow stromal cell subclone to study myogenic and osteogenic differentiation. They that BMP2-induced osteogenic differentiation of these cells exhibits a threshold effect and an all-or-none response, which can be successfully analyzed by using the bistable switch model [339] . Bhattacharya et al. [288] show that two mutually repressive feedback loops can generate a bistable switch capable of directing B cells to differentiate into plasma cells. In this process, it is important the differentiated cells are able to execute certain biological functions that requires that they have a low de-differentiate rate [340] . The underlying mechanism that prevent differentiated cells from dedifferentiating is the positive feedback in cell signaling pathways. Ahrends et al. [341] show that an ultrahigh feedback connectivity exists in pre-adipocytes of mammalian tissues, supporting more than six positive feed-backs, leading to a very low rate of differentiation. In summary, it is generally considered that the progress of biological processes is controlled by mechanism of bistablity. This mechanism has been discovered in cell differentiation [285, 286, 287] , lysogenylytic switch in bacteriophage λ [314] , Immune stress response [288] , the lactose utilization network in Escherichia coli [339] and so on. The phenomenon of bistable allows the cells generate a response in a digital manner, that is discretely switch between two or more distinct stable states. Exploring the bistable responses in organism help us to understand the inherent mechanism of corresponding processes and further advance our studies of biomolecular controller [342, 343] . Resilience in a biological network is characterized by its ability to maintain functions and adjust its dynamics to insure a consistent output, when it is exposed to both external and internal perturbations. Accurately predicting the output of a dynamical biological network with respect to perturbations is crucial for understanding signal fidelity in natural networks and for designing noisetolerant gene networks [344] . Next, we will review the studies on resilience in biological networks at multiple levels ranging from simple generic circuits to complex multicellular organisms. 3.2.1. Resilience of genetic circuits in presence of molecular noises Both the theoretical and empirical studies of biological bistability reviewed in Sec. 3.1 are nearly all deterministic. Here is no consideration of the common presence of stochastic fluctuations, which are induced by extrinsic and intrinsic noises [345] . The former are communicated by exogenous sources, such as oscillatory cascades that regulate progression of cell cycle [346, 347] or environmental stressors [348] . The intrinsic noises can be interpreted as random fluctuations within an individual cell. Typically, they alter the intensity of a signal, leading to an altered stoichiometric relationship between the input and the output signals [345] . Such fluctuations are inherent properties of transcriptional, post-transcriptional and translational dynamics [349] . For example, replication-transcription conflict [350] and RNA polymerase backtracking mediated by R-loop formation [351] are stochastic events that invoke intrinsic noise in an individual cell [347] . The intrinsic noise, or molecular noise, commonly exists in cells and enables the phenotypic diversification of completely identical cells exposed to the same environment [349] . The inherent stochasticity of biochemical processes is inevitable. It arises due to the random nature of chemical reactions within a cell [352] . When only a few molecules of a specific type exist in a cell, stochastic effect can become prominent [345] . For example, the feedback loops (toggle switch) that generate bistability reviewed in the previous section, can randomly switch between two states in the presence of noise [278, 353, 354, 355, 356] . Furthermore, the fluctuation in small systems, especially with low molecular concentrations, can lead to additional states which are essentially unstable [310] . Example of such instability is provided by the empirical study of the classic bistable bacteriophage λ switch [321] reviewed above. The switch based on the expression levels of two mutually repressive transcription factors (CI and Cro) not only stay in two stable states as (low, high) and (high, low), but also show two unstable states as (high, high) and (low, low) with different probabilities. Such stochastic dynamic behavior of gene regulatory network is governed by a chemical master equation, which describe the time evolution of the probability distribution of the system state [307] . As shown in Fig. 35 , a simple gene regulatory motif that demonstrates deterministic bistability and hysteresis without considering molecular noises. However, stochastic hysteresis loops with multiple mean states appear with different probabilities, which can be simulated by different initial conditions in the form of Gaussian distributions N(µ, σ) with mean µ and standard deviation σ. The roles of molecular noises in biological networks can be the "two sides of a coin" [351] . On one side, the induction or amplification of genetic noise is an important evolutionary pro-survival strategy in unicellular and multicellular organisms, which can foster phenotypic heterogeneity in a population [347] . On the other side, stochastic fluctuations may hinder the biological network from properly functioning and limits the ability to biochemically control cellular dynamics [344, 357] . The good side of noise can only show in the large evolutionary time scale and in large biological populations, while its bad side influences the molecular activities in cells all the time. Life in the cell is a complex battle between randomizing and correcting statistical forces, and many control circuits have evolved to eliminate, tolerate or exploit the noise [358, 359, 360, 361, 357] . For example, negative feedbacks could suppresses noise [359] and positive feedbacks could stabilized differentiated states in cells [349] . Despite the presence of molecular noises, the switchlike behavior in biological networks would not be destroyed. For example, bistable switches in the protein interaction network can operate reliably against the stochastic effects of molecular noise [290] . This is because circuits consisting of transcription factors and mi-croRNAs can not only show biological bistability as discussed in Sec. 3.1, but also confer resilience to biological processes against intrinsic and extrinsic noise [362, 305] . This is accomplished through noise buffering [363] , which employs microRNA-based mechanism that keeps gene expression stable and hence decreases the variation in gene expression [305] . In addition, a circadian network can oscillate reliably in the presence of stochastic biochemical noise. When cellular conditions are altered, the ability to resist such perturbations imposes strict constraints on the oscillation mechanisms underlying circadian periodicity in vivo [364] . The resilience in genetic circuits against stochastic noises mainly relies on the underlying connections between molecules, forming a complex genetic network that contains multiple nested feedback loops. For example, on induction of cell differentiation, the nested feedback loops prevent the established phenotypes to be reversed even in the presence of significant fluctuations [365] . Two positive feedback loops are involved, one is mediated by the cytoplasmic signal transducer Gal3p to generate bistability in cell differentiation, while the parallel loop mediated by the galactose transporter Gal2p increases the expression difference between the two states, enhancing the induced cell differentiation state. Another example is the circadian oscillation, which is generated by the negative regulation exerted by a protein on the expression of its own gene [366] . The intercellular coupling could increase its resilience with respect to molecular noise [367] . In addition, the cooperativity in repression discussed in Sec. 3.1.1 coupled with transcriptional delay could enhance biological system's resilience [367, 368] . Transcriptional delay is another intrinsic property of genetic circuits resulting from the sequential nature of protein synthesis and the time that transcription factors take to move to their target promoters [369, 370] . Gupta et al. [368] find that increasing delay dramatically increases the mean residence times near stable states, and therefore stabilizes bistable gene networks. ronmental stress Resilience in unicellular organisms, such as yeast, cyanobacteria and other microbes refers their ability to survive a disturbance [371] . It can be achieved either through absorbing effects of a disturbance without a notable change, or through cooperative growth so as to recover the abundance of its community. The ability to tolerate a disturbance primarily depends on the traits associated with individual cells, while the ability to recover mainly depends on traits associated with the populations. Note that, in microbiology, the former insensitivity to a disturbance is defined as resistance, and the latter ability to recover is called resilience [372] . Since that the term 'resilience' was first proposed to include both abilities to withstand and recover from perturbations [4] (see Chapter 2), so we use resilience to refer to both of these two abilities. Next, we review two typical examples of resilience in unicellular organisms under environmental stress. Cooperative growth of budding yeast in sucrose. The Budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiaes, is a singlecelled eukaryotic fungi, who uses oxygen to release the energy from sugar. The sugar concentration could affect the rate of yeast growth: up to a certain point, the higher sugar concentration results in the faster its growth (yeast cannot grow in very strong sugar, but this is beyond the scope of our discussion here) [373] . In an experiment, laboratory populations of budding yeast grow in sucrose, and a daily dilution was performed [30] , where a fraction (for example, 1 in 500 for a dilution factor 500) of cells were transferred into fresh media. As the dilution factor increases (the sucrose concentration decreases), yeast populations decreases and collapse at a tipping point, showing an abrupt phase shift.The tipping point the cooperative growth of yeast cells, which creates a positive feedback. The budding yeast eats sucrose, but needs to break it down into glucose and fructose before it can get the food through its cell wall. To break the sucrose down, yeast secretes an enzyme known as invertase [374] . The sucrose is hydrolyzed into glucose and fructose in an extracellular process, which can be shared between yeast cells, so that they can work cooperatively. Such cooperation improve the cell survival in yeast populations by efficiently processing sucrose concentration [375] . In the experiment where yeast populations grew in sucrose and daily dilutions with certain dilution factors were performed, bistability appears in the population densities of yeast cultures with a wide range of initial cell densities [254] . As shown in Fig. 36 , cultures starting below a critical density went extinct, whereas cultures starting at higher initial densities survived and reached a finite stable fixed point. A fixed point is recognized when the ratio of population densities between subsequent days n t+1 /n t = 1, where n t is the population density at day t (t = 1, 2, ..., 6). For the cultures starting near the critical density (unstable fixed point), some populations survives and others go extinct due to cooperative growth. The cooperations between yeast cells break down sucrose more efficiently, and more cells grow, leading to a positive feedback so that the population could survive at a nonzero stable fixed point. In contrast, if not enough cooperations form at the beginning, a weak positive feedback could drive the population to collapse. For more efficient cooperations, budding yeasts aggregate together building communities, or grow by incomplete cell separation forming undifferentiated multicellular clumps. Cells in clumps of cooperate to collect food, and have a growth advantage over an equal number of single cells in low sucrose concentrations. Cell clumps could grow when sucrose is scarce, whereas single cells cannot. In addition, clumps with more cells grow faster than smaller clumps [374] , showing a possible origin of multicellularity and advantages of evolving from unicellular organisms to complex multicellular organisms. Such multicellularity is an important mechanism of yeast populations to retain resilience against fluctuations in sucrose concentrations [376] . Bistable response of cyanobacteria exposed to increasing light. Cyanobacteria are blue-green bacteria that are abundant in the environment. They are among the world's most important oxygen producers and carbon dioxide consumers [377] . For cyanobacteria, light is the main source of energy. Light is absorbed by the phycobilisomes and photosystems is converted into chemical energy through photosynthesis [378] . The color (wavelength) and intensity (irradiance) of light could affect the growth of cyanobacteria. For example, the growth rates of the cyanobacteria were similar in orange and red light, but much lower in blue light [379] . It is important to note that under a certain range, increasing the light intensity increases the growth rates of cyanobacteria, yet strong light is harmful to cyanobacteria. It may even cause the collapse of cyanobacteria populations [380] . Understanding how cyanobacteria respond to light could improve photosynthetic efficiency and overall resilience. The phenomenon that the rate of photosynthesis decreases with increasing light is caused by photoinhibition. It manifest itself as a series of reactions that inhibit the activities of photosystem and it is apparent in cyanobacteria populations and phytoplankton species sensitive to high light [381, 382] . The existence of photoinhibition forces cyanobacteria to carefully balance harvesting sufficient photons to maximally drive photosynthesis while avoiding the damaging effects of excess energy capture [383] . This balance is achieved by phototaxis. Positive phototaxis is cell movement towards light, and negative phototaxis is movement away from light. If the light is strong and extensive, and there is no place that cyanobacteria could move away from the light, then the cyanobacteria will shade one another. Mutual shading can ameliorate this stress and promote the growth of cyanobacteria, which will in turn encourage more mutual shading, forming a positive feedback [380] . Such positive feedback leads to alternative stable states in the cell density of cyanobacteria populations (Fig. 37) . A low population density does not provide sufficient shading to protect itself against photoinhibition. Hence, the population goes extinct. However, population density above a threshold, allows the population to create sufficiently turbid conditions to suppress photoinhibition, so that the population can establish itself [382] . Similar to the formation of cell clumps in yeast population discussed above, the cyanobacteria cells also aggregate together to provide the shading required for protection of photosynthetic machinery from damage by excessive light [385] . Unlike yeast cells in a clump that usually stick together, the tightness of cyanobacteria cell aggregation can increase or decrease as the light conditions change. Shown in Fig. 38 , cells aggregating together in blue light that is harmful to them, but relax their clumps to optimize light capture in green light [383] . Thus, the resilience of cyanobacteria populations could be enhanced by such regulations of cell-cell contacts. Bacterial antibiotic responses. The extensive use of antibiotics has resulted in a situation where multidrugresistant pathogens have become a severe menace to human health worldwide [386] . Antibiotics affect bacterial cell physiology at many levels, and bacteria respond to antibiotics by changing their metabolism, gene expression, and possibly even their mutation rate [387] , which affects the level of their growth rate and ability to survive. Bacteria cell may survive an antibiotic treatment because individual cells may become tolerant or adapt to the treatment, or because the population recovers by recolonization, reproduction or rapid regrowth, after some individual cells were killed [388, 389] . Such mechanisms can be characterized by the resistanceresilience framework in the field of microbiology [390] , with resistance defined as the insensitivity to the treatment, and resilience as the time required for a community to recover its former composition and functions after a treatment [372] . The involvement of biological mechanisms related to antibiotic resistance and antibiotic resilience has been gaining concern in the scientific community [390, 387, 391, 392, 372] , contributing to the development of new treatment strategies to cope with and prevent the rise of resistant pathogenic bacteria [387] . Meredith et al. [371] apply the resistance-resilience framework to the analysis of bacterial pathogens that produce extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs). ES-BLs are becoming increasingly prevalent and can degrade many β-lactam antibiotics-the most widely used class of antibiotics. In the absence of antibiotic treatment, the population of ESBL-producing bacteria grows approximately exponentially until the growth rate decreases due to the limited nutrients, and ends up in the carrying capacity, as the blue/black curves shown in Fig.  39A . The time needed for a population to reach 50% of its carrying capacity is denoted as T 50% . If antibiotics are introduced, the time required for the bacterial population to reach its carrying capacity increases, and the higher antibiotic concentration is, the longer time is required to reach carrying capacity. as the green and yellow lines show in Fig. 39A . Antibiotic resilience is defined as the the inverse of the treated population's T 50% (T 50% A ), normalized by the untreated population's T 50% (T 50% 0 ), which is written as Antibiotic resistance is defined as the ratio between the minimum net growth rate in a treated population (ρ A ) and the net growth rate of an untreated population at the same time (ρ 0 ), which takes the form As shown in Fig. 39B , the higher antibiotic concentration is, less resistant the population becomes. Using the resistance-resilience framework can visualize the shift in a population's antibiotic response, and once the population undergo a crash, resistance is minimized and resilience dominate the survival (Fig. 39C ). This resistance-resilience framework effectively reveals the phenotypic signature of each strain (Fig. 39D ) when treated by a β-lactam. It reveals that an effective treatment should minimize both resistance and resilience. In summary, the resilience in unicellular organisms depends on the genotype and underlying molecular connections within individual cells and the cooperations between cells. The latter can improve cell growth, which in turn encourages more cooperation. This forms positive feedback and leads to bistability in the density of unicellular populations. The multicellular organisms can be viewed as evolutionary of benefits of clumps or clustering of cells. Thus, the insight gained from unicellular organisms can be can be extended to multicellular organisms. complex multicellular organisms The dynamics in biological networks are usually high-dimensional and nonlinear. They exhibit a large number of stable steady states (attractors) [393, 394] . Mapping the state of a biological system into a ball (or a point) in a high-dimensional state space, enables us to map a move to an attractor into a particular trajectory in this state space. Such movements can be then well described using a quasi-potential landscape, which is motivated by the famous epigenetic landscape first proposed by Waddington [395] . In a quasi-potential landscape, each point represents one state of the biological network at equilibrium and the hight of its quasipotential energy is inversely correlated to the probability that the system is found in that state [396] . An attractor state is at the bottom of a valley (a potential well), and is more likely to be occupied than states in the higher areas (the potential hills) [397] . In the landscape, the states of biological networks seek the way down to the potential well, representing the equilibrium of the system shifting to an attractor. The landscape reflects inherent properties of the biological system, showing how much 'energy' barrier needs to be overcome to enable the system to transition between any pairs of attractors [299] . Taking the double-negative feedback loop [321] discussed in Sec. 3.1.3 as an example, its four stable states could be mapped into four potential wells with different heights in a landscape, and the landscape could visualize the transitions between them (Fig. 40 ). Quasi-potential landscape has been a useful tool for understanding the phase transitions within biological systems, especially for the resilience of complex multicellular organisms [397, 398, 399, 400] . In order to draw the quasi-potential landscape, we may need to find quasi-potential functions of biological networks. Generally, the dynamics of a biological network can be described as a series of continuous differential equation [393] : . , x N (t)) T represents N system variables (e.g., gene expressions, biological molecular concentrations, etc.) and F(x) = (F 1 (x), F 2 (x), . . . , F N (x)) T describes the 'forces' acting to change corresponding variables' state. In closed equilibrium systems without significant exchange of energy, materials, and information with the outside environments, such as proteins folding [401, 402] , the local dynamics can be determined by the gradient of the interaction potential energy [393] : and the potential function U(x) can be directly inferred as: However, most biological systems are non-equilibrium open systems. Their dynamics can not be fully captured by the pure gradients (Eqs. 3.6 and 3.7). Fortunately, we can use the master equation [403] discussed in Sec. 3.2.1 to describe the time evolution of the probability of the system staying in each state. Next, we will review the studies on the reconstruction and analyses of the landscapes of cellular processes, such as cell cycle, cell differentiation, and disease progress in multicellular organisms. The Mexican hat landscapes of cell cycles. We have reviewed the simple genetic circuit in cell cycle, which could generate bistability in Sec. 3.1.3. However, the whole process of cell cycle is far more complex than what was presented there. The cell cycle is a series of events that take place in a cell during its replication and division. It comprises several distinct phases: G1 phase (resting), S phase (synthesis), G2 phase (interphase), and M phase (mitosis) [398] shown in Fig. 42A . Activation of each phase is dependent on the proper progression and completion of the previous one, which is monitored by cell cycle checkpoints. Plenty of studies has been carried out to uncovering the mechanisms underlying the cell cycle process, both in unicellular organisms, such as budding yeast [404, 405] , and multicellular organisms, such as Xenopus laevis [406] and mammals [398] . It has been found that the landscape and flux framework could be effectively used to explain the whole process of cell cycle and its checkpoints [404] . For example, Zhang et. al [406] quantify the underlying landscape and flux of Xenopus laevis embryonic cell cycle. The authors also uncover the corresponding Mexican hat landscape with several local basins and barriers on the oscillation path was uncovered. The local basins characterize the different phases of the Xenopus laevis embryonic cell cycle. The local barriers represent the checkpoints responsible for a global quantification of the cell cycle. In addition, through global sensitivity analysis upon landscape and flux, the key elements for controlling the cell cycle speed are identified, which helps in designing effective strategy for drug discovery for cancer. Another typical example is a well-studied mammalian cell cycle network [407, 408] , whose detailed diagram is shown in Fig. 41 . The network involves four major complexes formed by cyclins and cyclindependent kinases (cyclin/CDks), centered on cyclin D/Cdk4-6, cyclin E/Cdk2, cyclin A/Cdk2, and cyclin B/Cdk1. Together, they determine the cell cycle dynamics [407, 398] , which can be described by a set of 44 nonlinear ordinary differential equations. Li et al. [398] use the probability landscape and flux to determine the main driving force for the dynamics in the mammalian cell cycle network. The landscape reflects directly the steady state probability distribution P ss , which is determined by using a self-consistent mean field approximation [400] , and the potential landscape U (U = −lnP ss ), giving the weight of each state. By projecting such 44-dimensional landscape to a two-dimensional state space, the landscape of the mammalian cell cycle system in terms of two key proteins CycE and CycA is shown in Fig. 42 B, which has a Mexican hat shape. In the landscape, the red colored region represents high potential (low probability for the system to reach), and the blue colored region along the Mexican hat ring with low potential (high probability). The low potential blue region forms a circle of oscillation trajectory, which guarantee the resilience of cell cycle oscillation dynamics. Along the cycle path, the progression of a cell cycle is determined by two driving forces: potential barriers for deceleration and curl flux for acceleration. The curl probability fluxes are shown as the white arrows in the 2D landscape (Fig. 42C) , and the negative gradients of potential landscape are represented by red arrows. The force from the negative gradient of potential attracts the cell cycle into the oscillation ring. The flux drives the cell cycle oscillations along the ring path. Furthermore, along the ring with heterogeneous potential, there are three basin of attractions corresponding to three cell phases (G0/G1, S/G2 and M) and two barriers representing two checkpoints (G1 and G2 checkpoint). The potential landscape can help us to understand the role of attractors in the whole cell cycle dynamics quantitatively. This landscape also provides a simple physical explanation for the mechanism of cell-cycle checkpoints. In addition, the influence of external or internal perturbations on the resilience of cell cycle could be learned by doing global sensitivity analysis [398] . Such analysis quantifies the changes in the barrier heights, period, and flux when parameters (regulation strengths or synthesis rates) are changed. By selecting the highly influential parameters in terms of the genes and regulations of the network, key elements or wirings that control the stability and the progression of cell cycle are identified. The results can be also verified through experiments, leading to predictions and potential anticancer strategies. Epigenetic landscapes for cell-fate induction. In cellfate induction, a cell progresses from an undifferentiated state to one of a number of discrete, distinct, differentiated cell fates. To describe such process, Waddington's epigenetic landscape [395] is probably the most famous and most powerful metaphor, where cells are represented by balls rolling downhill through a landscape of bifurcating valleys [299, 409, 410, 411, 321] . The Waddington's landscape starts from a single valley, representing the single undifferentiated steady state. As time goes on, alternative valleys appear, representing multiple differentiated states. In the landscape, each valley represents a possible cell fate and the ridges between the valleys maintain the cell fate once it has been chosen. In Waddington's landscape, undifferentiated state is unstable, which triggers the differentiation process. It is true for the stem cells during embryonic development. However, in the adult, the multipotent undifferentiated cells are stable. Wang et al. [412] develop a framework to quantify the Waddington landscape for a simple gene regulatory circuit that governs binary cell fate decision module, through construction of underlying probability landscape for cell development. The circuit consists of two mutually inhibit transcription factors, which can be described by the minimal system equations [411] . In such quantified landscape, the undifferentiated state can still be stable but has a small finite chance to climb up (induced by fluctuations) from the basin of attraction and escaping to the differentiated states (Fig. 43) . In Fig. 43 , the depth of two valleys, which represent the potential distribution along the trajectories that starting from the same bifurcation point looks quite even. However, due to the complexity and noise (such as the molecular noise discussed in Sec. 3.2.1), the landscape for the cell developmental processes of multicellular organisms maybe quite bumpy, and during the cell differentiation process, stochastic state transitions may happen [413, 414, 415] . For example, Wang at.al [400] considered the effect of stochastic fluctuations in a canonical gene circuit. They use the Fokker-Planck equation to reconstruct the potential landscape. They find that the system can hop from one stable branch (e.g. pluripotent state) to another (e.g. either one of two differentiated state) with some probability, even when it doesn't reach bifurcation. The higher the noise level is, the higher probability for random state transitions. Fortunately, organisms develop mechanisms to prevent this stochastic effect [365] . Next, we show a specific example on cell differentiation. Chang et al. [276] estimate the epigenetic landscape for a genetic network involved in regulating pluripotency and human embryonic stem cell differentiation. This genetic network (Fig. 44A ) was constructed by starting with a set of marker genes of pluripotency and differentiation lineages. Then, the authors collected the regulatory paths between any pair of genes. The resulting network consists of direct regulatory interactions between 52 nodes, which includes three key regulators of embryonic stem cell (Oct4, NANOG and Sox2), six protein complexes, and marker genes for the differentiation lineages. To calculate the probability of each cell state, each protein in the network is considered as a binary variable, either active or inactive. Then the genetic network is transformed into a dynamic Bayesian network parameterized by the Monte Carlo Markov Chain method (Fig. 44B ). This network is used to simulate the evolving stochastic characteristics. Since the exact transduction of extracellular signals to transcript factors in human embryonic stem cell is unknown, estimation of the landscape was needed, Chang et al. [276] choose to manipulate the expression levels of the three key regulators (Oct4, Sox2 and NANOG), mimicking the extracellular conditions. The joint probabilities of all the nodes in the network with Oct4/Sox2/NANOG set to various activity levels were calculated. The integration of these probabilities was used to estimate the network landscape. Shown in Fig. 44C , two states having significantly higher probabilities than the rest of the states. The states represent the human embryonic stem cell and its differentiated states. In the human embryonic stem cell state, all the embryonic stem markers are active (1) and all the differentiation markers are inactive (0). While in the differentiated state, the activity compositions are opposite. These two states are separated by barrier states with smaller probabilities, which prevents transitions between cell types by noise. In addition, through the global sensitivity analysis of parameters or connections between genes in the human stem cell developmental network, Li et al. [409] quantitatively predict which connection links or nodes (genes) are critical to cellular differentiation or reprogramming. The results can be directly tested from the experiments. The identified key links can be used to guide the differentiation designs or reprogramming tactics. Quantifying the underlying landscape for cancer networks. Cancer is believed to be a genetic disease arising from the accumulation of multiple genetic and epigenetic alterations [416, 417] . It has long been recognized as an evolutionary process [418] , whose physical mechanisms underlying cellular process of transitions from normal to cancer states could be effectively studied by using the idea of ecological resilience [419] . Landscape analysis is a crucial tool for quantifing and visualizing the state transitions between normal and cancer states [397] . Next, we review the studies on uncovering the landscape for cancer systems both at the molecular and cellular levels. Yu et al. [277] constructed a reliable gene regulatory network for breast cancer. This network consists of 15 genes that are crucial for breast cancer, and 39 regulatory relations between them. As shown in Fig.  45A , this gene regulatory network contains four oncogenes (BRCA1, MDM2, RAS, HER2), three tumor suppressor genes (TP53, P21, RB), five kinases (CHEK1, CHEK2, AKT1, CDK2, RAF) being essential for the where X i represents the expression level of gene i (i = 1, 2, ..., 15), and three terms on the right side of the equation are self-degradation, activation and repression, respectively. Parameters K, a and b are constants; S represents the threshold of the sigmoid function; m 1 (m 2 ) is the number of nodes that activate (repress) node i, and n is the Hill coefficient. Based on the 15 dynamic equations and the self-consistent mean field approximation, the steady-state probability distribution P ss is obtained together with the potential landscape U = −lnP ss . Since it is difficult to visualize the landscape in a 15dimensional space, Yu et al. [277] projected the landscape onto a 2-dimensional subspace spanned by the expression levels of BRCA1 (an oncogene of breast cancer) and E2F1(a biomarker of breast cancer). As shown in Fig. 45B , there are three attractor basins on the phenotypic landscape, representing the normal, premalignant and cancer state, respectively. In the normal state, the cell growth, arresting and apoptosis obey the rules they normally follow. The premalignant state is a condition in which the cells grow with some abnormal features resembling certain cancer characteristics. In the cancer state, cell growth becomes uncontrollable and eventually spread to other organs of the body. The progression of breast cancer can be seen as switching transitions between different state basins. The transitions between normal and premalignant states are almost reversible, while those between premalignant and cancer states are irreversible, which clearly illustrate the mechanisms of cancerization [417] . In addition, global sensitivity analysis shows that changing the strengths of the key regulations in the breast cancer gene regulatory network can allow the landscape topography to move in preferred directions that are beneficial for reversing cancer back to normal state. Besides uncovering the epigenetic landscape from gene regulatory network (molecular layer) of cancer [399, 420, 277] , the cancer-immune interaction network (cellular layer) is also important for understanding tumorigenesis and the development of cancer and impact of immunotherapy [421, 422] . Li et al. [422] construct a cancer immune network consisting of 13 cells (a cancer cell and 12 types of immune cells) and 13 related factors cytokines, and uncover the underlying mechanism of cancer immunity based on landscape topography. In the landscape, three steady states (normal, low cancer, and high cancer states) appear. Upon certain cell-cell interactions, limit cycle oscillations emerge, which are common in the immune system [423] , providing a physical view of tumorigenesis and cancer recovery processes. In summary, the landscape and flux theory has been a powerful tool for quantifing and visualizing the dynamical transitions between different stable states in various important biological processes in multicellular organisms, such as cell cycle [424, 406] , cell differentiation [410, 425] , the initiation and development of disease [426, 417] . Based on the epigenetic landscape, key elements and links are identified through global sensitivity analysis, which quantifies how much perturbations a steady stable states can stand. Thanks to the presence of bistability (or multistability), a biological system can shift abruptly from one state to an alternative stable state at a tipping point [380] , Once the shift happens, reversing it could be difficult [427] . Thus, finding early warning signals before the catastrophic shift has important implications for preventing biological population collapses by effective human interventions, and the onset of diseases. Next, we review studies on detecting effective indicators as early warning signals before biological population collapse and the onset of diseases. 3.3.1. Early warning signals before biological populations collapse As discussed in Sec. 3.2.2, due to the cooperative growth of budding yeast in sucrose, bistability and a fold bifurcation appear when the dilution factor changes [254, 428] . As shown in Fig. 36 , the fold bifurcation occurs when the stable and unstable fixed points "collide". For higher dilution factors, populations always collapse, as extinction is the only stable state. For lower dilution factors side, near the bifurcation, a population becomes less resilient because the basin of attraction around the stable state (characterized by the distance between the stable and unstable fixed points) shrinks, elevating the chance of extinction by stochastic perturbations. Dai et al. [254] test the resilience of yeast populations at different dilution factors by salt shock of sodium chloride for 1 day, and find that populations at low dilution factors are able to recover from the perturbation, whereas those at high dilution factors go extinct. When a biological population approaches a tipping point, recovery rates from small perturbations are observed tend to zero [380] . Thus, in the vicinity of bifurcation in yeast populations [254] , the critical slowing down phenomenon is directly observed. Since in this vicinity, the populations become more vulnerable to disturbance and more time is needed to recover from small perturbations, the system becomes more correlated with its past, leading to an increase in autocorrelation between density fluctuations at different time points. In addition, among more than 46 replicate yeast populations, the size of fluctuations in population densities for five days increases as the dilution factor increases, so that the standard deviation and coefficient of variation both increase [254] . These three indicators based on critical slowing down are found to be good early warning signals. However, skewness, a suggested early warning signal not based on critical slowing down, which measures the asymmetry of fluctuations in population density [429] , is not a good warning signal for yeast populations collapse [254] . The three indicators (autocorrelation, the standard deviation, and coefficient of variation) based on critical slowing down discussed above are measured from the time series of population density, which demands observations over a long time span. Dai et al. [30] identify indicators based on spatial structure as early warning signals for yeast population collapse. They spatially extend the yeast populations [254] , and the spatial coupling between local populations is introduced by transferring 25% of a local population to each of its nearest neighbours. Consistent with critical slowing down, clear increases in the coefficient of variation and autocorrelation of connected populations towards the tipping point are observed. However, the magnitudes of increase in coefficient of variation and autocorrelation are smaller than those in the isolated populations (Fig. 46) . Such suppression of the two leading indicators in connected populations is caused by the averaging effect of dispersal. In an extreme case, where ten populations are mixed completely each day, the populations show almost no increase in variation before the tipping point. However, the spatial coupling introduces another warning indicator: recovery length, which is the distance necessary for connected populations to recover from spatial perturbations. The recovery length increased substantially before population collapse, suggesting that the spatial scale of recovery can provide a superior warning signal before tipping points in spatially extended systems [30] . In addition, Rindi et al. [430] observe that the recovery length increases when the marine benthic system approaches the tipping point, where the system shifts from a canopy-dominated to a turf-dominated state, providing field-based evidence of spatial signatures of critical slowing down in natural conditions. Besides the signals based on critical slowing down, trait variation has been identified as early warning signals for population collapse, especially the change in fitness-related phenotypic traits [431] . For instance, declines in the mean body size of stressed populations occur significantly prior to their collapse or extinction [432] . When cyanobacteria population approaches a tipping point, the photosystem II quantum yield (a chlorophyll concentrations association indicator) decreases significantly [380] . Berghof et al. [433] show that there is genetic variation in resilience indicators based on body weight deviations in layer chickens. Under fishing stress, the maturation schedules in cod populations significantly change before the population collapse [434, 435] . In addition, recent studies show that combined together trait-based and traditional density-based indicators can not only provided significantly more reliable early warning signals but also generate reliable signals earlier than using abundance data alone [432, 436, 431] . For instance, the mean or variance in body size combined with fluctuations in population density could show a greater indication of critical transition in protist populations than each of the two indicators alone [432] . Thus, before biological populations collapse, statistical indicators based on critical slowing down both in temporal and spatial fluctuations in population density, skewness and phenotypic trait-variation are efficient early warning signals. On one side, as discussed above, not all the indicators always perform well in certain population collapses. For example, skewness is not a good indicator for yeast population collapse [254] , and the variance in population density fluctuation does not increase before the collapse of cyanobacteria population when the light intensity increases [380] . On the other side, some of them may appear at the same time for the same system. For example, Drake et al [199] conduct an experiment with replicate laboratory populations of Daphnia magna, which are induced by the controlled decline in environmental conditions. Four statistical indicators, i.e., coefficient of variation, autocorrelation, skewness, and spatial correlation in population size all show evidence of the approaching bifurcation as early as 110 days ( 8 generations) before the transition occurring. for the onset of disease In humans and animals, resilience is the capacity to be minimally affected by disturbances or to rapidly return to the state maintained before exposure to a disturbance. Less resilient people or animals are expected to be more susceptible to environmental perturbations, which may lead to diseases or deaths [437, 433] . Due to the inherent complexity and nonlinear dynamics, tran-sitions from health to disease are usually not continuous but revealed by sudden shifts in system states [438] . Treating a person or an animal as a dynamical system, 'healthy' and 'diseased' are two alternative stable states, which can be modeled as two basins in the stability landscape (Fig. 47A and B) . When the dynamics of an individual has a high resilience and is far away from the tipping point, it is difficult to move the ball (representing the state of the individual) from 'healthy' into 'diseased', since the basin representing 'healthy' state is deep and wide. As the dynamics of an individual approaches a tipping point, the 'healthy' basin becomes shallow and narrow, increasing chances for transition from 'healthy' to 'diseased' by stochastic fluctuations. Once the catastrophic shift occurs, it is difficult to reverse. That is why early diagnosis is important in medicine and a trend from diagnosing disease to predicting disease emerges [439] , especially for chronic diseases. An increasing evidence shows that critical slowing down could be a source of efficient early warning signals for the onset of diseases. Next, we review examples of detecting the early warning signals before the onset of diseases. Epilepsy is a central nervous system disorder in which brain activity becomes abnormal, causing seizures or periods of unusual behavior, sensations, and sometimes loss of awareness [441] . A national survey of the UK population reasserts that epilepsy and seizures can develop in any person at any age [442] . Epilepsy makes living a normal life difficult for patients because seizures start and terminate suddenly, are not easy to predict [438, 443] . Since 1970s, researchers have been seeking ways to predict the occurrence of seizures from the electroencephalogram (EEG) of epilepsy patients [444] . For example, Meisel et. al [445] find that a Hopf bifurcation could be involved near seizure onset, and increased variance in spiking patterns of individual neurons has been proposed as an early warning signal to detect the onset of a sudden epilepsy seizure. However, most of the previous studies on prediction that yielded rather promising results were recently found to be irreproducible [446] . For instance, Wilkat et al. [447] investigate long-term, multichannel recordings of brain dynamics from 28 subjects with epilepsy, and find no clear-cut evidence for critical slowing down prior to 105 epileptic seizures. Whereas, for the critical transitions from the ictal and post-ictal states of a seizure (the selftermination of seizure), human brain electrical activity at various spatial scales exhibits the common dynamical signature of an impending critical transition indicating the critical slowing down [448] . Clinical depression is a serious mood disorder, char-acterized by a wide array of symptoms, such as inability to sleep, low mood, loss of interest in previously enjoyed activities, and suicidal tendencies [438] . These symptoms are correlate together, forming a network of symptoms. For example, a person may become depressed through the following causal chain of feelings and experiences: stress → negative emotions → sleep problems → anhedonia [449, 450] . In the network of symptom, positive feedback loops exist, such as worrying → feeling down → even more worrying or feeling down → engaging less in social life → feel even more down [451] . Such positive feedback loops can cause a system to have alternative stable states, and gradually changing external conditions may cause the system to approach a tipping point. Thus, the onset and remission of clinical depression may occur suddenly. Leemput et al. [452] show for a large group of healthy individuals and patients that the probability of an upcoming shift between a depressed and a normal state is related to statistical indicators of critical slowing down. The authors monitor the time series of emotion scores for four observed variables, representing four emotions: cheerful, content, sad and anxious. Among the general population sample, 13.5% subjects show transitions from normal states to clinical depressed states. In individuals who are close to a tipping point, both temporal autocorrelation and variance of fluctuations in emotion scores are higher than in individuals that are far away from emotional transitions (Fig. 47) . This difference suggests that critical slowing down could be an early warning signal for onset and termination of depression. In addition, Wichers et. al [453] directly observe rising early warning signals pattern in individual's critical transitions in depressive symptoms, based on long-term (10 times a day over 239 days) emotion monitoring data. The ability to anticipate transitions between healthy and diseased states could prove beneficial in terms of timing and magnitude of treatment interventions, which is essential in optimizing health care. Besides the applications in epilepsy and clinical depression, early warning signals, especially those based on critical slowing down, have been found in the onset of other diseases. For example, Quail et al [454] detect early warning signals to predict the onset of abnormal alternating cardiac rhythms. They treat embryonic chick cardiac cells with a potassium channel blocker, which leads to the initiation of alternating rhythms, and associate the transition with a period-doubling bifurcation. When the system approaches the bifurcation, its dynamics slow down, and noise amplification and oscillations in the autocorrelation function appear in the aggregate's interbeat intervals. Based on the return maps that relate the current interbeat interval with the following interbeat interval, its slope can be used to assess how far the system is from the transition. Hsieh et al. [455] develop a statistical indicator based on probabilistic risk assessment framework to predict and access the ozoneassociated lung function decrement, and propose a composite indicator as predictor, which includes standard deviation, coefficient of variation, skewness, autocorrelation and coefficient of spatial correlation. Tambuyzer et al. [456] find that amplitude increases of interleukin-6 fluctuations of individual pigs can be used as indicator of the infection state. In addition, for noisy biological systems, the critical slowing down do not always indicate an upcoming critical transition. Due to the decreased stability of the attractor, systems may exhibit flickering between two states until the alternative attractor is eventually gaining stability and becoming the new stable state [439] , which has been found in the onset of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation [440] and epilepsy [448] . In conclusion, the development and experimental validation of early warning signals for the onset of diseases is a promising direction, which can be used for future therapeutic applications, such as prediction of therapeutic responses and clinical outcomes, and for the design of personalized treatments. of complex diseases based on gene expression data The studies on detection of early warning signals of critical transitions in biological systems discussed above, are based on the specific phenotypic data. According to the central dogma, inside cells of humans and animals, gene expression is the cornerstone for all the cellular activities. In addition, thanks to the development of high throughput technologies, massive gene expression data has been accumulated [457, 439] . It is crucial and necessary for making it feasible to evaluate effective early warning signals for critical transitions in biological processes, especially the development of diseases, based on gene expression profiles. In 2012, Chen et al. [458] theoretically derive an index based on a dynamical network biomarker (DNB) that serves as a general early-warning signal indicating an imminent bifurcation or sudden deterioration before the critical transition occurs. The authors validate the relevance of DNB and diseases by related experimental data and functional analysis. Next, we review studies on identifying DNB based on time-series gene expression data, to predict critical transitions in biological processes. Given the gene expression profiles of a number of genes from several samples or across different experimental conditions, the correlations between gene's expression levels can be calculated, forming a gene coexpression network [459] . During the development of a complex disease, the expression levels of certain genes could change significantly, such as oncogenes are overexpressed [460] and tumor suppressor gene are underexpressed [461] in many cancers. Thus the correlations between genes will also change, leading to change in network's structure. By analyzing the nonlinear dynam-ics in gene expression near the bifurcation point, Chen et al. [458] prove that there exists a group of genes (or more generally molecules), called DNBs, with the Pearson correlation coefficients between DNBs (PCC d ) increasing while the correlations between DNBs and non-DNBs (PCC o ) decreasing, when the system reaches the pre-disease state. In addition, the average standard deviations of DNBs (S D d ) drastically increase, which coincides with the critical slowing down phenomenon [452] . As shown in Fig. 48 , the connections between DNBs become intense and the standard deviations of the DNBs' states increase, when the gene co-expression network is in the pre-disease state. Chen et al. [458] further propose a composite index I = S D d ·PCC d PCC o , which increases significantly in the pre-disease state and have been verified in complex diseases, such as the acute lung injury and liver cancer [462] . The implementation of such framework to detect DNBs [458] requires multiple case samples in each time point to calculate reliable Pearson correlation coefficients, which limits the framework application to individual pre-disease state prediction. Due to the strongly fluctuating and correlated nature of DNBs in the predisease stage, their normalized expression levels have a double-peak distribution, but the non-DNBs have a single-peak distribution in the pre-disease stage. Thus Liu et al. [284] use Kullback-Leibler divergence, which measures the difference between two data distributions, to formulate the DNB single-sample score to identify the pre-disease state of a disease on the basis of a single case sample. This facilitates early diagnosis before the disease state or the occurrence of serious deterioration. In addition, near the bifurcation point, DNB biomolecules exhibit significantly collective behaviors with fluctuations, which results in the local entropy increasing. Therefore, an index called single-sample landscape entropy score (SLE score) can be used to predict critical transition of biological processes [463] . Next, we show the applications of such DNB-based methods to detect early warning signals for the critical transitions in the development of diseases and other biological processes. Signaling the onset and deterioration of diseases. Diabetes is one of the most common chronic diseases and has two major subtypes: type 1 diabetes caused by the failure of pancreas to produce enough insulin due to the loss of beta cells [464] ; and type 2 diabetes resulting from insulin resistance, when blood sugar cannot enter cells [465] . The progress of both subtypes contains multiple stages (i.e. health stage, pre-disease stage and disease stage), and the clinical diagnosis is usually made in the disease stage, which is difficult to reverse [438] . In order to detect the pre-disease stage of type 2 diabetes, Li et. al [466] apply the DNB-based method [458] discussed above to the temporal-spatial gene expression data of rats in different stages of type 2 diabetes, and find that there are two different critical states during type 2 diabetes development, characterized as responses to insulin resistance and serious inflammation. They also show that most of DNB genes, in particular the core ones, tend to be located at the upstream of biological pathways. This indicates that DNB genes act as the causal factors rather than the consequence of driving the downstream molecules to change their transcriptional activities. For type 1 diabetes, two DNBs are obtained as early warning signals for two critical transitions leading to peri-insulitis and hyperglycemia in non-obese diabetic mice [467] . Moreover, Zeng et al. [468] identify the modules present at the pre-disease stage based on dynamical network biomarkers, which can serve as warning signals for the pre-disease state. Influenza is an infectious disease caused by influenza virus and it spreads around the world, leading to global respiratory illness and even deaths. The development of single-sample based DNB method makes it possible to predict in advance influenza at individual level. Based on the temporal gene microarray data of human influenza infection caused by H3N2 virus, Liu et. al [284, 463] successfully identify pre-disease samples from individuals before the emergence of the serious disease symptoms. In addition, influenza has the characteristic of seasonal collective outbreaks. In order to find the early warning signals preceding the influenza outbreak, Chen et. al [469] collect the historical longitudinal records of flu caused hospitalization from 278 clinics distributed in 23 wards in Tokyo, and 225 clinics distributed in 30 districts in Hokkaido, Japan, from 2009 to 2016. They construct a ward-network based on the actual locations of wards and their adjacency relationships. By applying a local network DNB-based index to predict influenza outbreaks in each ward, Chen et. al [469] detect early warning signal with an average of 4 week window lead prior to each seasonal outbreak of influenza. Acquired drug resistance in cancer cells is considered as the major reason why patients fail to respond to cancer therapies. Generally, acquired drug resistance can be regarded as a process of biological network evolution so as to make the system adapt to the drug environment [470] . According to the biological feature of the time-dependent progression of MCF-7 breast cancer cells exposed to tamoxifen, the process to acquire drug resistance is divided into three stages: a non-resistance, a pre-resistance (or the tipping point), and a resistance state. Through the DNB approach, DNB network alteration is found to occur prior to the observation of tamoxifen resistance, and follows the appearance of mutation genes [470] . Furthermore, distant metastasis of cancer cells is the main cause of cancer deaths. Detection of the tipping point before metastasis of cancer is critical to prevent further irreversible deterioration. DNB-based methods have been applied to detect early warning signals for lung cancer [463] and other cancer metastasis [471] . Recently, Yang et al. [472] analyse time-series gene expression data in spontaneous pulmonary metastasis mice HCCLM3-RFP model with DNB-based method, and identify CALML3 as a core DNB member, which has been further verified as a suppressor of metastasis, thus providing a prognostic biomarker and therapy target in hepatocellular carcinoma. Identitying the tipping point in other biological processes. The DNB-based method can not only be used to predict the critical transitions in the development of diseases, but also the critical transitions in other complex biological processes from time series gene expression data. The cell-differentiation process has been seen as a stereotyped program leading from one progenitor toward a functional cell, in the cell population-based view. In the single-cell level, cell fate induction requires broad changes of their gene expression profile, and cellto-cell gene expression stochasticity could play a key role in differentiation. Mojtahedi et. al [473] show that commitment of blood progenitor cells to the erythroid or myeloid lineage is preceded by the destabilization of their high-dimensional attractor state. This causes differentiating cells to undergo a critical state transition. At the point of fate commitment, a peak in gene expression variability appears [474] . Thus the structure of gene co-expression network changes greatly. By using the DNB-method, a group of DNB genes for which the fluctuations and correlations between them increase have been identified, which can be used as early warning signals for the differentiation in primary chicken erythrocytic progenitor cells [475] . In addition, the critical differentiation state of MCF-7 cells for breast cancer can also be identified by using DNB method. This approach provides an opportunity to interrupt and prevent the continuing costly cycle of managing breast cancer and its complications. Immunotherapy using antibodies that block immune checkpoints is an emerging success story for some patients with cancer. However, majority of patients gain no benefit but experience considerable toxicity [476] . Plenty of efforts have been poured into identifying biomarkers for predicting the response to immune checkpoint blockade in cancer [476, 477, 478] . However, so far no biomarker reliably predicts response in a sufficiently rigorous manner for routine use. Fortunately, the therapeutic response to immune checkpoint blockade is a critical state transition of a complex system. The DNB-based methods have shown their abilities to predict the transitions from a pre-disease state to a disease state [463] . Thus, the DNB-based methods may be a potential tool for predicting immune checkpoint blockade. Lesterhuis et. al [476] propose that these dynamic biomarkers could prove to be useful in distinguishing responses by non-responding patients to save them immunotherapy, as well as facilitate the identification of new therapeutic targets for combination therapy. In a sentence, DNB is a group of molecules that have strongly correlated activities and fluctuations [472] , which can be used as early warning signals for the onset and deterioration of complex diseases, as well as other biological processes, such as cell fate induction, providing new ways to uncover underlying mechanisms behind various biological processes, and can benefit the scheduling of treatments for complex diseases. In the summary of all the studies on the resilience in biological networks, we conclude that bistability, or multistability, universally exists in biological networks at different levels, ranging from genetic circuits at molecular level through unicellular populations to disease networks at phenotypic level. They are generated by the underlying feedback loops and ultrasensitivity [297, 280] or particular network topology [294, 301] . Due to the existence of alternative stable states, biological networks could response to external or internal stimulus in digital way. Once the stimulus exceeds a tipping point, critical transitions appear and the biological network shifts from one state to another abruptly, which is difficult to predict. But we could identify indicators of resilience as effective early warning signals for critical transitions in biological systems. They include coefficient of variance, autocorrelation based on critical slowing down and dynamic network biomarkers. The studies on the resilience in biological networks could help us understand the complex biological system and design effective therapeutic methods, as well as find more applications in health management. Next, we will review literatures on the resilience of social-ecological systems and social systems. Similar to the resilience in ecological and biological networks discussed in the previous two chapters, the resilience of a social network, defined as its ability to cope with perturbations, shocks, or stresses, can take on different forms in various settings. The resilience requirements can range from preservation of the entire system, or, specifically, the sustainability of its structure and operational ability. We consider resilience in the following three broad settings. In the first one, we consider humans social systems, which belong to the subject of traditional sociology. In this setting, we acknowledge two different notions of resilience. One focuses on something that we call cultural resistance of a society, which intuitively speaking requires that society evolves their opinions and beliefs in a smooth and orderly manner. The other type of resistance, termed here survival resilience, is concerned with the very preservation of a social system. Intuitively, this kind of resistance requires that a society, or community, can adjust itself in response to the external stresses or challenges without self-destruction. The second considers resilience of social animals and their communities. In this setting, we examine only survival resilience, which focuses on species and their communities preservation against environmental change and competition from other species and communities. Finally, the third setting recognizes the resilience of a system composed of two strongly linked subsystems, social networks and ecological systems. Humans as species have been so successful in spreading and dominating all ecosystems on the Earth that further unrestricted growth of human population and increased exploitation of living and mineral resources of the Earth may threaten the stability of a global ecosystem and preservation of the human civilization. We will refer to this complex system as the planetary social-ecological system to underscore its global range. The goal is to increase survival resilience of this complex system in the face of the increasingly limited resources of our planet and the rapid change of the environment in response to increasing impact of human activities on the Earth. Next we will introduce the two terms cultural resistance and survival resilience in social networks, focusing on human social networks below. Cultural resilience in social networks. Sociology has become a pioneer and early adopter of social network analysis. The first example known to us is an analysis of a friendship network in a school class of year 1880-81 that was made using mixed-methods by the German pri-mary school teacher Johannes Delitsch [479] . A more advanced approach, similar to modern social network analysis and called sociometry [480] , is discussed in Ref. [481] . This approach was used to analyze interactions of the inmates in a prison [482] . However, the significant barrier to overcome was the issues of data collection, which was laborious, imprecise, and prone to misinterpretations of results. The breakthrough came in the 1990s from internet and wireless-based interactions. They provided easily collected datasets scalable to millions and even billions (e.g., Facebook) of members. The network analysis has become a gold mine for social scientists. It opened also network analysis to statistical physics, including novel applications of classic Ising model [483, 484, 485] and new network models [2] . Alternative approaches developed in a new branch of computational sociology use agent-based computer simulations [486, 487] . All these development revolutionized the sociology [488] . Social analyses demonstrate that the network structure can enhance or weaken the network's survival resilience. For instance, communities in a social network play a vital role in its resilience [489, 490] . Their strengths and dynamics are closely related to the amount of social capital accumulated by the community members [491, 492, 493, 494] . In turn, this strength is essential for network resilience in response to a crisis or disaster [495] . In general, the more significant is the social capital accumulated within a community, the stronger is the overall resilience of such networks compared to a homogeneous system with weak communities or no communities at all. In the context of social systems, cultural resilience focuses on avoiding a drastic and disruptive change of prevailing opinions and beliefs held by the social system members. This kind of resilience is studied using models of social interactions, which enable the opinions to evolve and innovation to spread through the influence and persuasion exerted by personal interactions. Thus, these models do not consider changes imposed by the sheer military or police force to subjugate the societies. The models that represent these processes from the perspective of individuals include the voter model [496] , the Naming Game (NG) [497] , and the Threshold Model (TM) [498] , and their variants. Additional models focusing on interactions of group behavior, such as flock/swarm behavior [499] are also applicable to simulating social network dynamics. Whereas orderly and evolutionary changes are often necessary to enable social systems to adapt to the evolving environment, such changes might become so rapid and disruptive that they may result in loss of cultural continuity, and thus also of cultural resilience. Hence, studies that focus on the discovery of conditions under which shifts arise in social system opinions and beliefs are of great importance. Equally important is an ability to derive from system parameters the values of critical points at which such shifts appear. Identifying measurable early warning signals, or at least the distance to the tipping point, is vital to the resilience policy development and the disaster avoidance strategies. In the Naming Game studies, the critical tipping points arise in the presence of the committed agents (also referred to as zealots) introduced first in Ref. [500] . These agents never change the opinion that they hold initially and which they promote whenever they assume the role of a speaker. The critical point value is a function of the fractions of the population belonging to each of the committed minorities and the total number of such communities. The small number of communities with one of them sufficiently dominant in size guarantees that the social system will rapidly reach a consensus state [500] on the opinion of the dominant committed minority [497, 501] . On the over hand, a large number of small committed communities also guarantees consensus state, but the opinion of the consensus is independent of the initial size of the corresponding committed minority [502] , creating potentially messy or even disruptive transition. Other outcomes are also possible [501, 503] . Committed agents can also be defined in the voter model [504] . Inspired by the binary Naming Game model, a threestate model of social balance with an external deradicalization field is studied in Ref. [505] . The mean-field analysis shows the existence of a critical value of the external field strength. This value separates a weak external field under which the system exhibits a metastable fixed point from the strong external field under which there is only one stable fixed point. At the critical value, the field is at a saddle point. This dynamic is similar to the dynamics of the Naming Game, proving that an external field influences the entire network at the same time does not change dynamics significantly. Survival resilience. Besides the population level as studied in cultural resilience, social resilience is also studied at the level of individuals, which is the lowest level of social systems. Such studies focus on how the outer environment could trigger fluctuations in the life of an individual. This kind of research has stronger and deeper roots in psychology, especially in developmental psychology rather than in sociology or ecology. Positive psychology, including family-school partnership, or community support, have been observed to foster the resilience of individuals [506, 507] . More recently, the role of social capital in communities to which individuals belong have been studied, often in the context of an individual's reactions to traumatic events [508] . A natural extension of such studies is the research on community resilience's impact on health and human development. Hence, it can be seen as an example of codevelopment of the resilience theory in the context of socio-ecological systems (SES's) [508, 509, 510 ]. Another example of such co-development focuses on urban resilience of cities in response to the disaster, terrorism, or other disturbances [511, 512, 513, 514, 515] , which concentrates on one aspect of survival resilience. A study of the structural root causes of the resilience of consensus in dynamic collective behaviors is presented in Ref. [499] . The authors construct the dynamic signaling network to analyze the controllability of the group dynamics. The system is a small-world network. The resilience (i.e., the alignment of opinions) is studied in the presence of exogenous environmental noise. The authors found that resilience strongly depends on the out-degrees of the nodes. The group exhibits a higher level of resilience with larger out-degrees. Besides, when a single giant strongly connected component survives the disturbance, it is organized into a large-scale coherent alignment of individuals. Social contagion theory describes peer effects, interpersonal influence, and other events or conditions that could cause the emergence of crowd behavior. Based on an analysis of empirical datasets [516] , the authors describe the regularities that they discovered. Those discoveries motivated the authors to propose that human social networks may exhibit a "three degrees of influence" property. They also review statistical approaches they have used to characterize interpersonal influence with respect to such diverse phenomena as obesity, smoking, cooperation, and happiness. The community's resilience against disastrous events, such as violent acts of terrorism, is studied in Ref. [517] . The author observes that the community is the locus of response to disaster thanks to the amounts of "social capital" accumulated through interactions between members. The author analyzes the ways of enhancing the capabilities that the community already possesses for dealing with disasters. One example is that the policies addressing the threat of terrorism can be used to increase the resilience of communities facing such a threat. There is a unique challenge of studying the resilience of social systems, when compared to natural sciences, in which systems and interactions of their elements are unambiguously and often formally defined. In contrast, this challenge arises because social sciences rely on in-formal descriptions of social networks and their relationships. Such descriptions originated in traditional sociology but recently the sociologists also embraced socio-physics models, most of those, however, are of unproven validity. Traditional approaches to social systems use the macroscopic scale at which all inter-human interactions can be reduced to a set of mutual standards and patterns characteristic for interactions within groups and institutions of an underlying social system. Relatively stable and frequently arising group types are often elevated to a formal or legal organizational status such as marriages, families, corporations, or religious groups. An example of such an approach is presented in Ref. [518] . This reference introduces an AGIL scheme that distinguishes four core functions that collectively underlie the stability and survival of a social system. They are as follows. Function (A) denotes adaptation since a system must adapt to its physical and social environment as well as gradually accommodate the environment to its needs. Function (G) denotes goal attainment because a system must define and achieve its primary goals. Function (I) stands for integration to enable a system to coordinate and regulate the interrelationships of its components and strive toward a cohesive whole. Finally, function (L) denotes latency so a system can furnish, maintain, and renew itself and motivate its individuals to perform their roles according to social and cultural expectations. At such a high level of generality, social resilience is defined by Parsons' general theory in which intra-and inter-systemic relations are characterized by cohesion, consensus, and order imposed by the mentioned above four core functions. The aim is to represent the current status of social norms and rules to provide framework for analysis of the dynamics of the system. The opposite approach focuses on understanding resilience from interactions of individuals endowed with roles and attributes, which enables analysis of human interaction dynamics and motivates the development of the social network approaches. As discussed in the previous section, the cultural resilience in social systems focuses on the continuous and orderly evolution of beliefs in order to avoid disruptions and discontinuities in the culture. The prevailing approach in studying the dynamics of consensus formation [500] in social systems relies on modeling elementary interactions between individuals and observing what stable or semistable consensus emerges from the simple elementary interaction rules and the emerging social network structure. Accordingly, we review the results on cultural resilience by discussing the approaches based on the most popular agent interaction rules. The Naming Game model has been initially introduced to account for the emergence of a shared vocabulary created through social/cultural learning [519] . However, over time, the Naming Game has become an archetype for linguistic evolution and mathematical social and behavioral analysis [502] . Figure 49 shows an example of the Naming Game interaction rules. The beautiful property of Naming Game is that it is a minimal model employing local communications that can capture generic and essential features of an agreement process in networked agent-based systems. Examples are a group of robots, the emergence of shared communication schemes, or the development of a shared key for encrypted communications. In the Naming Game, agents perform pairwise interactions to reach an agreement on the name to assign to a single object. The interactions are limited to pairs of neighboring nodes, as defined by the underlying communication topology. A "speaker" and a "listener", are chosen at random. The speaker transmits a word from its vocabulary and sends it to the listener. If the listener's vocabulary contains this word, the interaction is termed "successful", and both nodes collapse their vocabularies to this one word. Otherwise, the communication is "unsuccessful" and the listener adds this word to its dictionary. The time unit of the game is the time needed for randomly select N agents as speakers, where N is the size of the network. In the context of the spread of opinion, each node's vocabulary represents the opinion that the node supports. Therefore, in this context, the number of opinions is often limited to two, leading to a binary version of Naming Game. In such a setting, the agent holding opinion A, and receiving from his friend opinion B, gets into a mixed state of considering both opinions. Then next friend interaction will allow this node to select the received opinion as his unique one. This state of hesitation introduces specific resistance to changing the opinion that a person holds immediately upon hearing another one from a friend. The basic properties of the Naming Game were established in Ref. [519] . The authors analyze the role of system size in scaling, the convergence into stable or semi-stable states as a function of both the vocabularies of agents and the total number of words generated by them, the disorder-order transition from the network point of view, and the conditions under which the con- sensus can be reached [520] . They also analyze how well the average convergence times and their distribution describe the convergence of individual processes, identify the word that is going to dominate in the final convergence stage, and, in case of the binary Naming Game, define the conditions for symmetry breaking. The study of the dynamics of the original Naming Game on empirical social networks was presented in Ref. [500] . The initial number of opinions was equal to the number of interacting agents. The study focuses on the impact that communities in the underlying social graphs have on the outcome of the convergence towards consensus. The main conclusion is that networks with strong community structure hinder the system from reaching a global agreement. The evolution of the Naming Game in these networks maintains clusters of coexisting opinions practically indefinitely. The authors also investigate the agent-based network strategies to facilitate convergence to global consensus. Figure The Naming Game model assumes one interaction at a time instance, and therefore only two different nodes are active in the relationship, one as a speaker and another as a listener. There are some extensions of the Naming Game to the model groups. For example, there is no restriction on the number of active nodes, or anyone can be both speaker and listener simultaneously. This variant is suitable for modeling competition between groups within a peer-to-peer network [521] . As expected, more intensive interactions enables the global consensus to arise earlier than in the regular Naming Game. So does also a large number of initial opinions within the competing groups. The original Naming Game assumes an initial condition in which each agent creates its own word for an observed phenomenon, a natural assumption for the initial applications. However, in case of opinion spread, limited size vocabulary or even just binary one could be sufficient for the modeling spread of opinions with the benefit of simplifying analysis. Such simplifications are useful for analysis of Naming Game transition to the stable state. The essential change in the convergence time arises when the committed agents are allowed. Without committed agents, the rules of Naming Game endow the listener with a single interaction commitment to its opinion. Indeed, receiving the same opinion from two interactions, the agent would change its current opinion to the new one. The idea of a committed agent is that his resistance to change opinion extends to the infinite number of interactions with friends sending this agent opinion that it does not hold. In short, committed agents hold their initial opinion forever. Yet, they are eagerly sending it out when selected as speakers. With a certain percentage of this type of agent, we could expect a consensus change with high probability and high speed. Numerous studies have shown that this percentage is significantly below half of the population. That makes it possible for a minority of committed members to enforce a consensus on the majority of society. In Ref. [497] , the authors demonstrate that a small fraction, p, of randomly distributed committed agents can rapidly reverse the prevailing majority opinion in a population. Specifically, when the committed fraction grows beyond a critical value p c of about 10% for fully connected graphs, there is a dramatic decrease in the time needed for the entire population to adopt the committed opinion. To simplify the analysis, the binary (also called two-word) agreement model us used. The fixed-point and stability analyses of the above mean-field equations show that for any value of p, the consensus state in the committed opinion (n A = 1 − p, n B = 0) is a stable fixed point of the mean-field dynamics. However, with p below the critical fraction p c , two additional fixed points appear; one of these is an unstable fixed point (saddle point), whereas the second is stable and represents an active, steady-state where n A , n B and n AB are all non-zero (except in the trivial case where p = 0). The time T c needed to reach consensus can also be computed using a quasi-stationary approximation, which indicates that the survival probability decays exponentially. The precise dependence of consensus times on p can also be obtained for p < p c by considering the rate of the exponential growth of T c with N. In other words, assuming T c ∼ exp(α(p)N) yields The simulation results for the case when the underlying network topology is chosen from an ensemble of ER random graphs are also presented in Ref. [497] for the given size N and the given average degree k . The qualitative features of the evolution of the system, in this case, are the same as in the case of the complete graph. Having the above result, the natural question arises about more general cases of opinion evolution in which more than one group is committed to distinct, competing opinions. The simplest case involve two groups and two opinions, A and B and they constitute fractions p A and p B of the total population, respectively was studied in Ref. [501] . The authors study the mean-field version of the model. In the asymptotic limit of network size, and neglecting fluctuations and correlations, the system can be described by the following mean-field equations For stylized social networks that the phase diagram of this system in parameter space (p A , p B ) consists of two regions (see Fig 52) , one where two stable steady-states coexist, and the remaining where only a single stable steady-state exists. These two regions are separated by two fold-bifurcation (spinodal) lines, which meet tangentially and terminate at a cusp (critical point). The simplified binary Naming Game model, in which the initial state contains nodes with only two opinions, was studied in Ref. [522] . The authors investigate consensus formation and establish the asymptotic consensus times and provide asymptotic solutions for the binary Naming Game. A six-dimensional ODE analytically captures the dynamics of the binary Naming Game model with committed agents [523] . The authors show that the tipping points for social consensus decrease when the sparsity of the network increases. The impact of committed agents on the number of opinions persisting in the network and on the scaling of consensus time is investigated in Ref. [524] . Further investigations of the value of tipping points show that they not only depend on the percentage of minority agents and density of the network connectivity, but also on the distribution of speaker activities over time [525] . The main conclusion is that a group with a higher density of short waiting times between its members speaking activities will enforce a consensus on its opinion over a group with the same overall speaking activity but with a lower initial intensity of speaking. The recent empirical study of the tipping points with the minority of committed agents has been presented in Ref. [526] . The authors show that theoretically predicted dynamics of critical fractions do emerge within an empirical system of social coordination based on an artificially created system of evolving social conventions. The authors first synthesize the diverse theoretical and observational accounts of tipping point dynamics to derive theoretical predictions for the size of an effective critical fraction of committed agents. A simple model of strategic choice is used in which agents decide which opinion to adopt by choosing the option that yields the greatest expected individual reward given their history of social interactions. The model predicts a sharp transition in the collective dynamics of opinions as the size of the committed minority reaches a critical fraction of the population (see Fig. 53 ). Two parameters determine the theoretical predictions for the size of the critical fraction: the length M of individual memory of the past interactions, and the population size, N. Inspecting these parameters shows that the predicted size of the tipping point changes significantly, with the individuals' average memory length M (see Fig. 53 ). The authors recruited 194 subjects via the World Wide Web, and clustered them into online communities for the experiments. Figure 54 shows a summary of final adoption levels across all trials, along with expectations from the introduced empirically parameterized theoretical model, with 95% confidence intervals. This figure compares these observations to numerical simulations of the theoretical model using population sizes and observation windows comparable to the experimental study (N = 24, T = 100, M = 12). The theoretically predicted critical fraction values from this model fit the experimental findings well. Some of the variability of the critical fraction results shown in Fig. 53 can be explained by one crucial parameter, the strength of the agent's commitment. This parameter was not controlled in the experiments in Ref. [526] . It was introduced in Ref. [527] , where the au- thors analyze the impact of the commitment strength defined as the number of subsequent interactions with speakers with opposite opinions needed for the committed agent to change the opinion. This strength is infinity for the traditional committed agents. The authors allow this strength to be set to any value and change by interactions with other agents introducing a waning commitment. The results of this analysis show that a shift in commitment strength affects the critical fraction of the population necessary for achieving a minority driven consensus. Increasing the strength lowers critical fraction for waning commitment, which can decline via interactions with agents holding the opposing opinion. Conversely, for the increasing commitment that can strengthen through interactions with agents holding the same opinion, the critical fraction increases with the commitment strength. If the strength of commitment is distributed among committed nodes probabilistically according to a distribution, the higher standard deviation of such distribution increases the critical fraction for waning commitment, but it decreases this fraction for increasing commitment. Assuming that the participants in the experiments in Ref. [526] have different strength of commitment or change their commitment strength over time might enable the model to find a good match to the experiment results in Ref. [526] using the variable commitment strength from [527] . To investigate the sensitivity of Naming Game dynamics for nodes in the multi-opinion state, the following two generalizations were introduced [528] . The first allowing the speaker's an asymmetric choice of an opinion to send, and the second allowing the listener to keep its mixed state even if the opinion it received is in its state and then studying impact of each of this two changes on the system dynamics. Hence, this version of the Naming Game model gains two continuous parameters. Both parameters vary listener-speaker interactions at the individual level. The first parameter, called propensity, extends the choices of speakers with mixed opinions by defining their probability p 0.5 of choosing opinion to send to the listener. The second parameter, stickiness, allows the listener holding a mixed opinion and receiving matching opinion from the sender to keep its current mixed opinion with certain predefined probability s. The authors use the "listener-only changing opinion at interaction" version of the Naming Game introduced in Ref. [529] . The so-generalized Naming Game preserves the existence of critical thresholds defined by the fractions of the population belonging to committed minorities. Above such threshold, a committed minority causes a fast (in time proportional to the logarithm of the network size) convergence to consensus, even when there are other parameters, such as propensity or stickiness or both, influencing the system dynamics. However, the two introduced parameters cause bifurcations of the system's fixed points that may lead to changes in the system's consensus. Figure 55 summarizes the most interesting findings. With stickiness, s > 0.5, the new stable region arises in which a large number of neutrals that are agents holding mixed opinions can effectively block the committed agents from reaching consensus. The experiments on social animals presented in Ref. [530] confirm these findings. The authors use a group of cows to demonstrate that, for a wide range of conditions, a strongly opinionated minority can dictate group choice, but the presence of uninformed individuals (nodes holding a mixed opinion in terms of the Naming Game model vocabulary) spontaneously inhibits this process, returning control to the non-committed majority. The results presented in both references highlight the role of uninformed individuals in achieving democratic consensus amid internal group conflict and informational constraints. Figure 56 shows the comparison between the final majority reached in a system without uninformed individuals and with different numbers of uninformed individuals. In the presence of sufficient uninformed individuals, the minority can no longer achieve the majority even by increasing the Furthermore, properties of the opinions themselves and preferences of committed agents also affect the value of critical fraction. in Ref. [531] , assuming that one opinion has a fixed stickiness, the authors investigate how the critical size of the competing opinion required to tip over the entire population varies as a function of the competing opinion's stickiness. The authors analyze this scenario for the case of a complete-graph topology through simulations and by a semi-analytical approach, which yields an upper bound for the critical minority fraction of the population. In Ref. [502] , the authors find that the system with high Shannon entropy has a higher consensus time and a lower critical fraction of committed agents compared to low-entropy systems. They also show that the critical number of committed agents decreases with the number of opinions and grows with the community size for each opinion. The most surprising result shows that when the number of committed opinion is of the order of the social system size, the critical size needed for minority driven consensus is constant. This means that in such a case the critical fraction tends asymptotically to zero when the social system size tends to infinity. This result suggests that committed minorities can more easily enforce their opinion on highly diverse social systems, showing such systems to be inherently unstable. Other less popular models of agent interaction and opinion evolution were introduce. For instance, in Ref. [532] , the authors present a simple model of opinion evolution in social systems, which is shown in Fig. 57 , by combining two rules: (i) individuals form their opinions to maximize agreement with opinions of their neighbors, and (ii) network connections form between individuals with the same opinion. In this opinion system, we would expect the resilience to increase over time in the system because the agents are adapting opinions in agreement with the opinions of their neighbors. Yet, this will also create latency. However, the dynamics of connection change will reduce the latency by grouping together the like-minded agents and thereby speed up the consensus formation. Threshold model. The threshold model focuses on the spread of novelty, in which nodes are in one of two states: the old opinion, and the new opinion [498] . Here, the most crucial challenge is to find the smallest number of nodes, called initiators, which starting with the new opinion would be able to spread this opinion to the entire network. Any node with the old opinion changes it to the new opinion when fraction t of its neighbors holds the new opinion. It is similar to the binary Naming Game model. Yet, the semantic of opinion change is different and one-directional, because the node switching to new opinion cannot turn back. In the simplest case of this model, all nodes have the same adoption threshold. The cascade size triggered by a set of initiators in this version of the model is a function of the initiator fraction [533] . The authors conclude that for a high threshold, there exists a critical initiator fraction which, when crossed, assures the global cascade. The authors also observe that communities can extend opinions spread. Different initiator selection strategies are also studied. The commonly used activation in these models is activating all seeds at once, which achieves the highest speed of the spread, but may not gain the highest transition of the network nodes to the new idea. Therefore, several novel approaches for seed initiation rely on a sequence of initiation stages [534, 535] . Sequential strategies at later stages avoid seeding highly ranked nodes that have been already activated by diffusion active between seeding stages. The gain arises when a saved seed is allocated to a node difficult to reach via diffusion. The experimental results [534] indicate that, regardless of the seed ranking method used, sequential seeding strategies deliver better coverage than single stage seeding in about 90% of cases. Longer seeding sequences tend to activate more nodes but they also extend the duration of diffusion. Figure 58 shows that various variants of sequential seeding resolve the trade-off between the coverage and speed of diffusion differently. The results show that sequential seeding is nearly always better than its single stage equivalent with the same parameters. The global results for all networks, strategies and parameters show better results than sequential seeding in 95.3% of simulation cases. The results from simulations demonstrate that the improvement can also exceed 50% with the use of the same number of seeds as in the single stage seeding. How-ever, these conclusions were drawn in experiments in which both simulations were making random decisions, so the results not always were a fair comparison. Therefore in Ref. [535] the authors propose a coordinated execution of randomized choices to enable precise comparison of different algorithms in general. For comparison of sequential seeding with single activation seeding, the new approach means enforcing that when the newly activated nodes at each stage of spreading attempt to activate their neighbors they use the same random value to make decision about activating or not the neighbor. Using this approach, the authors prove that sequential seeding delivers at least as good spread coverage as the single stage seeding does. Moreover, under modest assumptions, sequential seeding performs provably better than the single stage seeding using the same number of seeds and node ranking. Another interesting result is that, surprisingly, applying sequential seeding to a simple degree-based selection leads to higher coverage than achieved by the computationally expensive greedy approach that was considered to be the best heuristic. Figure 59 compare performance between sequential seeding and greedy heuristic and the theoretical limit. A more challenging model in which nodes have different thresholds sampled from the given distribution of threshold value with known average and variance is studied in Ref. [536] . The authors investigate the behavior of cascade sizes in the presence of different numbers of initiators and various threshold distributions for both synthetic and real-world networks. The authors observe that the tipping point behavior of the cascade sizes in terms of the threshold distribution deviation changes into a smooth crossover when there is a sufficiently large initiator set. The authors demonstrate that for a specific value of the threshold distribution variance, the opinions spread optimally. In the case of synthetic graphs, the spread asymptotically becomes independent of the system size, and that global cascades can arise just by the addition of a single node to the initiator set. Voter model. The voter model is likely the simplest model for the spread of opinions with dynamics that may lead to consensus [537] . Each node in the underlying network selects a single opinion from the two opposing opinions allowed in the model. Starting from a random initial distribution of opinions, the model dynamically evolves in steps. Each step selects a random node without opinion and assigns it an opinion of one of its nearest neighbors also chosen at random. The dynamics are simple here; the opinion with the initial majority is likely to bring all nodes to the consensus on this opinion. An exciting extension of this model enables the node not only to update its opinion but also to break and establish connections with other nodes [496] . The authors also introduce further model variations, such as "direct voter model" or "reverse voter model". They also use the memory-based Naming Game style opinion change in which no agent can move directly from one opinion to another, but needs to transit via an intermediate state. The so-introduced mechanisms are studied using a mean-field analysis. The authors show that slight modifications of the interaction rules can have drastic consequences for the global behavior of opinion formation models in the case of dynamically evolving networks. The mean-field analysis accounts for differences due to the asymmetric coupling between interacting agents and the asymmetry of their degrees. The necessity for agents to transit via an intermediate state before changing their opinion strongly enhances the trend towards consensus. Allowing the interacting agents to bear more than one opinion at the same time drastically changes the model's behavior and leads to fast consensus. Axelrod model. An interesting variant of the Axelrod model [538] was introduced and studies in [539] . The authors study a variant of the Axelrod model on a network with a homophily driven rewiring rule imposed. In this model, network nodes represent individuals. A set of F independent attributes defines every node's state. Each attribute can take one of q distinct traits represented by integers in the range [0, q − 1]. Initially, each attribute of each node randomly chooses its value from q integers. The network is interconnected randomly as an Erdos-Renyi (ER) random graph with the given average degree k . Each time step randomly selects a node i and then its neighbor j. Then, the similarity between nodes i and j is computed by counting the number of attributes for which i and j possess the same trait. If the similarity is equal to or above the given threshold, the influence step is executed. In it, node j adopts the trait of node i for the randomly chosen attribute from those for which nodes i and j currently do not agree. Otherwise, the rewiring step dissolves the link between i and j and replaces it by a link from i to randomly selected node k from those not already connected to i. The authors show that with these dynamics and in the presence of committed agents whose fraction exceeds the critical value, the consensus time becomes logarithmic in the network size N. Moreover, the author also demonstrates that slight changes in the interaction rules can produce strikingly different results in the scaling behavior of consensus time, T c . However, all the interaction rules tested in the study qualitatively preserve the benefits gained from the presence of committed agents. Analogous to the social systems of humans are the social systems composed of social animals (ants, honeybees, etc.). Those are also within the scope of this chapter. Most often, the studies in this area include the foraging behavior [540, 541] , nest building [542] , and copying with stresses [543, 544] . The resilience of social insects depends on three crucial elements of such system infrastructure: transportation networks, supply chains, and communication networks [545] . To assure resilience, the system may use three different pathways: resistance, redirection, and reconstruction. The human-infrastructure networks currently undergo rapid decentralization and increased interconnectivity. Hence, interesting analogies arise between them and the social insect infrastructures. Those analogies can inform management of human infrastructure resilience from social insect infrastructure resilience design. Inversely, researchers of social insects may benefit from adopting the sophisticated analytical and simulation tools developed for the study of human infrastructure resilience. The essential difference between the two design strategies is that unlike in human social systems, the change in animal social systems [540, 544] can come only via evolving the particular species social dynamics. The study of the foraging behavior in ant colonies that focuses on transition between disordered and ordered foraging in the Pharaoh's ant is presented in Ref. [540] . The authors found that small colonies forage in a disorganized manner, while large colonies transition to organize pheromone-based foraging. The theoretical model derived from those empirical findings is defined as follows: dx dt = (ants beginning to forage at feeder) −(ants losing pheromone trail) where variable x is the total increase of the ants walking to a single food source. Variable n stands for the colony size. Constants α, β, and s denote respectively the probability per minute per individual ant that she finds food through independent searching, the probability per minute per individual that she is led to the food resource by pheromone marked trail, and the maximum rate at which an ant can leave the trail. This leads to cubic equation for x and to equilibrium solutions at which dx/dt = 0. Setting s = 10, and using two value of alpha 0.021 and 0.0045 results in plots shown in Fig. 60 . The authors observe hysteresis arising for low independent searching ability α and intermediate values of colony sized n. This directly demonstrates that foraging in Pharaoh's ants is influenced by colony size in a nonlinear and discontinuous way. This transition in foraging is strongly analogous to the first-order transition in physical and social systems. The theoretical modeling of the honeybee's foraging dynamics in one-source and multi-source settings is presented in Ref. [541] . The eventual number of foragers depends on the bee concentration and the scouting rate. By fixing the scouting price, the author can analyze the dynamics of the proportion of potential foragers foraging in cases of the one-source and two-source settings. The results show that both phase transitions and bistability arise in the proposed model. The simulation results for the one-source case are shown in Fig. 61 . The collective process of ant nest building is studied in Ref. [542] . To analyze the shape diversity of the nests, the authors conduct two-dimensional nestdigging experiments under homogeneous laboratory conditions in which the shape diversity emerges only from digging dynamics. A stochastic model highlights the central role of density effects in shape transition. Figure 62 shows the experiment results. The digging dynamic follows the equation: where A (in cm 2 ) is the excavated area (i.e., the nest area), t (in hours) is the time elapsed since the start of nest digging, A M is the maximal area of the nest that is ultimately dug out, α stands for the cooperation level between ants, and β is the time value when A = 0.5A M .  The factors contributing to the appearance of abrupt tipping points in response to stress in animal societies are studied in Ref. [543] . The authors first constructed an analytical model of how the personality compositions of society members could alter their propensity to shift from calm to violent states in response to thermal stress. The evaluation of modeling is done by subjecting experimental societies of the spider Anelosimus studiosus to heat stress. The authors demonstrated that both colony size and members' personality compositions influence the timing of and recoverability from sudden transitions in the social state. Figure 63 illustrates the developed three-state model for social tipping points in social spiders. Experiments and field studies were combined in Ref. [544] to investigate the social and ecological factors affecting cold tolerances in range-shifting populations of the female-polymorphic damselfly Ischnura elegans in northeast Scotland. The range-shifting, i.e., the poleward shifts in geographical ranges, happen when the climate warms, and the geographical position of some species thermal range limit changes with it, and they expand their range to fill these new thermal boundaries. The authors also consider the consequences of changing cold tolerance for evolutionary change. Both envi-ronmental and social effects on cold tolerance and female color morph frequencies were recorded. Density manipulations in the laboratory provided experimental evidence that social interactions directly influence cold tolerance. The authors suggest that there is a broader need to consider the role of evolving social dynamics to shape both the thermal physiology of individuals and the thermal niches of their species reciprocally. Figure 64 shows the results of the study. Figure 64 : Environmental (A-C) and social (D-F) determinants of cold tolerance in adult and larval Ischnura elegans captured near their elevation range limit in Scotland. The x-axis "Habitat suitability" is computed from a maximum entropy model for species distribution [546] . With higher habitat suitability, the model predicts the area to be more suitable for living. The "Density treatment" in (F) means different scenarios of social pressure -whether being placed in the environment alone or with another member. Source: Figure from The resilience of three critical social insect infrastructure systems: transportation networks, supply chains, and communication networks is reviewed in Ref. [545] . The authors describe how systems differentiate investment in three pathways to resilience: resistance, redirection, or reconstruction (cf. Fig. 65 ). The authors also observe that human-infrastructure networks undergo rapid decentralization and increased interconnectivity, thus becoming more like social insect infrastructures already are. Therefore, human infrastructure management might learn from social insect researchers. In turn, the latter can make use of the mature analytical and simulation tools developed for the study of human infrastructure resilience. A review of the tipping points arising in the dynamics of animal societies is provided in Ref. [547] . The Figure 65 : Potential responses of a system to a disturbance. System performance is an experiment-specific measure of system functionality (harvesting rate, brood production rate, traffic flow). Time t 0 is the start of the experiment, pre-disturbance, t d indicates the start of the disturbance and t r indicates the beginning of the recovery phase for a system while t c indicates the point at which recovery is complete since system performance has returned to pre-disturbance levels. (A) Shows a system that has invested in resistance and as a result does not experience a decrease in functionality after the disturbance. (B) Shows a system that is using redirection. Although there is an initial decrease in performance, it is rapidly mitigated by rerouting flows using existing infrastructure. (C) Shows a system that uses primarily reconstruction-based resilience strategies. Since reconstruction requires the construction of new infrastructure, it takes longer to recover pre-disturbance performance. (D) Shows a non-resilient system, which does not recover pre-disturbance performance. Source: Figure from authors start with listing concepts directly related to social tipping points, including behavioral states and environmental parameters, attractors and basins of attraction, as well as perturbations. Among the social properties most relevant to tipping points, they list relatedness and group size, keystone individuals, behavioral diversity, social organization, and prior experience. Finally, among the types of social tipping points, they list social scale, metabolic tipping points, and social or cognitive tipping points. Socio-ecological systems, also known as Human-Environmental Systems (HES's), Socio-Ecological Systems (SES's), or "coupled human-and-natural systems" have been widely studied recently. Such systems are ubiquitous in agriculture, water use, terrestrial and aquatic systems, the global climate system, and elsewhere [58] . A social-ecological analysis of resilience enables the study of people-environment interactions across varying dimensions, times, and scales [548] . Serious attempts to integrate the social dimension into such studies are currently most often associated with works focusing on resilience. The large numbers of sciences involved in such explorative attempts led to the discoveries of new links between social and ecological systems. Recent advances include the understanding of social processes, like social learning and social memory, mental models and knowledge-system integration, visioning and scenario building, leadership, agents groups, social networks, institutional and organizational inertia and change, adaptive capacity, transformability and systems of adaptive governance that allow for management of essential ecosystem services [62] . Integrating the natural science and the social science aspects within one framework has been a crucial challenge for such studies. Whereas a "system" is practically a universal concept in the natural sciences, they vary across social sciences and their branches, placing them outside the realm of natural sciences. One possible approach to this challenge is presented in Ref. [549] . The authors suggest using an institutional lens to integrate social and natural aspects of the joint resilience studies because institutions may become methodological linchpins for integrating the social and the natural sciences for the sake of sustainability. Moreover, the progress in social sciences and core understanding of social system evolution enables researchers to evaluate more formally than in the past, the influence of different institutions on the social-ecological system resilience. For example, global and international institutions can promote and support building collaborations among countries to enhance resilience by negotiating global agreements and treaties [550, 551] . The national and local governments can support the organizational resilience of industries to strengthen the social response to social unrest [552] . The resource-dependent industries can support the resilience of social systems by sustaining their workforce in times of social stress [553] . Labor market resilience may increase the resilience of social systems against recession. Economic resilience may increase the resilience of social systems against disasters [554, 555] . Sustainability is a topic often studied jointly with resilience in the context of SES. in Ref. [556] , the authors have shown a general framework to identify ten subsystem variables that affect the likelihood of selforganization in efforts to achieve a sustainable SES (see Fig. 66 ). Three related attributes of social-ecological systems (SES') determine their future trajectories: resilience, adaptability, and transformability. Resilience (the capacity of a system to absorb disturbance and reorganize while undergoing change so as to retain necessary function, structure, identity, and feedback) has four components: latitude, resistance, precariousness, and panarchy, the most readily portrayed using the metaphor of a stability landscape [557] . The origin of the resilience perspective and an overview of its development to date are presented in Ref. [62] . With roots in one branch of ecology and the discovery of multiple basins of attraction in ecosystems in the 1960-1970s, it inspired social and environmental scientists to challenge the dominant stable equilibrium view. The institutional configurations that affect the interactions among resources, resource users, public infrastructure providers, and public infrastructure are discussed in Ref. [558] . We summarize the results in Fig. 67 that illustrates the framework, Tab. 2 that presents the entities involved, and Tab. 3 that depicts the actual links involved. The authors propose a framework that helps to identify SES's potential vulnerabilities to disturbances. The authors posit that the link between resource users and public infrastructure providers is key to affecting the robustness of SES's even though this link has frequently been ignored in the past. The intellectual roots and core principles of social ecology are traced in Ref. [548] . The authors demonstrate how these principles enable a broader conceptualization of resilience that may be found in much of the following literature. A coupled HES that is close to a tipping point is generally far less resilient to perturbations than the same system far from such points [58] . The authors of [58] [558] . Entities involved in social-ecological systems Figure 67 : A conceptual model of a social-ecological system. Entities are defined in Table. 2 while links are detailed in Table. 3. Source: Figure from [558] . show also that the coupled HES can exhibit a richer variety of dynamical regimes than the corresponding uncoupled system. Thus, early warning signals can be ambiguous because they may herald either collapse or conservation. Moreover, the authors also observe that human feedback can partially mute the early warning signal of a regime shift or cause the system to evolve toward and perpetually remain close to a tipping point. The coupling of the environment dynamics models and the social dynamics model presented in Ref. [58] can be summarized as follows: 1. The forest ecosystem is modeled as where R is the net growth rate, s is the supply and demand parameter, h is the harvesting efficiency while F is a function of time representing the size of the forest; 2. The social dynamics model is defined as where U is the utility gain of changing opinion, x is the function of time representing the proportion of the population adopting the opinion, k is the social learning rate; 3. The coupling is represented by equations where c is the rarity valuation parameter, d is the social norm strength, and ω is the conservation cost. The early warning signal approaches show the potential for warning of social-ecological regime shifts [559] . They could be valuable in natural resource management to guide management responses to variable and changing resource levels or changes in resource users. However, investigation of specific cases of social-ecological regime shifts is required to make sure that, first, the required data are available for the studied cases and, second, the resulting early warning signals are robust. The third and fundamental criterion by which to evaluate an early warning signal in a specific case study is whether the signal can give sufficiently early warning for the transition to be avoided. Fig. 68 shows the results of such analysis. A theoretical framework is built in Ref. [560] to demonstrate that rising variance-measure, for example, by the maximum element of the covariance matrix of the network, is a valid leading indicator of a system approaching instability. The authors show that this indicator's reliability and robustness depend more on the pattern of the interactions within the network than the network structure or noise intensity. Mutualistic, scalefree, and small-world networks are less stable than their antagonistic or random counterparts are, but this leading indicator more reliably predicts their instability. Table 3 : From [558] . Links involved in social-ecological systems. The regime shifts in social-ecological systems are discussed in Ref. [58] . The authors observe that the theoretical models of social-ecological systems are receiving growing attention. Hysteresis transitions have been observed in coupled social-ecological systems on networks. Complex community structure in socialecological systems can create multiple small regime shifts instead of a single large one. Human feedback in a social-ecological system can be fundamental to shaping regime shifts in environmental systems. Because of nonlinear feedback, resource collapse can be caused by surprising and counter-intuitive changes. Thus, failing to account for human feedback can underestimate the potential for regime shifts in ecological systems. Four modeling approaches are explored in Ref. [561] and applied to the study of regime shifts in coupled socio-environmental systems. They are statistical methods, models of system dynamics, models of equilibrium points, and agent-based modeling. A set of criteria has been established to (1) capture feedback between social and environmental systems, (2) represent the sources of regime shifts, (3) incorporate complexity aspects, and (4) deal with regime shift identification. The role of social networks in social-ecological regime shifts is investigated in Ref. [562] . The authors also study the corresponding hysteresis effects caused by the local ostracism mechanism under different social and ecological parameters. The results show that lowering of network nodes degrees reduces the hysteresis effect and also alters the tipping point. The numeri-cal results and analytical estimations verify this conclusion. Interestingly, the hysteresis effect is more reliable in a scale-free network than in a random network, even when both networks have the same average degree. A social-ecological regime shift in a model of harvesters of a common-pool resource is studied in Ref. [559] . The authors find that such a change may avoid over-exploitation of the resource by social ostracism of non-complying harvesters. The authors use the approach of generalized modeling to study the robustness of the regime shift to uncertainty over the specific forms of model components. The authors introduced their generalized modeling using a simple example of a single population X that can increase due to a gain process G(X) and decrease due to a loss process L(X). A generalized model, in differential equation form, for the population X is The corresponding Jacobian Matrix J of Eq. 4.9 consists of the single element which is also the eigenvalue The additional parameters are introduced to relate the model to the real world scenarios: scale, elasticity and ratio parameters. By analyzing the Jacobian Matrix J and referring to contextual knowledge, one could identify and evaluate possible bifurcations. Figure 69 shows the actual model considered in Ref. [559] . The corresponding generalized model can be written as follows: where c is the resource inflow or growth rate (which is independent of the current resource level), D(R) is the natural resource outflow rate or mortality and Q(E, R) is the resource extraction. Here, E( f c ) is the total effort exerted by the harvesters, which decreases with increasing proportion of co-operators. The changes in the fraction of co-operators are represented by the following equation: ). (4.12) Figure 70 plots the surface of fold bifurcations for ranges of generalized parameters. Figure 71 shows the bifurcation diagrams of simulation models on pairedparameters. Two developments are identified in Ref. [437] that enable users to build a framework for understanding systemic resilience. The first one is establishing dynamical indicators of resilience, i.e., early warning indicators. The second is increasingly ubiquitous collection of the needed data on the dynamic time series for humans and livestock enabled by the rapid rise of technologies for automated recordings, especially wearable electronics. The authors also suggest that humans and the livestock that they consume may be seen as a complex network with strong impact on ecology. The dynamical indicators for this network may be estimated directly from the interactive dynamics of its nodes. Such approach may help tip social and animal dynamic models from a reductionism to a systemic paradigm. Stability of planet ecology is directly impacted by the growing human population and its food eating habits. As pointed in Ref. [563] , one of the threats is the increasing meat consumption, which requires high energy input compared to alternatives. Kanerva [563] discusses how the societies can voluntarily lower meat consumption. The integrated research efforts for sustainability driven by the urgency of addressing the climate change threat are analyzed in Ref. [549] . They start with a detailed review of the core concepts and principles in the resilience theory that could cause disciplinary tensions between the social and natural sciences. Then, the au-thors point out some of the difficulties that currently weaken the feasibility of studying resilience in social systems. The most important among them are the following. • The ontological differences (e.g., social scientists tend to study resilience on the individual level rather than on the community level considered in ecological studies). Researchers are reluctant to use system as an ontological description of society. • The boundaries between disciplines have been constructed already, although the use of institutional lenses following the tradition in social science studies could help with this issue. • Social-ecological systems exhibit thresholds that when exceeded, result in changed system feedback that leads to changes in function and structure, thus the analogy of the ball and the undulating surface is problematic in relation to social phenomena. • As self-organization is becoming an overriding organizing principle in complexity theory in which resilience theory is rooted, its mechanism is dubious in the social system setting. • The similarities between resilience theory and abandoned theories of functionalism, which are now being replaced by theoretically stronger theories for understanding of society, are raising doubts among social scientists about applicability of resilience theory to their domain. In addition to the inherent complexity introduced by the nature of social system problems, scientists could not bypass the difficulty of coupling multiple systems when studying a single social system resilience phenomenon. The interdependence of the regime shifts in ecosystems is studied in Ref. [185] . The authors construct a weighted directed network of 30 regime shifts from a database containing over 300 case studies based on a literature review of over 1000 scientific papers. The links in this network represent causal relationships (having a cascading effect or simply sharing standard drivers) between each link endpoints. The analysis shows that the cascading effect accounts for ∼ 45% of all regime shift couplings analyzed, implying structural dependence. The key lesson from this study is that regime shifts can be interconnected, and they should not be studied in isolation under the assumption that they are independent of each other. It is valid for resilience study in general and indicates we should always include all necessary context when studying social system resilience to achieve precise modeling. Critical infrastructures (CI), are the backbone of human society and play an essential role in transporting materials and services between distant locations. These critical infrastructures span a multiple scales of space and time to provide various flow services. Examples include power grid, gas and petroleum systems, telecommunication, banking and financial systems, transportation, water distributions, and emergency management systems. The power grid is a critical infrastructure, yet it often breaks down due to unexpected large-scale blackouts, which has been attracting high research interests. The Internet symbolizes the beginning of the information era and has become one of the fast-growing critical infrastructures. There are also many other critical infrastructures embedded in different industry sectors. Due to their crucial role for society, partial or complete dysfunction of the critical infrastructure leads to largescale damages. While serving as the lifeline or backbone of the whole society, critical infrastructures may suffer various risks of perturbations or malicious attacks. On the one hand, under specific scenarios, small faults in the localized region will accumulate and may propagate in a domino effect way, leading to lethal cascading failures. For example, a line trip caused cascading failures in the power grid of North America in 2003, with damage around 10 billion dollars. According to the North American Electrical Reliability Council (NERC) [564] , outages affect nearly 700,000 customers annually. Under the most torrential rain on July 21 of 2012, from the last 61 years, city-scale traffic breakdown has happened in Beijing, which caused economic losses of 11.6 billion yuan. According to statistics, traffic congestion costs Americans $166 billion annually 1 . The eruption of the Icelandic volcano in 2010 has led to the cancellation of at least 60% of daily European flights, resulting in the breakdown of airline networks 2 . Besides extreme weather, over the internet, malicious cyber-attacks have been occurring ever more frequently [565] , increasingly threatening to paralyze the whole server systems. On the other hand, critical infrastructures usually are complex and contain a lot of non-linearly coupled components, which may adapt and learn from the changing environments. Consequently, the CI system, as a typical complex adaptive system, is more than the sum of its parts [566] . The complexity of CI lies in its emergent properties, as a result of interaction and synergy in a large-scale space and time. Therefore, CI systems can adapt and absorb uncertain disturbances while retaining their basic functionalities. This ability is called "system resilience" (also referred to as "ecological resilience" as discussed in Chapter 2), which is different from the "engineering resilience," a system's ability to bounce back after perturbations or stresses. Given the unexpected circumstances and interdependence, it becomes increasingly urgent to understand and improve the resilience of critical infrastructures. Resilience brings the ability of adaptation, absorption, and recovery from various perturbations, faults, attacks, and environmental changes. The study for system resilience stems from the selfrecovery of ecosystems [4] (also see Chapter 2) and biological systems [380] (also see Chapter 3). An ecosystem may automatically restore itself from the species invasion or environmental changes, and a cellular network can automatically recover by changing the expression level of some specific genes. Since C. Holling and his colleagues raised the concept of resilience in ecosystems [4] , the resilience theory has been generalized not only to biology [254] but also to climate [219] , economics [567] , and social systems [568] (also see chapter 4). It suggests a new possible direction for system reliability management. For critical infrastructures and other complex engineering systems, resilience engineering has recently become widely known to its research community [569] . Research of system resilience relies on our understanding of failures, which is related to but differs from the system's reliability and vulnerability. Traditional reliability analysis mostly follows a reductionism concept, assuming that the system failures are composed of certain failure combinations of a set of components [570] . The failures of different parts have no or weak correlations, missing the possible strong dependency between components. However, components are not isolated but interconnected with one another, forming a complex network. A network is a graph composed of nodes and links that connect the nodes. For the transportation systems, the road intersections represent nodes, and roads connecting two intersections are links. For the power grid, generators or transmitters constitute nodes, and transmission lines are links. For the Internet, routers are nodes, and cables are links. In this way, failures of the CI system are described and seen as emergent behaviors understood as a collective result of interactions between different hierarchical levels. A series of works about technical complex networks, including CI, analyze them from the point of view of complexity science [571, 572, 573, 41, 574] . The critical infrastructure networks usually contain numerous components coupled by nonlinear dynamical interactions. Their structure properties, discussed below, determine the systems' resilience [575, 576] , and its aspects such as the spatiality, small-world property, modularity, rich clubs property, and more. Although many complex systems, including social or biological systems, exhibit common topological properties, the complexities of CI networks differ from other complex networks. For example, the degree distributions are found to be scale-free for some networks, such as the gene regulatory networks in biology. Many CI networks are embedded in spatial space with certain constraints, resulting in degree distributions usually not being scale-free [577] . Good example of such constraints are road network [578, 579] . With the renormalization procedure, some complex networks are found to have self-similar structures, measured with fractal dimension [580] . CI networks usually have geometric constrains and are embedded in a two-or threedimensional (3D) space [581] . We call these networks "spatial networks" [582] , such as 2D or 3D lattices. The network dimensionality is fundamental since it not only determines how the system is connected in different scales but also has important implications for system functions and failures. For a d-dimensional regular lattice with N nodes, this average shortest path l scales as l ∼ N 1/d . Actually, spatial networks usually have a few long-range connections to bridge distances between far away areas to achieve the balance between optimal transportation efficiency and costs. Examples are the city highways in the road networks or the high-voltage transmission lines in the power grids. With the powerlaw distribution of link length, spatial networks could have dimensions higher than those that are embedded in space [583] , which may suggest the existence of hyperbolic space [584] . For example, in a mobile phone communication network, the probability P(r) to have a friend at distance r decays as P(r) ∼ r −δ , where δ = 2 [583, 585] , and in the global airline network, the probability that and airport has a link to an airport at distance r, decays with exponent δ = 3 [586] . Note that the di-mension characterizes the spatially embedded networks with 0 < δ < ∞. It plays a central role, not only in characterizing the structure but also in determining the dynamical properties on the network and its behavior near a critical point. Topologically, small-world networks usually have small distances and high clustering coefficient. Examples of CI in such category are road networks [587] , railway networks [588] , the worldwide maritime transportation network [589] , and power grid [590] . The phenomenon of small-world was first discovered in a letter-delivering experiment [591, 592] , where the distance between two people in the world was found to be 5.2 on average. A network model developed in 1998 [590] explains the formation of a small-world network through randomly rewiring of p fraction of links of a regular lattice. For small p, the systems show new properties of short global path length and high local clustering coefficient, which rarely appears in the original regular lattice. According to the statistical properties, small-world networks could be classified into different types with different scale constraints [593] . Latora et al. [594] introduced the concept of network efficiency as a measure of how efficiently communication networks exchange information and show that small-world networks are globally and locally efficient. Kleinberg has also demonstrated that one can find short chains effectively with pure local information in smallworld networks [595] . Dynamically, CI networks also have small-world properties [596] . For instance, in urban traffic, two different modes of critical percolation behaviors alternatively appear in the same network topology under different traffic dynamics. During the rush hours, it shows the properties of the critical percolation of the 2D lattice. During the non-rush hours or days off, it shows similar percolation characteristics as small-world networks. It is due to the presence or absence of high-way roads in a metropolitan city, which behaves as the long-range connection in the classical small-world network model [590] . Based on the evidence of both topology and dynamics of the transportation network, resilience is not purely a structural problem. Indeed, consider traffic in the transportation system, which can become gridlocked even if a natural disaster leaves the underlying roads, bridges, and railways relatively unscathed. There is mounting recognition that to truly address the resilience of networked CI systems, we must be able to measure and control their dynamic states. Modular networks are those with densely connected groups of nodes while having weak connections between these groups. CI networks are found to have modular structures. For instance, air transportation networks have typical modular structures due to geographical constraints and geopolitical considerations [597] . The modular structure of a system can be extracted through maximizing the quality function known as "modularity" over the possible network partitions [598, 599] . The higher modularity means denser intra-modular connections and sparser inter-modular connections. Intermodular links are found essential for the system robustness, while increasing modularity may lead to decreasing robustness against cascading failures [600] . Rich club property of complex network suggests the dense connections between nodes with high centralities (including degree or betweenness), which forms the core structure of the whole complex system. An analytical expression is provided to measure and analyze the rich-club phenomena in different networks, including CI [601] . At the autonomous system (AS) level of Internet topology, the core tiers between nodes show the rich-club property [602] . For international trade and financial networks, high-income countries tend to form groups, which may spread the financial crisis rapidly among them [603] . Rich club phenomenon examines the group tendency of prominent elements at the top of the network hierarchy to control the majority of a system's resources [604] . Besides the network topology, weighted rich-club networks are a non-trivial generalization, where its metrics and corresponding integrated detection methods are critical [605] . The international financial system represents a weighted graph, where nodes are countries and links are debtor-creditor relations between countries [606] . Note that the coreperiphery structure is stable against the 2008 financial crisis. While performing a critical role in the networks, rich-club nodes are also the targets of intentional attacks [607] . Critical infrastructures usually suffer two significant environmental perturbations: extreme weather (e.g., hurricanes, earthquakes, tsunami) and intentional attacks ("9.11" attacks, Bali Bombings). Under these perturbations, failure of CI has its complexity: at macroscopic, rare events, and at microscopic, cascading failures. From the historical statistics, most of CI failures are unusual events with low probability and catastrophic consequences [608] . It poses challenges for effective preparedness for the possibility of CI failures. For example, analysis of the empirical data [609] shows that blackouts have a scale-free distribution for the failure size. That is to say, the possibility of massive outages is far beyond the assumption based on the traditional statistical analysis. It intimates the symptom of selforganized criticality [610] , where the operating pressure of the system keeps increasing due to the demand for improving system efficiency. Meanwhile, underlying risks accumulate. These two competing forces drive the system into a state of criticality. Once perturbation affiliates into the system, failure size will show a power-law distribution. In the long term, the competition between efficient system operation and reliability improvements is also observed and has generated such unstable balance [611] , which may produce more massive blackouts in an unprecedented way. A model example of the sandpile model [612] can illustrate this idea the increasing system pressure (addition of sand) can generate the scale-free distribution of sand cascades. Meanwhile, criticality is believed to be different in engineering systems as a result of tuning and optimization. Different from many natural networks, CI has significant system target, which is usually optimized based on efficiency and cost consideration. This "Highly Optimized Tolerance" (HOT) requires sophisticated topological configuration and can generate high system reliability [613] . The HOT model can also produce a power-law distribution of failure size through different mechanisms. Given the statistical properties of macroscopic CI failures, it is critical to understand and model the microscopic behaviors. Failure of CI causes substantial damages to the system itself and other interdependent systems. When transporting materials and services, CI faces various types of perturbations, including component faults, extreme weather, dramatic changing demands, and malicious attacks. When one or a few components fail, damages to the failing nodes cause that transports have to go through other routes and they generate extra loads on these routes. These additional loads may induce overload on more sites and cause them to be paralyzed, which is called cascading overloads [614] . Then, a positive feedback process of overloads is formed and will continue to amplify the damaging effect. This process does not stop until the system reaches a new steady-state, which poses the main threat to the normal operation of critical infrastructures. Knowing the propagation behavior of the cascading failure enables us to evaluate the underlying risk and develop efficient mitigation strategies. Different from the visible spreading via contacts in most of network dynamics, cascading failures due to overloads usually propagate through the hidden paths to seemingly unexpected locations. Tremendous efforts were made to isolate or localize the faults based on the assumption that cascading failures are short-range correlated. However, the frequency of massive blackouts in the United States are reported not decreasing from 1984 to 2006, despite the enormous investment in system reliability [615] . Based on real failure data, jams in city traffic or faults in the power grid are spatially long-range correlated, decaying slowly with distance [616] . The longrange correlations between failures do not only explain why some existing mitigation efforts are inefficient but also suggest a new paradigm to tackle this risk. Besides the long-range spatial correlation of failures in CI, the spatiotemporal spreading of failures is also unique and worthy of study. One jam in some local area of a city may cause the subsequent jams nearby or locations a few kilometers away. These common phenomena are fundamentally different from the model assumption of the contagion model in the complex network sciences, including SIS and SIR models. Spatiotemporal propagation of overload failures follows a wave-like pattern [617] , with speed independent of spatial network structure. This propagation speed demonstrates that the failures in CI are not only infectious to neighboring sites, but they also spread to sites at a given characteristic distance (measured by constant velocity) [617] . Confirmed in realistic blackout data analysis, the spreading of failures is non-local with both the topological distance and geographical distance [618] . Theoretically, this non-local spreading features of cascading overloads could be modeled by adding dependency links into original network structures [619] , as shown in Fig. 72 . Although much progress was made thanks to the availability of big data in recent years, predicting the outbreak and propagation of cascading failures in CI networks is still challenging, yet pressing to become solved. It requires more fundamental understanding and modeling efforts to quantify the cascading failures in CI, enabling the design and improvement of system reliability and resilience. A meaningful way to understand the propagation of cascading failures is based on overload models including the Motter-Lai model [614] , the CA models [620] for transportation and the CASCADE models for power grid [621] , etc. In these models, flow dynamics have different features, and corresponding cascading failures display specific considerations. The overloads may cause partial or complete breakdown of the networks, with intentional attacks [614, 622] or random perturbations [616] . In extreme cases, the failure of a single node with the largest load is sufficient to destroy the entire or a substantial part of the system [614] . While the Motter-Lai model assumes that the overloaded node is permanently removed, Crucitti et al. [44] proposed a dynamical model with a link efficiency update rules. In this model, the overloaded nodes are unsteady but may recover back functionality, mimicking the congestion dynamics on the Internet. They also found that attacking a node with the largest load may lower the network efficiency to the collapse level. Simonsen et al. [623] proposed another type of dynamical cascading failure model, and found flow dynamics with transient oscillations or overshooting may cause more damages than the static models. Load redistribution during cascading failures is not always deterministic. Thus, Lehmann et al. [624] proposed a stochastic model that is analytically solved by generalized branching processes. CASCADE model is developed mainly for cascading model failures on the power grid [621] . This model is at a higher abstraction level, which could be theoretically solved by the Galton-Watson branching process [625] . The load redistribution and network structure are essential for cascading failures. Wang et al. [626] studied cascading failures on the scale-free networks based on local load redistribution rule. They found that the system reaches the most resilient level under specific redistribution parameters. Meanwhile, based on the global load redistribution rule in the Motter-Lai model, Zhao et al. [627] formulated the cascading process as a phase transition process. In this model, the cascading failure causes the full breakdown of the whole network below the transition point. Xia et al. [628] studied the cascading failures on the small-world networks, and found that heterogeneous betweenness is one critical factor for network resilience against cascading failures. Wang et al. [629] have studied cascading failures on coupled map lattices. They found that cascading failures are much easier to occur in small-world and scale-free coupled map lattices than in globally coupled map lattices. While most of the models initiate the cascading overloads from given nodes with certain structure features, percolation framework is also applied to study the critical condition of the giant component [616, 630] . In the past decades, the primary application of the cascading overload models have been CI networks. For instance, Wang et al. [631] applied them to the US power grid and surprisingly found that attacking the Figure 72 : The effect of a localized attack on a system with dependencies. (A), Propagation of local damage in a system of two interdependent diluted lattices with spatially constrained dependency links between the lattices (only one lattice shown here). The hole on the right is above the critical size and spreads throughout the system while the hole on the left is below the critical size and remains essentially the same size. (B), A localized circular failure of radius r c h in a lattice with dependency links of length up to r. Outside the hole, the survival probability of a node increases with the distance ρ from the edge. The parameter ρ c denotes the distance from the edge of the hole at which the occupation probability is equal to the percolation threshold of a lattice without dependencies p c ≈ 0.5927 36 . (C), Phase diagram of a lattice with dependencies or two interdependent lattices. Depending on the average degree k and dependency length r, the system is either stable, unstable or metastable. The circles illustrate the increase (when k increases) of the critical attack size (r c h ) that leads to system collapse in the metastable region. (D), As the system size grows, the minimal number of nodes which cause the system to collapse increases linearly for random attacks but stays constant (≈ 300) for localized attacks. This figure was obtained for a system of interdependent lattices diluted to k ≈ 2.9 and r = 15 (in the metastable phase-see c), with 1000 runs for each data point. Cited from [619] . lowest load nodes produces more damages than attacking the highest load nodes. Menck et al. [632] explored the stability mechanism of the power grid, revealing that the local structure of dead ends and dead trees could considerably diminish the system stability. For North American power grids, the failure of a single substation could lead to up to 25% loss of transmission efficiency as a result of an overload cascade [633] . Besides the US power grid, the Italian power grid [634] and the EU grid [622] were also studied using the cascading failure models. Blackouts are now mostly modeled by cascading overloads as a series of outage lines with the consideration of AC or DC flow dynamics [635] . Except for the short-time scale of cascading overloads, the OPA model [636] has been developed to incorporate also the long-term range of power grid when the network is continuously upgraded to meet the increasing load demand.The OPA model was validated with data from the Western Electricity Coordinating Council (WECC) electrical transmission system [611] . For further understanding of the realistic cascading failures, a simulation model has been proposed combining both power networks and protection systems [637] . Compared with a simple DC-power-flow based quasi-steady-state model, this model generates similar results for the early stages of cascading as other simulators but produces substantially different results for later stages. With the consideration of demand and supply features, including increasing demand and renewable sources, cascading failures could become the first-order transition in the large size limit [638] . The threat of cascading failures is also demonstrated in the critical information structures [639] . This model incorporates two uncertain conditions regarding the particular next failure node and time required before the next node state transition takes place. Next, we review the critical transitions in transportation infrastructure. Based on real-world data, Treiterer et al. [640] identified the existence of "phantom traffic jams", where the traffic jams are formed spontaneously with no apparent reason, such as an accident or a bottleneck. Such phantom jams could be traced back to a lane change, or flow dynamics [641] . Furthermore, large perturbations are found to propagate against the direction of the vehicle flow [642, 643] . Instead of the 1D highway, the formation and propagation of traffic jams in high-dimensional networks are more complicated. Equilibrium in traffic is a central concept that determines the flow assignment and resulting distribution. In the weighted networks [644] , cascading failures show three types of dynamical behavior: slow, fast, and stationary. For urban traffic, based on the percolation approach, a new framework for studying urban traffic is proposed [578] . When the roads become congested and are considered "effectively removed", the emergence and formation of urban-scale congestion could be viewed as a percolation process. The critical point of this percolation process could be used to evaluate the resilience of the urban transportation system. Thus, the dynamical organization could be analyzed in multiscales, showing the spatiotemporal unbalance between traffic demand and supply. Critical infrastructure systems depend on each other, which create more vulnerabilities than a single isolated system does [566] . For example, the 1998 failure of the Galaxy 4 telecommunication satellite has not only caused the breakdown of most of the pagers but also disrupted a broad spectrum of other CI systems, including financial sectors and emergency systems. The frequency of failure propagation between different CI systems is becoming higher due to the increasing embedding of the information systems into the existing CI systems to form so-called "Cyber-Physical Systems." More than that, the interdependence between non-information CI systems is also increasing, given the essential service each CI provideds. For example, blackouts in the power grid can cause the breakdown of transportation network or the water distribution network, due to the indispensable role of power for these systems. There are different types of interdependences in CI, including physical dependency, cyber dependency, logical dependency, and so on [566] . This interdependence relation can be tight or loose, depending on the functional processes involved. The current models for interdependent CI focus on the mapping of hidden functional dependency, differing from the connectivity links in a single network. In 2010, Buldyrev et al. [14] developed a framework for analyzing the robustness of interdependent networks subject to cascading failures. The failure of even a small number of elements within a single network may trigger a catastrophic cascade of failures that destroy global connectivity. In a fully interdependent case, each node in one network depends on a functioning node in other networks and vice versa. The system shows a first-order discontinuous phase transition, which is dramatically different from the second-order continuous phase transition found in isolated networks. This phenomenon is caused by the presence of two types of links: connectivity links within each network; and dependence links between networks. Connectivity links enable the network to carry out its function, and dependence links represent the fact that the function of a given node in one network depends crucially on nodes in other networks. The addition of these dependency links is found to change the system's robustness significantly. For the high density of dependency links, interdependent network disintegrates in the form of a first-order phase transition, whereas for a low density of dependency links, the system falls apart in a second-order transition [645] . Later on, this framework has been further generalized to handle the situation of n interdependent networks , which revealed that percolation in a single network is just a limiting case of the general situation of n interdependent networks [646, 647] . As is the case for CI networks embedded into 2D space with cost constraints, once spatially embedded, the interdependent networks become extremely vulnerable [648] . In contrast to non-embedded networks, there are no critical fraction of dependency links, and any small fraction leads to an abrupt collapse. There could be cascading overloads inside each network and dependency failures between different networks [649] with the consideration of flow dynamics. These combined cascading failures can generate more damages than failures in classical interdependent systems. Complex interdependence is also modeled as a cyber network overlaying a physical network [650] . An optimum inter-link allocation strategy against random attacks is proposed when the topology of every single network is unknown. The interdependent network models enable the design of complex systems with more overall system robustness and the development of new mitigation methods. Despite the existence of models for cascading failures in interdependent CI, it remains challenging to evaluate, mitigate cascading failures, and eventually control the outbreak and propagation of cascading failures. For the state-of-the-art, there are a few measures that can be adopted to manage the CI failures. Prevention and planning are two of the most common methods to avoid catastrophic failures, enabling improvement of the resilience of CI with resources allocated effectively to various parts and stages of CI [651] . Meanwhile, it is difficult to prevent all the CI failures only by planning in advance and enumerating all the possible failure scenarios. Another standard method is the crisis management [652] , which emphasizes the top-down responses to the catastrophes. Crisis management must organize the mitigation resources timely, especially in the stage of "aftershock". While these two methods focus on the two end stages of cascading failures, a more systematic framework for CI management is required. It is the central task of system resilience for critical infrastructures.  Resilience concepts have been increasingly applied across a growing number of directions. While reliability [653] emphasizes the system capability of continuously functioning under perturbations, resilience requires the system to bounce back soon and strongly from the serious damages. Resilience is also more than the protection [654] , usually referred to the critical infrastructure, and suggests the response and recovery from degradation of system functions. As a new concept for critical infrastructure, resilience has attracted much attention and was defined in different contexts [655, 656, 657, 658, 659, 660] . Resilience emphasizes the adaptation, absorption and recovery from the failure environment. The realization of this comprehensive ability can be divided into three stages: evaluation, prediction and adaptation. For critical infrastructure, the first step is to evaluate the system resilience. The earlier work to evaluate a system's resilience was done by the earthquake community, for whom the "resilience" means to measure the system performance under the earthquake and extreme weather. The loss of system performance (single CI or comprehensive urban systems) in the scenario of the earthquake is compared to the benchmark with the consideration of robustness and rapidity [19] , as shown in Fig. 73 . The loss of resilience can be defined as RL: resilience loss, Q(t): service quality of the community (limited to the range from 0% to 100%). It suggests that resilience could be conceptualized in four interrelated dimensions shown in Fig. 74 : technical, organizational, social, and economic. Technical resilience is about the performance of physical systems against earthquake threats. Organizational resilience is about the ability of organizations to respond to disaster emergencies while performing the core functions. Social resilience (as discussed in Chapter 4) is about the system ability to alleviate negative effects of service losses caused by the social aspect. Economic resilience is to reduce the direct and indirect economic losses as a result of earthquakes. Zobel [121] also proposed similar resilience definition based on "resilience triangle" (Fig. 75) , which is then extended to scenarios of partial recovery from multiple disruptive events [661] , and defined as Mathematical models for evaluation. Henry et al. [662] developed a time-dependent resilience metric to measure the system resistance to disruption during different stages including reliability, vulnerability and recoverability, which is written as R φ (t r |e j ): the value of resilience, indicates the proportion of delivery function that has been recovered from its disrupted state, φ(): delivery function (or the so-called figureof-merit), e j : disruptive event, t r : the set time for evaluating the current system resilience, t d : the time when the system transits to its final disrupted state, t 0 : original time. Francis et al. [663] have proposed a dynamical resilience metric, which explicitly incorporates the recovery speed. They also consider two dimensions of a system capable of absorbing perturbations and adaptive capacity to recover in the post-disaster stage, which is as follows Besides the deterministic definition of resilience, probabilistic metric is also considered in the resilience as-sessment. Chang et al. [664] have defined a probabilistic resilience based on the probability of the initial system performance loss after a disruption being less than the maximum acceptable performance loss and the time to full recovery being less than the maximum acceptable disruption time. This is different from deterministic metric, which is mainly for disasters with complete information, and can be written as R = P(A|i) = P(r 0 < r * and t 1 < t * ), (5.6) R: system resilience, P(A|i): (resilience defined as) the probability that the system of interest will meet predefined performance standards A in a scenario seismic event of magnitude i, r 0 : the initial loss, r * : maximum acceptable loss, t 1 : the time to full recovery, t * : maximum acceptable disruption time. Ouyang et al. [665] have proposed a resilience metric based on the expectation of system performance under perturbations, which is Youn et al. [666] have considered the resilience as the sum of the passive survival rate (reliability) and proactive survival rate (restoration), different from the most of definitions that integrate the system performance during the whole disruption process, which is defined as Φ(resilience) = R(reliability) + ρ(restoration), (5.8) Φ(resilience): the conceptual definition of engineering resilience, R(reliability): the degree of a passive survival rate, ρ(restoration): the degree of a proactive survival rate. Ayyub [667] has incorporated the effect of system aging in the resilience assessment, including different failure profile of brittle, ductile, and graceful failures, which follows the following definition 9) R e : system resilience, T i : time to incident, F: failure profile, measuring the system's robustness and redundancy, R: recovery profile, measuring the system's resourcefulness and rapidity, ∆T f : failure duration, ∆T r : recovery duration. Conceptual models for evaluation. Ouyang et al. [665] has proposed a multi-stage framework to analyze infrastructure resilience. These three stages are divided as: disaster prevention from normal operation stage, cascading failures from the initial failure stage, and the recover stage. Taking the power transmission grid in Harris County, Texas, USA, as a case study, the authors compare an original power grid model with several resilience models to validate the effectiveness of these models under random hazards and hurricane hazards. Cai et al. [668] have proposed an availabilitybased engineering metric to measure resilience, which depends mainly on engineering system structure and maintenance resources. System resilience is evaluated by the developed method based on dynamic-Bayesiannetwork. Renschler et al. [669] have defined resilience in seven dimensions (so-called PEOPLES, P: Population and demographics; E: Environmental/Ecosystem; O: Organized governmental services; P: Physical infrastructure; L: Lifestyle and community competence; Eco: Economic development; and S: Social-cultural capital). Based on Renschler's definition, Vincenzo et al. [670] have analyzed the transportation system resilience under extreme events. Considering the interdependencies between systems, categories and dimensions, any recovery plan could be evaluated by maximizing the re-silience index. Comes et al. [671] evaluate the resilience of power grid and New York subway systems, and compares them with such infrastructure in different regions. For the resilience of transportation networks, Ip et al. [672] have proposed a network resilience metric expressed as the weighted sum of node resilience, which for each node is evaluated by the weighted average number of reliable passageways to other nodes in the network. With this resilience metric, transportation networks are optimized with a structure optimization model. For information CI networks, resilience is also defined accordingly but it also includes concepts developed earlier from survivability [673, 674] . Sterbenz et al. [673] have defined resilience at any given layer as a (negative) change in service corresponding to a (negative) change in the operating conditions. Network operational space is divided into normal operation, partially degraded, and severely degraded regions, while the service space is divided into acceptable, impaired, and unacceptable regions. Then, the resilience is represented for a particular scenario at a particular layer boundary as the area under the resilience trajectory, as shown in Fig. 76 . Fang et al. [675] have proposed two metrics of optimal repair time and resilience reduction metric, to evaluate the component importance. These two metrics can determine the repairing priority of failed component to gain higher resilience, and the potential losses if the component repair is delayed. Spatio-temporal network models for evaluation. Until now, most of the resilience metrics are dimensionless, describing the system performance variation during the perturbations. However, critical infrastructures are typically spatial-temporal systems, failure of which spans along the space and time. This spatial-temporal failure behavior and corresponding system response requires more sophisticated framework to evaluate and analyze the system resilience. In [676] , Zhang et al. proposed a spatio-temporal definition to reflect the resilience feature of CI systems, as shown in Fig. 77 , which is defined as This resilience quantification integrates the spatial spreading of traffic congestions during its lifespan. More surprisingly, with the new spatio-temporal definition of system resilience, it is found that the system resilience follows a stable scale-free distribution, which is usually the result of self-organized criticality. This result contribute to the longstanding discussion of whether resilience is an intrinsic property of system [663] , by finding that traffic resilience has similar scaling laws for different days and different cities. This scale-free distribution is stable across different working days in Beijing and Shenzhen cities and is found to depend only on a few macroscopic parameters, including system dimension and demand. Besides the system resilience, the recovery time of jamming failures is also found to follow a scale-free distribution, but with a different exponent. Note that, on the temporal scale, the scaling relation between the lifetime of the traffic jam and system size is found in a 1D lattice cellular automaton model [677] . On the spatial scale, spatial correlations in traffic flow fluctuations are also found to follow a power-law decay [616, 678] . With these scaling on the spatial and temporal scales, a combined spatio-temporal scaling of traffic jams is found, viewing jams in a stereo way. Resilience independent of typical efficiencies [679] may be explained by the stable resilience scaling. Reliability of networks. System reliability [680] refers to fundamental quantities for system resilience. Reliability engineering focuses on the ability of a system or component to function under stated conditions for a specified period [681] . Besides the statistical measurement of failures, reliability engineering pays more attention to the analysis of failure mechanisms [682, 683] , prediction of possible causes, and improvement of like-lihood of the successful system functioning during its whole lifetime. In other words, reliability engineering requires inherently proactive management of whole system lifetime, including design, testing, operation, maintenance, and so on [684] . Reliability engineering is first applied to electronic equipment because of its high failure rate, while reliability engineering for complex systems is now different. For example, fault tree analysis, a classical and efficient assessment for system reliability, could help to locate the root cause for system failure. For complex systems, the emergency of system failures is usually not the sum of independent component failures, which poses challenges for fault tree analysis and other traditional reliability analysis methods. Actually, classical reliability methods assume the absence or weak coupling between components, protocols or failures. One possible solution is to combine the reliability engineering with network science [685] , which is proved valid when analyzing complex systems [686] . For network systems, existing reliability studies focus on connectivity. Connectivity reliability measures the probability of the existence of connection paths between network nodes. Connectivity reliability can be further classified as two-terminal, k-terminal and all-terminal problems [687, 688, 689] . The network is considered structurally reliable if there is at least one path between required terminals. Considering the redundancy, natural connectivity is proposed with acute discrimination for different networks and derived from graph spectrum [690] . Besides the reliability metric based on probability theory, another metric is proposed and referred to as belief reliability [691] , which can measure the aleatory uncertainty and also epistemic uncertainty. Connectivity reliability is usually considered in the scenarios of earthquakes [692] , flood [581, 693] , or other emergency situations [694] , where the state of roads are binary without considering the travel dynamics. Meanwhile, besides the basic connectivity function, reliability also refers to a certain service level from the user demand side. Travel time reliability is then developed to fill this gap [695, 696] , which is the probability that a trip could be completed within a given time duration. Asakura [697] has studied reliability measures between an origin and destination (OD) pair in a degraded road network with links damaged by natural disasters. While these types of reliability index have their own advantage, it remains challenging to measure the reliability in a more comprehensive way. Chen et al. [698] have made an attempt to define travel capacity reliability. It is defined as the probability that a network can meet a certain level of travel demand at the required service level. Considering the demand fluctuation, Shao et al. [699] studied traffic reliability with a stochastic user equilibrium traffic assignment model, which is solved by a proposed heuristic solution algorithm. To explore the spatio-temporal dimension of travel reliability, Li et al. [578] have proposed a new definition to measure the operational reliability of urban traffic with the dynamical traffic cluster, which is only composed of high-velocity roads. This can describe how well the network traffic above a certain service level covers the city, from the viewpoint of network operators instead of a single user. Since the introduction of the resilience concept into the study of critical infrastructure, resilience engineering is related to safety management [700] , which is also the focus of risk analysis. Given the unprecedented risks and possibly catastrophic damages resulting from them, risk analysis [701] is also one of the critical methods to understand the system resilience. Critical infrastructures are usually threatened by natural hazards, where risk assessment is related to the vulnerabilities exposed to these disasters [702] . Hazard assessment mainly studies the disaster itself, while vulnerability focuses on the exposure and economic losses of critical infrastructures caused by failures. Interdependence is also another source for system vulnerability [703] . Concepts of uncertainties in risk usually have two angles [704] . The first type considers risk as the inherent properties of the system, which can be measured by the severity of harmful consequences and its probability [705, 706] . The other approach considers the risk from the Bayesian perspective [707] , and focuses on development of an epistemic framework. Overall, risks come from the inherent uncertainties in the system itself and our limited knowledge about the system. These uncertainties of unexpected and adverse consequences could pose various threats to the systems. While these uncertainties in the risk assessment can hardly be fully realized, resilience may help to provide a complementary method for risk management, which builds the system's ability to absorb or adapt to these uncertainties. Besides uncertainty evaluation in the risk analysis, another critical step is to explore the vulnerable part of the system, which is the mitigation focus on the system recovery. Vulnerability is usually defined through the degree of exposure to hazards and the degree of losses due to the risks [708, 709, 710, 711] . For CI networks, another kind of features, spatial properties [648] , are recognized now to be another source of vulnerability. Different indicators can measure the vulnerability of a link as the service degradation due to to the possibility of it being closed. For road networks, several link importance indices and site exposure indices are proposed [712] , based on the variation in generalized travel cost when these links are disrupted. For power grids, based on networksurvivability analysis, identifying the most vulnerable locations in the power grid is studied [713] , considering the spatial correlation between outages. A water distribution network is critical for city life and therefore may be the target of intentional attacks. The vulnerability of the water distribution network is found to depend on hydraulic analysis and network topology [714] . Chang et al. [715] have proposed measurement for post-disaster transportation performance. Tuncel et al. [716] have proposed a risk management for supply chain networks based on failure mode, effects, and criticality analysis (FMECA) technique and Petri net simulation. In some cases, critical infrastructures are subject to multiple hazards. While some related studies [717, 718, 719] have focused on analyzing the probability of joint hazard occurrences, corresponding risk assessments method for this scenario have also been proposed [720, 721] . For example, considering multiple hazards of earthquake and hurricane, Kameshwar et al. [722] have proposed parameterized fragility based multi-hazard risk assessment procedure for highway bridges. Vulnerability in transportation is defined [723] as "a susceptibility to incidents that can result in considerable reductions in road network serviceability". Compared with reliability, vulnerability usually refers to more harmful consequences but lower probability to occur [724] . Based on an integrated equilibrium model for a large scale transportation system, Nicholson et al. have studied the critical components based on its socioeconomic impacts [725] . In the network analysis, vulnerability is related to nodes or links with specific topological features. For example, the vulnerable part of a scale-free network is usually considered to have the largest degree (i.e., number of links) [726] . Other topological features are also found to be related to the vulnerability. Weak relationships between different communities in a modular network can do extensive damage when it is removed. Critical links in the airline network are explored with memetic algorithms [727] , and are found different from those with the highest topological importance. Basoz [728] has proposed a risk assessment method consisting of three parts: (i) retrofitting of critical infrastructures as a means of pre-disaster mitigation, (ii) pre-disaster emergency response planning, and (iii) emergency response operations. He has measured the importance of components by network analysis and decision analysis. Chang et al. [729] have proposed a vulnerability metric based on the business sector, size, and building oc-cupancy tenure to provide a predictor of business loss. Hong et al. [730] have performed vulnerability analysis for the Chinese railway system under the flood risks and provided an effective maintenance strategy considering link vulnerability and burden. Critical infrastructures are usually modeled as spatially embedded networks, where vulnerability analysis has also found interesting and surprising results. The natural disaster, including earthquakes and landslides, could be modeled by localized damages or attacks to the spatial network of critical infrastructures. Berezin et al. [619] have proposed a general theoretical model for localized damage to a spatially embedded network with functional dependency. They have found that localized damage can cause substantially more harm to spatial networks than equivalent random damage. Localized damage will generate cascading failure when the attack size is larger than a critical value independent of the system size (i.e., a zero fraction). Empirical study [618] also confirms this modeling result. With the data of the North American power grid from 2008 to 2013, they found that significant cascading failures are usually associated with concurrent events closer to each other and the vulnerable set. Localized damage models have also been extended to interdependent infrastructures with terrorist attacks [731, 622] or vulnerability analysis [732] . Prediction of the spatio-temporal propagation of cascading failures could determine the timing and amount of mitigation resource allocation in corresponding realtime resilience management. Meanwhile, uncertainties in the emergence and proliferation of cascading overloads bring fundamental unpredictability to some extent. For CI and other engineering systems, resilience studies mostly assume a single equilibrium and focus on the system's ability to "bounce back" to the original state after perturbations. As the dynamical system complexity demonstrated, systems in practice could have multiple states, which could be studied by the theory of multi-state system [733, 734, 735, 736] . Multi-state systems are now applied to evaluate and optimize the system reliability [737, 738, 739] . While the multi-state system requires the availability of probability data for all the system components, it is rarely possible in the real case due to the limited budget and time for observation. Thus, the theory of the fuzzy set is combined with the traditional multi-state system to gain a realistic estimation with an acceptable computation cost. Ding et al. have extended the multi-state system analysis through the development of a fuzzy universal generating func-tion [740] . In this analysis, performance rates and corresponding probabilities are handled with fuzzy values. A general model for the fuzzy multi-state system is also proposed [741] . For ecological or climate systems, there exist multiple equilibrium states, allowing the system to shift from one to another state under a given disturbance at the tipping point [742] . Critical infrastructure states can also evolve into different states in daily operations or emergencies. Moving back to the original state may require reaching a different tipping point, it is called hysteresis property [743] , which is widely observed in various physical systems. Among other critical infrastructures, the hysteresis of traffic dynamics is mostly studied. Traffic hysteresis in freeway traffic was firstly observed in the real data in 1974 [640] . A traffic jam can spontaneously appear during phase transition without obvious reasons in free traffic flow, accompanied by a hysteresis phenomenon [744] . Fundamental relations in traffic between velocity, flow, and density or occupancy have been observed for a long time [745, 746] . The so-called fundamental diagram is widely accepted and identified in different scenarios, e.g., the flow-density relation. The fundamental diagram could be derived in different ways [747, 748] : (1) from statistical modeling; (2) from car-following, and (3) from fluid analogies. However, this diagram has been challenged by traffic hysteresis: for example, the relationship between density and speed is found to show a "loop" behavior. Different theoretical models are proposed to explain the phenomenon of hysteresis. It is conjectured [750] that hysteresis is generated by the asymmetrical driver behavior between acceleration and deceleration. Zhang [748] has proposed a mathematical theory to model the hysteresis phenomenon, where acceleration, deceleration, and equilibrium flow is distinguished. Empirical results are well predicted by the proposed approach. Chen et al. [751] have also suggested that traffic hysteresis will occur when drivers' reaction to traffic oscillations is not symmetric. With the incorporation of velocity-dependent randomization, Barlovic et al. [752] have demonstrated the metastable states with the Nagel-Schreckenberg model through the slow-to-start behavior. Rather than 1D lattice used in most of the above models, Hu et al. [753] have found hysteresis phenomena of information traffic on the scale-free network. They have observed hysteresis loop of two branches for the fundamental diagram: the upper branch is obtained by adding packets in the free-flow state, while the lower branch is obtained by removing packages from the jammed state. These model results suggest the existence of multiple states of traffic dynamics. Systems may undergo a regime shift of abrupt transition when evolving from one metastable state to another. This regime shift is usually highly unpredictable, which poses a significant challenge for the prediction in complex systems [181] . The tipping point often marks the critical threshold of a regime shift. When a system is approaching its tipping point, a positive feedback mechanism pushing system to another state is becoming much more substantial. It leads to a domino effect of cascading failures when the robustness or reliability of critical infrastructures is concerned. Homogeneous systems with dense connections may have strong local resilience yet be fragile globally [181] . Meanwhile, heterogeneous modular systems could have the adaptive capacity with gradual changes to environmental variations. The relation between system resilience and structure can help to predict socialtechnological infrastructures better. Prediction of closeness to the tipping point is an urgent and critical need for avoiding catastrophic collapse and improving system resilience. One classical work is "critical slowing down", suggesting that the rate of system recovery to the original state is becoming lower when it is approaching the vicinity of the tipping point [213, 380, 215, 222, 216, 217] . When systems have intense fluctuation, an alternative indicator is developed to infer the shape of system state landscape [754, 755] . The change of potential system landscape also reflects the shifting between different attractors. While these indicators have been successfully apply in different disciplines, a development of a valid applicable indicator is far from completion. As the availability of high-resolution spatio-temporal data is increasing, more indicators could be explored, including spatial information, which is sometimes more informative and robust than temporal indicators, especially for critical infrastructures. The ultimate goal of system resilience is to improve the system's ability to absorb and adapt to unexpected risks and faults. With the development of big data and control technology, CI systems have become more and more automated and intelligent. Meanwhile, one significant difference of CI systems compared with other engineering systems, is that human behaviors and decisions are deeply involved in every inch of CI systems. For example, traffic congestion has become an "urban disease" that impedes urban development. The primary "pathogenesis" may be due to the imbalance between supply and demand of spatio-temporal transportation resources, which is manifested by the mismatch between the rapid growth of short-term traffic The goal is to drive the network to a desired state by perturbing nodes in a control set: a set consisting of one or more nodes accessible to compensatory perturbations. (B) State space portrait. In the absence of control, the network at an initial state x 0 evolves to an undesirable equilibrium x u in the n-dimensional state space (red curve). By perturbing the initial state (orange arrow), the network reaches a new state that evolves to the desired target state x * (blue curve). (C) In this example, the network is controllable if and only if the corresponding slice of the target's basin of attraction (blue volume) intersects this region of eligible perturbations (grey volume). (D) A perturbation to a given initial condition (magenta arrow) results in a perturbation of its orbit (green arrow) at the point of closest approach to the target. (E) This process generates orbits that are increasingly closer to the target (dashed curves), and is repeated until a perturbed state x 0 is identified that evolves to the target. Source: Figure from demand and the slow improvement of traffic supply capacity. The urban traffic has the following features: increasing in the short-term, being distributed differently in the whole space, and jamming quickly in the local area. Under the circumstance of limited transportation resources, the congestion can become challenging to dissipate and may propagate over space and time, resulting in possible regional dysfunction of urban traffic. In extreme weather, important events, or other emergency situations, city-scale congestion and significant degradation of traffic capacity may happen, which calls for the system adaptation and recovery capability. Adaptation and recovery of CI could be achieved by the ultimate control of complex systems. Recently, the study of controllability attracts much attention towards the control of complex networks [756, 757, 758] . These studies offer theoretical tools to identify a subset of driver nodes to control the whole systems through proper control strategies. Liu et al. [756] have developed conceptual tools to study the controllability of an arbitrary complex directed network, through the set of driver nodes with time-dependent control for the system's entire dynamics. With this framework of network controllability, nodes and links could be ranked based on its importance in controlling the whole network [756, 757, 759, 760] . For example, connections could be classified into three groups (critical/redundant/ordinary) based on their influence on the controllability of the networks [756] . From the system control view, the realization of system resilience for recovering to a healthy state depends on if we could tune the system to the desired attractor in terms of control theory. For linear systems, this could be achieved by minimal control energy strategy. However, most of the critical infrastructures are not linear systems. For control of nonlinear systems, especially those with numerous components and complex interactions, currently there are no general solutions. Meanwhile, different approaches have been proposed considering the specific background of problems. For urban traffic, the system is found to follow the dynamic pattern of the macroscopic fundamental diagram (MFD), which allows the controller to perform state control accordingly. For example, optimal perimeter control for two-regions is proposed through model predictive control [761] , with the controller at the border between tworegions. For the power grid, Cornelius et al. have proposed to bring a network to its desired state through perturbation of the initial state to the attractor basin of desired state [749] , as shown in Fig. 78 Figure 79 : A multi agent system design. This design organizes agents in three layers: The reactive layer (bottom) consists of agents that perform reprogrammed self-healing actions that require an immediate response. Reactive agents, whose goal is autonomous, fast control, are in every local subsystem. The agents in the coordination layer (middle) include heuristic knowledge to identify which triggering event from the reactive layer is urgent, important, or resource consuming. These agents, whose goal is consistency, also update the system's real-world model and check if the plans (or commands) from the deliberative layer (top) represent the system's current status. If the plans don't match the real-world model, the agents in the middle layer trigger the deliberative layer to modify the plans. The deliberative layer consists of cognitive agents that have goals and explicit plans that let them achieve their goals. The goals of agents in this layer are dependability, robustness, and self-healing. Source: Figure from For critical infrastructure, a self-healing framework has been proposed to realize the system adaptation [564] , as described in Fig. 79 . This framework is based on intelligent agents distributed over the whole system at its different levels. These agents will make decisions according to their environments and interact with each other. Liu et al. [762] have proposed a self-healing model against cascading overloads, where agents could decide to restore timing and resources. An optimal restoration timing is found to recover the system from the edge of collapse. Lin et al. [763] have proposed a self-healing transmission network reconfiguration algorithm, with the consideration of electrical betweenness. Quattrociocchi et al. [764] realized the self-healing capability with distributed communication protocols. They have studied the effects of redundancy under different connectivity patterns on healing performances. Gallos et al. [765] have proposed a local-information based self-healing algorithm through adding after damage links as short as possible, considering the fraction of failed neighbors. Shang [766] studied the impact of self-healing capability on network robustness, with the percolation framework. Two concepts "robustness" and "stability" are quite related to "resilience". They are commonly used to analyze the system response under changing conditions, and sometimes difficult to distinguish due to the lack of clear boundaries [767] , and their own definitions may vary across different contexts. For example, in the study of how a system responds to changes in a specific driver, Dai et al. [768] define resilience as the size of the basin of attraction and stability as the recovery rate. Whereas in the bacterial response to antibiotic treatment [390] , resistance describes the insensitivity to the treatment and resilience defines the recovery rate. Especially resilience and robustness, they have been used as interchangeable concepts in some literatures on network analysis [1, 769] . Here we trace back to their original lucid definitions on resilience and stability that were first proposed in ecology [4] , and the robustness in complex networks [770] . We point out that these three notions describe distinct properties of systems. Resilience determines the tolerance of a large perturbation without shifting to an alternative stable state, being a measure of the ability of these systems to absorb changes of state variables, driving variables, and parameters, and still persist [135] . In this definition, resilience is the property of the system with persistence or probability of extinction being the result. Whereas, stability is the ability of a system to return to a specific stable fixed point after a temporary disturbance. The more rapidly it returns, and with the least fluctuation, the more stable it is. In this definition stability is the property of the system with the degree of fluctuation around a specific state its measure [4] . Resilience and stability are both defined on network dynamics [4, 12] , while the concept "robustness" is related to the static structure of a network, measuring the ability to maintain its connectivity when a fraction of nodes (links) is damaged [40] , Next, we give further clarification on the differences between them. The word resilience is derived from the Latin terms resiliere or resilio for 'bounce' or 'rebound' [771] . The action of "bouncing back" characterises the basic meaning of resilience, which is a dynamical property that requires a shift in the system's core activities. In other words, network resilience is a concept describing networks' ability to retain its basic functions defined on network dynamics within a certain region and there is no requirement to stay in a specific fixed point, which is different from the concept of stability. Resilience was originally used in material science to describe the resistance of materials to physical shocks [772] , and widely used to characterize individual's ability to cope with adversity, trauma or other sources of stress [773, 767] . In 1973, Holling et al [4] define resilience as a measure of persistence of systems and their ability to absorb change and disturbance, which has become a popular concept being widely used in ecology. Later on, resilience has been adopted as a generic concept to describe the response to changes in systems from other fields, such as biology [371] , social science [518] , engineering [569] , etc. For most of these applications, resistance to perturbations and rate of recovery after their occurrence are considered the key aspects of resilience [21] . Based on the adaptive cycle that includes four phases: growth, consolidation, release, and reorganisation [774, 775] , a more general meaning of resilience was proposed [24, 17] , which is the capacity of socialecological systems to adapt and transform in response to unfamiliar, unexpected, and extreme shocks. Resilience is probably the broadest concept among the three concepts discussed in this section [767] , and there are three types of resilience: ecological resilience (or termed as system resilience) [4] , engineering resilience [21] and adaptive resilience [774, 24] . As discussed in Chapter. 2, ecological resilience is defined as the magnitude of disturbance that can be absorbed before the system shifts to an alternative stable state, and engineering resilience is the speed of return to the steady state held before the disturbance. Adaptive resilience is the capacity to remain productive and true to core purpose by adapting and transforming to changing circumstances [776, 23] . As we reviewed in the previous four sections, these three types of resilience have not only been applied to low-dimensional dynamical systems [28] to predict their response to changes, but also to high-dimensional networks [12] . In complex networks, network dynamics are the underlying mechanisms required for resilience analysis. Next, we review more studies on network dynamics. Network dynamics. Network dynamics describes how the entities evolve over time, for example, how the gene expression level changes in gene regulatory networks [777] ; how the specie abundance evolves during a time period [778] ; how many individuals are newly affected by or recovered [779] from a certain disease? Modelling such processes require determinations of equation forms and a set of parameters, which are not easy to achieve due to the complexity and unknown mechanisms within these processes. Thus, comparing to extensive studies on reconstructing networks' static structures [780] , there are much less research on modelling large scale networks' dynamics. In the following, we review the dynamical models of several large scale systems. Systems may exhibit various forms of nonlinear dynamics [781] , such as oscillation, spreading and bifurcation. The dynamic models of them involve different equation forms and different parameters. For example, the networked Stuart-Landau (SL) oscillators system [782, 783] can be described by the following coupled ordinary differential equations (ODEs): dz j dt = (α j + iΩ j − |z j | 2 )z j + σ N k=1 c k j (z k − z j ), (6.1) where z j and Ω j are the complex amplitude and the inherent frequency of the jth SL oscillator, and α j is its control parameter. Parameters σ and c i j describes the interactions between the jth and other SL oscillators. Figure 80 shows the (a) active and (b) inactive dynamics in an isolated oscillator. The dynamics in gene regulatory networks can be modelled as Michaelis-Menten equations [784, 785] where B is the rate constant, a is the level of selfregulation and the Hill coefficient h describes the level of interactions between genes. The spreading process can be modelled as a susceptible infected susceptible (SIS) model [786] dx i dt All these dynamic equations can be generalised by the following equation where the first term W(x i (t)) describes the selfdynamics of x i , and the second term captures the interactions between the component i and its neighbours. Barzel et al. [242] develop a self-consistent theory of dynamical perturbations to uncover the universal characteristics in a broad range of dynamical processes. By analysing the macroscopically accessible distributions of the following dynamical measures: the correlation G, impact I, stability S , the propagation and cascade dynamics, the system's universality class could be determined even without knowledge of the analytical formulation of the dynamics within the system. Despite the difficulties in uncovering the complex and nonlinear mechanisms of network dynamics, the accumulations of massive data and rapid development of computational methods make it possible to identify and predict dynamic models directly from empirical data. Takens [787] proved that the underlying dynamical system can be faithfully reconstructed from time series under fairly general conditions, establishing a one-to-one correspondence between the reconstructed and the true but unknown dynamical systems [49] . Wang et al. [50] and Yang et al. [51] develop a framework based on compressive sensing, which is able to predict the exact forms of both system equations and parameter functions. Recently, Barzel et al. [52] develop a method to infer the microscopic dynamics of a complex system from observations of its response to external perturbations, enabling the constructions of nonlinear pairwise dynamics that are guaranteed to recover the observed behaviour. Given a complex networked system with N components, whose state x i (t), (i = 1, ...N) are govern by the following ODEs A i j M(x i (t), x j (t)), (6.5) where M 0 (x i (t)) describe the ith component's selfdynamics, and M(x i (t), x j (t)) captures the impact of neighbour j on the state of i. A i j is the adjacency matrix. Factoring the interaction term as M(x i (t), x j (t)) = M 1 (x i (t))M 2 (x j (t)), the system's dynamics is uniquely characterised by three independent equations m = (M 0 (x), M 1 (x), M 2 (x)), (6.6) which is a point in the model space M. For systems of unknown microscopic dynamics, the challenge is to infer the appropriate model by identifying M 0 (x), M 1 (x), and M 2 (x) that accurately describe the system's observable behaviour X. Define a subspace M(X) ∈ M comprising all models m that can be validated against X. Barzel et al. [52] proposed a method to link the observed system response to the leading terms of m. It defines the exact boundaries of M(X) rather than a specific model m, providing the most general class of dynamics that can be used to describe the observed responses captured by two quantities: the transient response T and the asymptotic response G. By applying to both numerical data of gene regulatory dynamic model and empirical data of cell biology and human activity, the effective dynamic model can predict the system's behaviour and provide crucial insights into its inner workings. In summary, the prediction of resilience in large scale networks have been restricted by the analytical tools and the unclear internal network dynamics for a long time. With the developed general frameworks, such as the dimension-deduction method proposed in Ref. [12] , and the methods for inferring network dynamics as we reviewed above, more and more studies could be carried out to predict the resilience in complex networks in future. The word "stability" is derived from the Latin term stabilis, which means firm or steadfast. In a dynamical system, stability defines the system's ability to stay in an equilibrium state. Stability has a rich history in ecology [788] . There, stability was first defined as the constancy of a given attribute, regardless of the presence of disturbing factors [789, 790] . For instance, stable ecological communities were those with relatively constant population sizes and compositions [791] . Later, the definition of stability has been expanded to describe other properties of ecosystems, such as the ability to maintain ecological functions despite disturbances [792] , or the ability to return to the initial equilibrium state [4, 788, 793] . This led to multiple definitions and interpretations of stability, and overlaps with the concept of resilience [794, 795, 796, 767] . For example, for systems with alternative stable states, one concept of stability depends on the number of alternative stable states: more stable systems are those with fewer stable states [788] . Another concept of stability describes the ease with which systems can switch between alternative stable states, with more stable systems having higher barriers to switching [788] . The latter concept is quite the same as the meaning of resilience. Some literatures even treat stability as a multifaceted notion and resilience is one component of stability [797] . Since resilience itself is a multidimensional concept, integrating persistence, resistance and the ability to recover/adapt, we trace back to the original definitions of these two concepts [4] and point out that resilience and stability describe distinct properties of systems. The concept "resilience" concentrate on the boundaries to the domain of attraction while "stability" focus on equilibrium states. On one hand, a system can be very resilient and still fluctuate greatly, i.e. have low stability. For instance, pest systems are highly variable in space and time; as open systems, they are much affected by dispersal and therefore have a high resilience [798] . On the other hand, a stable system may have low resilience. For example, the commercial fishery systems of the Great Lakes are quite sensitive to disruption by man, for they represent climatically buffered, fairly homogeneous and self-contained systems with relatively low variability and hence high stability and low resilience [4] . As shown in Fig. 81 , there are different ways of stability analysis. On one side, nonlinear dynamical systems are usually modelled as coupled ordinary differential equations, and the nonlinear stability analysis can be realised by observing how the states of variables evolve with time after perturbations. If the system could go back to the original state before perturbations, then this system is stable, and the faster the recovery is, the more stable the system is. On the other side, system's stability can be analysed in a linear way, that is, by studying the eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix of the networked system [799, 800] . The largest real part of the eigenvalues determines whether, and how fast, the system will return after perturbation [801] . If this quantity is negative, the system is stable; more negative values indicate that the system returns to stability more quickly. The imaginary parts of the eigenvalues predict the extent of oscillations in species densities during a return to equilibrium: Larger imaginary components predict more frequent oscillations [802] . Allesina et al. [801] proposed analytic stability criteria for complex ecosystems including different kinds of interactions: predator-prey, mutualistic and competitive. Even the stability criteria are proposed especially for ecosystems, they are widely applicable, because they hold for any system of differential equations [801] . Communities that return to their previous densities after perturbation are classified as stable, those that return to their equilibrium faster are categorized as more stable, and those that continue to diverge from the equilibrium are considered unstable [801] . (D) Linear stability analysis uses the eigenvalues' real (Re) and imaginary (Im) parts. Source: Figure from  The term 'robustness' is derived from the Latin term Quercus Robur that means oak, which was the symbol of strength and longevity in the ancient world. In a system, robustness characterises its ability to withstand failures and perturbations without loss of functions. For instance, biologists define robustness as the ability of living systems to maintain specific functionalities despite unpredictable perturbations [803] . Particularly, in network science, robustness is a concept related to the network's static topology, measuring its ability to maintain its connectivity when a fraction of nodes (links) is damaged [40, 804] . Mathematically, the robustness in a network is modeled as a reverse percolation process [805, 806, 807] . Percolation theory models the process of randomly placing pebbles to a square lattice with probability p, and predicts the critical value p c where a large cluster (called 'percolating cluster') emerges. At the critical point p c , a phase transition appears: many small clusters coalesce, forming a percolating cluster that percolates the whole lattice. For analysing the robustness of a network, we randomly remove a fraction f of nodes from the network and observe how the largest connected component size changes. When f is small, the node removal brings little damage to the network and a largest connected component continuously exists in the network. Once f reaches a critical point f c , the largest connected component vanishes, as shown in Fig. 82 . The robustness of a network is usually either characterised by the value of the critical threshold f c analysed using percolation theory or defined as the integrated size of the largest connected cluster during the entire attack process [647, 769] , which is For a random network with arbitrary degree distributions P(k), the largest connected component [808] exists if κ = k 2 k > 2, (6.7) which is called the Molloy-Reed criterion [809, 1] . The random removal of an f fraction of nodes leads to the changes in the degree distribution and parameter κ. Once the parameter κ < 2, the largest connected component disappears and the network is fragmented into many disconnected components. Based on the Molloy-Reed criterion, the critical percolation threshold follows where k 2 and k are uniquely determined by the degree distribution P(k). For the an Erdős-Rényi (ER) network with average degree being k , the critical threshold is f ER c = 1 − 1/ k . For a scale-free network with degree distribution P(k) ∼ k −γ , the threshold f SF c → 1 as N → ∞ if 2 < γ < 3, which means that we have to remove all the nodes in order to fragment such network [1] . For example, the physical structure of the Internet (γ ≈ 2.5) is impressively robust, with p c > 0.99. The study of the robustness of complex systems can help us understand the real-world, for example, help understand why some mutations lead to diseases and others do not in biology and medicine, and enable us to make the infrastructures we use in everyday life more efficient and more robust. In real-world, systems are not isolate, but interdependent or interact with one another. Take the interactions between systems into consideration, many studies have been carried out to study the robustness in interdependent networks [14, 810, 811, 812, 813, 814, 815, 816, 648, 619, 817, 818] , interconnected networks [819, 820, 649] , multi-layered networks [821, 822, 823, 824, 825] , multiplex networks [826] , and a network of networks [647, 827, 828, 829] . In these systems, networks interact with each other and exhibit structural and dynamical features that differ from those observed in isolated networks. For example, Buldyrev et al. [14] developed an analytical framework based on the generating function formalism [830, 831] , describing the cascading failures in two interdependent networks, and finding a first order discontinuous phase transition, which is dramatically different from the second order continuous phase transition found in isolated networks. Parshani et al. [810] studied a model more close to real systems, two partially interdependent networks, finding that the percolation transition changes from a first order to a second order at a certain critical coupling as the coupling strength decreases. Gao et al. developed an analytical framework to study the percolation of a tree-like network formed by n interdependent networks (tree-like NON) [646, 647] , discovering that while for n = 1 the percolation transition is a second order, but for any n > 1 where cascading failures occur, it is a first order (abrupt) transition. Liu et al. [817] find hybrid phase transition in the interdependent directed networks. The robustness of networks is also related to the failure mechanism. The studies reviewed above mostly focus on random failure, while in real scenarios, initial failures are mostly not random but due to targeted attack on important hubs (nodes with high degree) or occur to low degree nodes since important hubs are purposely protected [832] . Single real networks, like Internet, are vulnerable to targteted attacks [607, 833] . The simultaneous removal of several hubs will break any network. For coupled networks, Huang et al. [832] proposed a mathematical framework for understanding the robustness of fully interdependent networks under targeted attacks, which was later extended to targeted attacks on partially interdependent networks by Dong et al. [834] . Huang et al. [832] and Dong et al. [834] developed a general technique that uses the random attack solution to map the solution onto the targeted attack problem in interdependent networks. Furthermore, Dong et al. [828] extended the study of targeted attacks on high degree nodes in a pair of interdependent networks to the study of network of networks, and find that the robustness of networks of networks can be improved by protecting important hubs. In most studies of network robustness, networks are treated as static and unweighted [1, 835, 14] . However, such assumption is not applicable to real networks, which are usually dynamical and weighted. For example, a traffic network is always topologically connected but maybe dynamically failed, since the flux could be zero. In addition, the link weight is also very important to network's function. Take the interactions between clownfish and sea anemone for example, even if there are clownfishes and sea anemones in the same pool and there are possible interactions between them, most clownfishes could not find sea anemones when the water is seriously polluted, indicating a very low weight of their interactions. Loosing the protection from sea anemones, clownfishes may be eaten quickly, and sea anemones could also die without the food brought by clownfishes. Although there are some studies on "dynamical robustness" of networks [783, 836, 837] , the dynamics are mainly limited to oscillations which are more related to synchronization [782] . Thus, resilience is a broader concept for analyzing the dynamical changes in networks' response to perturbations. In summary, robustness of a network is its ability to maintain its statical topological integrity under node/link failures. The topological integrity of a network is usually characterized by its connectivities, such as the diameter [838] or the size of the largest connected component. Resilience has long been recognized as a defining property of many dynamical complex systems [4] , and network resilience has already become a new emerging sub-field in network science [12] . In this report, we have reviewed several primary theoretical tools and empirical studies to analyze the resilience of both low-and high-dimensional systems. To quantify the resilience of a complex system, we first need to uncover its dynamics, which are usually modeled as ordinary differential equations. For low-dimensional networks, we could detect their attractors by calculating the fixed points of the equations [73, 91] , and use the quasi-potential landscape to show the trajectory of transitions between different attractors [395, 321] . For high-dimensional networks, in addition to the traditional linearization method [36, 33] , dimension-reduction method based on meanfield theory has been verified as a powerful tool to predict the tipping points [12, 54] ; or we could use the changes in network structure as early warning signals for the regime shifts [458, 472] . We have incorporated the discussed above primary theoretical tools into the discussion of their applications and extensively reviewed state-of-the-art progress while analyzing the resilience of ecological, biological, social, and infrastructure systems. A series of topics, such as the alternative stable states (also called multiple stable states), regime shifts, feedback loops, and early warning signals, have been illustrated in both mathematical models and empirical studies. We also emphasized the impact of the network on resilience. We pointed out that network robustness and stability are distinct concepts from network resilience, with network robustness focusing on network topology, stability being a property of system with a degree of fluctuation around a specific fixed point, while resilience being a broader concept with withstand, recover and adaptation being its three essential elements. Given the rapid advances in the resilience of complex networks, we have discussed the results from both theoretical and empirical studies that will likely stay with us for many years to come. As for any emerging field, there is a large body of relevant questions and upcoming developments that may further increase the relevance of the discussed frameworks. Next, we highlight several research topics being addressed to achieve a comprehensive understanding of the resilience of networked systems. 7.2.1. Uncovering network dynamics form data on system evolution As we discussed in Chapter 6, network dynamics is a prerequisite for resilience analysis. Due to the complexity and often unknown mechanisms operating within complex networks, it is difficult to determine the equation forms, and a set of parameters and mechanistic models are rare for complex systems. Thanks to the accumulation of massive data, capturing the detailed node-level dynamics of biological, social and technological systems has become possible, which could help us peek into the inner mechanisms of complex systems. It has also become trendy to develop tools for discovering the model of network dynamic directly from data [52, 839] , or just network topology [840, 841] even without a mechanistic model. Previous studies have shown that a complex system's response to perturbations is driven by a small number of universal mechanisms [242] . Thus, the authors also proposed a method to infer the microscopic dynamics of a complex system from observations of its response to external perturbations [52] , allowing us to construct an effective dynamic model. By separating the contribution of network topology from the dynamics, Barzel et al. [840, 841] developed general tools to translate a network's topology into predictions of its observed propagation patterns. Despite these excellent efforts, tools for uncovering real dynamics for a specific real system are still lacking. Firstly, these studies assume that the nodes in the same network follow the same dynamical pattern, while in a real network, nodes may have very different dynamical behavior. For example, in a protein interaction network, two proteins may be connected because of simple physical binding/separation or due to the fact they participate in the same metabolic reaction to produce other compounds [842] . Secondly, the dynamic models discovered in these studies are all ordinary differential equations with time being the argument. While other variables, such as spatial distance, could be a vital driving force for dynamic changes. Hence, a more general model represented by partial differential equations may be needed. Last, the time scale for each component may vary in a vast range from seconds to months, which brings significant challenges to dynamic modeling. A feasible way for considering all these complexities is to combine enough prior knowledge about the real system and the data-driven dynamic model discovering methods. Despite the extensive studies on network resilience and related topics, such as alternative stable states, regime shifts, and feedback loops, there are far more theoretical studies than empirical studies. For example, comparing to the plenty of mathematical models showing the alternative stable states [28] , but there are a few empirical studies, especially those conducted in the wild world instead of experiments in laboratories. The reason is that real networks are usually too complex and interconnected for real world experimentation. There are always gaps between theoretical models and real systems, such as the universal dimension-deduction method for predicting the resilience of complex networks is based on the assumption that there are no negative interactions in the networks [12] . The remaining challenges in this field include bridging the gaps between the theoretical model and real networks and applying the resilience theory to various realworld systems, such as traffic networks, power grid, human mobility network [843, 844] , ecological and biological systems. For these real-world systems, it is crucial to develop strategies to improve their resilience and prevent collapse. Especially, nowadays there are massive data on these systems. Predicting the tipping point in these systems directly on data rather than models remains an open problem. Besides, previous studies treat the structure and dynamics independently to see how the structure perturbations affect the system's resilience. However, there is a "adaptive cycle" in real-world systems [23] , with which the system will adjust its dynamics to compensate for structure perturbations. It remains to be a challenge to reveal the interplay between structure and dynamics. It is increasingly clear that networks in the real world are not isolated but interdependent with one another. For example, for diverse critical infrastructures, the electric power network provides power for pumping and for control systems of the water network. In turn, the water network provides water for cooling and emissions reduction of the power network, the fuel network provides fuel for generators for electric power network and the electric power network provides power to pump oil for fuel network [769] . A set of networks may couple together, forming multilayer networks [845] , or networks of networks [846] . As discussed in Chapter 6, studies focusing mainly on the structural integrity and robustness have been carried out already [14, 825] . In contrast, resilience is a property related to network dynamics, and these networks may be characterized by different time scales and structural patterns, which makes the analysis of resilience of networks of networks extremely difficult. Early attempts have focused on specific dimension-reduction methods for ecological mutualistic networks [54] or purely numerical studies [845] . Despite these efforts, it remains a challenge to develop a general framework for analyzing the resilience of networks of networks, which could trigger a series of future research. Most real networks are incomplete due to the complexity and uncovered knowledge about the original systems, such as hidden relationships in social networks [847] , unmeasured connections in biological networks [848] , and adaptively changing interactions between species in ecological networks [849] . It is essential to develop tools to infer the original network structure and dynamics from incomplete information. Even a branch in network science, called link prediction, which aims to uncover the hidden relationships [848, 850] , could move a step towards this goal. It still would be difficult to achieve this goal fully. The more important challenge is that real complete networks are usually too large to handle. For example, the social network, Facebook, has attracted more than 2.5 billion users 2019. Hence, an inverse problem has attracted much attention, that is, given a huge real network, how can we derive a representative sample [851] ? Graph sampling is a technique to create a small but representative sample (an incomplete network) by picking a subset of nodes and links from the original network [852] . Serval sampling methods, such as random walk [853] , breadth-first sampling [854] , and scaling-down sampling [851] , has been proposed for graph sampling and has been proved to be able to keep the network scale small while capturing specific properties of the original network. Unfortunately, all the current research about graph sampling mainly consider the topological properties, ignoring the nonlinear dynamics of networks. A compre-hensive analytical framework is needed to predict the true dynamics behavior and resilience of the original system using the incomplete network. This framework must contain an unbiased graph sampling method that preserves the dynamics of the sampled nodes experienced by nodes in the original network. It could facilitate other related studies on large-scale dynamical networks, such as the controllability analysis [48, 855] and studies of coevolution spreading dynamics [856] . Based on such a framework, future studies on how to predict the dynamics and resilience of incomplete networks of networks could be another essential branch of network resilience. A reflection of our ultimate understanding of a complex system is our ability to control its behavior [48] . It requires an accurate model for network topology and dynamics and powerful tools for analyzing the network's resilience. Early related studies on controlling complex networks have been focused on the controllability of linear and nonlinear systems [756, 857] or controlling collective behavior in complex networks [858] . The latter studies ignored the strength of interactions between dynamical components, making them unsuitable for controlling network resilience here. As discussed in Chapter. 2, Jiang et al. [239] investigate how to manage or control tipping points in real-world complex and nonlinear dynamical networks in ecology, by altering the way that species extinction occurs: from massive extinction of all species to the gradual extinction of individual species, so that the occurrence of global extinction is substantially delayed. It is realized by merely fixing the abundances of some species, and the goal is to delay the tipping point. Controlling network resilience is extremely difficult but deserves our efforts, because it is critical for infrastructural networks, with real and immediate need to control the dynamics of information flow, and for social and organizational networks, with the ongoing need to understand the control principles of adversary networks. We could move towards such a goal by developing theory for quantifying the safe operating space [859] , and proposing strategies to enhance network resilience and recoverability in networks and multilayer networks. The strategies could include node state intervention, addition/diminution of links, rewiring, and weight changes. The resilience control and optimization represent a new direction in network science, offering new avenues to control the dynamical behavior of many real-world systems. 
