b2af37f8a7b86dfcfdfff4c5b614a91ca49f2d03
IL IL IL IL ILTS Officers and Council TS Officers and Council TS Officers and Council TS Officers and Council TS Officers and Council President President Elect Secretary-Treasurer Past President
Federico  Villamil Fdn  Favaloro Transplante  Hepatology Buenos  Aires Argentina   Sue  Mcdiarmid Timothy M Mccashland Michael F Sorrell Jacques  Belghiti Andrew  Burroughs Royal  Free Hospital  London Ronald W Busuttil Michael A Ramsay Juan  Rodes Satoru  Todo John J Council   Fung William T Merritt Johns  Hopkins Hospital  Baltimore Maryland Peter Neuhaus 


Background: Results of split liver transplantation (SLT) with pediatric donors have not been specifically reported, whereas the use of donors aged 10 years or less is currently not recommended. Patients and methods: From October 1997 to August 2003, on a total of 186 split liver procedures performed by the Bergamo transplant team alone or in collaboration with other liver transplant centers, 39 (21%) were carried out using donors aged < 15 years. In all cases the procedure generated a left lateral segment (segments II-III [LLS] ) and an extended right graft (segments I+IV-VIII [ERG] ). In 3 cases, no suitable recipient was found for the ERG and only the LLS was transplanted. Criteria for splitting were donor hemodynamic stability with normal liver function, and dimensional matching based on donor-to-recipient weight ratio. In all but one case the celiac trunk was maintained with LLS. Recipient population included 47 children receiving 39 LLS and 8 ERG and 28 adults transplanted with ERG. SLT were performed with 16 donors ≤ 10 years of age (mean weight 31 ± 9 kg) and with 23 between 11 and 15 years (mean weight 57 ± 11 kg). There were no differences among groups in pre-transplant patient status, cause of liver failure, primary or secondary SLT, and procurement parameters. Results: median recipients follow up was 19 months . Two-year patient and graft survival are reported in the table. Arterial complications (AC) occurred in 6% of the patients receiving split liver graft from pediatric donors (8% in the ≤ 10 years donors group, and 5% in the 10-15 years donors group). Recipient of LLS developed AC in 3% of the cases, while ERG recipients had AC in 12% of the cases. The incidence of surgical and infectious complications was also similar among groups. Conclusion: the use of pediatric donor for SLT allows to obtain good results, comparable to those obtained with SLT using adult donors.The similar incidence of AC among patients receiving LLS or ERG further supports the policy of maintaining the celiac trunk with LLS. Background/Aim: Biliary anastomotic complications or chronic rejection after liver transplantation may result in bile duct stenosis leading to liver graft failure and may require re-transplantation. We fabricated an artificial bile duct that would allow replacement of the native bile duct through tissue engineering techniques. Materials and Methods: Bone marrow cells taken from the swine were seeded onto the interior of tubular scaffolds of bioabsorbable polymer. These were scaffolds made from a porous copolymer of polycaprolactone and polylactic acid and reinforced with polyglycolic acid fibers. Hybrid pigs served as recipients of the bile duct organoid units (BDOU) fabricated by tissue engineering techniques. One hour after seeding the scaffolds with bone marrow cells, the bile duct organoid units were transplanted into each of the pigs from which bone marrow cells had been collected. Under general anesthesia, the animals were laparotomized and the common bile duct was cut around the confluence with the cystic duct. The duodenal end of the common bile duct was ligated, while the hepatic stump of the native common bile duct was anastomosed to the BDOU. Then, a hole, 5 mm in diameter, was made in the descending duodenum, to which was sutured the remaining end of the BDOU. The neo-bile duct was recovered 6 months after transplantation and subjected to macroscopy and histology. Results: Three recipient pigs survived up to the sixth month after transplantation, when they were sacrificed and their neo-bile ducts recovered. They gained weight after operation with no evidence of jaundice. Biochemistry performed just before sacrifice was within the normal range for all parameters examined in all three animals. On macroscopy, the transplanted BDOU with a grayish white surface were similar to the native common bile duct in morphology. On histology, the neo-bile duct was almost similar to the native common bile duct in morphology, and its portion possibly corresponding to bile duct epithelial cells was positive for cytokeratine19 just as the native bile duct was. Conclusion:The tubular BDOU of bioabsorbable polymer seeded with autologous bone marrow cells grew to form a shape similar to the native bile duct in 6 months after transplantation while functioning effectively as a bile duct. The results show that the artificial bile duct thus fabricated can be a substitute for the native bile duct. (LT) . Recurrent HCV is the leading cause of graft failure in these patients. It has recently been suggested that recurrent HCV may be more severe in patients who undergo living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) as opposed to transplantation with a graft from a deceased donor (DDLT). In our LT program, all patients with chronic HCV undergo prospective protocol liver biopsy (LBX) at periodic intervals to assess for fibrosis progression and do not receive interferon therapy until they reach Ishak stage 4 (early bridging fibrosis). This has allowed us to compare fibrosis progression associated with recurrent HCV in LDLT and DDLT. METHODS: Between 7/1998 and 12/2001 53 patients with well documented chronic HCV underwent DDLT and 23 LDLT. Primary immunosupression was similar in both groups and consisted of either cyclosporine, tacrolimus or sirulimus plus Cellcept and Prednisone (P). All patients remained on P for at least 6 months before this was discontinued. Both DDLT and LDLT patients underwent LBX 6, 12, 24 and 36 months following LT. Additional LBX were performed as needed to evaluate for abnormal liver chemistries. RESULTS: The LDLT and DDLT groups were well matched for age (47 yrs), race (77% Caucasian) and sex (82% male). Mean follow-up in both groups has now exceeded 3 years. CTP and MELD were significantly (p < 0.05) lower in LDLT vs DDLT. After 3 years graft survival was 76 and 89% in LDLT and DDLT (p=NS); patient survival was 79 and 91% (p=NS) respectively. The degree of fibrosis gradually worsened over time in both groups. However, no significant difference was observed between LDLT and DDLT groups. After 3 years mean fibrosis score was 0.9 and 1.9 in LDLT and DDLT groups respectively (p=NS). 50 and 47% of LDLT and DDLT recipients had developed portal fibrosis; 7 and 21% developed bridging fibrosis (p=NS). No pts had developed cirrhosis in either group. Acute rejection was observed in 14 and 21% of LDLT and DDLT (p=NS) . No significant difference in HCV RNA was observed in the two groups over time. CONCLUSION: Progressive fibrosis secondary to recurrent HCV does not occur more rapidly in patients who undergo LDLT compared to DDLT. Recurrent hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a serious problem post-transplant. Side effects of interferon-ribavirin combination therapy limit the sustained viral response achievable in a given HCV patient population. Coupled ribavirin/hemoglobin offers the potential of a therapy with improved safety and efficacy by targeting the delivery of ribavirin to key tissues (hepatocytes and macrophages) which possess receptors for binding and internalization of hemoglobin-haptoglobin complexes. This study was designed to evaluate the effect of a ribavirin-hemoglobin conjugate (RBV-Hb) in a mouse model of viral hepatitis induced by the coronavirus, MHV-3. Ribavirin was covalently coupled to highly purified hemoglobin HbAo at a mean molar drug ratio of 8:1 (ribavirin:hemoglobin). RBV-Hb was evaluated for retention of haptoglobin binding and cellular uptake in vitro, as well as the ability to recover bioactive ribavirin following enzymatic cleavage from RBV-Hb. The RBV-Hb-treated group was compared to control infected untreated and Ribavirin-treated groups for survival, clinical behavior, viral titer, biochemistry and liver histopathology. RBV-Hb was specifically internalized by cultured human and mouse hepatic cells but not by control non-hepatic cells. Ribavirin enzymatically cleaved from RBV-Hb retained in vitro bioactivity similar to unmodified ribavirin. Untreated and MHV-3 infected mice all developed clinical and biochemical signs of acute viral hepatitis and died by day 4 post infection (ALT max 7000 IU/L). Livers recovered from untreated and infected mice showed greater than 90% necrosis. In contrast, survival was enhanced in both Ribavirin and RBV-Hb treated and MHV-3 infected mice with a marked reduction in biochemical (ALT max 1000 IU/L) and histologic evidence of hepatic necrosis (<10%). Clinically, RBV-Hb treated mice behaved normally at all time points, in contrast to Ribavirin treated mice which developed lethargy and abnormal fur texture compatible with drug toxicity or ongoing viral infection. A beneficial effect of RBV-Hb was shown on the course of MHV-3 infection as demonstrated by prolonged survival, improved clinical behavior, and a reduction in biochemical and histologic disease. [Background] Development of de novo autoimmune hepatitis (de novo AIH) has been recently reported in patients with no evidence of autoimmune hepatitis before liver transplantation. Clinicopathological features of patients with de novo AIH have not been fully characterized. [Methods] Between 1990 and 2002, 671 patients who underwent liver transplantation in our Center survived more than one year. 79 patients developed chronic hepatitis (interface hepatitis with portal fibrosis). Among these 79, 19 patients fulfilled the criteria of definite or probable AIH according to the International AIH Group Criteria. Demographic data of HLA of both the recipients and the donors, all the episode biopsies after transplantation (n=103) were reviewed. [Results] The 19 patients (5 males and 14 females; the median age at transplantation was 9.4 years {0.7-26}) developed chronic hepatitis at a mean of 4.6 years (0.5 -10.5) after transplantation. Nine were definite AIH cases and 10 were probable cases. Autoantibodies and abnormally high level of serum IgG were found in 79% and 57% of the patients respectively. In most cases, basic immunosuppression was obtained with low-dose tacrolimus and no patients received azathioprine before development of de novo AIH. All were responsive to initial steroid therapy. Only 26% of the patients had HLA DR4, and none of them revealed HLA DR3. The most common findings before diagnosis of de novo AIH was acute cellular rejection (ACR), which was seen in 68% of the patients (control group; 49%). ACR more than 6 months after transplantation (late ACR) was seen more frequently than control group (42% vs. 17%, p<0.01). The interval between the diagnosis of de novo AIH and the last late ACR was 2.4 +/-1.5 years (mean +/-S.D.). Centrilobular fibrosis (CF) was demonstrated in all but one case (95%) at the diagnosis of de novo AIH, and 63% of the patients showed CF at the median of 1.1 years (1.5 months -4.9 years) after transplantation. [Conclusion] Female predominance and steroid responsiveness were noted in de novo AIH patients, similarly to conventional AIH, but lower frequency of HLA DR3/DR4 and preceding CF were unique findings seen in de novo AIH. Histological features such as late ACR and CF may be risk factors for the development of de novo AIH. Purpose. We previously reported the incidence of myocardial injury during liver transplantation and the poor correlation of this event with the results of preoperative dobutamine stress echocardiography. We have now investigated the association between specific preoperative cardiovascular risk factors, intraoperative hemodynamic instability and intraoperative myocardial injury in the same population. Methods. 117 adult patients undergoing orthotopic liver transplantation were studied. Preoperative risk factors noted included age, gender, diabetes, hypertension, smoking, obesity, arrhythmia and known coronary artery disease. The prevalence of intraoperative hemodynamic instability was noted. Hemodynamic instability was defined as the occurrence of either significant arterial hypotension (systolic pressure <80mmHg for >10 consecutive minutes), use of a vasopressor infusion, cardiac arrest or significant arrhythmia. Troponin was measured postoperatively in all patients to assess myocardial injury. Statistical comparisons were by Fisher's exact test or Student's t-test as appropriate. Results and conclusion. Postoperative troponin elevation occurred in 14 patients (12%). Hemodynamic instability occurred in 24 patients. 9/14 patients with elevated postoperative troponin displayed hemodynamic instability (4 hypotension, 2 vasopressor infusion, 2 cardiac arrest, 1 new arrhythmia) compared to 15/103 patients who did not have troponin elevation (14 hypotension, 1 vasopressor infusion). This difference was statistically significant, p<0.001. No pre-operative risk factor was significantly associated with postoperative troponin elevation. We conclude that myocardial damage during liver transplantation is associated with intraoperative hemodynamic changes; no preoperative risk factor we assessed identified those at risk. Methods. Vasotrac radial artery pressure measurements were compared with simultaneous invasive radial artery pressures (contralateral arm) in 14 patients undergoing liver transplantation. Correlation between the two methods was calculated and a Bland-Altman analysis performed to assess bias and limits of agreement (± 2sd). Results and Conclusions. 6468 simultaneous measurements were made over a duration of 1.5-7.5hrs per case. The study was terminated prior to the end of the case in 2 patients, one secondary to a cool finger distal to the device, the other to significant pressure markings. No adverse sequelae were noted. Vasotrac recordings became unobtainable for some period during 2 cases. For mean arterial pressure 57% of Vasotrac measurements were within 10% of direct arterial measurement. Correlation was 0.81. Vasotrac bias was +5.9mmHg, limits of agreement were ±19.6mmHg. For systolic arterial pressure 65% of Vasotrac measurements were withing 10% of direct arterial measurement. Correlation was 0.78. Vasotrac bias was +7.6mmHg, limits of agreement ±25mmHg. For diastolic arterial pressure 57% of Vasotrac measurements were within 10% of direct arterial measurement. Correlation was 0.81. Vasotrac bias was +3.3mmHg, limits of agreement ±15mmHg. We conclude that the Vasotrac is not adequately accurate to substitute for direct pressure monitoring during liver transplantation. Transplantation of liver with severe steatosis may result in primary nonfunction (PNF) of the graft. To date, protective strategy is still rare. As previously decribed by our group, human recombinant hepatocyte growth factor (hrHGF) has a cytoprotective effect on fatty liver during cold preservation in rats. Here we further examined the effects of hrHGF on survival and graft function in rat fatty liver transplantation. Methods Severe steatosis was induced by a 15-day choline-deficient diet in male Lewis rats. The fatty graft was orthotopically transplanted in normal male Lewis rat after 12 hr cold preservation in UW solution. In the HGF group, donor rats were pretreated with a single bolus of systemic injection of hrHGF (100µg/rat), and 30µg of hrHGF was also added to the perfusion/preservation solution. Animal survival, graft function and morphological changes were compared with those of the untreated group. Liver cell apoptosis was detected by TUNEL stain and liver regeneration was evaluated by BrdU stain at 2 hrs after reperfusion of the liver graft. Results One-week survival was significantly improved in the HGF group compared with the untreated group (83% vs. 33%, p<0.01, n=18/group). AST, ALT and LDH levels in the graft rinse effluent at the end of cold preservation and serum ALT and LDH at 2 hrs after reperfusion were significantly low in the HGF group. Although there was no significant difference in hyaluronic acid (HA) level in the rinse effluents at the end of preservation between the two groups, exogenous HA uptake rate (HAUR) at 2 hrs after reperfusion was improved in the HGF group (0.62±0.05 vs. 0.79±0.11, p<0.05). Morphologically, sinusoidal endothelial cells (SECs) and hepatocytes were well preserved as observed by transmission electron microscope in the HGF group compared with the control. hrHGF pretreatment also significantly reduced the (SEC) apoptotic index (1.65±0.60% vs. 4.90±1.25%, p<0.01) and increased BrdU incorporation index ( 2.07±0.62% vs. 0.06±0.04%, p<0.01) at 2 hrs after reperfusion. Conclusions hrHGF prevented the death of PNF in steatotic liver transplantation by attenuating preservation-reperfusion injury and facilitating recovery of the graft, probably through its antiapoptotic properties and acceleration of liver regeneration at early stage after transplantation. Operational tolerance {graft acceptance in an immunosuppression (IS) -free environment} after LDLT occurs in a substantial number (approximately 40%) of the patients by our elective protocol 72,449,2001) . There is, nevertheless, no reliable parameter to monitor and select patients who may discontinue IS without a risk of rejection. To identify such parameters, we analyzed systemically liver transplant (Tx) patients exhibiting operational tolerance for the profiles of peripheral blood lymphocytes. Methods. Seventeen liver Tx patients (Gr-tol) regarded as tolerant were enrolled in this study. FACS analysis was performed to determine the phenotype of peripheral blood lymphocytes. As controls, twenty-four age-matched volunteers with normal liver function (Gr-vol) were analyzed. Results. An increase was observed in the percentages of B cells, CD8 + T cells, CD4 + CD25 high+ cells and Vd1gdT cells in peripheral blood lymphocytes from Gr-tol, compared with those from Gr-vol (p<0.01, p=0.14, p<0.05, p<0.01, respectively). On the other hand, the percentages of CD4 + T cells, NK cells, NKT cells, and V2gdT cells were decreased in Gr-tol, compared with those in p<0.05, p<0.05, p<0.01, respectively) . There was no significant difference between the two groups with respect to the percentages of pan-T cells, total CD4 + CD25 + cells and ab / gd T cells (NS, respectively) . The similar tendency was found in the absolute number of each lymphocyte phenotype. Conclusion. Present results revealed several intriguing features of peripheral blood lymphocyte subsets in patients exhibiting operational tolerance after LDLT. Although the contribution of those subsets to the tolerant state remains elusive, the results may provide clues for reliable indicators of tolerance after human liver Tx. Purpose: Ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI) to the liver occurs frequently during hepatectomies and is unavoidable during liver transplantation. The goal of this study was to determine whether mild and clinically acceptable hypothermia could provide a protective effect against IRI in a warm ischemia rat model. Methods: Male lean Zucker rats (Weight: 303 ± 31 grams, Age: 10-13 weeks old) were subject to 75 minutes of warm ischemia with reperfusion of the left and median lobes (70% partial ischemia) under isoflurane anesthesia. Control rats were carefully maintained with a body temperature of 37.1 ± 0.14 ° Cusing heat lamps and warming pads. Experimental rats were exposed to ambient temperature and allowed to cool spontaneously to a core temperature of 33.4 ± 0.21 °C just before reperfusion of the liver. Survival rates were compared after 24 hours of reperfusion and blood and liver tissue of surviving animals were harvested for histological and biochemical analysis. Results: All mildly hypothermic rats survived in good general condition (n=5). In contrast, 1 of 6 control rat died within 24 hours and rats that survived were poor health condition. Histological analysis of liver tissue revealed significant necrosis in the control rats while hypothermic rats exhibited only mild histological changes. Serum AST and ALT levels at 24 hours were significantly higher in the control rats compared to the experimental group (AST: 15,113 ± 4,336 vs. 1,234 ± 980, ALT: 5,884 ± 2,063 vs. 714 ± 765, all p<0.01). Conclusion: Mild hypothermia achieved by exposure to ambient temperatures during surgery was sufficient to provide significant protection against IRI in a clinically relevant in vivo rat model. The efficacy of Highly Active Anti-Retroviral Treatment (HAART) leads to consider LT in HIV patients. We evaluated 10 HIV-positive patients transplanted during the last 4 years. The chart of 10 HIV patients aged from 34 to 49 years transplanted from 2000 was collected in two centres. Chronic HCV and HBV co-infection was present in 2; chronic HCV in 5 and chronic HBV in one. Nine patients received HAART before transplantation. Patients were transplanted for fulminant hepatic failure due to HAART toxicity in 2 and for chronic end stage liver disease in 8.Cadaveric graft was transplanted in 9 and right liver from living donor in one. CD4 + cell count was > 200 cells/mm 3 in 8 and HIV viral load was undetectable in 7 patients. Antirejection immunosuppression was begun within the first 24 h after transplantation with tacrolimus (FK506) and one or more of the following: corticosteroids, mycophenolate mofetil and azatiopirine. HAART treatment was restored within the first 40 days after OLT in 4 patients. Postoperative mortality (within 60 days) was 10% and 8 are alive to date (from 6 to 47 months). Postoperative surgical complications, including hepatic artery thrombosis in 2, were present in 5 (50%). Among the four patients who received HAART after LT, HAART liver toxicity was observed in two HCV co-infected patients and 2 experienced Tacrolimus toxicity related to protease inhibitors. In the patients with protease inhibitors Tacrolimus blood levels between 5 and 10µg/ L were achieved with doses of 0,5 mg every 3 days. In the 2 patients who permanently received HAART after LT, HIV viral load remained undetectable but postoperative CD4 + cell count was always < 200mm 3 . In 6 of the 7 patients in which HAART treatment was not restored or discontinued after LT, CD4 + cell count remained > 200/mm 3 and HIV viral load remained undetectable in only one. Our experience confirms that LT is effective in selected HIV patients with excellent results in those without co-infection C. The survival of patients who do not received post transplantation HAART treatment seems not to be compromised. Abhinav Humar 1 , Kristin Horn 1 , Ann Kalis 1 , Brooke Glessing 1 , Angelika C. Gruessner 1 , Rainer W. Gruessner 1 , Raja Kandaswamy 1 , William D. Payne 1 , John R. Lake 2 . 1 Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA; 2 Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA Background: Late renal dysfunction and eventual renal failure is an increasing concern and problem in liver transplant recipients. Long-term CNI use is believed to play a contributing role in many of these cases. There is increasing interest in CNI withdrawal from maintenance regimens in an attempt to improve renal function. We instituted a protocol of CNI withdrawal in liver transplant recipients with documented deterioration of their renal function. Patients who were at least 6 months posttransplant, with a rising serum Cr (a 50% inrease from their baseline value or a serum Cr consistently greater than 2 mg/dl), and no recent (within 3 months) acute rejection (AR) episode were eligible. These patients were converted from a CNI maintenance protocol to a regimen consisting of full-dose MMF (1g bid) and low-dose prednisone (5 mg/day). Recipients that were off prednisone, were restarted on it at the time of the conversion. Results: Since Jan 99, we have converted 13 recipients using this protocol. Mean recipient age was 57.3 yrs. Causes of liver failure were Hep C (3), PBC (2) , Hep B (1), ETOH (4) , and others (3). Mean time posttransplant at time of switch was 46.1 months (range=6-108 months). Six of the recipients were on CsA; 7 were on tacrolimus. Mean serum Cr at time of switch was 2.4 mg/dl (range=1. 6-5.9 ). Mean estimated Cr clearance was 37.9 mls/min (range=18-63). With a mean follow up of 22.9 months (range 4-58) since CNI withdrawal, the following results are seen: i) None of the recipients have had an episode of AR after the switch ii) 12 recipients remain on MMF/Pred; 1 has restarted on FK with the MMF being stopped because of a very low WBC count. iii) No recipient has progressed to end-stage renal disease and dialysis iv) 11 of the 13 recipients have had an improvement in renal function, and 2 have had no change. No recipient has had a deterioration of renal function. v) Mean serum Cr for all recipients at present is 1.7 (range=1.0-3.0) (p=0.02 vs. pre switch); estimated Cr clearance= 51.8 (range= 19-86) (p=0.02). Conclusions: CNI withdrawal with conversion to MMF/Pred is a viable option in LTx recipients with deteriorating renal function. There did not seem to be a significant increase in the risk for AR after switching in this small group of patients. Renal function was noted to improve in the majority of recipients after stopping the CNI. Roberto Troisi 1 , Lucien Noens 2 , Bart Vandekerckhove 3 , Roberto Montalti 1 , Salvatore Ricciardi 1 , Jan Philippe 4 , Bernard de Hemptinne 1 . 1 Dept. of General, Hepato-Biliary and Transplantation Surgery; 2 Hematology; 3 Immunohematology Lab-Blood Bank; 4 Clinical Biology, Ghent University Hospital Medical School, Ghent-Belgium Introduction. Graft and patient survival rates in recipients of AB0 incompatible (AB0-I) liver transplantation is poor due to the greater incidence of vascular thrombosis, biliary injury and acute cellular rejection (ACR). AB0 mismatch liver transplantation is controversial especially in non-urgent situations and in living donor liver transplantation. We investigate a new protocol consisting on highly selective apheresis (HSA) using Glycosorb® AB device that remove only blood group antibodies, associated with daclizumab and mycophenolate mofetil induction without splenectomy in living donor liver transplantation in adults (AALDLT). Methods. Between January and April 2003, 2 out of 10 recipients underwent AB0-I (A 1 >0; A 2 >B) AALDLT with the right lobe in our institution. Case 1 was a man 45 y.o. and case 2 was a man 52 y.o., underwent transplantation for multifocal HCC on HCV-related cirrhosis both. HSA was performed on preoperative day -2 and -1 and following AALDLT according to the anti-IgM/IgG titer increase. Immunosuppressive regimen consisted on daclizumab (1mg/Kg) induction on day -1; 1; 15; 30; 45; mycophenolate mofetil 2 x 1 g on day -1; 0 and each postoperative day; tacrolimus 2 x 1 mg on day -1 and each postoperative day with doses adjusted to maintain serum through levels of 12-15 ng/dl. Conventional steroid tapering doses was administered. Results. After a median FU of 9 months, both patients are alive and well. In patient 1, preoperative anti-IgM/IgG titer before and after HSA fall from 128 to 4 and from 64 to 2 respectively. No ACR episodes occurred. Anti IgG titers remained between 1 and 8. In patient 2, preoperative anti IgM/IgG titers fall from 1 to 0 and from 32 to 0. This patient experienced two episodes of ACR grade 2 on the third postoperative week and at 6 months. Anti IgG titers remained between 2 and 16. A standard plasmapheresis was performed at 6 months due to the increase of Anti IgM and IgG titers. Both patients did not experienced major complications or infections episodes or CMV disease. Conclusions. AALDLT from AB0 incompatible donors has been successfully performed using this new approach. Selective apheresis with Glycosorb AB® has showed high efficiency to decrease significantly anti blood group antibodies. This treatment may potentially expand the donor pool in AALDLT with minimal morbidity and good outcome. IN CHINESE LIVER TRANSPLANT RECIPIENTS TREATED Objective To clinically validate basiliximab is an effective induction therapy antibody in Chinese liver transplant recipients. Methods 48 patients with cirrhotic liver disease, fulminant hepatitis or HCC, aged from 26 to 60 years old, and 37 male, 11 female, who all received liver transplant from cadaveric donor, were double-blinded and randomly divided into two groups. Patients were administered 40 mg of basiliximab (n = 24) or placebo (n = 24) as two 20-mg bolus injections days 0 and 4, plus cyclosporine and steroids. The first dose should be given within 2 hours after organ perfusion and the second on day 4 after transplantation. In addition, all patients were administered triple immunosuppressive therapy with cyclosporine(Neoral), steroids and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF). The efficacy of basiliximab was assessed by conventional parameters, and tolerability was assessed by the incidence of adverse events, infections, and laboratory test result abnormalities. All cases who were doubtful of acute rejection in clinic received biopsy-confirmed acute rejection. No one required re-transplantation for severe complication. Results At 3 months, the first acute biopsy-confirmed rejection episodes were more frequent in placebo group 37.5% (9/24) than basiliximab group 12.5% (3/24) (p=0.048). The incidence of infection consisting of lung , blood, and ascites between two groups were 52.6% and 50.0%, respectively. Cyclosporin (5-8 mg/kg/day) was started at or after 72 h (n=13 ) in basiliximab group , and Cyclosporin (5-10 mg/kg/day) in placebo group. Nephrotoxicity were seen in the basiliximab group and placebo group (10.5% and 20.0%, respectively). The refractory rejection episode was only happened in placebo group(n=1). Basiliximab caused no injection-site reactions, anaphylaxis, or cytokine release syndrome. Conclusion Immunoprophylaxis with 40 mg of basiliximab in combination with triple immunosuppressive therapy provides increased efficacy in reducing the incidence of acute rejection episodes, with no clinically significant increase in adverse events. Use of basiliximab combined with triple immunosuppressive therapy can use low-dose Cyclosporin, meanwhile, reduced incidence of nephrotoxicity. Objective To evaluate the safety and reliability of Neoral C 2 monitoring, and determine the target level of C 2 in Chinese adult liver transplant recipients. Methods 31 de novo Chinese adult liver transplant recipients were randomized to three groups( C 0 group, "high" C 2 group, "low" C 2 group) according to different monitoring tools and target levels. During follow-up, at each visit, the physical exam was performed and routine blood chemistry was obtained including CsA levels.The change of immune status and episodes of rejection were also observed closely. Results The "low" C 2 group had the lowest Neoral oral dose(2.40±0.26mg/kg/d), and had remarkable difference compared with the other groups (P<0.001). The best liver,heart and renal function was observed in "low" C 2 group. The CD4 + / CD8 + of "low" C 2 group was 1.10±0.46, has no remarkable difference with C 0 group. The rejection incidence of three groups were very similar. "low" C 2 group had highest clinical benefit(72.73%), while the clinical benefit of "high" C 2 group is the lowest(9.09%). Conclusions With rational target levels, C 2 monitoring can decrease the oral dose of Neoral and side effects remarkablely without the increase of rejection incidence.The target level of C 2 in Chinese adult liver transplant recipients is: 600-800ng/ ml during 1 to 6 months after transplantation, 400-600 ng/ml from 6 to 12 months, 200-400 ng/ml after 12 months. Tacrolimus has been increasingly used in liver transplant patients to prevent rejection. The drug has relatively a narrow therapeutic window. We report here the changes in the kinetic profile following oral dose of tacrolimus, before and after reversal of Jejuno-ileal (J-I) bypass. Case 1: 57 year old lady underwent deceased liver transplantation (LTx) in February, 2003 for end stage liver disease related to (J-I) bypass, 20 years prior to LTx for obesity. Her stable dose of tacrolimus was 7mg twice a day, with trough concentration ranging from 5.2 to 6.4 ng/ml. She underwent reversal of (J-I) bypass seven months post LTx. Kinetic studies were performed prior to reversal of (J-I) bypass and 3 months after reversal with the stable oral dose of tacrolimus in steady state. Results: Immediately after reversal of (J-I) bypass her trough level increased to 25.4 ng/ ml from 6.2 ng/ml. Tacrolimus was put on hold for 2 days and then restarted at 3mg twice a day. Subsequently she stabilized to 5 mg twice a day to achieve trough concentration ranging from 4.1 to 6.6 ng/ml. The area under the concentration curve (AUC) improved from 10.9 to 20.7 ng/ml/hr/mg, a two-fold increase with J-I reversal. Also peak value of twice the trough concentration was observed at three hours after the oral dose of tacrolimus, following reversal of I-J bypass, which was absent prior to reversal (figure below). Conclusion: Prior to reversal of J-I Bypass patients required higher doses of tacrolimus and kinetic study did no show any peak value. After reversal of J-I bypass patient demonstrated regular peak value and required lower doses. Also AUC after J-I reversal improved by two fold. In the immediate postoperative period, toxic levels were observed probably because of large area of absorption with relative adynamic bowel activity. Careful monitoring is necessary in such situation to avoid tacrolimus related drug toxicity. Background/Aim: Immunoprophylaxis using intravenous (IV) hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) decreases the recurrence of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection after orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). However, IV HBIG is expensive, has significant side effects. The efficacy of an alternative prophylaxis using intramuscular (IM) HBIG and lamivudine was prospectively analyzed in this study. Materials and Methods: The study population included 66 HBsAg-positive patients (55 males, 11 female; mean age 47 years; 35 HBV DNA-positive, 33 HBeAg-positive) who underwent OLT between Jan 1999 and Dec 2002. The patients with HBV replicative status (HBV DNA-positive, or HBeAg-positive) was 74% (49/66). Four patients (3 patients had YMDD mutation) were treated with oral lamivudine over one year before OLT. All patients received 10,000 IU of IV HBIG monthly and lamivudine daily during first 6 months after OLT and then switched to 2000 IU of IM HBIG bimonthly and oral lamivudine 100 mg daily. Recurrent HBV was defined as the reappearance of hepatitis B surface antigen. Quantitative hepatitis B surface antibody (HBsAb) was measured monthly using Abbott Laboratory RIA AUSAB kit. The quantitation of HBV DNA was measured by bDNA method (detection limit: 10 5 copies/ ml) Results: During a median follow up of 25.9 months (duration 12-60 months), only one (1.5%) of 66 patients showed the recurrence of HBV 11 months after OLT. The mean titer of HBsAb (S/N) at 6 month, 12 month, 18 month, 24 month after OLT were 96.3±5. 3, 84.4±7.4, 96.7±11.3, 88.1±18.4, respectively. Three patients with YMDD mutation before OLT had no recurrence of HBV after combination prophylaxis (60, 24, 23 months after OLT, respectively). Conclusions: Combination prophylaxis with IM HBIG and lamivudine is highly effective in preventing recurrent HBV regardless of HBV replication status, may protect against the emergence of resistant mutants, and is cost-effective strategy than HBIG mono-therapy. This combination may be one of effective prophylaxis against patients with YMDD mutation before OLT. Adel Bozorgzadeh 1 , Ashokkumar Jain 1 , Kerrie Lansing 1 , Randeep Kashyap 1 , Mark Orloff 1 . 1 Surgery, Strong Memorial Hospital, Rochester, NY, USA End stage liver disease related to HCV infection is the most common cause of liver transplantation in the USA. The recurrence of HCV in the transplant allograft is uniform after successful liver transplantation. The available antiviral treatment is not without side effects and has no guarantee of success. The controversy remains whether such patients should receive further transplantation for recurrence of disease. Aim of the present study is to examine the outcome of re-transplantation for HCV recurrence at our center. Between December 1994 through November 2003, all patients who received retransplantation were examined. The patients with documented recurrence of HCV were identified and examined in detail. Results: Six patients, all male, mean age of 47.7± 6. 3 were retransplanted for recurrence of HCV. Five patients received a 2 nd graft and one received a third. The mean interval to recurrence from previous transplant was 48 ± 34 months. The mean HCV RNA was 614160 ± 364681IU/ml. All of the patients were genotype 1A. Two of the six patients received anti HCV treatment consisting of Pegintron and ribavirin prior to retransplantation. Patient survival: One patient died from sepsis three months after retransplantation. The remaining five patients(83.3%) are alive with a follow up time ranging from 5 to 35 months post retransplantation. Graft survival: One patient required retransplantation for hepatic artery thrombosis.Overall actual graft survival was (66.7%) Recurrence after retransplantation: Out of five patients, two have documented recurrence of disease with HAI scores of 6/18, 3/18 and fibrosis scores of 2/6 and 2/6 respectively. Both of these patients have been initiated on anti-HCV treatment. Conclusion: Initial results of retransplantation for HCV recurrence in carefully selected patients have been satisfactory, however long-term results are still awaited. Mary Vetter 1 , Ashok Jain 1 , Mark Orloff 1 , Randeep Kashyap 1 , Pat Milot 1 , Joan Romano 1 , Leah Bryan 1 , Jackie Cullen 1 , Kerrie Lansing 1 , Kari Burlee 1 , Linda Merrick 1 , Pam Betzold 1 , Colleen Sober 1 , Tomi Schisler 1 , Kristen Wrobbel 1 , Adel Bozorgzadeh 1 . 1 Surgery, Strong Memorial Hospital, Rochester, NY, USA Hemochromatosis is a hereditary disorder of excessive iron absorption leading to systemic iron over load in the body. Excessive deposition of iron in the liver can induce fibrosis and lead to endstage liver failure. The disease appears to affect male more than female. These are also suggestions that patients with hemochromatosis post LTx do less well compared to non hemochromatosis, partially related to poor myocardial function from iron deposition and sepsis. Aim of the presentation is to report the incidence and survival outcome for hemochromatosis from our center after liver transplantation (LTx) and compared with UNOS database. Patient and method: Since 1988 506 patients (male = 321 female=185) underwent LTx at our center. Out of these 8 patients (male=5, female=3 mean age 52.8 ± 11 year) were disposed to have hemochromatosis based on high ferritin levels and high iron storage in the explanted liver. All patients from out institution were followed until Nov 2003. (Mean follow up 25.6 ± 13.2 months). Results: One patient who was co-infected with HCV died 9 months after LTx from recurrent HCV and another patient died of myocardial infraction at home six months post LTx. Remaining 6 patients are currently alive with nearly normal liver function. In present series, female between the age group of 42 to 64 years, constituted 37.5% of cases with hemochromatosis. Two of the three female patients had phlebotomy prior to transplantation. The hepatic iron indexes were 0.6 and 0.2 in explanted liver with ferritin levels of 69 and 30. The third patient who did not have phlebotomy had hepatic iron index of 4.8 and ferritin level of 958.n As per UNOS database from 1/88 to 3/03, 497 patients received LTx for hemochromatosis of which 86 (17.3 %) were females. Conclusion: Unusually high rate of liver transplantation for female patients with diagnosis of hemochromatosis was found from our center. This disparity in incidence of hemochromatosis in females in our region is unclear further confirmatory genetic configuration for the disease is currently underway. However, survival after LTx during the follow up period of 19 to 53 months was satisfactory. Manish Gupta, Michael J. Hanaway, Todd D. Merchen, Joseph F. Buell, Michael Alonzo, Mark J. Thomas, E. Steve Woodle, Steven M. Rudich. Transplant Surgery, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA INTRODUCTION: Cirrhosis due to hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a leading indication for orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). Following OLT for HCV, as many as 80 to 90% of all allografts become re-infected. As many transplant programs are utilizing extended criteria donor (ECD) livers, the impact of this practice on recurrent HCV infection remains unknown. PURPOSE: To analyze rates of HCV re-infection in OLT recipients receiving ECD livers compared to a control group of standard criteria donor (SCD) liver allografts. METHODS: All OLTs performed between Jan 2002-Oct 2003 were categorized as having received either an ECD or SCD liver at our center. ECD grafts were defined as having any one or more of the following: donor age > 60 yrs, biopsy exhibiting >40% macrovesicular and/or >75% microvesicular steatosis, any donor down time (±CPR), requirement of 2 or more pressors within 12 hours of procurement, or liver function studies > 5 x upper limit of normal. All recipients underwent liver biopsy at 90 days or earlier, if there was an appreciable rise in baseline liver function tests (LFTs). RESULTS: The two groups (ECD and SCD liver recipients) were similar in regards to: MELD score (match and lab), gender, age, and graft ischemic (total and warm) times. Ninety OLTs were performed during the study period: 42 ECD livers and 48 SCD livers were transplanted. HCV-related cirrhosis accounted for 24/42 (57.1%) of the OLTs in the ECD group and 20/48 (41.7%) of the OLTs in the SCD group (p=0.14). Biopsy-proven recurrent HCV infection was noted in 21 (23.3%) of all allografts. The ECD group was found to have a 33.3% recurrence rate (8/24) while in the SCD group a recurrence rate of 65% (13/48) was noted (p=0.04). No significant differences were observed between the groups in LTFs of patients requiring biopsies. CONCLUSION: The aggressive use of extended criteria donor hepatic allografts was noted not to lead to an increased rate of HCV re-infection in the recipient allograft. Indeed, there was a statistically significant increase in HCV re-infection in those recipients receiving standard criteria donor livers. This suggests that perhaps a "stressed donor allograft" is protected from viral re-infection. The long term outcome following transplantation for HCV has deteriorated questioning whether use of more potent immunosuppressant agents contributes to lower patient and graft survival. This study was designed to evaluate outcome differences in patients receiving Neoral C2 as compared to tacrolimus C0 following liver transplantation for HCV. 128 patients underwent liver transplantation for HCV at our center; 48 received Neoral and 80 Tacrolimus. All received Solumedrol/prednisone. C2 levels of Neoral were adjusted to 1000 ng/mL for the first 6 months and then lowered to 800 ng/mL months 6-12 and then 600 ng/mL thereafter whereas tacrolimus levels were kept between 10-15 ng/ml for months 1-6 and then reduced to 5-10 ng/mL after month 6. Rates and severity of rejection were similar for patients receiving Neoral or Tacrolimus ((37% vs 34%, p=NS). Patient and graft survival was higher in patients receiving Neoral compared to those receiving Tacrolimus (90% vs 78% p<0.05). The incidence and severity of recurrent HCV was much higher in patients receiving Tacrolimus with many patients progressing to severe fibrosis or cirrhosis by year 3 post transplant. HCV viral titers increased more rapidly in patients treated with Tacrolimus than Neoral and by 3 years mean viral titers were 3.2 million copies in patients receiving Tacrolimus versus 1.05 million copies in patients treated with Neoral (p<0.05). Levels of AST, ALT, ALP and bilirubin were more markedly disturbed in patients receiving Tacrolimus. Use of rebetron only provided a sustained virologic response in patients on Neoral as previously reported, although the sustained virologic response was only seen in 20% of treated patients. The incidence of diabetes mellitus was significantly higher in patients treated with Tacrolimus. Addition of Cellcept (MMF) resulted in more severe recurrent HCV infection in both Neoral and Tacrolimus treated groups. These data strongly suggest that use of Tacrolimus in comparison to Neoral leads to a poorer outcome following transplantation for HCV. Multivariate analysis of this single center data as well as analysis of the Lis2t study will hopefully provide further insight into factors contributing to these results which will allow us to design better immunosuppressive protocols for this group of patients. Along with the evolution of adult living donor liver transplantation (LDLTx) the number of transplants for hepatitis C (HepC) cirrhosis has been increasing with LDLTx worldwide. The results are reported to be unsatisfactory compared to the transplantation for other indications due to recurrence of HepC after transplantation. We analyzed the outcome of LDLTx for HepC in our institute in terms of the factors affecting the HepC recurrence and the efficacy of treatment for recurrence. Data were collected by retrospective chart review and were analyzed with Kaplan-Meier method and Cox proportional hazard regression method. Immunosuppression after transplantation consists of tacrolimus and low dose steroids. Preoperative or posttransplant preemptive viral therapy was not done. Posttransplant liver biopsy was done for abnormal liver function tests. From March 1999 till 2003, 72 patients (male 50, female 22) received LDLTx for HepC cirrhosis. Mean age was 54 years old (33∼69 years old). Blood group combination was identical with 48 cases, compatible with 13 cases and incompatible with 11 cases. Genome typing showed 1b with 35 cases. Preoperative viral load (KIU/ml) was 260 (mean), varying from <0.5 to 1440. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed almost same patient survival with HepC cirrhosis and with other indications (77% at 4 years). HepC cirrhosis complicated by hepatocellular carcinoma showed lower patient survival compared to HepC cirrhosis alone. Cumulative virological recurrence rate was 94% with histological recurrence rate of 64% (mean follow-up period 23.2 months). Factors affecting posttranspalnt HepC recurrence include recipient age (older), recipient sex (female), donor sex (male) and donor body mass index (higher). For the HepC recurrence (histological), 24 patients underwent interferon + ribavirin therapy. At the time of diagnosis, 30% of cases showed moderate fibrosis (F2). HCV-RNA became negative after treatment in 8 out of 18 recipients. Conclusions: > Intra-institutional comparison showed no significant difference in terms of recipient survival either with HepC or other indications. > Virological recurrence is unavoidable. > Protocol biopsy for monitoring recurrence may be effective for prompt treatment. Jan M. Langrehr 1 , Marcus Bahra 1 , Ulf P. Neumann 1 , Peter J. Neuhaus 1 . 1 Surgery, Charite Virchow Clinic Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany Background: The optimal immunosuppressive regimen for HCV positive liver transplant recipients has not been established. Treatment for acute rejection wiht steroids is associated to increased viral replication and graft hepatitis.We retrospectively analyzed 232 patients after orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) for HCV cirrhosis to determine the influence of methylprednisolon pulse therapy on long term outcome after OLT. Methods: 232 liver transplants in HCV recepients between 1989 and 2001 were analyzed. Median follow-up was 4.4 years, median age of patients was 53 years (15-72y). Immunsuppression consisted of Tacrolimus (Tac) or Cyclosporine A (CyA) in different protocols. All rejection episodes were histologically proven. Results: 28/232 graft losses due to severe hepatitis C reinfection occured (12.06%). 105/ 232 patients showed a minimum of one episode of acute rejection (45.25%). 71/86 patients received methylprednisolon pulse therapy for one time (82.55%). 15/86 required treatment with OKT3 for steroid-resistant rejection (17.44%). 19/232 patients required repeated steroid pulse therapy due to more than one episode of acute rejection (8.1.%). In patients with more than one episode of acute rejection the risk of HCV related graft loss was significantly enhanced (6/19, p<0.017). The primary immunosuppresion had no influence of the outcome in our data. Conclusion: Our data show that outcome of HCV positive patients with repeated steroid pulse therapy for acute rejection is significant worse compared to patients with single pulse therapy. Therefore repeated steroid pulse therapies should be avoided in HCV positive transplant recipients. New strategies in managing acute rejection in these patients are required. King-Wah Chiu 1 , Yaw-Sen Chen 2 , Hock-Liew Eng 3 , Yu-Fan Chang 4 , Chao-Long Chen 2 . 1 Hepatology and Gastroenterology; 2 Departments of Surgery; 3 Pathology; 4 Diagnostic Radiology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan Introduction: Recurrent HBV infection after liver transplantation (LT) is related to the prophylaxis of lamiuvdine and hepatitis B immune globulin. Negative serum HBsAg is not absolutely represents a status of HBV infection after LT. Objectives: From March 1997 to December 2003 episodes of LT of 54 recipients for the HBV related end stage liver diseases were enrolled. There were 35 in living (LRLT) and 20 in cadaveric (CLT). All of the recipients were negative for the serum HBV-DNA before LT. Method: After LT, liver biopsy was performed while serum aminotransferase progressively elevated up to 5 times of normal. Histochemical stain for tissue HBsAg and HBcAg, and the scoring system with histological activity index (HAI) were collected. HBV-DNA was extracted from the serum and liver tissue. PCR was performed and genotyping of HBV Sgene was obtained using by restriction fragment length polymorphism method. Experience liver pathologist is invite to reading the liver biopsy. Results: Of 55 LT, 9 recipients (16.4%) were noted to have the intralobular or portal activity with HAI scores more than 3, but no one of them to have the evidence of fibrosis. They happened approximately from 7 to 36 (mean=20.5) months after LT. There were 7 (20%) in LRLT and 2 (10%) in CLT but no statistic significant difference between them. On the other hand, one recipient (1.8%) has HBsAg re-appearance in our series. Conclusions: Histological recurrence is occurs about at 20.5 months, and 9.1 times response to that of the serum recurrence in the hepatitis B infection after the liver transplant. There is a trend that a patient with LRLT is 2 times frequent to those with CLT in the histological recurrence, but it needs further basic study to prove them. End stage liver failure due to HCV cirrhosis is the leading indicator for orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). Recurrence of HCV post-OLT is almost universal; however, early aggressive hepatitis is rarely reported in literature. In our department liver transplantation program has been started in July 2000. Since that time 69 OLT were performed. Standard immunosuppression protocol consists of Prograf and prednisolone in tapered dose. Actuarial one year graft and patient survival is 88.4% (elective [93.2%] urgent transplantations[60%]). In 18 (26%) cases the HCV cirrhosis was the indication for the treatment. Co-existing hepatocellular cancer was diagnosed in 4 cases in this group.14 patients from this cohort was HCV-RNA PCR positive prior to OLT. One patient died at day 2 due to irreversible brain damage, further 2 died 2 and 13 months after OLT with well functioning graft (accordingly due to cardiac failure and metastatic HCC). The recurrent hepatitis was observed in 5 cases during the first month/year post OLT. One out of this 5 presented aggressive hepatitis (ALT level exciding 6000 u/L, Bilirubin rose from 1.9 to 10 mg/dL developed in day 10 after OLT. RT PCR showed active replication HCV RNA in liver biopsy and 1.02 x 10 6 RNA copies in the blood serum (genotype 1b). CMV infection was ruled out. Patient started on combined treatment Interferon Alfa (6 mln.units a day) and Ribaviryn (600 mg tds) responded well to the treatment with quick recovery.Further biopsies confirmed the diagnosis of viral hepatitis (active inflammation + some fibrosis) as main cause of liver injury. Current liver function (two years after OLT) is accepatble with bilirubin level of 1,5mg/dL, ALT/AST of 103/350, ALP of 74 and GGTP of 120. Invasive Aspergillosis (IA) has reported to occur in 1 to 8% of liver transplant recipients and less frequently kidney recipients. The mortality related to IA is significantly high and early diagnosis remains a challenge. Several studies have indicated a promising role for circulating markers of infection, using a double-sandwich (ds) ELISA (Platelia Aspergillus, Bio-Rad) that detects galactomannan (GM). In prolonged neutropenic patients and stem cell transplantation recipients, GM detection has proved to be an effective diagnostic tool with an excellent sensitivity; its usefulness is debatable in solid organ transplant setting. Methods: from December 1999 to December 2003 a total of 296 Elisa tests were performed in 92 high risk patients submitted to liver (64) or kidney (28) transplant (3.2 tests/pt) in order to evaluate the diagnostic potential of circulating galactomannan. Risk factors for IA were considered: poor/late graft function; renal failure/HD; Cytomegalovirus reactivation; nadir PLT count below 30.000/ml; greater transfusion requirements; retransplantation. GM detection was performed by a double-sandwich Elisa test and was considered positive if optical density was found to be higher than 1.2.Results: Twenty-three out of 92 patients had a positive Elisa test at least once, that was instead consistently negative in 69 out of 92 patients. According to CDC diagnostic criteria for IA, no cases of "defined" or "probable" IA occurred in the study population; in 5 patients diagnosis of "possible" IA was done. As a tool for "defined" or "probable" IA, GM detection yields a specificity of 75% (25% of false positive results). As a screening test for "possible" IA, specificity increases to 78% with a sensitivity of 62%; in our population with a low incidence of IA, the positive predictive value of the test was 22%, while the negative predictive value was 95%.Conclusion: According to our experience, GM detection usefulness as screening test for early diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis is largely debatable; due to the high number of false-positive results, "defined" as well as "probable" IA diagnosis can not rely on GM detection and it seems reasonable that alternative circulating antigens might be identified for the early diagnosis of IA. Cytomegalovirus is the main pathogen of liver transplantation (LT) patients. During immunossuppression, the patients require rigorous clinical and laboratory monitoring to prevent or treat opportunist agents such as CMV and HHV-6. Rapid tests such as antigenemia and nested PCR are currently used for this purpose. Objective: The objective of this study was to monitor Liver Transplant patients for active CMV and HHV-6 infection after transplantation. Methods: Seventeen patients were monitored. The follow-up to detect active infection for these virus consisted of antigenemia (AGM) for CMV and PCR for CMV and HHV-6 , from before the transplant and up to 365 days post-transplant. If an active infection was detected, gancyclovir was initiated followed by maintenance therapy. Results: Fiveteen patients (88.2%) had two or more positive CMV-PCR results, six patients (35.3%) had at least one cell positive for CMV-antigenemia. Among the patients with an active CMV infection , eleven (64.7%) had probably CMV-disease. Positive PCR results were obteined in median 77 days before antigenemia and in median 37 days after transplantation. Twelve of seventeen patients were folowed-up for HHV-6 using PCR technique. Among these 12 patients, 91,6% had positive HCMV PCR and 66,7% had positive HHV-6 PCR. The CMV/HHV-6 co-infection rate was 41,6% . Four patients had acute graft rejection episodes. All of them had positive CMV PCR and 75% had positive HHV-6 PCR. Conclusion: We conclude that antigenemia and PCR techniques are efficient in the followup of active CMV infections. HHV-6 could be a potential risk factor for CMV-disease and acute celular rejection episodes. Background: Long-term neurologic recovery and complications in children receiving a liver transplant for FHF are not well described. The purpose of this analysis was to determine if there were long-term neurologic sequelae once these patients had recovered from their liver transplant. We also tried to determine the impact of this on long-term schooling in these children. Results: We studied outcomes in pediatric patients receiving a successful liver transplant for FHF. Only patients transplanted after 1990 were included in this analysis. Excluded were recipients who had early graft loss or died within the first 3 months after transplant. A total of 10 recipients were identified that fit the study criteria. Mean age at time of transplant was 8.2 years (range = 1-18). There were no documented neurologic abnormalities in these patients prior to the onset of FHF. Cause of FHF were Hep A (n=1), autoimmune (n=1), acetaminophen (n=1), and unknown (n=7). Seven of the 10 recipients had severe encephalopathy (Grade III or IV) at the time of transplant. Mean waiting time from presentation to transplant was 8.8 days (range = 2-23 days). With a mean follow up of 6.3 years (range 1-12 years), all 10 recipients are alive with functioning grafts. Neurologic complications in the 10 recipients include persistent seizures in 2 of the recipients -in 1 recipient the seizures are well controlled medically , but the other recipient has ongoing severe seizure disorder and is now globally aphasic as a result of these. Of the other 8, 1 has major developmental and language delays and another 2 recipient have mild cognitive impairment on formal neuropsychological testing. Another 3 recipients have had major behavior issues requiring psychological intervention. With regards to schooling 5 are at an age appropriate grade level, 2 are 2 grade levels behind, 1 is 1 grade level behind, 1 does not attend school due to neurologic impairment, and another left school after 2 years due to behavioral problems. Conclusions: Long-term major and minor neurologic problems are not uncommon in pediatric patients transplanted for FHF. Schooling is commonly impacted upon in these patients. These problems should be anticipated and adequately addressed in the long-term management of these patients after recovery from their transplant. We encountered two cases of pediatric living-related liver transplant recipients who showed the increases in blood concentration of tacrolimus (Tac) or cyclosporine (CsA) during diarrheal episode. First case was a 2.3 year-old girl. Tac was orally given at a dose of 1.8 mg twice daily (0.34 mg/kg/day) and the trough blood concentrations were stable (9.7 -10.3 ng/mL) until 29 posttransplant day (POD). On POD 32, she had diarrhea caused by rotavirus infection, and the concentration elevated to 18.0 ng/mL on POD 35. The second case was a 1.6 year-old boy. CsA (Neoral®) was orally given at a dose of 80 mg twice daily (14 mg/kg/day). The blood trough concentration of CsA was 161 to 230 ng/mL. On POD 15, he had fever and watery diarrhea, and the concentration elevated to 571 ng/ mL on POD 17. Tac and CsA are well-known dual substrates for cytochrome P-450 (CYP) 3A and P-glycoprotein (P-gp). Both CYP3A and P-gp exist in the enterocytes of human small intestine. Inflammation and infection in the intestine potentially increase the bioavailability. To investigate the effect of intestinal inflammation on the metabolic and efflux pump activities, we conducted experiments using the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)induced intestinal damage model in rats. Intestinal epithelial CYP3A activity was assessed by nifedipine oxidation using rat intestinal epithelial microsomes. Drug efflux by P-gp was tested by digoxin flux in excised rat intestine perfusion system. LPS (0.3 mg/kg) significantly reduced the intestinal epithelial CYP3A activity by 41 % (P<0.01). In the proximal jejunal segment in the rats treated with LPS, mucosal to serosal flux of digoxin was significantly enhanced compared to that of control (+91 % at 120 min perfusion, P<0.05). Efflux of digoxin, which was uptaken to intestinal epithelium, to mucosal perfusate was significantly blunted in the jejunum treated with LPS (-48 % at 120 min, P<0.05), which indicates that digoxin efflux into intestinal lumen is decreased in the small intestine treated with LPS. These results suggest that reduced intestinal CYP3A and P-gp function may partly be involved in the mechanism of the enteritis-related increase in the blood concentration of Tac and CsA. Figure  21 -13), which consisted of 3, 30-minute sessions of 100% oxygen at 45 feet of sea water equivalent pressure (2.4 Atmospheres Absolute) . Each treatment lasted 110 minutes, and each 30-minute period was interspersed with 5 minutes of pressured air to obviate O 2 toxicity. A repeat ultrasound 2 weeks following LTX showed good flows in the hepatic artery. The patient's liver function tests improved and he was discharged from the hospital with excellent graft function. HBO therapy helps to oxygenate ischemic hepatocytes by increasing the oxygen carrying capacity of hemoglobin and increase in soluble oxygen concentration in the blood. It also helps to reduce edema by down regulating adhesion molecules leading to diminished leukocyte and platelet adhesion and capillary injury. The current status of this treatment modality is discussed. Ken Hoshino 1 , Yasuhide Morikawa 1 , Naoki Shimojima 1 , Shigeyuki Kawachi 1 , Minoru Tanabe 1 , Go Wakabayashi 1 , Motohide Shimazu 1 , Masaki Kitajima 1 . 1 Surgery, KEIO University, School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan Fulminant hepatic failure is also an indication for liver transplantation. Using appropriate support, i.e., continuous hemodiafiltration (CHDF) and plasma exchange, liver function could recover. However, not a few patients develop cerebral edema or multi-organ failure before completion of liver regeneration. Furthermore, in pediatric cases, causes of hepatic failure are unknown in many cases. This facts lead to the difficulties to determine an indication and optimal timing of liver transplantation for children.We should be always careful to make a therapeutic decision in these setting. We have treated 10 children suffering from sever liver dysfunction from 1999. 10. to 2003.12. (3 months to 14 years old). Living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) was performed in 7 patients. Five of them are alive in 13 months to 52 months (mean: 30.6 months) after transplantation. Two patients out of 7 were lost at 10 and 4 months after operation respectively. In three patients out of 10 patients, we did not perform LDLT. Because one patient was recovered spontaneously by CHDF and plasma exchange therapy, the other two patients was diagnosed to Reye like syndrome and hemophagocytic syndrome respectively which indicated contra-indication of LDLT. We evaluated 10 patients according to the guidelines which are defined by Japan acute liver failure study group in 1996, five patients fulfilled the criteria (one patient: no need of liver transplantation, 4 patients: need for liver transplantation). In theses group, 4 patients were performed LDLT. and all the five patients were alive. On the other hand, 5 patients which did not fulfill criteria. It means that all the five patients developed severe encephalopathy in day 2 or 3. Two patients were diagnosed immediately as systemic disease and died at day 4 and day 21 respectively. Three patients were performed LDLT. Only one patient survived after LDLT. One patient developed severe cerebral edema immediately after LDLT. Conclusion: 1. The survival rate of the patients with fulminant failure patients who could keep the guideline would be very high (almost 100%). 2. Patients with fulminant hepatic failure should be considered LDLT as soon as possible when hepatic encephalopathy develops. 3. however, the systemic disease which shows hepatic failure should be neglected immediately to evaluate the contra-indication of LDLT. Hideaki Okajima, Takayuki Takeichi, Mikako Ueno, Katsuhiro Asonuma, Yukihiro Inomata. Department of Transplantation/Pediatric Surgery, Kumamoto University Hospital, Kumamoto, Japan [Back Ground] Immunosuppression with tacrolimus in pediatric living donor liver transplantation has been established gradually, but not completely yet. We assessed our current protocol, in which the trough level of tacrolimus was maintained less than the traditional one. [Patient & Method] Between September 2000 and November 2003, 18 children, 8 boys and 10 girls with a mean age of 83 months (ranged 2-180), received 19 living donor liver transplantations in our institution. Follow up period of 18 children ranged 4-40 months with a mean of 18. Original disease were biliary atresia in 14, and Bayler's disease, primary hyperoxaluria type I, hepatoblastoma and fulminant hepatic failure in 1 each. Immunosuppression consisted of tacrolimus and steroids. Tacrolimus protocol: 0.025 mg/kg x 2 per oral (po) on the day before transplantation. Aimed trough level of tacrolims was 10-12 ng/ml in the first week, 8-10 ng/ml in the second week, 6-8 ng/ml until one month, 5 ng/ml after one month and less than 5 ng/ml after three months. Steroid protocol: 1.0 mg/kg/day intravenously (iv) with methylpredonisolone on the first three days after liver transplantation, 0.5 mg/kg/ day iv following three days, 0.3mg/kg po with predonisolone after one week and withdrawal between three and six months after liver transplantation. [Results] Mean trough level of tacrolimus was less than 10 ng/ml in the first 3 days and then well controlled following the protocol after post-operative day 4. Two of 19 grafts were lost. One of them had a complication with bile leakage and died ten months after transplantation due to sepsis. In the other recipient, veno-occlusive disease occurred one week after the transplantation and successfully treated by re-living donor liver transplantation. Only one recipient suffered from one episode of acute rejection and there has been no episode of chronic rejection. Cytomegarovirus infection has occurred in four recipients and Epstein-Barr virus infection has occurred in two recipients. There has been no episode with posttransplant lymphoproliferated disorder. [Conclusion] Trough level of tacrolims in our current series is maintained relatively lower than the traditional one, but effectively avoided both rejection and infection, though the case number is still limited. Such a low dose protocol can be standardized in the pediatric living donor liver transplantation after confirmation by further experience. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging plays an important role in the preoperative evaluation of the living-related liver donors to reduce postoperative morbidity and complications. Though invasive, intraoperative cholangiography is still the golden standard in demonstrating anatomical variation of bile ducts. However, there is still doubt whether intraoperative cholangiography could be replaced by non-invasive MR cholangiography. Therefore, we design this study to compare the validity and reliability between these two imaging modalities. We retrospectively searched the database of living-related liver transplantation center in National Taiwan University Hospital during the period from April 2000 to September 2003. The clinical information and images including MR cholangiography and intraoperative cholangiography of total 58 donors (female: male = 35: 23) were reviewed. We compared the visibility of branching pattern of biliary trees, detection and count of the division degree of bile ducts between these two imaging modalities. Five types of branching patterns of the bile ducts were encountered. The rate of disagreement in the classification of branching pattern of the bile ducts using MR cholangiography and intraoperative cholangiography was 5% (3/58 Pathologic changes of the recipient native portal venous system may cause thrombosis of the portal vein, especially in pediatric living donor liver transplantation (LDLT). This study assessed the utility of Doppler ultrasound for the detection of intraoperative portal vein occlusion and identification of predisposing risk factors in the recipients. 73 pediatric recipients who underwent LDLT at Chang Gung Memorial hospital, Taiwan from 1994 to 2002 were included. Pre-operative and intraoperative Doppler ultrasound (US) evaluation of the portal vein was performed. Age, body weight, native liver disease, type of graft, graft recipient weight ratio (GRWR), type of portal anastomosis, portal velocity, portal venous size and presence of portosystemic shunt were analyzed for statistical significance of predisposing risk factors. Eight episodes of intraoperative portal vein thrombosis, with typical findings of absent Doppler flow in portal vein and prominent hepatic artery with a resistant index lower than 0.5 (P<0.001), were detected during transplantation, which was then corrected by thrombectomy and re-anastomosis. Children age ≤ 1year old (P=0.025), weight ≤ 10 Kg (P=0.024), low portal flow ≤ 7cm/sec (P=0.021), portal venous size ≤ 4mm (P=0.001), and GRWR > 3 (P < 0.017) were all risk factors for intraoperative portal vein thrombosis. Doppler US is essential in the pre-operative evaluation, early detection and monitoring of outcome of the portal vein in liver transplant. SPLIT LIVER TRANSPLANT (SLT) FOR 2 ADULT RECIPIENTS -EVOLUTION OF THE SURGICAL PROCEDURE. Abhinav Humar 1 , Timothy Sielaff 1 , John R. Lake 1 , William D. Payne 1 . 1 Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA Background: SLT for 2 adult recipients is a procedure that is slowly developing as questions regarding donor and recipient selection are better answered. It remains a technically demanding procedure and optimizing the surgical technique of the split will play an important role in its success and ability to expand the donor pool. Results: Since 1999, we have performed 28 right lobe/left lobe splits (transplanted into 28 adult recipients) from 14 deceased donors. In the first 9 donors, the split was performed exactly similar to the way we perform adult living donor procedures. The liver was split in the midplane; the inferior vena cava was preserved with the left lobe graft, along with the middle hepatic vein and all the main hilar structures, including the common hepatic artery, portal vein, and common bile duct (CBD). In the last 5 donors, we have modified the procedure to include the cava with the right lobe graft. This has the advantage of maximizing outflow of the right lobe graft (by preserving all short hepatic veins draining into the cava) and allows back-table reconstruction of large middle hepatic vein (MHV) tributaries using vein grafts from the donor (thus minimizing warm ischemic time for the right graft at time of implantation). Outflow of the left lobe graft was then based on the common confluence of the MHV and left HV. In the last 3 donors, we have modified the split further to preserve the CBD with the right lobe graft (Fig) . Biliary drainage of both grafts is then possible with a single anastomosis in both recipients (right graft via the CBD, left graft via a single left hepatic duct). Prior to this modification, 9 of 11 right grafts required 2 separate biliary anastomosis; since then, all 3 right lobe grafts have had a single biliary anastomosis. All 14 left lobe grafts have had a single biliary anastamiosis. We have noted the incidence of biliary complications to be stongly correlated with the number of biliary anastamosis. Conclusions: The surgical procedure of adult SLT continues to undergo modifications. Optimizing the surgical technique will play a crucial part in its success. In the era of MELD, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has become a prominent indication for liver transplantation. As radiofrequency ablation (RFA) has emerged as a modality in bridging patients with HCC to transplant, we have aggressively developed a minimally invasive program to optimally utilize this resource. Methods: A review of all RFA cases performed in liver transplant candidates in a single center was performed. Operative findings, morbidity and mortality data was focused upon. Results: Forty-six procedures in 45 candidates were performed. All pts were Childs class B or C. Eight pts were placed in the lateral position with 38 in the supine position. In 4 pts lesions were not well visualized utilizing a laparoscopic intraoperative ultrasound probe (IOUS). All 4 pts had a hand assist port placed and a T-bar ultrasound probe utilized. This was sufficient to visualize lesions in 3 of the patients with the remaining patient requiring a conversion to an open procedure. The mean number of lesions at exploration was 1.6. Fifteen pts had prior abdominal surgery and dense adhesions. The mean tumor size was 2.5cm. The mean estimated blood loss was 100cc. There were no peri-operative deaths. The most common complication was a transient new onset of ascites 11% (n=5) or worsening of ascites 50% (n=23). Wound complications including ascites leak 7% (n=3) and wound infection 7% (n=3) were infrequent. 67% (n=31) patients were listed for transplantation and 52% (n=24) have been transplanted thus far. Two pts who underwent transplantation had subsequent cardiac complications and died after OLT. Explanted liver tumors have been documented to have 30%-99% necrosis. Six deaths (43%) were observed in the group of pts not listed for transplant. Causes of death included: hepatic failure (n=2), tumor progression (n=3), and massive variceal bleed (n=1). Conclusion: The laparoscopic approach for RFA offers a safe and effective approach for the evaluation and treatment of HCC. With the addition of the hand assist technique the great majority of patients are able to undergo RFA without conversion to a formal open procedure. An effective bridge to transplantation, patients receive adequate MELD scores for subsequent transplantation without incurring excessive morbidity or mortality. Introduction: Identification of malignant lesions in cirrhotic patients increase priority scores for these patients based on the MELD system. Often diagnosis and treatment must be based on frozen section results from a cirrhotic liver. Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is a promising treatment for such tumors in the pre transplant period providing interval therapy prior to transplantation Methods: Review of all patients at a single transplant institution who underwent RFA for tumor treatment and subsequently underwent liver transplantation. All patients had frozen and permanent section pathological biopsies evaluated for the presence of tumor. These results were compared to the final pathology after hepatectomy for liver transplantation. Results: 16 patients were identified who underwent abdominal exploration and RFA with open biopsy of known liver tumors prior to liver transplantation. All patients had cirrhotic liver disease. The cause of liver disease and cirrhosis was hepatitis C (69%), hepatitis B (12%), hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), alcohol and crytogenic cirrhosis (6% each). Preoperative MELD score was a mean of 12.4 ± 7.6. Of the 16 patients, 14 were identified at time of operation as having HCC on frozen section pathology (88%), although one patient later proved to have cholangiocarcinoma variant of HCC. Two patients identified as having no tumor at biopsy were subsequently shown to have HCC at time of hepatectomy (12%). One patient had a hemangioma incorrectly identified as atypia and one patient had HCC incorrectly identified as normal tissue. Each patient had an average of 2 tumors (range 1 to 6) located in either the right lobe (11 patients) or both lobes (5 patients). Tumor size averaged 3.1 centimeters in diameter. After exploration, RFA and biopsy, the MELD score mean increased to 23.4 ± 6.4 (two-fold increase). At a median follow up time of 7 months all patients remain alive. Conclusions: Abdominal exploration frozen section biopsy and RFA is an aggressive approach to cirrhotic patients with undiagnosed liver masses. At our institution this procedure achieved a tumor identification sensitivity of 88% and specificity of 100%. The practice of tumor staging by RFA and biopsy resulted in more accurate MELD scoring and led to definitive treatment by liver transplantation. (HCC) is now the fifth most common cancer world wide, is the third cause of cancer-related death and is increasing from past years in the United States. The greatest risk factors for developing HCC remains to be hepatitis. Prognostic estimation is a question of tumor staging, residual liver function and co-morbidities of the patient. The natural history of HCC has been historically based upon data collected prior to adequate diagnostic tools and serum markers of cancer. Because of this, survival estimations and recommendations of therapy underestimate a patient's survivability with current therapies. It is not clear if preoperative imaging studies accurately define the state of tumor burden. We hypothesize that there is no difference in accuracy between extracorporeal preoperative imaging and intra-corporeal operative US (IOUS) of liver tumors. 68 patients were evaluated for liver tumor(s) and received open or laparoscopic radiofrequency ablation (RFA) between 12/2000 and 9/2003. All patients were diagnosed with a liver tumor(s) by either ultrasound (US), computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). All patients had pathologic verification of malignancy at the time of RFA. Twenty one patients proceeded on to liver transplantation (Ltx). Pathology of the tumor at the time of RFA and on explant were compared. 68 patients with 92 liver masses had RFA performed. Preoperative imaging found the average tumor size to be 1.9 cm by US, 4.0 cm by CT and 2.9 cm by MRI. IOUS assessment found a maximal tumor diameter to be 3.47cm (p<0.05, P=0.09, P=0.42, respectively). Twenty-one (30.9%) patients proceeded on to Ltx. This cohort had an average of 1.23 tumors per liver and mean diameter 2.9cm. Intra-corporeal US significantly differed from all pre-operative imaging results (US, 1.8cm; CT, 4.5cm; and MRI, 4.9cm; P<0.05) . Accurate identification and tumor sizing is critical in surgical decision making for cirrhotic patients with tumors. Preoperative staging has been inaccurate because of the cirrhotic liver parenchyma characteristics; distinguishing viable tumor from regenerating nodules has been challenging. This study identifies that pre-operative US, CT and MRI poorly assesses the true tumor burden. This would advocate for IOUS interrogation of liver tumors in cirrhotic patients prior to medical decision making to better assign therapies to maximize outcomes for these patients. LT with preservation of the inferior vena cava (IVC), known as piggy-back (PB) technique offers several advantages: no need for a veno-venous bypass (VVB), shorter operation time and less peroperative blood loss. However no consensus exists regarding the optimal reconstruction of the venous outflow tract (VOTR). Several modifications of VOTR have been described. We report our experiences with end-to-side (ES) caval anastomosis in adult LT, particularly in terms of complications specific to this PB technique. A consecutive series (1995) (1996) (1997) (1998) (1999) (2000) (2001) (2002) of 149 adult LT in 141 patients using ES caval anastomosis were analyzed, which represents 50% of all (n=299) adult LT performed in this period. In all cases an end-to-side VOTR was done as follows: (1) during recipient hepatectomy orifices of the right, middle and left hepatic veins were closed with running suture; (2) the caudal end of the donor IVC was closed and its cranial end was left open and prolonged by longitudinal midline incision in the posterior wall; (3) after clamping of the recipient IVC, the anterior wall was incised longitudinally and the graft was placed orthotopically, and rolled to the right; (4) the anastomosis between donor and recipient IVC was performed using two running sutures. VVB was not used in any case and a temporary portocaval shunt was performed in 9 patients (6%). Twenty-seven patients (19%) died during follow up, but death was not related to the procedure. All surviving patients had a minimal follow up of one year. Median follow-up was 2,6 years (range 0.0-8.6 years). One, three and five year patient and graft survival were 84%, 80%, 80% and 80%, 72%, and 69%, respectively. AHP, warm ischemia time, revascularization time and total operation time were 78 min (range 43-207), 50 min (range 20-130), 89 min (range 43-217), and 552 min (range 255-890), respectively. Intraoperative use of packed red blood cells was 2,0 (range 0-33) and 30% patients did not require transfusion. Seventy patients (49%) had a postoperative complication. In only one case the complication was specifically related to the technique. Our experiences indicate that piggyback LT with ES caval anastomosis is a safe procedure with a low incidence of technique-related complications.  In 408 LT a duct-to-duct interrupted POLYGLYCONATE (MAXON)6-0 anastomosis was performed. A 2, 5 mm Latex T-Tube was placed on the recipient's duct and exteriorised straight through the abdominal wall. On day 7 post LT a cholangiogram was made, if normal T-Tube was closed. Three months after LT a new cholangiogram was performed and T-Tube removed if no alterations were found. RESULTS: There have been 40 biliary complications (9,8%). We have not included those related to Arterial Thrombosis. We had 24 leaks (5,88%), 9 anastomosis stenosis (2,2%), 5 T-Tube extracting problems (1,22%) and 2 accidental T-Tube removals (0,49%). From the 24leaks, 17came from around the T-Tube insertion and 7 from the anastomosis. Only one case in each group needed surgery ( Hepatoyeyunostomy ).Two T-Tube leaks were treated with transhepatic drainage. Opening the T-Tube till the leakage was resolved treated the remaining cases from both groups. Two patients with anastomotic stenosis needed surgery (Hepatoyeyunostomy) . 5cases were resolved with dilatations and the remaining stenoses were treated maintaining the ttube for a longer period. There were no significant complications on T-Tube removal. 3 patients received antibiotics for pain and fever. Local surgery was needed twice to remove the T-Tube from the skin.T-Tube was accidentally taken away in two patients.Only one needed surgery. CONCLUSIONS: We have a very low incidence of complications when removing the T-Tube and although there is an increase in T-Tube leakage they are mainly not significant. Moreover T-Tube has been very useful treating anastomotic leaks and stenosis. As we have a very low incidence of major biliary complications( 2,94 %) with a reoperation rate of 1, 23 % we consider safe and useful using T-Tube drainage In a retrospective study, we identified the patients (pts) with those hepatic artery thrombosis (HAT) -that we called "very late HAT" -arising more than 3 years after liver transplantation (LT): our aim was to check what kind of diagnostic tool was useful in the diagnosis of very late HAT. Patients and methods In our Unit, since 1983 through January 2004, 603 consecutive LT, with 72 Retransplantations (RETX), were performed in 531 adult and pediatric pts. The protocol of surveillance for HAT included Doppler Ultrasonography (US), and, in case of diagnostic doubts, computed tomography (CT) scan with arterial reconstructions, and/or hepatic arteriography. Doppler US was performed daily, soon after LT, and then monthly and yearly, unless the onset of rising values of liver enzymes. Patients with very late HAT were reviewed, focusing attention to diagnostic tools to detect intrahepatic arterial flow, and outcome. Results 24 HAT were recorded, 19 of them arising within 3 years after LT. So, 5 adult pts underwent 5 very late HAT, that is 0,8% of LT, 20% of HAT. Mean time of onset of very late HAT was 10, 3 ± 4,4 years (range 3,7 -14,9) . All patients with very late HAT had mild fever with biochemical signs of cholestasis. Doppler US always assessed the presence of intrahepatic arterial flow. On the contrary, TC scan reported, together with a dilatation of the intrahepatic biliary tree sometimes with abscesses, the right diagnosis, with complete HAT and no arterial intrahepatic flow. Angiography confirmed TC scan results. 3 patients underwent a successful RETX (4,1% of RETX), whereas 2 died of sepsis before surgery. Discussion and Conclusion Very late HAT after LT has a low rate, probably destined to increase due to the increasing number of long time transplanted pts. It must be suspected when a rise of values of hepatic enzymes with mild clinical signs of sepsis occur, without a clear explanation. Doppler US has a misleading pattern, as arterial intrahepatic inefficient flow detected by Doppler US is probably due to diaphragmatic vessels, so it can be argued that the rate of very late HAT is probably underestimated. CT Scan with arterial reconstructions can correctly detect the diagnosis. The usefulness of low-cost contrast enhanced US needs to be verified. RETX before the onset of sepsis has a an high success rate. , SURGICAL / NON SURGICAL,  IMMUNOLOGICAL / NON IMMUNOLOGICAL COMPLICATIONS  AFTER PRIMARY LIVER TRANSPLANTATION AND ITS IMPACT  ON GRAFT AND Introduction: Improvements in liver transplantation (LTx) survival outcome are widely acknowledged. However little is known about the types of longterm complications after LTx and their direct or indirect impact on patient and graft survival after liver transplantation. Aim: To examine the incidence of various types of complications in a large LTx population with a long-term follow-up. Material: One thousand consecutive patients (M=600,F=400) mean age 42.5 ±20.2, 834 adults (age>18years) and 166 children (age<18 years) received primary LTx between Aug, 1989 and Dec. 1992 , were followed until Feb 2002 with respect to the nature and frequency of post LTx complications and the impact of the complications on patient and graft survival was determined, recognizing that many patients have more than one complication. Results: Overall patient / graft survival at 10 year 61.5%/ 56.9% (84.8%, 80.0% for children, 56.8%, 52.3% for adults.Various complications, which occurred, in adults and children are grouped according to various systems and shown below. Conclusion: While multiple and often times, severe complications can occur following LTx, the overall survival of these patients is excellent. However, the impacts of various combinations of complications need further evaluation. Future studies should be directed towards reduction in rate of complications and prevention of multiple complications to improve patient and graft survival. TECHNICAL REFINEMENTS IN EX-SITU SPLIT LIVER. Silvio Balzan 1 , Olivier Farges 1 , Federica Dondero 1 , Daniele Sommacale 1 , Satoshi Ogata 1 , Marylène Plasse 1 , Jacques Belghiti 1 . 1 Hepatobiliary Surgery and Transplantation, Beaujon Hospital, Clichy, France Background: The split-liver is an important technique to alleviate donor shortage. However, the number of split grafts has not increased over the past 5 years. Besides difficulty in organization, other limitations for split-liver transplantation include the additional time required to prepare the graft, longer ischemic time and technical difficulty, with increased incidence of biliary complications in some series, in particular with ex-situ splitting. Biliary complications can be related to ischemia (due to extensive hilar dissection) or section of multiple biliary ducts (due to biliary blind section). The aim of this study is to describe a technical refinement to alleviate those drawbacks by a clear identification of hilar biliary anatomy with minimal hilar dissection using methylene blue in ex-situ split liver. Method: The whole organ is retrieved and preserved with Wisconsin solution according to standard techniques and a cholangiography is performed to identify major anatomical biliary variations. The parenchyma transection is then performed (along the main portal scissura or umbilical fissure) prior to any hilar or pedicular dissection. The hilar plate is thus exposed but neither dissected nor encircled. Methylene blue 1% diluted in physiological serum is then injected in the biliary tract by a metallic cannula inserted in the distal extremity of the common bile duct. This maneuver allows a very clear visualization of all large and small biliary structures at the hilar level. The best site for the biliary duct partition is selected and the section is performed without previous vascular dissection. Results: This technique was used in 5 split-liver transplantations. Optimal visualization of hilar large and small bile ducts was achieved in all procedures and the best site for biliary section was identified with minimal dissection. A single biliary anastomosis was possible in all 10 recipients. Biliary complications were identified in only 1 (10%) patient who had a biliary fistula in postoperative period. The time required to liver partition was shorter than with standard technique (45 vs 60 minutes respectively). Conclusion: The parenchymal transection performed prior to any hilar dissection and the injection of methylene blue in ex-situ split liver is a simple technique that allows clear visualization of hilar bile ducts. Optimal site of biliary section can be identified without extensive dissection. During orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) with inferior vena cava (IVC) preservation several technical modifications related to the outflow cavo-caval anastomosis have been proposed. As suggested by Parrilla and Belghiti an end to side outflow anastomosis created with the patch of the three native suprahepatic veins seem to be associated with a lower incidence of graft related venous outflow complications. Nevertheless, caval clamping that includes the three suprahepatic veins is sometimes technically difficult and requires transient IVC cross-clamping expecially in patients with a large liver. We describe a modification of Belghiti's liver hanging maneuver applied to the last phase of hepatectomy during OLT with IVC preservation. The lifting of the liver provides a better exposure of the suprahepatic region and allows easier orthogonal clamping of the three suprahepatic veins that occlude only a minimal portion of IVC. In the proposed modification the blind dissection of the anterior part of the IVC is limited to the region between the right and middle hepatic veins, minimizing the risk of this maneuver and exposing the suprahepatic veins for clamping. In 30 consecutive OLT with IVC preservation the modified liver hanging maneuver was achieved in all cases. Caval clamping including the three hepatic veins with preservation of the caval flow was achieved in all cases. The graft outflow anastomosis was performed between the graft IVC and the constructed common cloaca of the 3 hepatic veins in 28 cases and with the right hepatic stump enlarged to a minimal part of IVC in 2 cases Post-operative graft function and ascites were recorded on postoperative day 1, 3 5, 7 and 10 as showed in the table. The proposed modified hanging maneuver provides a better exposure of the three suprahepatic veins during OLT with IVC preservation. This provides a large outflow anastomotic cloaca that includes the right hepatic vein and preserves caval flow. Graft function and ascites on post-operative day 1, 3 5, 7 <Introduction> Lethal liver dysfunction induced by Extended hepatectomy could be caused by various and complicated factors, one of which is considered that the entire whole portal blood directed toward the small remnant liver. Furthermore, in adult liver transplantation, the similar impairment may be occured in cases with small for size graft. Accordingly, we hypothesized that resection of the small intestine would reduce portal pressure, and would become a strategy to overcome the problem. <Materials and Methods> Fourteen beagle dogs of either gender aging around one year were elected for this study. Dogs were randomly divided into Groups A and B. Group A was consisted of 70% hepatectomised dogs with transection and reanastomosis of the small intestine. Group B was consisted of dogs with 70% hepatectomy after 50% proximal resection of the small intestine. Because, death of each one dog from Group A and B severally, 6 dogs of each group were examined, and 3 dogs were euthanized in 1 and 4 weeks, respectively of each group. Effect of 50% resection of the small intestine on portal pressure after the 70% hepatectomy was investigated of the hemodynamic changes, liver functions, and histology of the liver. <Results> Significant decrease of the portal pressure in Group B with 50% enterectomy was revealed compared with that in Group A (P=0.002). On the first postoperative day, AST, ALT, ALP, HPT, ALB and AT3 in Group B were significantly more profitable than those in Group A. Total hepatic blood flow was significantly higher in Group B than Group A (P=0.037) after the hepatectomy. Histopathological findings of the remnant liver biopsied at one hour after the hepatectomy in Group A showed more severe swollen hepatocytes than those in Group B. Although, the remnant liver weights at 1 or 4 weeks in Group B was lighter than that in Group A. More PCNA positive hepatocytes in Group B at 1 and 4 weeks seemed to mean gradual and prolonged proliferations. Furthermore, the other findings of tissue flow and TUNEL stain results in Group B were superior than those in Group A. <Conclusion> Our results suggest that control of portal pressure by the enterectomy can a countermeasure to avoid not only residual liver dysfunction after extended hepatectomy but small for size graft syndrome after living liver transplantation in adults. Background: Early and late biliary tract complications after cadaveric orthotopic liver transplantation still remain serious morbidity and mortality. The choledocho-jejunostomy and the duct-to-duct biliary reconstruction with stent or t-tube have been commonly performed as the standard methods. Recently, the duct-to-duct biliary reconstruction without stent nor t-tube has been used. The aim of this study is to evaluate the early and late complication rate and outcome of duct-to-duct biliary reconstruction without stent nor t-tube after cadaveric liver transplantation for adult patients. Methods: Between February 1996 and December 2003, 266 adult patients underwent 268 cadeveric orthotopic whole liver transplantations with duct-to-duct biliary reconstruction without stent nor t-tube. Most of the anastomoses were performed in continuous fashion using reabsobable sutures. Clinical data were obtained by retrospective review of medical records and computerized database. Results: Three biliary leakage (1.1 %) was observed within the early post operative period (POD 2 -5) after liver transplantation. Fifteen stenosis (5.6%)of the common bile duct anastomosis were observed within the early post operative period (POD3-8). Seven stenosis (2.6 %) of the common bile duct anastomosis were observed at late post operative period (POD54-1109). Of the 7 patients, 4 patients had hepatic artery thrombosis. Three non-anastomotic obstruction (1.1%) of the common bile duct were observed at early post operative period (POD7-11). Complications unrelated to the surgical technique, including two intra-hepatic biliary stricture (POD5, 82), one papillary stenosis (POD197) and one biliary stone (POD23) were observed. There was no mortality in this study group due to the biliary complication during this study period. There were 5 morbidities (3 early stenosis, 1 late stenosis and 1 biliary stone) in the last 100 patients. Conclusions: Duct-to-duct biliary reconstruction without stent nor t-tube represents a useful technique in cadaveric liver transplantation for adult patients. However, biliary stenosis remains as a technical related complication. This study analyses the impact of this change on peri-operative parameters, renal support, complications and outcome. Methods: All data were prospectively collected on a dedicated data-base. A consecutive series of 384 primary liver transplants (2000) (2001) (2002) (2003) were analysed. There were 138 CON-LT and 246 CCP-LT transplants. Two hundred and twenty were male (55%), median age 52 years (16-73). Indications and disease severity as judged by MELD scores were comparable in both groups. The two groups were compared with respect to patient and disease characteristics, ischaemia times, operating time, use of blood products, in-patient stay and morbidity and survival. Results: (table) The requirement of respiratory support was higher (P=0.03) in the CON-LT group. There was no difference in the requirement of renal support. 30 day patient survival was 89% for CON-LT and 93% for CCP-LT (P=1.4;NS). Temporary porto-caval shunts (PCS) were used in 192 (78%) patients who underwent CCP-LT. The outcome parameters between those who had PCS and those who did not were not significant. However the group without a temporary PCS had a significantly lower warm ischemia time (P=0.03). Conclusion: Conversion to cavo-cavoplasty has not had an adverse impact on surgery, graft and patient survival. We observed a reduction in FFP and platelet support. CON-LT group had a higher requirement for respiratory support and a longer ITU stay, although the post operative hospital stay and survival were similar in both groups. Introduction: After small-for-size liver transplantation with a remnant liver volume of less than 0,5% of body weight often a severe portal hyperperfusion has been noticed. The influence of this portal hyperperfusion to the postoperative liver dysfunction has been discussed controversially. Several experimental and clinical studies tried to reduced the portal overflow by surgical shunt or ligation of the splenic artery. We report about our first experience with the Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic Shunt (TIPS) for temporary portal decompression in a small-for-size Mini-pig model. Material and methods: 20 Mini-pigs between 24 and 40 kg underwent laparotomy under general anaesthesia. The study was authorized by the German government and is conform with 1991 Revision of Guiding Principles in the Care and Use of Animals. In all animals extended resection of 75 % of liver volume (left lateral lobe, left medial lobe, right medial lobe) using crash-clamp technique was performed followed by the introduction of the TIPS (6 mm Easy-Wall Stent, Titan, 43 mm length) in the remnant liver (25% of total liver volume). TIPS was placed between right hepatic vein and main portal vein by fluoroscopic control and finger guidance. Anticoagulation was performed with 10.000 iE Heparin intraveniously during placement followed by low molecular Heparin daily. Portal vein and TIPS flow velocity was measured 1 and 72 hours after resection intraoperatively by 12 MHz Doppler-Duplex ultrasound. Results: The additional time for placing the TIPS was 60 minutes in average. In 17 animals (85%) the TIPS was successfully placed. In one case no hepatic vein was found for catheterisation (5%), two animals died due to blood loss immediately after resection (10% There was no stenosis of the anastomosis between the right hepatic vein and the IVC; however, intra-hepatic stenosis of the hepatic venous trunk like twisting form and a pressure gradient of 14 mmHg at the stenosis was revealed by hepatic venogram and manometry. We placed an expandable metallic stent (EMS) at the intra-hepatic venous stenosis, and succeeded in decreasing pressure. Liver function recovered and the amount of ascites decreased. The patient was discharged on the 41rd postoperative day, and is currently well 9 months after the operation. Case 2: A 51-year-old male developed outflow block18 days after LDLT for liver cirrhosis with hepatitis C. There was a stenosis of the anastomosis between the hepatic vein and the IVC, and the gradient was 10 mm Hg. We placed an EMS at the stenosis. The patient had been well after then to discharge on the 38rd postoperative day, and is currently well 8 months after the operation. Cases 3 and 4: Case 3 is a 54-year old male who had a LDLT for liver cirrhosis with hepatitis C; Case 4 is a 51-year-old male also with liver cirrhosis with hepatitis C. Both had LDLT performed with anastomosis of the right hepatic, inferior right hepatic, and major hepatic veins from segments V or VIII. They presented with outflow block. Veno cavographies demonstrated stenosis of the IVC and gradients were 13 mm Hg and 11 mm Hg; so we placed IVC Gianturco stents at 10 and 20 postoperative days, respectively, in the two patients. Liver function recovered and the amount of ascites decreased. Case 3, unfortunately, died due to severe gastrointestinal bleeding from a duodenal ulcer on the 77th postoperative day. Case 4 was discharged on the 43rd postoperative day, and is currently well 6 months after the operation. Early portal vein thrombosis is a rare but severe complication of liver transplantation requiring retransplantation or sometimes leading to death. We describe a successful reflow after early surgical intervention and pharmacological lysis of intrahepatic thrombus by direct injection of urokinase solution into the portal vein. A 56-year-old Japanese female affected by primary biliary cirrhosis underwent living related liver transplantation using right lobe graft from her son. The recipient had preexisting portal vein thrombosis from the portal trunk to the confluence of the splenic vein and superior mesenteric vein before transplantation. The portal vein was narrowed by chronic inflammatory tissue. The thrombus was removed, and the stricture was released by removing the scar tissue, and portal vein reconstruction was carried out. Good portal flow was demonstrated by ultrasound colordoppler examination immediate after operation, however, the portal flow was not detected on day 1 post transplantation. Laparotomy was performed emergently and fist-size hematoma was found around portal vein compressing the portal trunk below the anastomosis. Removing hematoma, the portal vein was opened to reveal thrombus locating from confluence of splenic vein/SMV to intrahepatic branches of right portal vein. The portal vein was recanalized by removal of thrombus in the portal truck and injection of 24,000 U of Urokinase directly into the intrahepatic portal vein. Within 30 min of this procedure intrahepatic portal vein was visualized and good portal blood flow was secured on US. Continuous urokinase infusion (12,000 U/day) through a middle colic vein was started during the operation and continued for 3 days. Activated clotting time was maintained between 200 to 250 second by infusion of heparin from the same catheter until day 16, when warfarin was started in replace of heparin. After 2 months of follow-up, the patient is in good clinical condition with normal graft function and good portal flow.This case report confirms the possibility of successful recanalization of the portal vein with thrombus by surgical removal of the stricture and urokinase injection through the portal vein. Placement of infusion catheter into a branch of SMV and direct infusion of anticoagulant drugs into portal vein could help to decrease the risk of recurrent thrombosis. The risk of developing "de novo" malignancies after liver transplantation is around 1% per year. The incidence varies from 3 to 15%, and it is greater than that in the general population. The potential causes for cancer after solid organ grafting are: chronic immunosuppression and viral. Objective: The goals of this paper were to review the medical literature about the subject and to verify the incidence of "de novo" malignancies in our service. Methods: A retrospective analysis of the medical files of 264 successive patients submitted to orthotopic liver transplantation from September 1991 to January 2004 was performed. Type of tumor, the risk factors involved, the treatment modality and the patient survival were registered and analyzed. The recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma was excluded. There were 5 (1.8%) cases, four men and one woman, the average age being 39.5. The type of tumor, the age of each patient, time from liver transplantation to malignancy diagnosis and the survival of each patient are noted. Results: There was a 60% mortality. The survival was affected by the benign nature of one of the tumors and by the early manifestation of intestinal obstruction in another allowing adequate surgical treatment. Three of the patients were heavy alcohol consumers before the transplant. Conclusion: The screening for premalignant lesions must be strongly encouraged, aiming at better post-operative results. Background Donor right hepatectomy subjects a healthy donor to an ultra-major surgical operation only for the benefit of the recipient. This has become a standard treatment modality to partially relieve the refractory shortage of cadaveric liver grafts. Justification of this procedure ought to be made with the full knowledge of the potential negative effects on the donor. Psychosocial assessment and monitoring of the donor has to be an integral part of such program. Aim of study To quantify the impact of donor right hepatectomy including the middle hepatic vein on donor quality of life before and after surgery longitudinally. Materials and methods Questionnaires with condition specific and generic components were completed by a face-to-face interview by one of the two full-time liver transplantation coordinators before operation, and 1, 2, 3, 6, and 12 months after operation. The generic instruments used were Karnofsky Performance Status, and the Chinese (Hong Kong) version of the Medical Outcomes Study 36-Item Short-form Survey. The latter measures eight concepts: physical functioning, physical role, emotional role, social functioning, bodily pain, mental health, vitality, and general health. Condition specific questions were also included. Results Between November 2002 and November 2003, 30 consecutive donors who underwent donor right hepatectomy including the middle hepatic vein were assessed and monitored prospectively before and after surgery. They were aged 35 years (21 to 56), with male to female ratio of 33.3%:66.7%. The median follow-up was 6 months (2 to 12). All except 1 were Chinese (1 Indian). There was no donor mortality or major complications. All the donors completed the questionnaires on schedule. Donor quality of life before surgery was excellent physically as they were by definition healthy individuals. The worsening was most significant in the 1 st to 3 rd month post-operatively, especially in the domains of physical functioning and bodily pain. These and other psychological aspects returned to the previous levels in 6 months' time. 86.7% (N=26) of these donors reckoned that their donor experience was positive. Conclusion Donor quality of life was adversely affected immediately following surgery. Return to previous levels could be expected at 6 month in large majority of donors. Live donor liver transplantation seems to be acceptable for the rescue of recipients with end-stage liver disease as adverse changes in donor quality of health is temporary. The MELD/PELD (M/P) system for liver allocation was implemented on February 27 2002. Reporting of 6-month post transplant survival data is 84% complete for the 4204 liver transplants performed with deceased donors from 2/27/02 through 12/31/02. For recipients transplanted at M/P scores, actual 6-month patient survival was 91.38% (CI=90.40,92.25) that was significantly better than the 79.5% (CI=75.46,83.55) survival rate for status 1 candidates. Overall 6-month graft survival for M/P recipients (87.56, CI=86.49, 88.62) was also superior to the status 1 recipients (74.66%, CI=70.38,78.94). Pediatric graft survival (88.16%, CI=84.17,92.14) was similar to adults (87.51, CI=86.40,88.62). When stratified by PELD score at transplant, pediatric recipients had excellent 6-month patient survival with no difference in patient survival rates among the strata. Pediatric graft survival was also not different among the PELD strata. However when adults are stratified by MELD score at transplant, recipients with MELD>35 had acceptable but inferior patient and graft survival compared with the other strata. Adult recipients with HCC MELD exceptions had improved 6-month patient survival (90.70%, CI=88.73,92.67) over non-HCC exceptions (86.46%, CI=82.40,90.52) and standard MELD (86.64%, CI=82.40,90.52) recipients but these differences were not statistically significant. We conclude that early post transplant patient and graft survival remains excellent under the MELD/PELD system with even the most ill adult and pediatric chronic disease recipients achieving 84.3% and 86.8% 6-month patient survival rates respectively. 4 Gastroenterology & Hepatology, University Hospital Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands Biliary complications are a cause of morbidity and graft dysfunction after liver transplantation. Ischemia and reperfusion play an important role in the occurrence of bile duct injury. Animal studies have shown that administration of bile salts can seriously amplify preservation injury of the biliary tree. Bile salts have detergent properties and their cytotoxic effects are antagonized by phospholipids. The role of bile salt secretion and changes in bile composition on the occurrence of bile duct injury, however, has not been studied before. We investigated changes in the secretion of bile salts and phospholipids after human liver transplantation and correlated these with biochemical markers of bile duct injury. In addition, expression of bile salt uptake (NTCP, Na + -dependent taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide) and secretion (BSEP, bile salt export pump) systems, as well as the phospholpid translocator (MDR3, multidrug resistance protein 3), was studied. Three sequential biopsies were taken from liver grafts in 28 patients: at the end of cold storage, 3 hours after reperfusion, and 1 week after transplantation. Blood and bile samples were collected daily until 13 days after transplantation. Serum concentrations of ALP and γ -GT, as well as the release of these enzymes into the bile, were used as markers of bile duct cell injury. After transplantation, bile salt secretion restored rapidly, whereas phospholipid secretion increased at a slower rate, resulting in a significantly higher bile salt/phospholipid ratio in bile formed on day 1 compared to day 13. In parallel with this, NTCP and BSEP mRNA levels increased significantly after transplantation, whereas MDR3 mRNA levels remained unchanged, in comparison with gene expression before transplantation or in normal control livers. Bile duct cell injury, as reflected by ALP and γ -GT release into the bile, correlated significantly with bile salt secretion. Conclusion: Bile salt secretion is rapidly restored after transplantation and is disproportionately higher than the initial secretion of phospholipids. This results in the formation cytotoxic bile. These findings suggest that endogenous bile salts have a role in the pathogenesis of intrahepatic bile duct damage after liver transplantation. Extended criteria donor (ECD) liver utilization has expanded the limited donor pool for patients awaiting orthotopic liver transplant (OLT). Many centers approach ECD livers with caution as the outcomes following their use remains unclear. PURPOSE: To analyze outcomes of OLT using ECD livers compared to a control group of standard criteria donor (SCD) liver allografts. METHODS: All OLT recipients at our center between Jan 2002-Oct 2003 were categorized as having received an ECD or SCD liver. ECD allografts were defined as having any one or more of the following: donor age > 60 yrs, biopsy exhibiting >40% macrovesicular and/or >75% microvesicular steatosis, any donor down time (±CPR), use of 2 or more pressors within 12 hrs of procurement, or liver function studies > 5 x upper limit of normal. Parameters that were reviewed included: recipient demographics (age, sex, MELD, mean follow-up, length of stay), graft ischemic times (total and warm), laboratory data, and clinical outcomes (death, biliary complications, rejections). RESULTS: 90 OLTs (42 ECD and 48 SCD) were performed during the study period. No statistical differences were observed in laboratory data including: serum creatinine, transaminases (AST/ALT), total bilirubin, and albumin at discharge, day 30, 90, and 180 for both groups. The two groups were similar with respect to rejection episodes per patient ECD (1.1) vs. SCD (1.3) [ p=ns]. Five instances of vascular complications were identified (3 ECD vs. 2 SCD), although only one of those was a hepatic artery thrombosis. CONCLUSIONS: Clinical outcomes following OLT using ECD livers are identical to those using SCD livers. No differences were noted insofar as early or mid laboratory values, LOS, biliary or vascular complications. With intelligent recipient selection, the aggressive use of ECD liver allografts can become an important component of any transplant program. In order to expand the donor pool, there has been an increasing number of steatotic livers used for transplantation. It is known that the use of livers with significant macrosteatosis poses a higher risk for primary non-function and early graft failure. However, the long term effect on allograft and patient survival after transplantation of livers with macrosteatosis is not known. In this study, we wanted to determine: 1) if there was a higher incidence of late graft failure, and 2) whether there was a higher incidence and more severe recurrence of hepatitis C in liver transplant patients who received fatty livers. A retrospective analysis of 736 patients who underwent 829 liver transplants (93 retransplants) between January 1, 1994 and December 31, 1997 was performed. Of these cases, 142 donor biopsies in 133 patients were performed, and these comprise the study group. The mean follow-up for the patients was 5.9 ± 4.0 years with an overall patient and graft survival of 57% and 54%, respectively. Sixty-two of the biopsies (58 patients) showed histologic findings of macrosteatosis (Group I) and 81 biopsies (78 patients) had no evidence of macrosteatosis (Group II). Both groups were comparable with respect to recipient age, gender, UNOS status, and etiology of liver disease as well as donor age and cold ischemia time. The overall patient survival for Group I and Group II was 48% and 63% [p=NS], respectively, and graft survival was 48% (Group I) and 56% (Group II) [p=NS] . There was no difference between Group I and Group II in either the early (<1 year) (34% vs 30%, respectively, p=NS) or late (> 1 year) (18% vs 16%, respectively, p=NS) graft failure rates. Fifteen patients in Group I and 28 patients in Group II had hepatitis C and there was no difference in patient and graft survival between the 2 groups. Bridging fibrosis or cirrhosis has developed in 3 of 15 (20%) patients in Group I and 8 of 28 (29%) patients in Group II (p=NS). Patients in Group I were divided into those who received grafts with >30% (6 patients), 20-30% (16 patients), and <20% (36 patients) macrosteatosis. We found no difference in the patient and graft survival in these patients. CONCLUSION: Even with selected macrosteatotic donors, long term patient and graft survival after liver transplantation is satisfactory. In addition, the use of fatty livers did not appear to affect the incidence or severity of recurrent hepatitis C. Immunosuppression may increase the risk of non-skin malignancy after liver transplantation (LT) and malignancy may increase mortality. Aim. To study the incidence of non-skin malignancy after LT, to identify its risk factors and to evaluate its impact on patient survival. Patients and methods. The incidence of non-skin malignancy after LT was studied in 187 consecutive patients surviving more than 6 months after their first LT (May'90-October'01). The patients were followed until 2003. Risk factors were studied by Cox analysis. The impact of malignancy on survival was studied in a case-control study (2 controls per case). Results. Twenty-seven patients developed non-skin malignancy. The actuarial 1-, 3-, 5-, 7-and 10-year incidences of non-skin malignancy were 1%, 5%, 14%, 20% and 24%. In multivariate analysis, risk factors associated to the development of non-skin malignancy were a higher age, history of cigarette smoking and history of high alcohol intake before transplantation. Actuarial 1-, 3-, 5-, 7-and 10-year survival rates of patients with non-skin malignancy were significantly lower than survival rates of patients without neoplasia (93%, 74%, 66%, 49% and 42% vs 100%, 98%, 96%, 93% and 82%, respectively; P < 0.0001). Fifteen of the 27 patients with non-skin neoplasia died (median after diagnosis of malignancy: 5 months) and 12 of them are alive (median: 27.5 months). Conclusions: Non-skin malignancy is a frequent complication after LT. It is related to age, alcohol and cigarette smoking. Non-skin malignancy reduces post-LT survival. Ashokkumar Jain 1 , Mark Orloff 1 , Randeep Kashyap 1 , Kerrie Lansing 1 , Adel Bozorgzadeh 1 . 1 Surgery, Strong Memorial Hospital, Rochester, NY, USA Introduction: The outcome of hepatic retransplantation is inferior compared to that of primary liver transplantation. However, in a failing primary allograft it is the only option for survival. Aim of the present study is to compare the survival outcomes of retransplantation in regard to presence or absence of HCV infection. All patients who received a second liver graft, from our institution, were examined for causes of retransplantation, presence of (group A) or absence of HCV infection (group B). Between 12/94 to 11/03, 68 patients were retransplanted and followed until January 2004. The mean follow up time was 37 ± 29 months. Results: 19 patients were infected with HCV (group A: 17 males, 2 females; mean age 45 ± 6.5 years) and 49 patients who were not infected with HCV (group B: 21 males, 18 females; mean age 49±9.7 years). Causes of retransplantation included hepatic artery thrombosis (group A/B, n = 6/27), primary non-function (group A/B, n = 5/13) HCV recurrence (group A/B, n = 6/0), and other causes (group A/B, n = 2/9). Patient survival: Overall patient survival at 12, 24, and 36 months was 70.1%, 57.2%, and 54.1%. Patient survival in-group A was 78.6%, 61.7%, 61.7% and in-group B 66.8%, 56%, and 51.6% at the same time points. (p = 0.43) Graft survival: 3 patients in-group A required a third liver graft for HCV recurrence (N=1), and hepatic artery thrombosis (N=2). In-group B, 6 patients required further retransplantation for hepatic artery thrombosis (N= 4), and biliary cast syndrome (n= 2). Overall graft survival at 12, 24, and 36 months was 65.6%, 51%, and 48.3%. Graft survival in-group A was 73.3%, 56.3%, and 56.3% and in-group B it was 62.6%, 49.2%, and 45.7% at the same time points. (p = 0.60). Conclusion: Contrary to the general belief and other publications , in our observation HCV positive patients survival was slightly better compared to HCV negative patients. However, the difference was not statistically significant. Roberto Troisi 1 , Roberto Montalti 1 , Salvatore Ricciardi 1 , Hans Van Vlierberghe 2 , Isabelle Colle 2 , Bernard de Hemptinne 1 . 1 General, Hepato-Biliary and Transplantation Surgery; 2 Dept. of Hepato-Gastroenterology, Ghent University Hospital Medical School, Ghent, Belgium Background. Biliary complications in adult-to-adult living donor liver transplantation (AALDLT) are the major causes leading to early and long-term post-transplant morbidity. We analyze retrospectively the incidence, risk factors and overall morbidity of a single centre experience. Material and methods. From September 1999 to October 2003, 53 consecutive AALDLT were performed in our institution (47 Right Livers and 6 Left Livers). The M/F ratio was 32/21 and the mean age was of 54y (range 19-66). Indications were: n=22 (41%) viral cirrhosis; n=19 (36%) HCC on cirrhosis; n=2 (4%) PBC; n=2 (4%) PSC; n=8 (15%) other. Mean GRBWR was of 1,13 (range 0.56-1.93). Preoperative biliary anatomy in donors was done either by Cholangio-MRCP (53%) or Cholangio-CT (47%). Results. The median FU was of 13 m. Variations in biliary anatomy were encountered in 55% of RL donors whereas none occurred in LL. Biliary reconstructions were done as follows: Hepatico-Choledoco (HC) in 36 pts (68%), Roux-en-Y (RY) in 16 pts (30%), combined in 1 (2%). Single ducts anastomoses were done in 37 (75%) pts, multiple (2) (3) (4) in 13 (25%). Bilioplasty permitting a single duct anastomosis was needed in 7 (13%) pts. There were 20 complications in 18 (34%) pts: 35% in HC and 31% in RY respectively (p=ns). Early BC were observed in 15 (28%) pts: n=6(30%) non-anastomotic leak (3 revisions, 2 conservative, 1 PTC); n=5(25%) anastomotic fistulas (4 surgical revisions and 1 conservative); n=4(20%) peritonitis from T-tube dislocation (2 surgical revisions). Late BC (stenosis) were observed in 5 (25%) pts and required 3 dilatations and 2 stents. Late stenosis (27 m) in one patient led to sepsis and graft loss. Following factors were not significant prognostic factors: number of anastomoses, type of liver, biliary drainage, MELD score, GRBWR. The incidence of BC decreased after the 20th AALDLT (40% vs. 30%) (p=0.8). Overall 4-years patient and graft survival is 80% and 72% respectively. No statistical difference was found between recipients who experienced biliary complications and those who did not. Conclusions. BC represent the major cause of early and long-term morbidity in AALDLT. HC anastomosis is possible also in case of multiple ducts. BC seems to be independent from the learning curve; however, one graft was lost due to late BC. A longer FU is needed to address exactly the incidence of graft loss for late biliary complications in AALDLT. Johan Ungerstedt 1 , 2 , Grzegorz Nowak 2 , Bo-Goran Ericzon 2 , Urban Ungerstedt 1 . 1 Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; 2 Transplantation Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden The liver has a central role in the metabolism of amino acids. Amino acids may therefore serve as indicators of hepatic graft functional status after orthotopic liver transplantation. The microdialysis technique gives the opportunity of intra hepatic monitoring of amino acids from the extra cellular fluid by introducing a small catheter into the liver. In the present study we monitored intra hepatic amino acids postoperatively in 10 patients with microdialysis in order to describe levels and changes of amino acids in the liver early after transplantation in humans. Ten consecutive patients undergoing whole organ orthotopic liver transplantation were studied, 4 due to hepatitis C cirrhosis, 3 with familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy (FAP), 2 with primary sclerosing cholangitis and 1 with primary biliary cirrhosis. The microdialysis catheter was introduced into segment IV of the transplanted liver at the end of the operation. Monitoring of the liver continued for three days and amino acids where analysed by HPLC with fluorescence detection. The levels of Aspartate, Citrulline, Glutamate, and Taurine were initially high (9.7, 71, 169, and 116 mM respectively) and decreased during the first three postoperative days to 2.3, 40, 22, and 39 mM respectively. Arginine, Aspargine, Lysine, Ornithine, Serine, and Threonine increased during the period from 31, 47, 170, 78, 69, and 91 mM to 30, 98, 646, 220, 103, and 207 mM. However, Alanine, Glutamine, Glycine, Isoleucine, Leucine, Phenylalanine, Tyrosine, and Valine together with Methionine were stable during the monitoring period. One patient experienced rejection and cholangitis one week after transplantation and finally required retransplantation 4 months later. This patient had a diverging amino acid pattern in the Arginine/Citrulline (Arg/Cit) ratio, already during the first four hours postoperatively. This is the first time intra hepatic amino acids have been monitored in humans. We conclude that it is possible to measure amino acids and that the amino acids changed differently during the postoperative recovery face. We did not experience any complication due to the introduction of the microdialysis catheter. This opens possibilities for improved monitoring of the transplanted liver. The low Arg/Cit ratio during the first 4 postoperative hours in one of the patients that later needed retransplantation indicates that changes in the intra hepatic amino acids may reflect clinical outcome. This will be addressed in further studies. The disease is clinically progressive with organ dysfunction and is usually fatal about 10 years after the onset. TTR is mainly produced in the liver, and liver transplantation has been proposed an effective treatment for FAP. Living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) for such an inherited disease is not easy in donor selection, but has been a significant treatment in Japan due to the scarcity of cadaveric donors. We analyze the results of LDLT for FAP and evaluate the efficacy of LDLT on the progression of FAP. Methods: Since January 1999 to December 2003, seven patients with FAP, including 4 males and 3 females, have undergone LDLT at our center. Donors included 4 spouses, one mother and one daughter. If the donor was recipient's blood relation, the gene analysis was performed to exclude potential FAP. The recipients' age distribution was between 30 and 49 years old (median: 35). The median duration of symptomatic disease before transplantation was 9 months (ranged from 5 months to 8 years). The modified body mass index (BMI) was calculated to evaluate the change of nutritional system. The scoring of the disturbance in sensory, autonomic, motor and visceral nervous systems was performed and compared before and after transplantation. The follow-up periods ranged from 8 months to 4 years. Results: Three left lobes and 4 right lobes were used as the grafts and graft and recipient body weight ratio ranged from 0.47 to 1.18 % (median: 0.96 %). The pace maker was placed in two patients just before transplantation to avoid sudden cardiac arrest due to cardiomyopathy by amyloid accumulation. All recipients remain alive and have returned to normal social lives. The nutritional conditions have improved after transplantation in most patients. The scores of the disturbance in nervous systems have not changed significantly before and after transplantation, showing neither improvement nor progression of neurological symptoms. Conclusions: LDLT allowed the timely transplantation, and could prevent the progression of FAP. As the neurological symptoms presented preoperatively have not improved after transplantation, the earlier transplantation after the onset should be considered, if the door is available. Sundeep Adusumalli, Timothy M. McCashland, Micheal Sorrell, Dan Schafer. Hepatology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA Introduction -Aims: 1) evaluate survival after cardiac operations in patients before or after liver transplant 2) examine the cause of heart disease 3) investigate the cause of death Methods-A retrospective analysis of 4 patients before liver transplant and 7 patients after liver transplant undergoing cardiac surgery. Data evaluated included, patient demographics, type of liver disease, type of heart disease, severity of liver disease, severity of heart disease, complications, and patient survival. This information was obtained through the transplant database from 1996-2002. Results -Survival in patients with cirrhosis after cardiac surgery occuring before OLT was 50% at 1 year and 25% at 2 years. The only long-term survivor with a cardiac surgery before OLT had a low MELD score (9) compared to those who died MELD score (18). Patient survival after cardiac surgery occuring after OLT at 1 year was 50% and 33% at 2 years. CAD (3/4 pts) and aortic stenosis were the causes of heart disease pre OLT, and valvular heart disease was most common cause after OLT (5/7 pts). Aortic value replacement was required in 4/5 patients with valvular heart disease and all had developed endocarditis after OLT as the source of valvular disease. Liver failure (1/3 pts) and infections (2/3 pts) were the leading causes of death before OLT, whereas cardiac deaths (3/5 pts) were common after OLT. Patients who survived tended to have a lower MELD score at cardiac surgery (9, 9, and 10) Summary -Patients with poor liver function at the time of cardiac surgery had lower survival. Cardiac surgery following liver transplantation had poor long-term survival (33% 2 year). Bacterial endocarditis leading to valvular heart disease was the most common etiology for cardiac surgery post liver transplant. Genomic medicine has rapidly evolved as a specialty. Gene transfer and gene therapy techniques are being utilized to treat inborn errors of metabolism, hepatic cirrhosis and hepatocellular cancer. This is in keeping with the National Institutes of Health's recent proposals for support of translational research. This presentation aims to discuss the following proposed application of HGP to transplantation: • Histocompatibility testing: genome-based molecular typing • Interventions in the donor to make donor genome more compatible with the recipient • Modifying the donor organ to express 'compatible antigens' • Expansion of the genetic code to accommodate additional amino acids in strategic positions to increase compatibility • Molecular imaging of targeted macromolecules on donor organ and recipient immune system to diagnose early rejection and monitor allograft function • Pharmacogenetic or DNA diagnostic testing using microarray technology to develop 'genome-based' specific immunosuppressive therapy • Development of gene microarray technology to detect and monitor chimerism, evaluate genomic basis of transplant tolerance and develop genome-based tolerance assays • Unraveling of the human genome is expected to have a tremendous impact on the field of transplantation As the donor population becomes older, the quality of all donor allografts decreases. With decreasing numbers of ideal donors, one wonders if a donor is good enough to provide a pancreas and/or thoracic organs, should one assume that the liver will also be acceptable for transplantation? PURPOSE: To evaluate clinical outcomes in OLT recipients using grafts from liver-only procurements compared to multi-organ recoveries. METHODS: UNOS database was retrospectively reviewed for recovery and transplant outcomes of abdominal and thoracic organs between 1/99-12/02. The data were analyzed for OLT recipients with respect to: primary non-function (PNF) rate, 6month graft survival, and overall patient survival, with follow-up ending in June 2003. Four procurement groups underwent OLT: liver-only (L-O), liver-pancreas (L-P), liver-thoracic (L-T), and liver-pancreas-thoracic (L-P-T). RESULTS: There were a total of 20,334 OLTs performed in the time period. The overall rate of PNF was 3.6%, the 6-month liver allograft survival was 83.7% and patient survival was 77.9%. Following OLT, the PNF rate was significantly higher for grafts from L-O procurements compared to L-P and L-P-T procurements (4.4% vs. 2.4%, p<0.01 and 4.4% vs. 2.6%, p<0.01 respectively). No PNF differences were observed between L-O and L-T groups (4.4% vs. 3.8%, p=0.10). The 6-month liver allograft survival was superior in multi-organ recovery groups (L-P, L-T, L-P-T) compared to the L-O group: 84.8%, 84.6%, and 86.2% vs. 81.7% respectively, p<0.001 for all. Overall patient survival was also superior in L-P, L-T, and L-P-T groups compared to the L-O group: 80.2%, 79%, and 80.4% respectively vs. 75.6%, p<0.0001. CONCLUSION: Clinical outcomes are superior in OLT recipients when the graft is procured as part of a multi-organ recovery compared to liver-only recovery. In addition, recovery of the pancreas along with the liver provides a lower PNF rate for OLT recipients compared to liver-only or liver-thoracic procurements. These observations suggest that donors who are ideal enough to provide pancreatic allografts also provide the best hepatic allografts. Results: The IPITTR reviewed 296 cases of high-risk transplants performed using donors with known or incidentally discovered malignancies. 124 cases (42%) of donor transmission were confirmed. The majority were observed in kidney recipients (n=222), followed by liver (n=38), heart (n=27), lung (n=5) and pancreas (n=4). The incidence of donor malignancy transmission was uniform among allograft recipients, occurring in 45% of renal, 37% of liver, and 30% of cardiac. The majority of donors involved in this study were cadaveric (n=296); there were three living unrelated donors and the remainder were living-related donors. Mean donor age was 37.4 ± 15.0 years of age. Seventy-six (26%) of the donors had a known history of malignancy. Mean recipient age was 37 ± 15.4 years. The mean time from transplantation to presentation of the donor malignancy transmission was 2 months, with a range of 2 days to 38 months. The most commonly tumors encountered in eligible donors are central nervous system tumors. A recent study from the IPITTR evaluated risk factors involved in donor transmission. In this series, an overall CNS tumor transmission rate of 23% was observed, with several specific risk factors including high-grade tumors, ventriculoperitoneal and ventriculoatrial shunting, craniotomy, and external radiation having been identified. When no identifiable risk factors were identified, the incidence of donor transmission was only 7%. In the presence of one or more risk factors, the incidence of tumor transmission was increased to 46%. Two donor tumor histologies were noted with very high transmission rates: malignant melanoma and choriocarcinoma. Choriocarcinoma, a gynecologic malignancy, had an identified transmission rate of 93%, with a resulting 64% mortality rate. Malignant melanoma has demonstrated a 74% tumor transmission rate with a resulting 58% mortality. Utilization of organs from donors with a historic or active lung malignancy resulted in a 43% tumor transmission rate, with a corresponding 32% percent mortality rate. Conclusions: Donor transmission of malignacy is a real entity. While organs from donors with CNS malignancies can be used in the abscence of risk factors, the use of organs from patients with melanoma, choriocarcinoma or lung cancers should be avoided. Jochen Klupp 1 , Andreas Pascher 1 , Kerstin Leckel 1 , Antonio Spinelli 1 , Robert Pfitzmann 1 , Jan M. Langrehr 1 , Peter Neuhaus 1 . 1 Dept. of Surgery, Charité-Virchow, Berlin, Germany Up to date waiting list priority in Eurotransplant (ET) is categorized in a system comparable to the former UNOS system (T1 high urgency, T2 urgency, T3 liver disease with complications, T4 liver disease without complications, T5 not transplantable). It is under discussion weather MELD score system is also applicable in the ET territory. Therefore we evaluated all patients who received an orthotopic liver graft at our institution between Jan 1 2000 and Dec 31 2002 (n=347). Indications for transplantation were acute liver failure (16), alcoholic cirrh (74), HBV (28), HCV (41), PBC (11), PSC (17), malignoma (51) and others (109) including 33 retransplantations. Overall one year patient and graft survival was 86% and 79%. Mean MELD score at transplantation was 16 (group I: 6-10, n=73; II: 11-13, n=72; III: 14-20, n=72; IV: 21-44, n=68). MELD correlated only weakly with Child score (r=0.31). One year patient survival was 0.94 in group I, 0.9 in group II, 0.84 in group III and 0.8 in group 4 (p=0.15 ). In comparison one year survival of Child A patients was 0.93, Child B 0.89 and Child C 0.85 (p=0.13). Only patients with a score >20 showed a higher need for blood transfusion (p=0.04) and longer time on ventilator postoperatively (p<0.01). The overall hospital stay was not affected. MELD score failed to discriminate within the high risk group IV: One year survival in patients with a score 20-30 (n=34) was 79% and in patients with a score greater than 30 (n=16) survival was 81%. Excluding patients with malignant diseases the overall discrimination of MELD was better (p=0.05), however only patients in group IV showed lower 1y survival (p=0.79) compared to the other groups (p=0.94, 0.94 and 0.9 in groups I -III, respectively). MELD score did not reflect outcome in 3 out of 28 patients with cholestatic liver disease, who died 137, 143 and 1041 days after OLT. Patients with a MELD score up to 20 had all a comparable prognosis after liver transplantation. Patients with a score 20 and higher showed a significantly poorer outcome, with a more complicated perioperative course. However, higher scores above 30 did not show increased patient morbidity and mortality. Liver transplantation as a therapeutic method for treating liver terminal diseases causes a new problem after its implantation: the scarcity of organs. Objective: The aim of this study was to analyze, retrospectively, the donors classified as marginal and ideal and the relation of this classification with the survival of the recipients after orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). Methods: A total of 197 OLTs were done in this service from 1991 to 2001. One hundred and forty eight became eligible for this study. The classification of marginal donors was based on criteria defined as follows. Major criteria: age over 55 years, aspartate aminotransferase greater than 150UI/l, serum bilirubin greater than 2mg/dl, serum sodium greater 150 mEq/l, use of dopamine greater than 10µg/kg/min or any other vasoactive amine, cardiac arrest, Intensive Care Unit (ICU) stays for more than 5 days and moderate or severe macrosteatosis. Minor criteria: dopamine usage bellow 10µg/kg/min, history of alcoholism, drug abuse, ICU stays less than 4 days, microsteatosis of any degree and mild macrosteatosis. Statistical analysis was carried out using Cox regression and the Kaplan-Meyer survival method. Results: The rate of marginal donors was 61.5%. In this study the 180 th postoperative day survival was 77.0%. Survival rates were 81.1% for marginal donor's recipients and 70.7% for ideal donor's recipient (p>0.05). Conclusion: The use of liver marginal donors was viable and could expand safely the numbers of liver transplants, diminishing the number of deaths on the waiting lists. Claudia Hriesik 1 , Burckhardt H. Ringe 1 . 1 Department of Surgery, Center for Liver Disease, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA In the early days liver transplantation (LTx) was recommended in patients with advanced non-resectable hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) resulting in poor long-term survival. Today, patient selection has become more stringent and is based on early, resectable cancer stages. However, present criteria used are different among transplant centers, which makes it difficult to compare results, and do not always accurately predict prognosis. We have reviewed the medical literature since 1954 to identify criteria published for the staging of HCC. To evaluate and compare the reliability of these criteria we focused on two questions: (1) Can the criteria be used in the decision making process before and for treatment? and (2) How accurately can these criteria predict prognosis? As a tool we used the certainty factor (C factor) as suggested by the UICC defining the level of diagnostic judgment and reliability: C1 clinical, C2 radiological, C3 biopsy, C4 resection, C5 autopsy. A total of twenty different HCC staging systems were selected and used for this compared analysis. • Eleven staging systems provided clinical and radiological assessment only. These systems were capable of selecting treatment without assessing a definite prognosis, e.g. the Milan criteria. • Two systems assessed pathological criteria only, e.g. Edmondson and Steiner. Both systems cannot be used to select therapy but provide prognostic information only. • Seven staging systems allowed to both assist in decision making for therapy based on clinical criteria as well as the assessment of a prognosis after surgery based on pathological data. An example is Vauthey. Ideally, staging criteria should be able to guide in therapeutic decision making and to predict long-term prognosis. However, accurate prediction of prognosis is usually based on pathological criteria, e.g. vascular invasion, which is usually not available before or without surgery. It would be desirable to use a uniform staging system in order to compare the results of different studies Roman Schumann 1 , Jeffrey T. Cooper 2 , W. Heinrich Wurm 1 , Richard B. Freeman 2 , Richard J. Rohrer 2 . 1 Dept. of Anesthesia; 2 Dept. of Surgery, Divison of Transplant Surgery, Tufts-New England Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA Introduction: The UNOS MELD score attempts fair allocation of scarce cadaveric donor livers, based on liver disease severity. Timely liver transplantation (LT) is also the treatment of choice for porto-pulmonary hypertension (POPH) and hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS) from advanced,stable liver disease. However, afflicted patients may not meet MELD listing criteria and/or miss the opportunity for curative LT, once their expected morbidity and mortality from progressive POPH and HPS become prohibitive. Living donor (LD) LT is MELD independent, and we report successful longterm outcomes in one recipient with each disorder. Both patients' MELD scores were 11 (upper limit: 40). I. Porto-pulmonary hypertension. An echocardiogram (ECHO) in a 37 yo man with alcoholic cirrhosis showed a severely enlarged, hypokinetic right ventricle. Initial right heart catheterization results, and data after 32 months of epoprostenol (EPS) therapy (maximally 19 ng/kg/min limited by drug side effects) were: pulmonary artery pressure (PAP, mmHg) 110/70⇒44/20, pulmonary vascular resistance (dynes•sec•cm 5 ) 960⇒76, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (mmHg) 14⇒15, and mixed venous oxygen saturation (%) 59⇒83. During right lobe LT from his sister, amrinone and inhaled nitric oxide were added to increasing EPS, then weaned postop. Graft unclamping was associated with a brief rise in PAP to 52/30. EPS was gradually discontinued over 7 months. At 24 months graft function is excellent, the patient works full time, and his POPH has resolved. II. Hepatopulmonary syndrome. Rapidly worsening HPS was diagnosed in a 49 yo woman with cirrhosis from Wilson's disease. Pulmonary function tests, an ECHO 'bubble study' (intrapulmonary shunts, normal cardiac function) and the following room air arterial blood gas values were diagnostic: pH 7.44, pCO 2 33, pO 2 47. Wheelchair bound from HPS, her exercise tolerance was minimal on 12 l/min home O 2 . Within 7 months after right lobe LT from her husband, she became wheelchair independent, intermittently requiring 4 l/ min of oxygen during ambulation. Conclusion: The MELD score does not adequately represent patients with life-limiting hepatopulmonary disorders. LDLT offers a timely, life-saving alternative in selected patients. Evidence-based prognostic recipient selection algorithms predicting acceptable LT outcomes are currently not available. Until then, careful individual risk/benefit analysis is mandatory. Ashok Jain 1 , Mark Orloff 1 , Kerrie Lansing 1 , Randeep Kashyap 1 , Mark Kelley 1 , Robert Betts 1 , Marilyn Menegus 1 , Adel Bozorgzadeh 1 . 1 Surgery, Strong Memorial Hospital, Rochester, NY, USA Introduction: CMV infection is the commonest viral infection after solid organ transplant transplantation leading to significant morbidity and mortality. Ganciclovir has been proven to be effective to prevent and treat CMV infection. Recently Valganciclovir (Valgan; Gannciclovir Hydrochloride) has been found to have significantly better absorption compared to gannciclovir (450 mg valgan absorption is equivalent to 3 gm oral ganciclovir absorption and 900 mg valgan equivalent to 5mg/kg intravenous ganciclovir) and has been suggested as prophylaxis for prevention of CMV infection after solid organ transplantation. Aim of the present study is to examine the efficacy of valgan prophylaxis after primary liver transplantation. Material Methods: Between July 2001 to May 2003, 203 consecutive post-liver transplant recipients (129 males, 74 females, mean age 53±11 years) received valgan prophylaxis (900 mg/day to 450 mg/every other day depending on the renal function.) for 3-6 months. All patients were followed for a minimum of 6 months. PCR positive CMV in peripheral blood diagnosed symptomatic CMV. [Routine periodic surveillance of blood PCR was not performed]. The rate of CMV infection was stratified according to donor and recipient status of CMV antibodies. GroupI= Donor +/Recipient +, Group II= Donor -/Recipient +, GroupIII= Donor +/Recipient -, and GroupIV= Donor -/Recipient -. Result: During the follow up period 29(14.3%) patients developed CMV (Positive by PCR in peripheral blood), of these 5 patients had invasive CMV on liver biopsies. The incidence was highest in Group III -14/54(25.9%) and lowest in Group IV-0/35. In Group I and II, it was 16.4%(12/73) and 7.3% (3/41) respectively. Mean time to symptomatic CMV infection was 169 ±117 (median174) days post transplantation. The rate of CMV for either donor or recipient positive status (Group I, Group II, and Group III) was 17.3% with an invasive CMV hepatitis rate of 3%. Conclusion: Overall rate of symptomatic CMV was 17.3% in either donor or recipients positive for CMV antibody despite high dose prophylaxis of valcyte, suggesting ineffectiveness of valcyte oral prophylaxis for prevention of symptomatic CMV in liver transplant recipients. Vijayaragavan Muralidharan 1 , Naoko Yoshimura 1 , David Mayer 1 , John Buckels 1 , Paul McMaster 1 , Darius Mirza 1 , Simon Bramhall 1 . 1 Liver Unit, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom Aims. In liver transplantation (LT), matching of the donor and recipient blood groups is important. Few studies have investigated the long term effects of non-identical but compatible LT in FHF, two of which have suggested an increased rate of acute and chronic rejection. We investigated the potential haematological effects and outcome in such LT recipients. Methods. Prospectively collected data on LT patients LT between 1984 and 2001 was analyzed. Mann-Whitney U-test was used for quantitative data, Pearson's chi-square test for categorical data, Kaplan-Meier method for actuarial survival and Wilcoxon method for comparison. Results. 220 patients underwent LT for FHF of which 161 received a blood group identical organ while 59 received a non-identical but compatible group organ. The identical blood group included 125 with group O, 48 with group A and 4 with group B. In the non identical group of patients there were 11 recipients with blood group AB (donor A=05; B=01; O=05), 36 with group A (donor group O) and 12 with group B (donor group O). Haemolytic anaemia was seen in 2 patients in the non identical group (3.4%) and one in the identical group (0.6%). Both patients in the non-identical group demonstrated graft vs host type antibodies relating to the haemolysis and required blood transfusions. Disseminated intravascular coagulation was also present in 4(6.8%) of the non-identical recipients. There was no difference in the number of patients requiring peri-operative transfusion (96.6% vs 98.1%) or in the volume of blood transfused (5 vs 6 units). There were no differences between the non identical and identical group with similar acute rejection rates (41% vs 43%,) 30-day graft loss (30.5% vs 24.2%), sepsis related deaths (14% vs 16%). 30-day survival (74.6% vs 78.3%) and 1 yr survival (60.6% vs 71.4%) were all comparable. Long term outcomes were comparable including 5 year patient (55% vs 63%, ns) and graft survival (51% vs 58%, ns) and graft loss from chronic rejection (3.4% vs 3.1%). A graft vs host type haemolytic reaction is a transient and uncommon complication (3.4%) in these patients. Blood transfusion in the presence of haemolysis should be undertaken with donor specific blood to prevent continued haemolysis. Long term outcomes are comparable to those with identical organs. Peter Faybik 1 , Gabriela Berlakovich 2 , Claus G. Krenn 1 , Amir Baker 1 , Heinz Steltzer 1 , Alois Werba 1 , Michael Zimpfer 1 , Hubert Hetz 1 . 1 Anaesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, University Hospital, Vienna, Austria; 2 Transplant Surgery, University Hospital, Vienna, Austria Objective : Besides the shortage of liver grafts, contraindications for orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) in some patients with acute liver failure (ALF) forced a development of liver support systems. A variety of liver support systems have been evaluated but none of these has yet proven to be entirely effective. We use the Molecular Absorbent Recirculating System (MARS) that supports the excretory and detoxification function of the liver. MARS utilises selective hemodiafiltration with countercurrent albumin dialysis aiming to selectively remove both water-soluble and albumin-bound toxins of the low and middle molecular weight range. MARS can clear toxins and mediators (IL-6, TNF-a) that are involved in remote organ dysfunction accompanying ALF and also increases albumin binding sites for free unbound fractions of these molecules and thus supports liver regeneration. Furthermore, additional factors thought to be essential for liver regeneration are not removed because of higher molecular weight. Thus MARS may support the regeneration of patient's native liver or bridge him until OLT. Methods : Four patients with acute liver failure were treated with MARS. The precipitating cause for ALF were liver resection (1), hemorrhagic schock with ischemic hepatitis (1) and acetaminophen intoxication (2) . All of them fulfilled the King's College Criteria for OLT but it was denied due to contraindications such as sepsis (3) and malignoma (1) . In one patient the liver biopsy revealed high likelihood for spontaneous regeneration. In all patients 1 to 5 MARS treatments were performed lasting for 6 -20 h. The effect of MARS treatments were evaluated using blood chemistry, coagulation tests and plasma disappearance rate of indocyanine green dye. Results : Three patients survived without OLT and one patient died (acetaminophen intoxication). In all cases OLT was considered to be necessary, but contraindicated and denied. However the patient who has died was already admitted in a very bad condition and the therapy was started later than in other cases. Conclusion : Our data suggest that MARS may be an alternative modality of treatment for patients who are contraindicated for OLT, patients who are waiting for the grafts or are likely to recover spontaneously. This may help to save liver grafts. Further randomised clinical trials are needed to warrant this therapy. DeokBog Moon 1 , SungGyu Lee 1 , KwangMin Park 1 , KiHun Kim 1 , ChulSoo Ahn 1 , TaeYeong Ha 1 , SeongHoon Cho 1 , KiBong Oh 1 , YeonDae Kim 1 , KeonKuk Kim 1 . 1 Division of HBP Surgery and Liver Transplantation, Department of Surgery, University of Ulsan College of Medicine and Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea (Purpose) Salvage liver transplantation (LT) has been suggested as a rational strategy. However, recent reports showed different results about it in terms of transplantability and patients' outcomes. We performed this study in order to assess the risk and outcome of salvage LT in comparison with that of primary LT. (Methods) Among total 651 LT patients from August in 1992 to March in 2003 at our insistitution, we reviewed 170 LT patients with hepatocellular carcinoma who could be followed up more than 10 months The patients were divided into salvage LT and primary LT group. The patient and tumor characteristics, intra-operative variables, in-hospital days, operative mortality (≤2 months) and complications were compared between them. Then overall survival and recurrence free survival from the time of transplantation were calculated in each group. (Results) The number of salvage and primary LT group was 12 (7.1%) and 158 (92.9%) respectively. Both group had clinically similar characteristics. However, tumor characteristics are somewhat different between two groups. The patients' distribution of UICC stage was I (n=0, 0%), II (n=4, 33.3%), IIIA (n=2, 16.7%), IVA (n=6, 50.0%) in salvage LT and I (n=45, 28.5%), II (n=59, 37.3%), IIIA (n=21, 13.3%), IVA (n=33, 20.9%) in primary LT (P = 0.02). Intra-operative packed RBC transfusion volume was not different (12.7 and 11.7 units each, P=0.21), but autotransfusion system (Cell-saver) was used in 3 patients and the volume was about 2500 ml. FFP transfusion volume was respectively 23.6 and 15.8 units (P=0.01). Post-operative complication rate in salvage LT were higher than primary LT (P=0.17). The 5-year cumulative survival rate was 19.7% in salvage LT and 71.2% in primary LT (P=0.01), but the recurrence free survival rate was not different (P=0.42). Operative mortality (≤2 months) cases were 3 patients (25%), 9 patients (5.7%) respectively (P=0.041). However, when we divided patients by time periods, until 2000.12.31, operative mortality in salvage LT was higher than primary LT (P=0.02), but thereafter that was similar between them (P=0.54). (Conclusion) Salvage LT is associated with a higher operative mortality and a poorer outcome than primary LT. However, recently we could overcome one of the biggest problem in salvage LT -operative mortality with help of accumulated experiences about LT. So, if indicated, that is sort of reasonable strategy. Patients with HCC remained in the waiting list a median of 60 days (r 0-307) with a drop out rate of 5%. LTx was indicated according to the Milan criteria. The etiology of cirrhosis was: HCV 54%; alcohol 36%; HBV 4%; others 5%.The Child-Pugh classification was: 56% A, 32% B and 11% C. Chemoembolization with lipiodol and adriamycin was carried out preoperatively in 48% of patients. RESULTS: Immunosuppression was mainly based on tacrolimus and steroids (79%). Acute cellular rejection was 15%. In the explanted liver, the average size of the tumor was 3.3 cm (1-8 cm) . Both lobes were affected in 16%. Seven livers showed tumors bigger than 5 cm. Microscopic vascular infiltration was seen in 17%. The median ICU stay was 3 days(r 1-62) and hospital median stay was 15 days(r 9-101). Six patients with HCV and one with cryptogenic cirrhosis had tumor recurrence, dying 5 of them. Neither the patients with HCC bigger than 5 cm nor the patients with alphafetoprotein higher than 100 ng/ml had tumor recurrence. Hospital mortality was 3% and overall mortality was 19%. The main causes of dead were: HCV recurrence in 5 cases; tumor recurrence 5 cases; de novo tumors 3 cases. Median follow-up was 997 days (r 40-2826). Overall survival at 1, 3 and 5 years is 94, 83 and 75%. Survival of HCC associated to HCV and alcoholic cirrhosis at 1, 3 and 5 years was 93, 77, 68.5% and 97, 97, 91% respectively. This difference is statistically significant (log-rank test p=0.02). The survival free of tumor at 1, 3 and 5 years was 91, 79 and 74.5%. Free tumor survival for HCV and alcoholic cirrhosis at 1, 3 and 5 years was 90, 70, 66% and 97, 97, 91% respectively. The difference has statistically significance (log-rank test p=0.012) CONCLUSIONS: -LTx is an excellent treatment for HCC with very high survival and low recurrence rate at 5 years overall for alcoholic cirrhosis -Survival of HCV is a strong determinant of survival for transplanted HCC -Survival of HCC shows a statistically significance between alcohol and HCV Mark J. Thomas 1 , Ann Cho 2 , Andrew Raheim 3 , Manish Gupta 1 , Todd Merchen 1 , Steve Rudich 1 , Micheal Hanaway 1 , E. Steve Woodle 1 , Joseph Buell 1 . 1 Division of Transplantation, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA; 2 Radiology, University of Cincinnati School of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA; 3 Pathology, University of Cincinnati School of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA Primary liver malignancies (PLM) are the fifth most common cancer world wide and is the third leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the USA. The current standard of care for PLM is surgical resection. The minority of these patients will have acceptable morbidity and mortality. Liver transplantation (Ltx) in selected patients have produced acceptable outcomes. However, given recent data on tumor doubling rates and transplant waiting times, it is estimated that 25-45% of these patients will not be transplantable within 12 months of diagnosis. Ablative techniques, therefore, offer a solution for addressing this problem. We have hypothesized that radiofrequency ablation (RFA) of PLM is safe and produces acceptable outcomes. Referred patients were evaluated for liver tumor(s). All patients were diagnosed with a liver tumor(s) by either ultrasound (US), computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Each patient was taken to the operating room for laparoscopic or open RFA. Each patient had pathologic verification of malignancy from core needle biopsies prior to RFA (60 intra-operative and 16 pre-operative). 76 patients were referred for evaluation of identified PLM and were acceptable for RFA. 57 patients (76%) were found to be cirrhotic. There were 143 lesions identified by preop radiological tests (2.07 lesions per patient) with an average size of 3.45 cm. 72 RFAs were completed laparoscopically and 4 through open laparotomies. At the time of RFA, intraoperative ultrasound (IOUS) was unable to identify 5 (3%) tumors. 82% of all tumors were found to be malignant on pathology. Of all operative biopsies (n=60), frozen section pathology identified 91.7% correctly. There were 2 false positive (3.3%) and 3 (5%) false negative diagnoses. Post RFA there were 9 complications and one recurrence of tumor prior to transplantation or death. There were 6 deaths (8%), 1 within 3 months after RFA from hepatic failure with associated hepatorenal syndrome. Of those patients who were transplanted (24), explanted tumor volumes were evaluated and found to be 30-99% necrotic. Radiofrequency ablation of liver tumors is a safe procedure, even in the cirrhotic patient. It can be used in adjunct to liver transplantation or as a stand alone treatment for those not Ltx candidates. Further study is needed to identify whether it is an acceptable option instead of Ltx. Gunnar Soderdahl 1 , Tomas Nordman 2 , Pehr Rissler 2 , Jerker Olsson 2 , Lennart Eriksson 2 , Bo-Goran Ericzon 1 . 1 Department of Transplantation Surgery, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden; 2 Department of Microbiology, Pathology and Immunology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden Background. In order to improve the results after liver transplantation for hepatocellular cancer, adjuvant treatment with doxorubicine has been suggested. We have applied a model for evaluation of the effect of doxorubicine and/or cyclosporine A on liver tumor growth and antioxidant levels in the liver. Methods. Three chemically induced rat liver tumors of various differentiation were minced, suspended in saline and transferred to the spleen of 3 groups of syngenic rats. Each recipient group were then divided into 4 subgroups (A-D). Subgroup A received treatment with i.v.doxorubicine 0.5 mg/kg body weight once a week (n=10), subgroup B received i.p.cyclosporine 2.5 mg/kg body weight twice each week (n=10), whereas subgroup C received a combination of cyclosporine and doxorubicine (n=10). Subgroup D received no treatment (n=15). The rats were sacrificed after 5-22 weeks. Results. In the animals transplanted with a relatively high-differentiated tumor, no tumor cell proliferation was found in any of the subgroups. When the tumor exhibited a more pronounced dysplasia, doxorubicine significantly stimulated tumor growth. This effect was further increased by cyclosporine. In the animals that were transplanted with the most aggressive tumor, doxorubine inhibited tumor growth. When given together with cyclosporine, however, this inhibition was abolished. Cyclosporine alone had no effect on tumor growth. The levels of a-tocopherol, ubiquinol and ubiquinone in the liver were significantly increased by doxorubicine after 17 weeks of treatment. When combined with cyclosporine, the levels increased further, while cyclosporine alone had no effect. Conclusion. These data suggest that doxorubicine, especially when given together with cyclosporine, may have a stimulatory effect on liver tumor cell growth in rats. This effect correlates to a concomitant up-regulation of the antioxidative defence system in the liver. The calcinurin inhibitor, cyclosporine A (CsA), affects cancer growth and metastasis, but it is still unclear how cancer is progressed under general immunosuppressive therapy after organ transplantation. Herein we addressed how CsA promotes the dissemination of colon cancer cells that were transmitted to the liver. The metastatic cell line of rat colon cancer, RCN-H4, was originally developed from a Fisher rat, and stably transduced with firefly luciferase. First, 1 x 10 6 cells were then syngeneically inoculated into the liver of Fisher rats through the portal vein. The tumor-burden liver was transplanted into the Lewis rat. The animals were followed daily by 15 mg/Kg of CsA (p.o.). Tumor progression was evaluated by in vivo luciferase bioluminescent imaging. Substantial luciferase expression was observed in the grafted liver of the CsA-treated animals at day 15, but not in the graft of mock-treated animals. In the un-transplanted Fisher rats, this immunosuppressive regimen showed that tumor cells survived in the liver (nearly 100%) and metastasized to mesenteric lymph nodes (∼50%) at day 15. Luciferase expression was not observed in the lung, bone, and brain. Mock treatment with olive oil showed low survival frequency in the liver (17%). This tumor cell line expressed the chemokine receptors CXCR4 and CCR7, which have recently been implicated with organ-tropic metastasis and progression of tumors. Thus, these findings suggest that the immunosuppression with CsA allows the tumor cells in the donor graft to survive in the recipient, where some chemokine receptors may be mediated for tumor dissemination. Fatty change of partial liver graft has been a major concern in living donor liver transplantation due to its influence on graft size evaluation and posttransplant graft function. Hepatic steatosis is often associated with overweight, so we tried body weight reduction in potential living donors with fatty liver and/or obesity to alleviate hepatic steatosis. From January 1999 to December 2002, 447 healthy volunteers underwent liver donation for adult-to-adult living donor liver transplantation in our institution. Ultrasonography-guided per-cutaneous needle biopsy to the right liver has been carried out to nearly all living donors as a preoperative evaluation procedure for hepatic steatosis besides abdominal ultrasonography and triphasic computed tomogram. During the study period, there were 9 volunteers whose liver donation had been withheld due to histologic or radiologic findings of excessive hepatic steatosis and/or overweight. We had advised all of them to reduce their body weight. The goal of weight reduction by near 5% of initial body weight was achieved in 6 donors during 2-6 months, and mean proportion of weight reduction was 5.9±2.0% (3-9) of initial body weight. Their body mass index before and after weight reduction were 25.3±3.8 and 23.7±3.4, respectively. Total amount of hepatic steatosis was significantly changed from 48.9±25.6% before weight reduction and to 20.0±16.2% after weight reduction. The proportional change in microvesicular steatosis (from 30% to 5.6%) was more obvious than in macrovesicular fatty changes (from 18.9% to 14.4%). Six right lobe and 3 left lobe grafts were procured uneventfully from these 9 donors, and all 9 corresponding recipients survive more than 12 months to date. We think that short-term weight reduction of living donors will be helpful to alleviate excessive hepatic steatosis especially in microvesicular type and can contribute to expand the pool of marginal living donors. However, our data implicates that arbitrary body weight reduction can give erroneous information leading to underestimation of hepatic steatosis. Therefore, baseline assessment of hepatic steatosis should be mandatory before reduction of body weight to prevent its erroneous underestimation. Hiroyuki Furukawa 1 , Tsuyoshi Shimamura 2 , Maeng Bong Jin 1 , Tomomi Suzuki 3 , Masahiko Taniguchi 3 , Masahiro Hattori 3 , Toshiya Kamiyama 3 , Michiaki Matsushita 3 , Satoru Todo 3 . 1 Organ Transplantation and Regenerative Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan; 2 Devision of Organ Transplantation, Hokkaido University Hospital, Sapporo, Japan; 3 General Surgery, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan Objective: Under the scarce availability of cadaveric donors, living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) has become a standard therapeutic option for end stage liver disease in Japan. Risk factors affecting the outcome of LDLT has not been well defined. Reported herein is the analysis of the outcome and contributing risk factors. Methods: From September 1997 to December 2003 adult patients received LDLT. Recipient's age ranged from 21 to 61. Types of the grafts consisted of 44 right lobes and 32 left lobes. Major indications were postnecrotic cirrhosis (n=36) including 22 with hepatoma, cholestatic liver disease (n=21), and fulminant hepatic failure (n=16). Immunosuppression was with tacrolimus and steroid. Azathiopurine or mycophenolate mofetil was added if necessary. Contributing pre-, intra-and post-operative risk factors were analyzed for the survival rate, length of hospital stay, and postoperative peak total bilirubin (PTB) as endpoints. Results: Overall adult patient survival rates were 84.0% at 1 year and 76.3% at 5 year. With univariate analysis, risk factors affecting the survival rates were early fungal infection (p=0.0001), hepatic artery complication (HAC) (n=0.002), MELD score (0.016), recipient age (p=0.017), early bacterial infection (p=0.022), intraoperative platelets transfusion (p=0.035), and intraoperative FFP transfusion (p=0.050). With multivariate analysis, risk factors affecting survival rate were early fungal infection (p=0.004, Exp(B)95%: 2.5 to 27.8)), recipient age (p=0.04, Exp(B)95%: 1.7 to 19.8), MELD score (p=0.008, Exp(B)95%: 1.5 to 14.3), and intraoperative platelets transfusion (p=0.020, Exp(B)95%: 1.2 to 11.6). Significant factors for length of hospital stay were GV/SV ratio (P=0.007), HAC (p=0.010), postoperative apheresis (P=0.012), and venous complication (P=0.032). Significant factors for PTB were GV/SV ratio (p=0.0001), length of ICU stay (p=0.038), donor age (p=0.039) and preoperative total bilirubin (P=0.046). Conclusion: Survival and risk factors of LDLT are similar to cadaveric liver transplantation. Although small-for-size graft and elderly donors worsen the graft function, and venous complications prolong hospital stay in LDLT, those factors are not correlated with survival. To maximize the advantage of LDLT, it should be performed at optimal timing before the recipient's condition deteriorates. We will report on the development of software-assistants for the preoperative determination of functional liver volume in adult-to-adult living donor liver transplantation (LDLT). Moreover, we will present the methods and results of a worldwide internet based distant service in which these software-assistants are used to provide risk assessment and preoperative planning for transplantation centers. Evaluation of donors as well as surgical procedures vary from one transplant center to another, which adds to the challenges for a web-based distant service. Our distant service approach provides individual risk analysis and surgical planning information to the participating centers based on CT-scans from the donor. The information generated includes volumetric information for the total liver, the donor's individual vascular territories, and the functional liver volume, as well as anatomical details for all vascular systems. The software-assistants are in particular developed for the following tasks: -Determination and quantification of risks resulting from grafts or remnant lobes which have critical volume -Determination, quantification and visualization of risks resulting from grafts or remnant lobes which are left with compromised territories -Interactive Determination of appropriate cutting lines and their associated resulting risks The software has been used so far in the preoperative evaluation of more than 300 potential LDLT donors from 12 transplantation centers worldwide. Our clinical collaborators are from Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Singapore, Taiwan, and the US. The web-based distant service has proven to be feasible to support planning in LDLT. Especially the determination of risks associated with different resection strategies is unique and considered very helpful by the clinical partners. Figure 1 shows the volume at risk of venous congestion in case of a resection right to the middle hepatic vein without anastomosis of the V5 branches. Currently, in adult-to-adult living-donor partial liver transplantation, homografts from cadavers or the portal vein, external iliac vein and others within the liver removed from the recipient are utilized to increase the inner diameter of the portal and hepatic veins and IVC or to expand the anastomotic site, but these techniques have the disadvantages of limited tissue availability and a complicated procedure for harvesting the vein. To solve these problems, we developed an easy-to-use, tissue engineered patch and assessed its applicability to the reconstruction of the portal and hepatic veins during living-donor liver transplantation. [Materials] A bioabsorbable polymer sheet was used as the patch, with no cells seeded. The sheet was designed to be absorbed in the body within 6 to 8 weeks. Hybrid pigs were laparotomized under general anesthesia and used as the recipients of the sheet produced by tissue engineering. A side clamp was placed on the IVC in the lower part of the liver, followed by the removal of a 3 x 2 cm portion of the IVC, which was then patched with the sheet. Three months after transplantation, the graft site was removed and subjected to gross and histologic examinations. [Results] All the pigs transplanted with the sheet survived until sacrificed for the examination of the graft site three months later. The pigs gained weight, with no evidence of postoperative IVC occlusion. The polymer transplanted onto the IVC was found to have been completely absorbed, and the graft site was morphologically similar to the native IVC on gross examination. The patched IVC was neither stenosed nor deformed. Immunohistology revealed that the patch site was covered with endothelial cells, with the smooth muscle observed in the media. Like the native IVC, the patch site tested positive for factor VIII. [Conclusions] This is the first report of successful patching of the IVC using a cell-free bioabsorbable polymer material. The results suggest that such a polymer sheet can be used for the reconstruction of the IVC, hepatic and portal veins during living-donor liver transplantation (Background and Aims) Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) has been investigated as an effective agent to allow the reduction of dosage or discontinuation of calcineurin inhibitors in patients with significant impairment of renal function. However, the absorption of MMF through the gastrointestinal tract was not fully verified yet during the immediate posttransplant days. Therefore, the event of acute rejection should be intensively monitored during the period in those recipients with reduced or no use of calcineurin inhibitors. The purpose of this study is to determine the protocol of immnosuppressive therapy during immediate posttransplant period for the recipients with impaired renal function after living donor liver transplantation. (Methods) One hundred forty two cases of adult-to-adult living donor liver transplantation were performed in our institution between January 2003 and December 2003. Among them, there were 87 (61%) patients with impaired renal function. These 87 recipients were classified into 2 groups according to immunosuppressive regimen with the exception for steroid administration. Group 1 was administered only oral MMF over 5 days during the first 1 week (n=23), and group 2 was administered oral MMF plus low-dose calcineurin inhibitor (n=64). These two groups were followed up for detection of acute rejection. (Results) The overall incidence of acute rejection during the first year was 21% in group 1 and 4% in group 2, resulting significant difference (P=0.028). However, there were no statistically significant differences between these two groups in the aspects of age, sex, preoperative condition (serum creatinine level, MELD risk score, CTP score, UNOS status), and survival. (Conclusion) In living donor liver recipients with significant renal function impairment, the sole oral administration of MMF with steroid during immediate postoperative period seemed to be vulnerable to acute cellular rejection. Therefore, combined administration of low-dose calcineurin inhibitor in intravenous route and MMF in oral route is recommended in patients with renal function impairment after living donor liver transplantation. Around 50% of patients elegible for right lobe adult-to-adult living-donor liver transplantation (LDLT) are unable to identify a suitable living donor (LD). It has recently been shown that the proportion of Hispanic recipients with suitable LD was ≥2-fold greater compared with other ethnic groups. Having larger families, with more potential donors, and a greater predisposition to donate among Hispanics appear as the most likely explanations. Goal: To investigate the applicability of LDLT in a Hispanic transplant center. Methods: From 02/00 to 11/03, LDLT was offered to 78 adults. Following an interview with a transplant surgeon, all potential LD underwent a non-invasive evaluation including liver and blood tests, hepatitis serologies and doppler ultrasound (US) with volumetric assessment. Celiac angiography was obtained in all accepted LD, a few days before surgery. Liver biopsy was indicated in selected cases mostly when a single potential LD for certain recipients had abnormal liver tests, increased BMI or steatosis on US. Results: A suitable LD was identified for 61 of the 78 recipients (78%). Of the 78 LD evaluated for the 61 recipients, the 1 st LD was accepted in 48 (79%), the 2 nd in 9 (15%) and the 3 rd in 4. All 26 potential LD were found unsuitable for the remaining 17 recipients (22%). Overall, of the 104 LD evaluated, 61 were accepted (59%) and 43 rejected (41%): 9 (21%) on the initial screening due to age or small body size, 32 (74%) after the noninvasive evaluation (US-steatosis in 15, small liver size in 8, psychosocial issues in 4, vascular anatomy in 3 and for other reasons in 2) and 2 (5%) following angiography. Liver biopsy was performed in 11 LD (11%). Six were rejected due to severe steatosis associated with significant inflammation or fibrosis in 5 and hemosiderosis in 1. Histological examination of the 5 accepted LD showed mild to moderate steatosis (<50%) with minimal or no inflammatory changes or fibrosis. Among the 61 recipients with a suitable LD, 4 were transplanted with deceased donors, 3 developed contraindications (2 severely decompensated cirrhosis and 1 cancer progression), 1 remains listed and 53 (87%) underwent LDLT. Conclusions: 1) This study confirms the increased applicability of LDLT among Hispanics and 2) LD with mild histological abnormalities appear to fare well following LDLT although this should be confirmed in larger series 91 SEQUENTIAL LIVER AND KIDNEY TRANSPLANTATION FROM A LIVING-RELATED DONOR. Ichiro Koyama 1 , Shohei Fuchinoue 1 , Tamotsu Tojimbara 1 , Ichiro Nakajima 1 , Satoshi Teraoka 1 . 1 Department of Surgery, Kidney Center, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan Patients and Methods. Six cases of sequential liver-kidney transplantation (LTx, KTx) from living related donor were performed on five pediatric and one adult patient. Indications for LTx were primary hyperoxaluria (PH1, four), congenital hepatic fibrosis (CHF, one), and intrahepatic biliary congestion (IHBC, one). Kidney allografts were transplanted from 3 to 10 months after LTx from the same donor. Initial immunosuppressive regimen was consisted of tacrolimus or cyclosporine and corticosteroids. The steroid was withdrawn after KTx in all six patients. Results. With a mean follow-up of months, the overall patients survival rate was 83% (5/ 6). Case 3 recipient died due to rejection and bile leakage on days 202.In five recipients, steroid withdrawal was successfully accomplished after KTx. In case 1 recipient, no immunosuppressants were administered from 5 years post-KTx. Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) alone has been administered to case 2 recipient instead of tacrolimus due to tacrolimus-induced nephrotoxicity. Other three recipients were maintained with a low dose of tacrolimus. Liver and kidney graft functions of whom survived are all normal. The pediatric recipients in the present study showed significant catch-up growth after steroid withdrawal are currently exhibiting normal body growth. Conclusions. In the situation that cannot expect cadaveric doner such as in Japan, livingrelated liver and kidney transplantation is an attractive and appropriate alternative in patients with end stage renal disease and concurrent liver disorder. Multiple organ transplantation from the same donor may facilitate the induction of immunotolerance. Biliary complications are a major source of morbidity following LDLT. Variations in biliary anatomy pose a technical challenge for reconstruction. Up to a third of potential donors are rejected based on anatomic abnormalities. A single duct-to-duct anastomosis is performed whenever possible. This technique is preferred over hepaticojejunostomy as the former is more physiologic and provides access to the biliary tree for both diagnostic and therapeutic interventions. Some centers consider multiple ducts a contraindication to donation whereas others would generally construct a Roux-en-Y biliary-enteric anastamosis. However, multiple duct-to-duct anastomoses can be a safe and effective alternative. Methods: From September 1999 to August 2003, 71 adult LDLT were performed at our center. All donors had MRI and intra-operative cholangiograms to evaluate the biliary anatomy. As a result of early segmental branching 2 ducts had to be anastomosed in 9 recipients. Four patients had a Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy and 5 patients had double duct-to-duct anastomoses performed. Of these, 3 patients had the donor's accessory right hepatic duct anastomosed to the recipient's cystic duct stump and the main right hepatic duct to the right or common hepatic duct. In the remaining two patients, the donor's two ducts were anastomosed to the right and left hepatic ducts. All anastomoses were performed using 6-0 or 7-0 PDS in a running fashion. T-tubes and stents were used in all cases. Results: Of the five patients with double duct-to-duct anastomoses, two patients developed strictures diagnosed two and seven months postoperatively. A third patient had an early postoperative anastomotic leak (7 days postop). The remaining 2 patients had uneventful postoperative courses. All complications were managed percutaneously and /or endoscopically without reoperation. Although the initial complication rate was 60%, after a mean follow up of 18.6 months all patients were alive, doing well, and free of biliary complications. Conclusion: Although the complication rate for double duct anastomoses is significantly higher than that reported for single duct reconstruction, most complications can be managed non-operatively. Ideally, donors with a single right hepatic duct system should be sought. However, the presence of multiple ducts should not be a contraindication to donation and does not necessarily require a Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy. Multiple duct-to-duct reconstruction appears to be a safe alternative. Since November 1997 70 living related liver transplantations were performed using the right hepatic lobe . The details of hepatic blood supply and outflow in living donor were evaluated by ultrasonography and CT-scan with 3D-reconstruction preoperatively. All variants of right hepatic lobe arterial blood supply were appropriate. The right hepatic lobe in 8 donors was supplied by 2 arteries (from celiac artery and from mesenteric artery). Only in 1 of these cases the celiac branch was significant and demanded arterial reconstruction by end-to-end anastomosis between right hepatic artery and cystic artery from mesenteric branch before implantation. Bifurcation of portal vein with at least short trunk of the right portal branch was preferable in donor according to convenience of graft perfusion for cooling and conservation. In 5 cases of 2 separate right portal branches the separate perfusion of each branch was used. The portal reconstruction of these 5 grafts was successfully performed on the back-table using recipient's portal bifurcation preliminary removed during hepatectomy. In 57 living related liver donors we observed the single large right hepatic vein. All additional small hepatic veins from the right lobe in these cases were considered to be of no significance and were ligated. The hepaticocaval anastomosis was being performed almost side-to-side between the artificially performed wide opening in the right caval wall and widely dilated hepatic vein's opening of the graft. In 10 cases of 2 equal right hepatic veins of the graft the inferior right hepatic vein was implanted with end-to-side technique after the upper anastomosis had been performed. In 3 other cases 3 hepatico-caval anastomosis were performed with the same technique. In all cases good function of grafts was obtained. No vascular complications were observed. The survival of grafts and recipients is 97.1 percent. The variants of vascular reconstruction in recipient allow to use right hepatic lobe from living donor in all cases without technical contra-indications. Background/Aim Living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) is now being carried out worldwide to alleviate shortages of cadaveric organs. The requirements of widening its indications, especially in adult patients, have been emphasized. Using the right liver graft is a way of meeting the need for LDLT in adult patients, however, it can be harmful for the donor. Therefore, prior to adopting the right lobe LDLT as a standard technique, we designed the present study to investigate the potential advantages and limitations of the left lobe LDLT for adult or adolescent patients, from the standpoint of reducing the risk of living donor. Methods Between June 1990 and December 2003, two hundred and three patients underwent LDLT, at our institution. In 101 of these, the graft comprised the left liver with or without the left portion of the caudate lobe. The perihepatectomy profiles of the donors, significance of left liver grafts, postoperative courses of the donors and recipients, and survival of the recipients were investigated. Results All the donors recovered well and returned to a normal lifestyle. None required banked-blood transfusion or re-operation, and postoperative liver function tests had satisfactory results. The cold ischemic time for the graft was 128 ± 52 minutes. The graft volumes (GVs) ranged from 302 to 686 ml, and GV/standard liver volume (SV) ratios varied from 26 to 81%, at the time of transplantation. No patient developed immediate postoperative liver failure, despite 86% of the liver grafts had GV/SV ratios less than 50%. The graft survival rate of patients received small liver grafts (GV/SV<35%, n=17) was significant lower than that of patients transplanted large liver grafts (GV/SV<35%, n=84) (63% vs. 92% at 1-year, respectively, P=0.002). The overall patient survival rates were 87%, 83% and 81% at 1, 3, and 5 years, respectively. Conclusion LDLT using a left liver graft imposes potential postoperative complications (a small liver is more vulnerable to injury, and recipients of small grafts are at higher risk of fatal complications during recovery). The grafts, corresponded to equal to or more than 35% of the recipient's SV, have yielded favorable results in adult/adolescent LDLT, with minimal burden to the donors. Results: There was no mortality. Two patients (1 st period) required blood transfusion from the blood bank. During the 1 st period, major complications in 6 patients included bile leak (4) (two of them required surgery ) and pneumonia (2). Four patients had minor complications including urinary infection (2), abdominal wall hernia (1) and wound infection (1). During the 2º period, major complications in 5 patients included bile leak (4) This analysis is based on data from the patients enrolled in LIS2T and randomized to the cyclosporine microemulsion (CsA) arm. LIS2T, a 6-month prospective multicenter study compared efficacy and safety of CsA with C2 monitoring and tacrolimus after de novo liver transplantation. Patients received an organ from either a cadaveric (C) or a living donor (L). The study was conducted in Europe, the Americas, Asia and Pacific. Methods: The cohorts L (n=23) and C (n=226) were compared regarding patient characteristics, CsA dose, C2 levels, C2/dose ratio to identify differences in CsA absorption and clinical outcomes. Results: Patient characteristics:There were more Orientals (L:13%, C:1%, p=0.006) and females (L: 57%, C: 33%, p=0.037) in the L cohort. Indication for transplantation: alcoholic cirrhosis was less frequent in the L cohort (L: 4%, C: 25%, p=0.034), there was no significant difference regarding hepatitis C (L: 35%, C: 31%) or cholestatic diseases (L: 22%, C: 16%). A choledochojejunostomy was performed in 35% of the L vs 10% of the C recipients (p=0.002). A T-tube was used in 44% of the L vs 35% of the C (n.s.). All other patient characteristics were comparable. Immunosuppressants: All patients received CsA within 24h post transplant with steroids. The proportion of patients receiving triple therapy (azathioprine) was: L= 48%, C=43% (n.s.). The mean CsA starting dose was 9.6±3mg/kg/day in L vs 8.2±4 mg/kg/day in C (n.s. It is performed immediately after the reconstruction of HA, after the closure the operation wound and after carried into intensive care unit. Subsequently protocol Doppler US was performed according to our algorithm twice a day for 2 weeks, once a day for next 1 week and once two days until hospital discharge. The waveform was divided into three categories, "Normal", "Small" and "Others". Serial protocol Doppler US was continued on the "Normal" waveform. "Small" waveform means normal pulse wave with low velocity. On the "Small" waveform without degeneration of liver function, existence of dehydration was evaluated and, if presents, corrected immediately. After that if small waveform changes to "Normal" waveform, serial protocol Doppler US was continued. The "Other" waveform involves dampened, faded or absent waveform. When "Other", "Small" waveform with liver dysfunction or "Small" waveform without recovery after correction of dehydration was detected, urgent angiography was performed. Once HAC was imaged on arteriography, angioplasty, injection of anticoagulants or insertion of metallic stent was tried. When the treatment was failed or impossible to do, urgent reanastomosis of HA was performed. We considered the relation between mortality of HAC and serial Doppler US. Result HAC was found in 25 cases (33.8%) of 74 adult LDLT. HAT was only one case (1.4%) HAS were 19 cases (25.7%). HAA were 5 cases (6.8%). All HAT and HAS were suspected by protocol US and confirmed by arteriography. 3 HAA were found in the postoperative bleeding. The number of death was 11/ 74 (14.9%) in HAC group. But the death concerning HAC was only 3cases (4.1%). Serial Doppler US indicates the RI in HAC group was significantly lower than the RI in non-HAC (P=0.041). Conclusion Serial monitoring arterial flow by Doppler US after LDLT is a useful tool for early detection, and urgent treatment of HAC, which allows low mortality and long graft survival. Bolus steroids are usually given prior to liver graft reperfusion, based on the assumption that steroids protect from ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI). This assumption was recently challenged by rodent experiments demonstrating that steroids can aggravate this phenomenon. Liver transplantation (LTx) between identical twins gives a unique opportunity to study the natural production of anti-and pro-inflammatory cytokines during IRI in the complete absence of confounding effects due to alloimmune response and immunosuppression (IS), in particular steroids. Methods A 38-year-old male with HCV-related cirrhosis and multiple hepatocellular carcinomas received a hepatic right lobe graft from his identical twin. No IS (including no intraoperative bolus steroids) was administered. Total cold ischemia time was 276 minutes. IRI was assessed by transaminases. Serum was sequentially examined by ELISA for proinflammatory (IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-8) and regenerative / anti-inflammatory (IL-6, IL-10) cytokines. The peak levels of serum transaminases (ALT/AST; 511/550 IU/L) were low and comparable to those usually observed in our standard LTx patients receiving steroids (ALT/AST; 393.6±564.5 / 394.2±748.0 IU/L). IL-6 dramatically increased after removal of the native liver and rapidly reached its highest value 2 hours after reperfusion (400 times higher than baseline). IL-10 is also highly and rapidly augmented (peak value at 1hour after reperfusion, 40 times higher than baseline). However, IL-1β and TNF-α did not increase during and after LTx. IL-8 slowly increased during LTx but reached its highest value post Tx. In the absence of steroid, IL-6 (cytokine essential for liver regeneration) and IL-10 (potent anti-inflammatory cytokine) dramatically and rapidly increased during LTx while increase in IL-1β,TNF-αand IL-8 (typical pro-inflammatory cytokines) was less overt. Therefore, the predominant balance of protective cytokines during LTx may naturally contribute to protection of liver grafts from IRI. Thus, the concept that intraoperative administration of steroids is necessary to protect from IRI in LTx has to be revisited. Choon Hyuck Kwon 1 , Seok Ho Choi 1 , Nam-Joon Yi 1 , Kyung-Suk Suh 1 , Kuhn Uk Lee 1 . 1 Surgery, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea (Background) Recently duct-to-duct biliary anastomosis is usually done in living donor liver transplantation. But in certain cases with many reasons including the anatomical variation of the bile duct, it is difficult to reconstruct the biliary drainage by duct-to-duct method. (Purpose) We present our experience using the cystic duct to reconstruct the bile duct in duct-to-duct method. (Patients & Methods) There are three cases in which we use the cystic duct. Two cases are the variation of biliary system causing the right anterior and posterior duct far apart. And the other is the injury of the bile duct. (Results) In two of them, the anastomosis was done between right posterior duct of donor and cystic duct of recipient in addition to anastomosis between right anterior duct of donor and right hepatic duct of recipient. In the other one, the anastomosis was reconstructed between right hepatic duct of donor and cystic duct of recipient. During the follow-up, the evidence of passage disturbance of biliary drainage did not appear. ( In live donor liver transplantation (LDLTx) organ procurement is usually well controlled, allowing the assessment of liver preservation and early graft function under standardized conditions. Since there are not many publications on the use of histidine-tryptophanketoglutarate solution (HTK) we prospectively studied its efficacy and safety in LDLTx. Our consecutive series included 21 patients (19 adults, 2 children; age 9 mo -61 yr), suffering from end-stage cirrhosis (14), malignant liver tumors (6), and acute hepatic failure (1). All donors (age 22 -69 yr) had normal liver function tests, and included six cases with hepatic steatosis (5 -20 %. The donor operation was performed by the same surgeon, and resulted in 19 right lobes, one left lobe, and one left lateral graft (mean graft weight 837 ± 218 g, graft-recipient-body weight ratio 1.33 ± 0.74 %). Liver preservation was done in a standard fashion by gravity perfusion with HTK, starting in situ through the portal vein (4.6 ± 1.0 L), and continued on the backtable with infusion via the hepatic artery (1.0 ± 0.5 L) for 10 min each to allow for adequate equilibration. Aditionally, the bile ducts were flushed with HTK. The first warm ischemia time (WIT) was less than one minute, the second WIT was 37 ± 15 min, and the total ischemia time was 194 ± 69 min. There was no primary non-function in this series. All liver grafts showed good recovery with maximum aspartate aminotransferase 574 ± 519 U/L, total bilirubin 13.97 ± 4.77 mg/dL, and partial thromboplastin time 50.13 ± 9.83 sec, respectively. One graft was lost from parenchymal fracture secondary to portal hyperperfusion after six days, and the patient was salvaged with retransplantation. Five patients died 14 -111 d after surgery from various infectious complications, none of them related to impaired graft function. 7/21 recipients developed early biliary leakage within 8 -45 d from the resectional surface, and following multiple duct reconstructions. There was no late ischemic type biliary lesion. These results confirm earlier observations that HTK solution is effective and safe -also when used in LDLTx. Potential advantages of HTK in comparison to other preservation solutions are: low potassium concentration, low viscosity, no particles, in situ perfusion, no need to flush before reperfusion, improved biliary protection, better recovery of microcirculatory changes, ready to use, and lower costs. Since the risk-benefit ratio is of particular importance in LDLTx the use of HTK solution should be encouraged. PURPOSE: Target C-2h (C2) levels of Cyclosporine A (CsA) have not yet been well established for living donor liver transplantation (LDLT). The aim of this study was to establish optimal use of CsA using C2-monitoring for LDLT patients. METHODS: 19 patients (6 male and 13 female) were enrolled in this study. Mean age were 46 +/-14 years. 12 patients were assigned to the first protocol: CsA dosing was initiated at 10-15 mg/kg/day orally within 24 hours posttransplant. CsA dose was adjusted to get the target levels of C2: 800-1200 ng/ml (4 patients; 500-900ng/ml). At the same time C0 levels were monitored and maintained under 500 ng/ml to avoid side effects. On day 6, time-concentration curve was drawn with C0,2,4,6 and 12 levels. In the late 7 cases, the second step protocol was applied; 10 mg/kg/day CsA was fixed for initial 2 days (2 patients; for 10 days) by nasogastric or enterofeeding tube. Target C2 and C0 levels were 500-800 ng/ml (C2) and <350 ng/ml (C0), respectively. RESULTS: 2 out of 12 patients (16.7%) had acute rejection in the first protocol. However, the patients enrolled in this protocol tend to be overdosed because of unstable absorption (C0 = C2) or abrupt increase after malabsorption in the early postransplant period. Adverse events were observed 10/12 patients (83.3%): infection (3cases), oral ulcer (3), renal dysfunction (3), hypertension (2), and headache (1). In the second protocol, 2 out of 7 patients (28.6%) had acute rejection with low C2 levels. No severe adverse event was observed in this protocol. CONCLUSION: Clinical outcome was satisfactory but many LDLT patients displayed unstable absorption profiles in the early posttransplant period after LDLT. Further investigation might be required to establish an optimal use of CsA using C2-monitoring for LDLT patients. Objective: Hepatic arterial reconstruction is one of the most difficult procedures in living-donor liver transplantation. If hepatic artery thrombosis occurs after liver transplantation, the recipient clinical prognosis will be uneventful. The aim of this study was to summarize the experience of the microsurgical technique in the reconstruction of hepatic artery in living donor liver transplantation. Methods: thirty cases of LDLT have been performed in our Center from Jan 2001 to Dec, 2003. In 30 cases, left lobe with middle hepatic veins was harvested in 20 cases, left lateral lobe in 3 cases and right lobe in 7 cases. Depend on intra-operative ultrasound and preoperation evaluation, donor operation was determined on the anatomic analysis of hepatic veins, portal veins and hepatic artery. The branch of the recipient's hepatic artery needs to be dissected as peripherally as possible. Hepatic arterial reconstruction was performed using microsurgical technique with direct end-to-end anastomosis (recipient hepatic artery to graft hepatic artery) as long as possible with interrupted 8-0 Prolene sutures and double clip. Result: 5 grafts have two hepatic arterial branches. The hepatic arteries in 16 cases were less than 2mm in diameter. The range time required for an arterial reconstruction was 24-40min. Hepatic artery thrombosis was occurred in 2 cases (6%), both of which needed retransplantation. The microsurgical technique in reconstruction of hepatic artery has significantly decreased the incidence of hepatic artery thrombosis and has significantly improved the surgical outcome in living donor liver transplantation. Purpose: Right lobe donation is technically more difficult and need to define surgical technique and has more risk for surgical complication. Right lobe donation usually matched graft size but safety of donor is major concem. We reviewed our experience of donor hepatectomy using right lobe in regarding to safe of our donor operations, retrospectively. Methods: Retrospective analysis of 42 donor operations for adult LDLT using right lobe was performed. We observed the patient characteristics, the operative findings, liver regeneration, peak liver enzymes (AST, ALT, bilirubin) as donor risk, mortality and morbidity. Results: The peak value of liver enzymes in the group of less the 30% of remained liver were significantly higher than the group of more than 30% of remained liver and these values could induced the risk on donor. The postoperative peak value of liver enzymes were increased according to degree of fatty change especially in case of more than 10% fatty change even without significance. The regeneration of liver volume on postoperative 3 months was about two times compare to preoperative value and the regenerative activity was more increased in the group of less amount of remained volume. There was no donor mortality and most important complication was biliary injury, bile leakage and biliary stricture. Conclusion: Right lobectomy for donor operation requires a meticulous surgical technique to minimize donor morbidity. Right lobectomy can be performed safely with minimal risk in case of careful donor selection that the remained liver volume exceed 30% of the total liver volume and the liver of minimal fatty change. Purpose: The living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) has increased in the number because of the shortage of cadaveric liver graft. For the adult recipients, LDLT using right lobe could meet the metabolic demands of the adult recipient and so, is the most common procedure in our hospital. The management of venous drainage from segment 5 and 8 tributaries is in controversy. We reviewed the vascular techniques for middle hepatic vein reconstruction with patent rate and the effect on the early liver function recovery. Method and Result: From Jan. 1999 to Aug. 2003, 95 LDLTs using right lobe were performed and in 89 cases of LDLT, a venous conduit from middle hepatic tributaries was made. The autogenous saphenous vein was used in 85 cases, the cadaveric iliac vein in 3 cases and the autogenous umbilical vein in 1 case. The single autogenous saphenous veins were used for the conduit after a saline distension in 55 cases. Among them, 2 cases with a vein from segment 8 were anastomosed to the side of the saphenous vein sequentially. The reversed Y shaped autogenous saphenous vein branches were used for the multiple meddle hepatic vein tributaries drainage in 12 cases. The saphenous venoplasty were used for large sized middle hepatic vein in 15 cases. Seventy-seven cases were available for patent study on the 7th postoperative day by CT scan and in 40 cases (51.9%) out of 77 cases, the venous flow was patent and continued to be patent 3 months later. The postoperative changes in the liver function test (AST, ALT, bilirubin) were determined in both groups. In the 37 occlusion cases (especially in small for size graft), the mean AST, ALT, bilirubin level was higher than that of the patent group until the second week but this was no statistically significant. The graft regeneration activity of the occlusion cases on POD 7 th day by CT volumetry was also less compare to that of the patent cases. For early good graft function after LDLT, an initial physiological decongestion of the graft should be considered. More beneficial liver function and more regenerative activity in the early postoperative period were found in the patients with patent middle hepatic vein despite the high occlusion rate. Conclusion: Physiologic venous drainage procedure from the middle hapatic vein are recommended for rapid graft decongestion and an initial good graft function. This is a report on our strategy and results of living donor liver transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). It is most important to prevent graft recurrence for improving survival rate. Our strategy is based upon following three points: 1. Reducing the number of cancer cells in the peripheral blood as little as possible before transplantation. 2. Reducing the administration of immunosuppressant early in post operation for avoiding cancer cell attaching to the graft. 3. Prevention against cancer recurrence after transplantation. [Patients] From 1999 to 2003, eleven patients were transplanted due to HCC. Five patients satisfied Milan criteria but six exceeded. [Methods] Before transplantation fluorouracil and interferon beta were administered systemically as immunochemotherapy for reducing cancer cells in the peripheral blood. Human telomerase reverse transcriptase (h-TERT) mRNA by RT-PCR was used to estimate cancer cell levels in the blood. White blood cells of donor were infused intraportally during and after the operation so that immunosuppressants were reduced early after transplantation by inducing immunoligical tolerance achiving macrochimerism of CD56+ NKT cells in the graft liver. After transplantation fluorouracil was administered intraportally and cisplatin and epirubicin were systemically to prevent recurrence by the cancer cells arising from intraoperative manipulation. [Results] All three patients who were negative for h-TERT mRNA within Milan criteria were alive but one h-TERT mRNA positive patient was dead because of tumor recurrence. Two of six patients who exceeded Milan criteria were alive without recurrence, whose h-TERT mRNA changed from positive to negative before transplantation. [Conclusion] Blood h-TERT mRNA detection may be valuable for liver transplantation for HCC which exceeded Milan criteria. Yoshinobu Sato 1 , Hideki Nakatsuka 1 , Satoshi Yamamoto 1 , Toshiyuki Takeishi 1 , Takashi Kobayashi 1 , Kenichiro Hirano 1 , Takaoki Watanabe 1 , Katsuyoshi Hatakeyama 1 . 1 Division of Digestive and General Surgery, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Niigata, Japan Aim of Study: Size mismatch is most obstacle in adult living related donor liver transplantation (ALRDLT). We have reported that acute elevated portal hypertension, reflecting wall shear stress against portal vein and sinusoid, become a trigger of liver regeneration following partial hepatectomy and excessive shear stress induce liver injury after massive hepatectomy. We have controlled portal pressure immediately after LRDLT below 25cmH2O by splenic arterial ligation, splenectomy, IMV-left renal venous shunting, and double outflow capacity(DOC) method of hepatic vein in left graft lobe. In this study, we investigated the relation between the posttransplant liver function and portal hypertension and the small for size graft in ALRDLT. Materials and Methods: Adults patients (n=16 to 68 years old) who underwent LRDLT from 1999, March to 2001, were divided into three groups, group I ; graft volume / recipient body weight (GV/RBW) ratio>1.0, group II; GV/RBW ratio<1.0. We analysed the relation between the GV/RBW ratio and the posttransplant serum total bilirubin, D/T ratio, COHb, and AKBR. Moreover we compaired the portal pressure and seurm T.Bil level between the traditional left hepatic venous reconstraction (n=11) and the DOC method (n=6) in left graft liver patients. Results: Serum T.Bil level peaked at 1 to 3 weeks and decreased thereafter. Hyperbilirubinemia after LRDLT wasa higher and more sustained among group II than group I patients(p>0.01) D/T ratios among group II recipients were significantly higher than those in group I (p<0.01) COHb and T.Bil were strongly correlated after LRDLT(y=0116x+1.275, r=0.810, p<0.0001) COHb among group II transplant patients were significantly higher than those in group I (p<0.05). Portal pressures after LRDLT and serum T.Bil levels in double outflow capacity method were better than those of traditional method. Conclusions: ALRDLT in cirrhotic patients using small-for-size grafts with excessive portal hypertension might lead to hyperbilirubinemia from the mechanism of Hemoxygenase-1 -CO system in micro hepatic circulation. The splenic arterial ligation and splenectomy, IMV-left renal vein shunting from the view point of inflow, and new hepatic venous reconstraction by DOC method from the view poin of outflow prevent from liver injury by a reduction of excessive portal hypertension after major hepatectomy. Oreste Cuomo 1 , Massimo Di Palma 1 , Lorenzo Iovine 1 , Walter Santaniello 1 , Renato Regine 2 , Alfonso Ragozzino 2 , Teresa Carfora 1 , Rosalia Anello 1 , Domenico Loffredo 1 , Marco Campoine 1 . 1 Laparoscopic, Hepatic Surgery and Liver Transplantation Unit, Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, Italy; 2 Radiology Unit, Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, Italy Selflimited liver hematoma can occur after iatrogenic liver injury. So far only 4 cases of hematoma following percoutaneous transhepatic procedure after liver transplantation have been reported, 3 out 4 treated by re-transplantation. We report a case of large expanding subcapsular hematoma in LDLT, successfully treated by cadaveric whole liver re-transplantation. CASE REPORT A 57 y.o. male, Child-Pugh C viral cirrhosis underwent LDLT. Estimated CT-scan right lobe graft volume was 845ml; actual graft weight was 574 gr.; GW/RW was 0.98%. Liver FNAB was performed 2 days before donor hepatectomy. At laparotomy a 2 cm subcapsular hematoma of segment 6, probably following liver biopsy, was observed. The right donor hepatic vein (HV) was small and anastomosed to the right recipient HV enlarged by incising the inferior vena cava (IVC) downward about 2 cm. and removing a piece of anterior wall. An accessory HV >5mm. was anastomosed to the IVC in endto-side fashion. Graft portal vein (PV) was anastomosed to the trunk of recipient PV; after reperfusion right PV flow was 1,6 l /mn. On p.o. day 1 US and CT scan revealed a large expanding subcapsular hematoma and the presence of hypodense spots in the graft compressed by hematoma. In the first 4 PODs doppler PV and hepatic artery velocity ranged respectively 71 to 66 cm/s. and 0,55 to 0,66 cm/s. On day 4 a second CT-scan was suggestive for the presence of blood clots around the liver. Liver function tests were stable. At laparotomy was only confirmed a large subcapsular hematoma, liver biopsy showed lobular spotty necrosis, limited hepatocytes balloning, cholestasis and ischemic cholangitis. Between day 7 and 9 liver and renal functions rapidly deteriorated (abundant ascites, elevated bilirubin, renal failure). A cadaveric whole liver retransplant was successfully performed. At histology massive subcapsular hematoma of segment 5, 6, 7 and ischemic damage of the liver graft were found. Discussion In our case a small right HV and the preservation of an HV >5mm probably failed to assure sufficient outflow. Furthermore high portal flow and rapid regenerative process of the partial graft may have caused rebleeding from the bioptic injury and the occurrence of a massive subcapsular hematoma, ultimately responsible, by compressing the congested liver, for hepatic failure necessiting retransplantation. (Objective)More than two thousand living donor liver transplantations(LDLTx) have been performed in Japan, while the number of cadaveric cases are only 23. Thus, LDLTx has been established as a therapeutic modality for patients with end-stage-liver-disease. However all of the patients cannot receive this procedure due to various reasons. In this study, we determine major obstacles for patients who were referred to our hospital but could not undergo liver transplantation (LTx). (Case Material)From September 1997 until December 2003, a total of 352 patients with acute or chronic end-stage-liver-disease were referred to our center for possible LTx. Forty six were children (with mean age 5 y.o., range 10 days to 17 y.o.) and 306 were adults (with mean age 48 y.o., range 18 to 73 y.o.). A hundred-nine patients (26 children and 77 adults) received LDLTx, 6 patients (all adults) received cadaveric liver transplantations (CLTx). (Result)Of three hundred fifty two referrals, 166 (47%) were not evaluated because of no necessity in 44 (13%), exceeding indication in 41 (12%), refusal from the patient or his family in 40 (11%), no living donors in 28 (8%), and financial matter in 11 (3%). The rest of 186 (53%) were evaluated, and 164 were medically indicated for liver transplantation; 109 had either LDLTx or CLTx, 24 were on the list, 24 died while waiting, 4 abandoned from financial matter, and 3 refused. Of overall 249 cases who did not undergo LDLTx, 67 (27%) had no living donors, 56 (22%) exceeded indication, 48 (19%) were medically unnecessary, and 10 (16%) refused from the himself or his family. (Conclusion)In the era of LDLTx, early referral is mandatory to save more patients with end-stage-liver-disease. For the patients without living donors, it is quite necessary to promote cadaveric organ donation. , were compared based on remnant liver size and amount of macrosteatosis. Donors were divided into remnant size groups, group 1(<30%) and group 2(≥30%), and macrosteatosis groups, group A(<10%) and group B(≥ 10%). The residual liver volumes, and pre-op histological features were correlated with post-op liver function. Remnant liver sizes were estimated by CT volume renderings prior to donation. Liver function was measured by serial lab values (T.Bili, AST, ALT, ALK, and INR), lengths of stay (LOS), and post-op complications. Data was analyzed using SPSS software and compared by 2-tailed t tests. RESULTS: Residual liver volumes ranged from 20%-28%(mean 25%) in group 1(7 female, 8 male; mean age 40±6.9) and from 30%-50%(mean 38%) in group2(48 female, 32 male; mean age 34.9±8.9). The mean peak AST and ALT were significantly higher (p=.05, .03) in group 1 when compared to group 2. There was no statistical difference in LOS, complications, and peak ALK, INR, or T.Bili. By post-op day 5, all factors became insignificant. Macrosteatosis ranged from 0%-7% in group A(n=88) and from 10%-17.5% in group B(n=7). Group B had significantly higher peaks in T.Bili, AST, and ALT levels (p=.01, .01, and .01 respectively) than group A. LOS, complications, ALK, and INR did not differ. On post-op day 5, the mean TBili and ALT levels in the ≥10% group were still elevated (p =.05, .02) in comparison with group A. CONCLUSION: Donors with residual volumes <30% had no increase in complications, LOS, or long term liver dysfunction. However, the degree of macrosteatosis must be accounted for. While no donors had prolonged morbidity, biochemical liver dysfunction still persisted at day 5 in the macrosteatotic group. Federica Dondero 1 , Camille Taille 2 , Daniele Sommacale 1 , Francois Durand 1 , Claire Francoz 1 , Alain Sauvanet 1 , Olivier Farges 1 , Herve Mal 2 , Jacques Belghiti 1 . 1 Hepatobiliary and Transplantation, Hospital Beaujon, Clichy, France; 2 Pneumology Introduction : The safety of donors is a crucial condition for living donor liver transplantation. In order to promote the report and analysis of donor complications, the aim of this study was to evaluate the incidence and severity of postoperative respiratory complications in 112 consecutive liver living donors (LLD). Patients and methods: From 1996, 112 LLD including 44 with right hepatectomy (RH) were analyzed through a prospective database. All respiratory events were assessed through clinical, bacteriological and radiological examination including a systematic ct-scan at day-7 in the last 59 ( 53%) and analyzed according to surgical procedures. Results : Respiratory complications were observed in 21 donors (19%). Major complications were present in 13 donors (12%) including pulmonary embolism in 7 (6%), bacterial pneumonitis in 3 (2.7%) and septic pleuritis in 3 (2.7%). Minor complications were present in 8 cases (7%) including iatrogenic pneumothorax in 3 (2.6%) and symptomatic pleural effusion in 5 (4.5%) requiring thoracocentesis in two cases. Pulmonary embolism in all cases was not severe and associated with deep vein thrombosis in only 4 cases. The systematic CT scan at postoperative days 7 revealed the presence of pleural effusion in 38 cases (95%) after right hepatectomy and in 9 cases (47%) after left hepatectomy. Pleural effusion was unilateral right in 55% of cases and bilateral in 45%. The alveolar condensations was present in 5 of cases (8%). In the subgroup with CT scan, chest x ray revealed pleural effusion in 41% (n=24) and alveolar condensations in 5% (n=3). The rate of major pulmonary complications was significantly higher after RH as compared to left procedure (27% vs 5%) (p<0.05). Patient age, sex, tobacco abuse, body mass index, intraoperative blood loss and abdominal complications were not correlated with the presence of respiratory complications. Conclusion : This experience of major surgery in healthy donors revealed that respiratory complications are more frequent than expected in early postoperative course. These respiratory complications, mainly observed after right hepatectomy, are underestimated by clinical examination and chest radiograph and not related to abdominal complication and medical history. Koji Yamamoto 1 , Yasutugu Takada 1 , Yasuhiro Fujimoto 1 , Hironori Haga 1 , Hiroto Egawa 1 , Koichi Tanaka 1 . 1 Department of Transplantation and Immunology, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Kyoto, Japan Background and Aim: We experienced first donor death in Japan in 2002. The liver biopsy showed that the donor had been suffering from NASH. There might have been NASH donors included in the donor pool in our program. To secure donor safety, we should understand the prevalence of NAFL and NASH in the donor population. Methods: We did retrospective review of liver zero biopsies for 263 right lobe donors from February 1998 to April 2003 (male 132, female 131, mean age 41.9 years old ). 1) The evaluation was made in terms of the extent of fatty change by hematoxylin and eosin staining. The samples were also scored based on histopathologic abnormalities in NASH from American Association for the Study of Liver Disease. 2) The postoperative laboratory data were compared based on the severity of the fatty change. Results: Among 263 donors, 143 donors (54.5%) did not show fatty change. Macrovesicular fatty change over 5% was observed in 47 donors (17.9%) and fatty change over 30% were seen with 4 donors (1.5%). Three of them were shown to have NASH, which led to donor death with one donor. The remaining 2 donors did not show any postoperative complications or abnormal laboratory data. The NASH score was higher with the dead donor (8 points) compared with other 2 NASH donors (5points, 5points). The peak AST and ALT tends to be higher with donors whose liver showed fatty change of 5% or more. Surviving NASH donors did not show any statistical difference compared with non-NASH donors in terms of postoperative laboratory data. Conclusion: There was no significant difference with the postoperative course and laboratory data as long as the fatty change remained around 30%. There may be a higher risk with advanced NASH donors. Background/aims: It is accepted that steatosis may compromise early liver graft function. However, the impact of steatosis in the long term has not been clearly investigated. The aims of this study were (a) to investigate the long term outcome of steatotic grafts as compared with non steatotic grafts or grafts with mild steatosis and (b) to determine whether initial steatosis in the donor represents by itself a risk factor for persistent steatosis or other delayed graft lesions. Patients and methods: 114 consecutive patients (71 males and 43 females) who all survived more than one year after liver transplantation (LT) were studied. 30 patients (26%) received a graft with more than 30% macrovesicular steatosis (Group 1) while the remaining 84 (74%) received a graft with less than 30% or no steatosis (Group 2). All had a biopsy at the time of reperfusion and one year after transplantation. Results: Indications for LT, age and gender were comparable in the 2 groups. Body mass index (BMI) was significantly higher in Group 1 than in Group 2 (26 ± 6 vs 24 ± 3, p=0.008). One year after LT, only 19 patients (17%) still had steatosis over 30%. Predictive factors for steatosis over 30% at one year were high BMI (29 ± 5 vs 24 ± 5, p=0.001), the increase in body weight during the first year (8 ± 13 vs 1 ± 9 kg, p=0.008) and dyslipidemia (20% vs 3%, p=0.04). Initial graft steatosis (Group 1 vs Group 2), alcohol consumption (10% vs 6%), diabetes (37% vs 20%) and HCV infection (42% vs 24%) did not have a significant impact on liver graft steatosis at one year. Paradoxically, one year after LT, the presence of fibrosis at any grade was significantly less frequent in Group 1 than in Group 2 (17% vs 40%, p=0.02). In patients with HCV infection, neither initial steatosis nor steatosis at one year had a significant impact on fibrosis. Among patients with one or more recognized risk factor for steatosis only 24% did have steatosis at one year. The results of this study suggest (a) that liver graft steatosis one year after LT essentially depends on recipient-related factors and not to initial steatosis in the donor, (b) that only 24% of those with risk factors for steatotis eventually develop steatosis at one year and (c) that initial steatosis does not seem to favor the development of fibrosis in either HCV-infected or non HCV-infected patients. Gonzalo P. Rodriguez-Laiz 1 ,Ernest Bombuy 1 , Auxiliadora Amador 1 , Joana Ferrer 1 , Ramon Charco 1 , Jose Fuster 1 , Antonio Rimola 1 , Miguel A. Navasa 1 , Ramon Bataller 1 , Javier Forns 1 , Juan C. Garcia-Valdecasas 1 . 1 Liver Surgery and Transplantation Unit, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain Introduction: Living donor right liver resection is associated with a significant morbidity and a not so negligible mortality. It was initially suggested that the overall risk should be similar to that of major elective liver surgery, however recent reports suggest that this is not so. The aim of this study is to compare the morbidity and mortality associated to right lobe living donor liver resections with that of right hepatectomies performed for metastatic disease. Materials and methods: Prospective data from 38 living donors who underwent right hepatectomy between March 2000 and June 2003 (living donor liver resection group, LDLRG) were compared to retrospectively collected data from 38 right hepatectomies performed for metastatic disease (metastatic liver resection group, MLRG) during approximately the same time period. We have analyzed demographic data (age, sex), intraoperative variables (blood loss, need for blood transfusion), postoperative liver function, as well as the morbidity associated with the procedure (bile leakage, biloma, intraabdominal abscess, wound infection, liver failure, etc) or not directly related to it (infection, pneumonia, pulmonary embolism). Results: Patients in the LDLRG were significantly younger (32±8 vs. 63±10 p< 0.001). Blood losses were similar (713±89 vs. 707±615), as well as the need for blood transfusion. Immediate postoperative liver function was similar in both groups. The overall incidence of complications was higher in the LDLRG (44.7% vs. 23.7%, p=0.09); surgically related complications were also higher in the LDLR group, reaching statistical significance in the incidence of bile leaks (8 vs. 1, p=0.02). However when non-surgically related complications were considered, the incidence was not different. No patient died in the LDLRG, while two patients did so in the MLRG. Conclusion: Living donor liver resection is a more demanding surgical procedure, associated to a higher incidence of surgically related complications, mainly due to the biliary tract. Although the role of routine abdominal drainage after liver resection for tumors has been questioned, abdominal drainage after donor right hepatectomy for live donor liver transplantation (LDLT) has been a routine practice in most transplant centers. Postoperative bile leakage has been reported to occur in 10% to 20% of the donors and abdominal drainage is considered mandatory. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the safety of donor right hepatectomy for LDLT without abdominal drainage. A prospective study was performed on 100 consecutive liver donors who underwent right hepatectomy for LDLT from July 2000 to September 2003. Biliary anatomy was carefully studied with intraoperative cholangiography using fluoroscopy. The middle hepatic vein was included in the graft in all except one patient. Parenchymal transection was performed using an ultrasonic dissector without vascular inflow occlusion. Right hepatic duct was transected at hilum and the stump was closed with 6-O polydioxanone continuous suture. Absence of bile leakage was confirmed with methylene blue solution instilled through the cystic duct stump. Abdomen was closed after careful hemostasis without drainage in all donors. There were 40 male and 60 female donors with a median age of 36 years (range, 18 -56 years). The median operative blood loss and operating time of the donors was 350ml (range, 42 -1400 ml) and 448min (range, 310 -640min), respectively. None of the donors required any blood or blood product transfusion. The median postoperative peak total serum bilirubin level was 59ummol/L, and peak prothrombin time was 17.9 seconds. There was no operative mortality. Median postoperative hospital stay was 8 days (range, 5 -30 days). Postoperative morbidity occurred in 19 (19%) patients, most of which were minor complications. No donor experienced bile leakage, intraabdominal bleeding or collection. None of them required surgical, radiological, or endoscopic intervention for postoperative complication, except for one donor who developed biliary stricture that required endoscopic dilatation. All donors were well with a median follow-up of 28 months (range, 3 -42 months). With detailed study of the biliary anatomy and meticulous surgical technique, donor right hepatectomy can be safely performed without abdominal drainage. Abdominal drainage is not a mandatory procedure after donor hepatectomy in LDLT. The problem of small-for-size graft has been inevitable in many of adult-to-adult living donor liver transplantation, especially,in case of using the left lobe graft. Procurement of the left lobe with caudate lobe was originated by the effort to increase the graft mass itself by 5%. However, there have been some arguments about the effectiveness of concomitant caudate lobe transplantation. We investigated the effort-effectiveness of concomitant caudate lobe transplantation and fate of the implanted caudate lobe. From January 2002 to December 2003, 290 cases of living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) were performed at our institution. There was 28 case of adult-to-adult LDLT using the left lobe with caudate lobe among them. The volumes of left lobe and caudate lobe were measured separately using computed tomogram (CT) volumetry. The operation time for concomitant caudate lobe procurement took average 30 minutes additionally over routine left lobe procurement because of dissection of the retrohepatic vena cava. We divided the left hepatic duct near the hepatic confluence not to make separate caudate duct after accurate localization with radio-opaque marker attachment. There was no separate caudate duct in 28 grafts in this series. The graft weight of left lobe with caudate lobe was 454±55 gm, yielding mean graft-recipient weight ratio 0.79±0.11. Volumetry of preoperative donor CT revealed that the volume of the caudate lobe was 24.1±6 mL, and it was equivalent to 5% of the graft volume. We had prepared the largest caudate vein with vena caval patch in 23 donors and reconstructed it in 22 recipients. The mean diameter of caudate vein was near 3 mm. In rest 5 donors, it was closed because of its small size of less than 2 mm. The implanted caudate lobe regenerated at lower rate after 1 month comparing with the regeneration of the left lobe. The caudate lobes in the group of caudate vein ligation revealed nearly no regeneration (from 22.5±7.8 mL to 22.0±6.7 mL) after 1 month comparing with the reconstruction group ( from 26.1±7.1 mL to 30.3±9.2 mL). We think that 5% increase of graft mass deserves to perform concomitant caudate lobe procurement at the expense of 30 minutes' effort. As most parts of the caudate lobe revealed normal perfusion on weekly follow-up using triphasic dynamic CT when the caudate vein was reconstructed, it seems to be reasonable to reconstruct one largest caudate vein. Features of the recipients with donors over 69 were similar to the general group. ICU median stay and hospital median stay after LT were 3.5 days (r 2-59) and 20 days (r 10-101) respectively. There were 61 infection episodes (70% bacterial) in 24 patients (58.5%). 8 patients suffered from CMV infection (20%) and 7 had a fungal infection (17%). Acute cellular rejection was diagnosed in 12 patients (29%). Arterial complications were found in 3 patients (7.3%). Biliary complications were seen in 5 patients (12.1%): 3 perikehr leakages, one stenosis and one hepatico-yeyunostomy dehiscence. There were 3 retransplantations: one acute (arterial thrombosis) and 2 late (HCV recurrence). Hospital mortality was 4.8% due to sepsis and cardiac failure. All these results do not reach statistical significance when compared to general group. Median follow up was 1054 days (r 21-2665). Patient survival at 1, 3 and 5 years in >70 years group vs. < 70 years was: 87% vs. 91%; 83% vs. 83% and 75% vs. 77% (p= n.s.). Graft survival comparing both groups was: 85% vs. 87%; 72% vs. 79% and 65% vs. 74% (p= n.s.). Survival to 1, 3 and 5 years of HCV patients receiving organs from donors > 70 years was not statistically different from the ones with younger donors : 81% vs. 83%, 81% vs. 73% and 68% vs. 70% (p= n.s.). CONCLUSIONS: Results obtained using livers from donors aged 70 and over are not different from younger donors. We think our results are based on good liver function tests, no severe steatosis and short cold ischemia time when using aged livers. Age should not be considered a major criterion when rejecting donors for liver transplantation. Methods: From the Studies of Liver Transplantation (SPLIT) a consortium of 39 pediatric LT centers in the US and Canada, we describe donor characteristics for 1,378 recipients of first liver only grafts, and examine in univariate and multivariate analyses their effect on patient (pt) and graft survival. Results: 51.8% of pts received a cadaveric donor (CD) whole organ, 28.0% a reduced or split graft and 17% a living donor (LD) graft. There is an increase in the use of split grafts from 5.9% before 1998 to 10.6% after 1998, whereas the % of LDs has remained constant. Of pts aged <12 mos, 32.1% received a whole organ vs 49.2% of pts aged 1-4 years and 66.5% aged 5-12 years. 65% of children were transplanted within 6 mos of listing. The mean time to LT was <3 mos for LDs and reduced CDs compared to 6.1 mos for whole grafts. 30% CD recipients were in the ICU at LT compared to 19.2% LD recipients. 66% of LD pts had a PELD score <10, compared to 51.4% of CD pts. ABO incompatabile grafts were used in 2.4% of pts. Mean cold ischemia time for CD compared to LDs was 8.1 vs 3.1 hrs: mean warm ischemia times were similar 52.2 and 49. mins respectively. Intraoperative blood use was similar 69 and 79 mls/kg. Overall Kaplan-Meier estimates of 3 year pt and graft survivals were 84% and 76% respectively. Pt survival was comparable regardless of donor-recipient gender match. In unadjusted univariate analyses whole liver recipients had a significantly better pt and graft survival compared to CD reduced, split of LD recipients (Log rank p<0.0001 for both outcomes). Donor age was significant for graft survival, p<0.02. Relative risks for death or graft loss for ABO identical compared to incompatible pts were significantly reduced (RR=0.32 and 0.37 respectively: p=0.003 and 0.0003). In a multivariate model of baseline factors affecting 6 mo pt and graft loss, intraoperative blood use, warm and cold iscemia, and organ type were significant predictors. Conclusion: Donor characteristics affect time to LT, differ by age of recipients, influence the operative procedure and have significant impact on pt and graft survival. Marco Spada 1 , Matteo Cescon 2 , Alessandro Aluffi 2 , Michela Guizzetti 2 , Marco Zambelli 2 , Domenico Pinelli 2 , Monica Altobelli 3 , Giuliano Torre 3 , Bruno Gridelli 1 , Michele Colledan 2 . 1 ISMETT, UPMC, Italy, Palermo, Italy; 2 General and Transplantation Surgery, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy; 3 Pediatrics, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy Purpose: Although split liver transplantation (SLT) for pediatric patients is increasingly accepted, few data are available on graft size mismatch impact on the outcome. Methods: 184 cases of pediatric isolate, liver transplantations were prospectively evaluated for graft size matching. Graft weight was available in 157 cases (85%), of which 132 (84%) were split livers (122 left lateral segments grafts [LLS], 7 extended right grafts [ERG] , and 3 left lobes [LL]), and 25 (16%) whole livers. Seventeen cases (11%) were urgent cases. Patients were categorized in four groups by graft-to-recipient weight ratio (GRWR): small grafts (SG; GRWR ≤ 1.5%, 13 cases), medium grafts (MG; 1.5% < GRWR ≤ 3%, 42 cases), large grafts (LG; 3% < GRWR ≤ 5%, 72 cases), and extra large grafts (XLG; GRWR > 5%, 30 cases). Results: SG were associated with larger and older recipients, and with older donors; LG and XLG were more used in urgent cases. Post-transplant bilirubine clearance was delayed in SG. Post-transplant surgical complications were more frequent in SG, while no differences were observed in vascular, biliary and infectious complications and acute rejection rate among groups. Unrelated death-censored graft survival was not significantly different among groups (75%, 83%, 91%, and 75% at 4 years in SG, MG, LG, and XLG, respectively). When considering LLS only, unrelated death-censored graft survival in SG (actuarial 67% at 4 years) and XLG (75% at 4 years) was significantly lower compared to that in LG (93%), but not in MG (84%), while differences were not significant considering elective cases (75%, 83%, 92%, and 84% at 4 years in SG, MG, LG, and XLG, respectively). Patient survivals were not significantly different among groups (79%, 83%, 91%, and 87% at 1 year in SG, MG, LG, and XLG, respectively). A strong relationship was observed between GRWR and donor-to-recipient weight ratio (DRWR) (r 2 =0.15 for all grafts and r 2 = 0.47 for LLS). Conclusions: Pediatric SLT can be safely performed with a wide range of GRWR. GRWR can be fairly predicted by means of DRWR. The use of SG led to an higher incidence of surgical complications, while the use of SG and XLG resulted in a significant lower graft survival when considering LLS only. The analysis of elective cases showed that SG and XLG can be used obtaining results comparable to those obtained with MG and LG. Options for the treatment of early hepatic artery thrombosis (HAT) after liver transplantation (LT) are known to be the surgical or angiographic arterial revascularization and/or retransplantation (RET). In a retrospective study, our aim was to verify if recanalization can be really an option and a solution to early HAT or if it must be considered only a bridge to RET. Patients and methods Since 1983 through January 2004, 603 LT in 531 adult and pediatric patients (pts) were performed in our unit. We retrospectively reviewed pts whose grafts underwent early HAT (occurring after a time < 30 days from LT) and the treatments performed, with a mean follow-up of 3,9±4,2 years. Revascularization consisted of a surgical thrombectomy, with post-operatively intravenous heparin-based anticoagulable pharmacotherapy. We reviewed HAT who underwent arterial recanalization or/and RET, and the outcome of these procedures. Results 24 (3,9%) cadaveric liver grafts in 21 pts underwent 24 HAT; 9 (1,4%) early HAT occurred in 9 liver grafts -6 whole grafts, 2 left lateral segments and 1 "right liver"transplanted in 2 pediatric and 7 adult pts. Mean time of onset of early HAT was 12±7 days from LT. 5 pts underwent diagnosis of early HAT and prompt recanalization after a mean time of 10±6 days from LT, and subsequent RET 142±254 days from 1 st LT. More precisely 1 pt underwent RET 596 days after 1 st LT, whereas the other 4 pts after a mean time of 29±26 days from 1 st LT. Two pts underwent RET without any previous recanalization 12 and 20 days respectively after 1 st LT; one other pt underwent arterial recanalization 12 days after LT. One last pt was treated conservatively. In all cases, thrombectomy was effective with restoration of arterial flow only for a very short time after surgery, then HAT recurred. RET was only dilayed. 1-5-10 years graft actuarial survival of RET for early HAT was 68%. Discussion and conclusion Early HAT after LT occurred in 9 -1,4%-out of 603 transplanted grafts in 531 adult and pediatric pts. Early revascularization of hepatic artery was never successful, HAT constantly recurred, so RET was performed whenever a graft was available. According to our review, thrombectomy cannot be considered a reliable option for the treatment of early HAT. Only early RET is a reliable option for patient recovery. Background and Aims: Diagnosis of delayed vascular complications (DVC) which occur later than 3 months after liver transplantation (LT) is difficult to be made and DVC are often overlooked. DVC contribute to morbidity and mortality in LT. Purpose of this study is to investigate proper diagnosis and management of DVC. Patients and Methods: Live donor LT has been performed in 120 pediatric patients under 18 years at The University of Tokyo and Jichi Medical School. DVC was observed in 9(7.5%) patients. DVC consisted of hepatic vein stenosis in 6(5%) and portal vein stenosis in 3(2.5%). Hepatic vein stenosis occurred from 2 months to 7 years, so as portal vein stenosis did from 6 months to one year after LT. Clinical course, liver function of blood chemistry, Doppler US, computed tomography(CT), managements and outcomes have been investigated. Results: 1) Hepatic vein stenosis; Sever hypoalbuminemia, systemic edema and hepatosplenomegaly were observed in all of the patients. Serum transaminase level elevated slightly in five. Doppler US showed low flow velocity, dilatation of the hepatic vein and scarce positive component in the wave form. CT showed ascitis and hepatosplenomegaly. Trans-jugular interventional hepatic venoplasty was performed in two and per-cutaneous trans-hepatic venoplasty was done in four. Graft failure arose in three patients and two of them died two to three months after intervention. One is surviving for 18 months uneventfully after re-transplantation. Three other patients are surviving uneventfully for 2 months to 5 years after intervention without recurrence of stenosis. Melena and splenomegaly were identified in all of the patients. Liver function of the blood chemistry was within normal range. Doppler US showed slow portal velocity and splenomegaly which was also observed with CT. Percutaneous transhepatic interventional portal venoplasty was performed in all of the three patients. Two of them are surviving uneventfully for 3 to 6 months. Due to graft failure, retransplantation was done 3 months after venoplasty in one patient who is surviving without any complications after retransplantation. Conclusions: 1) Hypoalbuminemia, ascitis, melena and splenomegaly are early signs for the diagnosis of DVC. 2) Doppler US is a useful technique for making an early diagnosis of DVC. 3) Interventional venoplasty is useful management of DVC. BACKGROUND: Improvement of rejection after intestinal transplantation (ITx) led to the use of a steroid free protocol based on rATG preconditioning and induction with low dose tacrolimus (TAC). METHODS: 36 children 5 months to 20 years received pre-transplant rATG 2-3mg/kg, followed by ITx (liver/intestine n=12, intestine n=15, multivisceral n=6, modified/ multivisceral n=1, liver/intestine/pancreas n=1, intestine/pancreas n=1). Post-transplant rATG 2-3mg/kg (total of 5 mg/kg), with TAC started within 48 hours. Target trough concentrations were of 15-20 ng/dl for 2 weeks, then 10-15ng/dl thereafter. Follow-up ranged from 1-20months (mean of 9 months). RESULTS: The first and second year patient/graft survivals were 100% and 97% respectively. 18/36 children experienced rejection (50%) which occurred at 3 to 30 days after ITx. 18 children remain free of maintenance steroids; 2 received prednisone for liver allograft rejection (3/9, 33%) . Maintenance TAC monotherapy is as follows: 2 receive a single daily dose 3 days/week, 1 receives a single daily dose every other day, 12 receive a single daily dose 7 days/week (levels mean 9.8ng/dl), and 18 are receiving a 2 times/day dosing (levels mean 10.2ng/dl). Two patients are on rapamycin. Two patients developed EBV infection documented by EBV-PCR which resolved with antiviral therapy; 1 developed CMV enteritis. CONCLUSION: The use of rATG preconditioning induction has decreased the incidence and severity of rejection after ITx with improved patient and graft survivals. We speculate that the "steroid free" strategy with consequent improvement in infectious and toxic complications of immunosuppression may result in better short and long term survival. (Results) Eighteen of the 19 patients showed a positive response to vaccination. In 9 patients who received grafts from anti-HBc (+) donors, one patient showed no response, 5 patients low response (peak HBsAb titer < 1000 IU/L), and 3 patients high response (peak HBsAb titer ≥ 1000 IU/L). De novo HBV infection developed in one patient who showed no response to vaccination. In 10 patients who received grafts from anti-HBc (-) donors, 6 showed a low response and 6 a high response. (Conclusion) HBV vaccination in pediatric patients after liver transplantation appeared to be effective at protecting patients that received a graft from anti-HBc (+) donors from de novo HBV infection. Saiho Ko 1 , Ichiro Tanaka 2 , Hiromichi Kanehiro 1 , Hideki Kanokogi 1 , Junji Okayama 1 , Midori Shima 2 , Akira Yoshioka 2 , Alan Giles 3 , Yoshiyuki Nakajima 1 . 1 Department of Surgery, Nara Medical University, Kashihara, Nara, Japan; 2 Deapartment of Pediatrics, Nara Medical University, Kashihara, Nara, Japan; 3 Department of Pathology, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada The cause of hemophilia is deficiency of coagulation factor VIII production in the liver, which can be cured by transplantation of non-hemophilic liver. Because the liver function of hemophilia patients is quite normal except for production of factor VIII, auxiliary partial orthotopic liver transplantation (APOLT) has a benefit that patient survival is secured by preserving native liver even in case of graft loss. However, it has not been known if the production of factor VIII from the graft of APOLT would be enough to prevent bleeding in patients with hemophilia. Methods. The feasibility of APOLT as a curative treatment for hemophilia was evaluated using a beagle dog with hemophilia A. Left lobe partial liver graft was taken from a normal beagle dog and orthotopically transplanted to the recipient with hemophilia A (factor VIII < 5%) after resection of the native left lobe preserving right lobe. Canine factor VIII was supplemented intravenously to the recipient until day 1 after transplantation to control operative bleeding. Tacrolimus and steroid were administrated as immunosuppressive therapy after transplantation. Results. The blood factor VIII activity increased to more than 30% immediately after APOLT, and maintained until the recipient's death of pneumonia on day 46. No episode of bleeding was seen during observation. Conclusions. The sustained production of factor VIII was observed after APOLT in a canine hemophilia model. Transplantation of approximately one third of the normal whole liver resulted in cure of hemophilia. Distinctive function of the partial liver graft coexisting with native liver was monitored by measuring blood factor VIII activity. These findings suggest the feasibility of APOLT as a curative treatment for patients with hemophilia. Background: The relationship between body mass index (BMI) and outcome of liver transplantation (OLT) has been debated, particulary in patients with hepatitis C (HCV). Aims: To examine the association between BMI and postOLT survival. Methods: Two NIH-sponsored multi-center databases prospectively enrolled OLT recipients at 4 highvolume centers. Data including preOLT BMI and liver disease diagnosis and postOLT follow-up were extracted in 2707 adult patients undergoing primary OLT between 1985 and 2000. The relationship between BMI and survival was assessed by the proportional hazards analysis. Results: The table describes patient characteristics prior to OLT. The mean BMI for the cohort was 26.4 kg/m 2 (SD 5.6). There was no difference in BMI between patients with HCV (n=647) and those without (n=2060). Subsequent to OLT, 734 recipients died. The figure shows that for the overall cohort, there was no association between preOLT BMI and the risk of postOLT death (95% confidence band also shown). Among patients with HCV, high BMI was not associated with shorter survival, whereas there was a trend for an increased risk of death at the lower end of BMI (p=0.055). In a multivariable analysis, BMI had no effect on survival, as compared to age (hazard ratio(HR)=1.02, p<0.01) and HCV (HR=1.34, p=0.01). No signficant interaction was present between BMI and HCV. Conclusions: In this large cohort of carefully selected OLT recipients at high-volume centers, BMI had no effect on postOLT survival. In particular, there was no association between increasing BMI and mortality in patients with HCV. These data suggest that high or low BMI alone should not be construed as contraindications for OLT even in patients with HCV. Aims: ARF requiring renal replacement therapy (RRT) either before or after LT may be associated with a poor outcome. We aimed to determine the changing incidence of RRT, identify risk factors for post LT requirement for RRT and the impact of RRT on patient/ graft survival. Methods: Prospectively collected data on all adult patients undergoing elective LT for chronic liver disease between 1994 and 2001 was analyzed. Combined liver and kidney transplants and fulminant hepatitis were excluded. Mann-Whitney U-test was used for quantitative data, Pearson's chi-square test for categorical data, Kaplan-Meier method for actuarial survival and Wilcoxon method for comparison. Results: 753 patients underwent LT for end stage disease of which 57 had pre existing renal impairment (S.creatinine > 150µmol/L). Post LT RRT was required in 117 of the 753 patients (15.5%). The incidence of post LT RRT increased from 9.6% in 1994 to 20.4% in 2001. Patients with normal pre LT renal function (n=696) were less likely to require post LT RRT (n=92,13%) compared to those with pre-existing renal impairment (n=57) who had a significantly higher risk of post LT RRT (n=25, 44%). Factors assessed for post LT RRT were divided into recipient, donor, intra operative and graft factors. Among recipient factors, patients who were in hospital at time of LT, pre LT ventilatory requirement (p=0.003), a higher BMI (<0.0001), abnormal Hb (p=0.001), WBC (p=0.01) and coagulation profile (p=0.01) were significant on univariate analysis. Donor age (47 vs 42, p=0.004) and BMI (p=0.01) was greater for those with post LT RRT. Intra-operative blood (p<0.0001), fresh frozen plasma (p<0.0001) and cryoprecipitate (p=0.002) use was significantly greater in those requiring RRT. Of 604 patients with normal renal function without RRT (Group A), 52 died in the first year (8.6%), 32 within three months. Of those with normal renal function with RRT (Group B, n=92), 52 (56.5%) died within the first year. Patients with pre LT renal impairment that improved post LT without RRT (Group C) (32) had a 1 yr mortality of 9.2% (n=3). Those with pre existing renal impairment who then required RRT (Group D) (n=25) also had a higher 1 yr mortality (n=8, 32%). Conclusions: The incidence of post LT renal impairment requiring RRT is increasing. Post LT RRT is associated with increased mortality, particularly in those with normal pre existing renal function. Body: Purpose: Model for End-stage Liver Disease (MELD) score has emerged as a useful tool in predicting mortality in patients awaiting liver transplantation, although it was originally designed to assess short-term prognosis in patients undergoing transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt. Methods: From Jan 1997 to Nov 2003 662 adult patients with End Stage Liver Disease were put on the Waiting List for orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). 388 patients were transplanted, 131 died on list, 55 were removed from the waiting list due to tumor progression (n=11), poor condition (n=6), non compliance (n=7), clinical improvement (n=28) or technical reasons (n=3). 48 patients are still awaiting OLT. All patients were categorized according to the MELD Score. Results: The difference in the MELD Score at listing versus MELD Score off listing (died on list, transplanted or removed) is shown on table below. Patients died on list showed a significant increase during waiting time as well as a significant higher MELD score at listing compared to patients who were transplanted or removed (p<0,001). Died on list Transplanted Removed MELD at listing 21,5 ± 7,2 15,8 ± 5,2 15,4 ± 5,6 MELD off listing 27,5 ± 10,5 16,9 ± 6,7 14,4 ± 6,8 Table 1 Multivariate analysis (Cox Model) identified meld score at listing (p=0,002; RR 9,3), ascites (p=0,002; RR=9,7) and encephalopathy (p=0,007; RR=7,2) as independent risk factors for death on the waiting list. Patient survival estimated by Kaplan Meier method was similar at 3, 6 and 12 months after transplantation regardless of the MELD Score. However, patients with a MELD Score >=25 showed a remarkable trend towards a lower survival at 3 years (62% versus 80%, p=0.08). This trend is confirmed in a multivariate analysis evaluating MELD Score as a pre-transplant risk factor for long term survival after OLT (p=0,02; RR=5,6). A further detail of interest in this analysis is the fact that patients with MELD Score < 11 showed a higher risk for death after OLT (89% survival) than on waiting list (98% survival) at three months. Conclusion: Our study demonstrated that MELD Score is a strong predictor for death on the waiting list and should also be considered as a pre-transplant risk factor for long term post-transplant survival. Relative risks for graft loss and patient death were evaluated using univariate Kaplan-Meier and multivariate Cox proportional hazard model methods for three pre-tx diagnosis groups: 778 HBV; 3,463 HCV; and 7,429 other. RESULTS: Graft survival was lower in HCV versus other patients (72.2% vs. 75.7%, p=0.0043). There was no difference in graft survival between the HBV and other groups (75.6% vs. 75.7%, p=0.93). A linear relationship was observed for donor age and graft loss in HCV and other patients, but not HBV patients (see figure) . Selected protective and risk factors for graft loss are listed in the table below. Similar outcomes were observed for patient death (not shown). CONCLUSION: Graft and patient survival rates are lower in HCV-infected liver recipients compared to HBV or other pre-tx diagnoses. There is a striking linear relationship between donor age and risk for graft loss and patient death in HCV and other patients, but not HBV patients. MMF + Tacro + CS therapy was associated with statistically significant reduction in graft loss and patient death vs. Tacro Introduction: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an endothelial cell mitogen and an important stimulator of sinusoidal endothelial cell proliferation. The aim of this research was to study the effects of exogenous VEGF in a rat model of acute liver failure. Materials and Methods:The study was conducted on 64 rats (240-300 gr.) according to the 1991 Revision of Guiding Principles in the Care and Use of Animals. All rats underwent intraperitoneal injection (5 ml/Kg) of 25% carbon tetrachloride (CCl 4 ) and 75% paraffin oil. This dosage of CCl 4 was devised to induce nonfatal acute liver failure with spontaneous recovery in 7 days. The animals were randomly divided into 2 groups. Group B animals underwent i.v. injection of 200 ng of VEGF 165 one hour following intra-peritoneal injection of CCl 4 . To obtain daily LFTs and histological liver samples, 4 rats in each group were sacrificed daily up to 8 days. Results: In group A the liver histology showed massive periportal hepatocyte necrosis associated with portal lymphocytic infiltrates. The peak of the damage was documented at 72 hours following CCl 4 . Group B showed minimal necrosis, moderate periportal edema and a minimum periportal steatosis. At 48 hours steatotic changes had disappeared and the periportal edema was resolving. LFTs demonstrated severe liver damage in rats in group A. In group A the peak AST (mean 322.5 IU/L) and ALT (mean 250.25 IU/L) were recorded at 72 hours. In group B, at 72 hours the mean AST was 137 IU/L (normal <95 IU/L) and ALT 68 IU/l (normal <45 IU/L). The maximum levels of AST and ALT, in group B, were 152.3 IU/L and 72.3 IU/L, at 24 hours. Conclusion: According to our results exogenous VEGF successfully protects the liver from CCl 4 induced acute liver failure. Further studies will demonstrate if exogenous VEGF can be effective in other liver injuries. Background: This study was undertaken to determine the causes of mortality in liver recipients who survived at least 10 years after transplantation. Methods: Retrospectively collected data of 455 consecutive patients (497 grafts) who received liver grafts between May 1977 and Sept. 1993 were reviewed, which included 74 pediatric patients (86 grafts); 381 adult patients (411 grafts). Demographics included age, gender, indications for transplantation, patient survival, graft survival and causes of death. Follow-up data was available for 96% of patients. Results: Two hundreds and thirty-nine patients survived more than 10 years. Recipients who survived the first year had 10-year survival of 68%. Twenty-nine patients died during their second decade post liver transplantation. The deaths occurred from10.2 years to 19.7 years after transplantation. 88% of the recipients who survived the first decade are still alive. Death with a functioning graft occurred in 20 patients (68%). The causes of death in those 20 recipients were de novo malignancy (n=9), cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease (n=8), and infection (n=3). The mean age at death of patients who died from cardiovascular disease and malignancy was 63 years. The remaining 9 deaths were graft related which included recurrent disease (n=3), chronic rejection (n=2), and others (n=4). The mean age of patients who died of graft failure was 48.8 years. Ten patients (35%) died with impaired kidney function likely due to Cyclosporine toxicity. There was an increased risk of graft failure in male recipients of female livers. Biliary atresia, Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis and Primary biliary cirrhosis had the best 10 years survival rates (76, 65 and 59% respectively). Aside from three patients who died of recurrent disease, 4 patients who died of causes other than recurrent disease had dysfunction from recurrent disease. Conclusion: Survival of liver recipients who live beyond the 10 th post-transplant year is very good. De-novo malignancy emerges as the major cause of death follwed by cardiovascular disease and cerebral vascular accidents. Aggressive monitoring for cardiovascular disease and stringent follow-up surveillance to enable early detection of de-novo cancers may further improve long term outcome. Background: The National Liver Transplantation Programme in the UK was established in 1983 and since then over 9000 transplants have taken place. The aim of this study was to investigate the long-term transplant survival of these liver transplants. Methods: Data on elective liver transplants performed in the eight designated liver centres in the UK from 1 January 1985 to 31 December 2002 were obtained from the National Transplant Database (NTxD). Long-term transplant survival estimates were obtained using the Kaplan-Meier method. Transplant survival time was calculated as time from first graft to patient death or graft failure. Results: Between 1985 and 2002, 6197 first cadaveric heartbeating liver only transplants were performed: 5369 (87%) in adult and 828 (13%) in paediatric patients. Transplant survival estimates and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI) were 63% (CI 62-65%) at 5 years, 52% (CI 51-54%) at 10 years, 42% (CI 38-46%) at 15 years and 38% (CI 33-44%) at 18 years post-transplant. The median transplant survival time was 11 years (95% CI 10.2-12.4 years). There was some evidence to suggest better long-term transplant survival for paediatric recipients compared with adult recipients: 56% and 35%, respectively, of transplants still functioning after 18 years, p=0.06. Analysing these data by year of transplant (in three-year groups from 1985 to 2002) showed that transplant survival was significantly different between the groups, p<0.0001, with more recent transplants doing better. This was mainly due to a significant improvement in transplant survival in the first year post-transplant for the years analysed. One year transplant survival was 54% (95% CI 48-59%) for transplants in 1985 to 1987 compared with 85% (95% CI 83-87%) for transplants in 2000 to 2002, p<0.0001. Analysis of longterm transplant survival of those transplants functioning after one year showed no statistically significant effect of transplant year. Conclusions: 50% of first cadaveric heartbeating liver only transplants recorded on the NTxD since 1985 were still functioning after 11 years. Long-term transplant survival has significantly improved over the last 18 years. This improvement has been principally due to fewer graft losses in the first post-transplant year. However, there has been no appreciable improvement in transplant survival for those transplants still functioning after one year.  Living-donor liver transplantation (LDLT) is a universally accepted therapy for patients with chronic liver disease. Experience with the use of live donors (LD) in fulminant hepatic failure (FHF) is limited. Goal: To review our experience with LDLT in adults and children with FHF. Methods: From 06/95 to 12/03, 40 consecutive children (mean age of 3.5 years, 63% females) with FHF underwent LT: 21 with deceased donors (DD) and 19 (47.5%) with LD. Twenty two consecutive adults (mean age of 33 years, 100% females) with FHF were transplanted from 02/00 (date of the 1 st LDLT in our center) to 12/03: 15 with DD and 7 (32%) with LD. Etiology of FHF in the 19 children who underwent LDLT was indeterminate in 13 (68%), HAV in 4 (21%), autoimmune hepatitis in 1 and toxic in 1. Among the 7 adults, 3 had autoimmune hepatitis (43%), 2 HBV (29%), 1 hepatotoxicity and 1 FHF of indeterminate etiology. All patients with FHF were listed for DD. At the same time, one or more LD were evaluated. LDLT was performed whenever a patient deteriorated and no DD became available. The use of LDLT in FHF was approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee. Results: Actuarial 1-year survival was 76% and 84% in children and 73% and 71% in adults transplanted with DD or LD respectively. Among the 7 adults, pre-LT serum bilirubin was 17.1±7 mg/dL, INR 3.5±2.2 and median ALT 1096 IU/L (428-7139 IU/L). Two patients with deep coma and cerebral edema were referred from other institutions after 7 days of waitlist for DD. Both died within 24 hours of LDLT from multiorgan failure. In the remaining 5 patients who survived, LDLT was indicated at the time when encephalopathy progressed to stage 3 in 2 patients and to stage 4 in 3. The median time-interval to LDLT in survivors was 3 days (2-4 days). Conclusions: 1) LDLT is at the present time a normal practice in our center for children with FHF; 2) To be successful, LDLT among adults with FHF should be indicated in a timely fashion and early in the course of the disease. Aim: To assess clinical outcomes using livers from controlled NHBD in the era of organ shortage with report on survival and complications on the largest single center experience with up to10 years of follow-up. Patients and Methods: 55 liver transplants performed in 54 patients from NHBD between 1994-2003. Donors ranged between 4-68 years old (mean 41±16), with arrest to crossclamp time of 6±4.7 minutes. During this period 26 livers were discarded for documented anatomic and histologic reasons. The age of the recipients ranged from 27-69 years (51±10). Since mid-2002, we accepted NHBD livers recovered by other programs. 13 livers were imported (three transcontinental) and 9 transplanted. Results: Cold ischemia time was 358-862 (578±149) minutes. Primary Non-Function (PNF) occurred in 6 patients (11%) -four retransplanted and two survived, two other died of sepsis. Hepatic artery thrombosis (HAT) occurred in another 6 (11%) patients; three retransplanted and one survived; two died without re-transplantation and one survived with reconstruction. Biliary strictures or leaks were seen in 10 (18%) patients which four were irreversible (two required retransplantation, one died before re-transplantation and one re-listed). Livers from NHBD were used to re-transplant 5 emergency patients and three survived. Of the 8 livers recovered from donors 60 years and older, only 2 were utilized -one died of PNF and the other experienced HAT. The overall mortality in the group was 13 patients. The 1-, 5-, and 10-year patient and graft survival is 78%, 76%, 76%, and 69%, 67% and 67% respectively. Patient survival in the periods 94-97 and 98-2003 were 45% and 85% respectively. Organs procured by other programs did not show any difference in function. Conclusion: The rate of PNF and major biliary complications was significantly higher than organs from heartbeating donors, leading to lower early graft survival, although long-term survival was not different. Better management of these potential donors have resulted a better outcome. More standardized donor management and recovery techniques could result in procurement of better organs to be shared between the transplant programs. Thus, controlled NHBD remain an acceptable source of organs in the era of organ shortage. Two groups were designed. A study group, (SG, n=27 (10 minute vascular clamping), and control group (CG, n=26). Outcome of recipients was analysed. RESULTS: Donor characteristics were similar related to: age, ICU-stay, steatosis, vasoactive drug usage, infection, hypertension-hypotension, hypoxia-anoxia, and cardiac arrest. Donor procurement was performed in standard fashion. Recipient's characteristics were also similar related to age, sex, diagnosis, operative procedure ,management, operating time, red blood cells requirement, total and warm ischemic graft time. Postoperative liver function during the first 10 days, related to transaminase levels, prothrombin activity, and total bilirubin weren´t different in either group. When donors were classified related to their potential quality according to a published score (Traspl Int 2000), we found that AST and ALT levels at 24 hours were higher in IP grafts (AST: 2384±3233 vs 801±628 p<0.01; ALT: 1678±2002 vs 866±641 p<0.04) in good donors. However, Prothrombin activity was better (PAc: 79±16 vs 77.5±10 p<0.01). Four patients developed primary non-function (two in each group),and were retransplanted. CONCLUSSIONS: IP doesn´t seem to be effective in OLT, with ten minute vascular occlusion and a graft ischemic time of 8 hours. Furthermore, good donors don´t seem to benefit from this procedure. IP during donor procurement has yet to be defined, therefore Multicentric studies are needed in the future. Erik Schadde 1 , Chao Huang 1 , Richard B. Freeman 1 . 1 Transplant Surgery, Tufts-New England Medical Cener, Boston, MA, USA Background: Mycophenolic acid (MPA), cyclosporine (CSA) and corticosteroids (CS), are commonly used immunosuppressant drugs in clinical transplantation. We hypothesized that some of the interindividual variation in response to these drugs can be explained by variations in cytokine gene polymorphisms (CGPs).Methods: We measured the cytokine production and proliferative response of PHA (10ng/ml) stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) isolated from 32 healthy volunteers to determine if these responses differed according to CGPs. PBMCs were cultured with and without MPA (20 mg/ml), CSA (2mg/ml), CS (2mg/ml). Proliferative response was assessed at day 3 by BrdU incorporation and TNF-a production was assessed by ELISA. Results were tabulated for the following GCPs: IL-1ra variable tandem repeat (VTR) allele homozygotes (IL-1Ra CGP1) vs. IL-1ra VTR heterozygote (IL-1Ra CGP2), IL-10 -1082,-819, -592: GCC/ ACC;GCC/ATA (IL-10 CGP1) vs. IL-10 ACC/ACC;ACC/ATA;ATA/ATA (IL-10 CGP2), TGFb 10, 25: T/T G/G; T/C G/G (TGFb CGP1) vs. TGFb T/C G/C; C/C/ G/G; T/T G/C (TGFb CGP2) and , TNFa 308 G/A: A/A (TNFa CGP1) vs. TNFa G/G (TNFa CGP2). Results from triplicate experiments are reported. Results: MPA and CSA completely inhibited the PBMC's proliferative response. Overall, MPA, CSA and CS reduced TNFa production by 51%, 49%, and 73% respectively However, cells with the IL-10 CGP1 produce 5 times more TNFa at baseline than IL-10CGP2 and this TNFa production was not suppressed by MPA, CSA, or CS. In addition, CSA suppressed TNFa production from TNFa CGP1 cells significantly more than in TNFa CGP2 cells. CS significantly suppressed TNFa production from cells containing IL-1RaCGP1 relative to IL-1RaCGP2 cells. CS also significantly suppresses TNFa production form cells with IL-10CGP1 but not cells with IL-10CGP2. TNFa production from the TNFa CGP1 cells is significantly suppressed by CS during PBMC proliferation compared with TNFa CGP2 cells. Conclusions: Our data suggest that some CGPs or combinations are associated with higher TNFa production during PMBC proliferation. Some of these are less sensitive to immunosuppression. This suggests that some CGPs or combinations (genotypes) deserve further study and may help to identify candidates for immunosuppressive reduction and/or withdrawal. Introduction: Recent reports demonstrate the efficacy of induction immunosuppression with Thymoglobuline, a potent anti-thymocyte policlonal antibody, in allowing alloengraftment and acquired tolerance, by means of a tolerogenic regimen of recipient pre-treatment and low-dose postoperative immunosuppression. We investigated the effects of this novel approach in a series of consecutive 53 liver transplant patients after a followup of > 1 year, and the possibility of weaning off immunosuppression. Methods: from October 2002, we used Thymoglobuline pre-treatment (5 mg/kg once-only i.o. dose) + low-dose Tacrolimus monotherapy in 53 patients (19 LDLT, 34 CAD-LT) receiving liver transplantation for various indications. Results: Cumulative patient's 1-year survival rate was 87%, not significantly different from an historical control group. 25 patients (47%) experienced 32 mild acute rejection episodes, all treated with a 1-g bolus of Methylprednisolone; 4 patients (7.5%) required steroid recycle, 2 OKT3 treatment; rejection rate was similar in control group (41%) but 26.9 % episodes were graded moderate or severe, and required steroid recycle+maintenance (30.9% pts) or OKT3 treatment (10.2%). Mean TAC levels were 7.1 ng/ml (range < 1.5-13.6 ng/ml) (10.4 ng/ml control group, p=0.04), whereas mean daily TAC doses were 4.2 vs 8.4 (p=0.01); after a mean period of 4.2±1.4 months, a planned weaning schedule was initiated: 26 Thymoglobuline pts stay in BID TAC administration, 11 pts OD, 3 pts every other day, 2 pts 3 times/week, 1 pt once/ monthly; 3 pts were discontinued from TAC for toxicity and stay on Sirolimus OD monotherapy. No major rejection complications were experienced subsequent to weaning. Conclusion: Induction with Thymoglobuline in liver transplant recipients is effective in protecting against rejection and can actively promote graft tolerance and gradual weaning off immunosuppression, the actual dosages and levels of which are far lower than historically considered. Further investigations in multicenter trials with adequate follow-up is essential for establishing a new paradigm in immunosuppression in liver transplantation. Silvina E.T. Yantorno 1 , Julio J. Trentadue 1 , Andres E. Ruf 1 , Gladys Saa 1 , Valeria I. Descalzi 1 , Oscar C. Andriani 1 , Luis G. Podesta 1 , Federico G. Villamil 1 . 1 Liver Unit, Fundacion Favaloro, Buenos Aires, Argentina The key for success in fulminant hepatic failure (FHF) is to identify on admission patients who will survive with medical therapy and those who will require urgent liver transplantation (LT). The King's College and Clichy's prognostic criteria have been previously validated. MELD has been found to be an excellent predictor of mortality among cirrhotics awaiting LT. Experience with MELD in FHF is limited. Goal: To assess the efficacy of MELD, King's College and Clichy's scores to predict outcome in patients with FHF. Methods: From 06/95 to 12/03, 121 consecutive patients with FHF (64 adults, 57 children) were referred for LT of which 22 (18%) survived and 18 (15%) died with medical therapy and 81 (67%) underwent LT. Etiology of FHF (adults/children) was indeterminate in 30%/ 39%, HAV in 12%/50%, HBV in 11%/0%, autoimmune hepatitis in 19%/3.5%, druginduced in 17%/1.7% and other in 11%76.8%. In this series there were no cases of acetaminophen toxicity. The positive and negative predictive value (PPV, NPV), diagnostic accuracy (DA) and concordance(c)-statistic were investigated on admission in the 40 patients who either survived or died without LT. Results: The MELD score was significantly higher in patients who died compared to those who survived without LT, both among adults (38±7 vs 26±7, p=0.004) and children (37±6 vs 23±6, p=0.006). The prognostic efficacy of the international scores and of MELD score >30 are shown in the table. The rates of false-negative results were 7.5% for King's, 20% for Clichy's and 0% for MELD. Falsepositive results occurred in 15%, 2.5% and 5% respectively. The DA in adults/children were 82%/72% for King's, 68%/89% for Clichy's and 91%/100% for MELD. Conclusions: 1) The MELD score appears to be an excellent predictor of outcome in adults and children with FHF (DA of 95% and c-statistic score on 0.955); 2) Compared to the English and French prognostic criteria, MELD was associated with the lowest rate of false-negative results; 3) The cut-off of 30 selected for MELD in this study requires further validation Methods: Following IRB approval and documentation of verbal informed patient consent, 10 patients undergoing primary orthotopic liver transplantation were enrolled. At each of the four time points during liver transplantation, two blood samples were obtained. Points of measurement included: baseline (after anesthetic induction and before incision), five minutes prior to reperfusion (III-5), ten minutes after reperfusion (III+10), and seventy minutes after reperfusion (III+70). One sample was sent for routine PT and TEG analysis. In the second sample, 6.1 mcg of rFVIIa was added (approximate equivalent dose of 120 mcg/kg for an average sized patient) before PT and TEG analysis. PT was measured in seconds. TEG variables included reaction time, clot formation rate, maximum amplitude (MA), and lysis at 30 minutes. Data at all four time points were analyzed using the Wilcoxon signed rank test. Results: Nine of 10 patients had PT and TEG analysis performed at all 4 time points. The tenth patient had the baseline analysis only, due to intraoperative complications. There was a statistically significant difference in the baseline PT (P<0.02, 15.8 ± 3.21 seconds in the routine sample and 13.6 ± 2.36 seconds in the rFVIIa sample). There was a statistically significant difference in the TEG MA (P<0.02) at 5 minutes prior to reperfusion. The mean MA in the routine sample was 53.5 mm, and was 39 in the rFVIIa sample. There were no other statistically significant differences in the PT or in the TEG variables at any of the other sampling times. Conclusions: Previous studies have shown a change in TEG variables as well as PT with in vivo administration of rFVIIa. Our in vitro study failed to demonstrate a consistent effect of rFVIIa in blood from patients undergoing liver transplantation. It does not appear that an in vitro model will permit assessment of the effect of rFVIIa prior to its administration to a patient. Situs inversus totalis (SIT) is rare and involves right-left reversal of the abdominal and thoracic viscera. Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is associated with early mortality without surgical repair. Both present perioperative management challenges. We report the first case of living-donor liver transplant (LDLT) to an adult with SIT and TOF. A 62 year-old man with SIT, TOF, and primary sclerosing cholangitis presented for LDLT. TOF resulted in a reconstructed RV outflow tract, ventricular septal defect closure, and pulmonary valve homograft. Tricuspid annuloplasty was also performed. Preoperative ECG had normal sinus rhythm with right bundle branch block. Echocardiogram revealed pulmonary and tricuspid regurgitation, RV dilation with reduced function, and LV hypertrophy with normal function. Coronary angiography showed mild atherosclerosis. Intraoperative ECG leads were reversed due to the dextrocardia. Transesophageal echocardiography was used to guide a pulmonary artery catheter past the repaired tricuspid annulus, and assess preload and ventricular function. The operation was hemodynamically uneventful. Postoperatively, he had 2 episodes of SVT with spontaneous conversion to sinus rhythm. Twelve days post-discharge, he developed reentrant SVT requiring administration of adenosine. He was placed on atenolol and has had no more episodes of SVT. There are several issues to consider in LDLT with SIT and TOF: The postreperfusion syndrome during orthotopic liver transplantations is defined as a decrease in the mean arterial pressure of 30% to 70% below its baseline value, and can occur within 1 minute of the graft's reperfusion. The postreperfusion syndrome is often severe, can cause early graft dysfunction and may culminate in multi-organ failure in the recipient. The precise mechanism of the postreperfusion syndrome is not known. Inotropes and vasopressors have been used to counteract the often profund hypotension of the postreperfusion syndrome, but were not able to prevent its occurence. There is evidence, however, that the postreperfusion syndrome is caused by the influx of oxygen free radicals, generated in the liver graft during its ischemic time, into the circulation of the recipient at the reperfusion of the liver graft. Based on this assumption, mannitol which besides its well known diuretic functions has also radical scavenging properties, can be employed to attenuate or even prevent the occurence of the postreperfusion syndrome. We report about the successful use of mannitol for the prevention of the postreperfusion syndrome in more than 200 patients undergoing orthotopic liver transplantations. About 10 minutes prior to reperfusion of the liver graft, a bolus of mannitol 20%, 1 g/kg, is infused into the recipients circulation to be present as radical scavenger at the moment of reperfusion of the liver graft. If necessary, boluses of calcium chloride are given to elevate the calcium level > 1 mmol/l, and sodium bicarbonate is infused to correct the base excess towards +/ -0 prior to reperfusion. At reperfusion of the liver graft, an infusion of mannitol 20%, 1g/ kg, is started for the duration of 1 hour for continuous radical scavenging from the reperfused liver graft. Vasopressors and/or inotropes are used during the reperfusion phase only if the mean arterial blood pressure drops below 70 mmHg. With this algorithm we have been able to completely prevent the postreperfusion syndrome from occuring in the majority of orthotopic liver transplantations, and had to resort to a short term use of vasopressors and/ or inotropes in only a few of the cases. While intraoperative potassium disturbances during liver transplantation are well described, their importance in patients undergoing liver retransplantation, a population with substantial perioperative challenges and suboptimal outcomes, has not been studied. The aims of the present study were to investigate the incidence and risk factors of intraoperative potassium disturbances in liver retransplantation. After IRB approval, the medical records at a single tertiary academic center between January 1, 1998 and June 30, 2003 were reviewed. During the study period, 137 patients underwent 157 retransplantations. Three patients were excluded from analysis because of incomplete data. Of 134 patients, 130 patients received a second graft, 21 patients a third and three patients a fourth. On average, 5.9 potassium values per operation were recorded. Overall, 106 patients (68.8%) developed hyperkalemia (K > 5.0 mmol/L), hypokalemia (K < 3.5 mmol/L) or combined disturbance (hyperkalemia and hypokalemia). The range of potassium values was 2.2 mmol/L to 8.0 mmol/L. Of 154 retransplantations, 48 patients (31.2%) developed hyperkalemia, 43 patients (27.9%) hypokalemia and 15 patients (9.7%) combined disturbance. In the hyperkalemic group, 24 patients (15.6%) developed severe hyperkalemia with the potassium value exceeding 6.0 mmol/L. Potassium elevation occurred in the prereperfusion period in 14 patients, in the postreperfusion period in 17 patients and in both the pre and postreperfusion periods in 18. In pediatric patients (age 18 or less, n=43), hypokalemia (48.8%) was more common than hyperkalemia (4.7%), or combined potassium disturbance (13.9%). Preliminary analysis (ANOVA) revealed that older age, higher preoperative serum creatinine and potassium levels, but not blood urea nitrogen, prothrombin time were significantly associated with intraoperative hyperkalemia during liver retransplantation. In conclusion, intraoperative potassium disturbances, either hyperkalemia or hypokalemia, are common in patients undergoing liver retransplantation; intraoperative hyperkalemia is associated with older age, higher preoperative serum creatinine and potassium levels. Further classification and modification of preoperative risk factors may improve the outcome of liver retransplantation. Flavio Takaoka No epidural catheters were placed in the last 55 donors. RESULTS: Mean surgery time was 597 ± 137 min. All patients were extubated in the operating room, transferred for ICU 41,1 ± 23min later. Postoperatively, all but one donor required intensive care unit admission. In the immediate postoperative period, all donors exhibited significant elevation of liver enzymes and an 83% prolongation in the prothrombin time. Median hospital stay was 6 days (5 to 21 days). No long-term complications were encountered in our experience. One donor presented bile leakage that was managed conservatively. Perioperatively, no donors received non-autologous banked blood, six received autologous blood. CONCLUSIONS: Intraoperative management is of paramount importance for minimizing risks for the donors. Blood transfusion requirements can be kept minimal, despite reports of significantly higher blood transfusion requirements 5 . Epidural anesthesia or analgesia involves recognized risks and should be replaced by other safe and effective alternatives. Uniform reporting of management and complications specific to the donor experience with LDLT is required in order to continue to increase donor safety. (Background)Immunomodulation by gene transfer into the graft liver has a great potential as a novel theraputic approach in liver transplantation. However, there are serious concerns about the possibility for induction of immune responses against viral vectors and for recombination with endogenous virus to produce a deleteriously infectious form, though several viral vector-mediated gene transfers into liver has been reported effectively. In the previous study, we developed a novel gene transfer method targeting to the graft liver by a rapid injection of naked DNA in rats. Herein, we applied this novel gene transfer method to the rat organ transplantation model. (Materials and Methods) Inbred rat strains of DA (MHC haplotype RT1 a ) and Lewis (RT1 l ) weighing 200-250gwere used. Firstly, we re-evaluated levels of transgene expression through the hepatic vein and the portal vein. A large volume of PBS (2.5% of body weight) containing naked the pGL3 was selectively injected into the liver via hepatic vein and portal vein using a flexible catheter. Gene expressions were evaluated using the non-invasive IVIS™ system without sacrificing the animals. Next we evaluated the application for the gene transfer to the recipient liver. The CTLA4Ig gene was transferred to the recipient Lew liver and functionally tested by allogenic DA heart transplantation. DNA vaccination of HBV by transferring the pCAG-HBs-IRES-Luc to the liver was tried, and HBs antibody titer in the serum was measured. Finally, we performed rat liver transplantation using the liver graft that transferred the pGL3 or pCAG CTLA4Ig, and evaluated the gene expression and its' function. (Results)After local delivery of CTLA4Ig cDNA to the liver, survival of DA heart grafts lengthened with increased CTLA4Ig serum levels. Expression of luciferase gene after rapid injection of the pCAG-HBs-IRES-Luc into the liver were efficiently observed, and HBs antibody titer in the serum was elevated after 4 times boosting by gene gun shooting to the skin. Liver allo-graft injected with naked pCAGCTLA4Ig were transplanted orthotopically and heterotopically, and graft and recipient survivals were prolonged. (Conclusion)Catheter-based graft liver-targeted gene transfer through hepatic vein allowed high levels of transgene expression in the rat liver. This novel method is considered to be a powerful and useful tool for use in organ transplantation. Result: Mean serum creatinine before introduction of Rapamycin was 2.9±1.6 (median 2.4) mg/dl with mean blood urea nitrogen of 39.2±12 (median 39.5 )mg/dl. At last followup mean serum creatinine was 2.4±1.4 (median 1.75 )mg/dl with mean blood urea nitrogen of 43.7+33 (median 30 )mg/dl. Individually 11 (73.3%) patients showed improvement. Three (20%) patients experienced acute rejection, 9 (60%) patients required use of cholesterol lowering medication, and 1 patient had thrombocytopenia. The mean tacrolimus dose was 4.5mg/day before and 1.9 mg/day after introduction of Rapamycin (in two cases it was discontinued). At last follow-up mean Rapamycin dose was 3mg/day. Conclusion: Rapamycin was found to be useful as calcineuruin sparing immunosuppression to improve renal function in 73% of LTx recipients. However 20% of patients experienced rejection and 67% had Rapamycin related hyperlipidemia or thrombocytopenia. PURPOSE: Sufficient immunosuppression is important in liver transplantation, however it is still unknown which immunosuppressive regimen is the most convenient. The purpose of this study was to investigate the impact of different immunosuppressive regimens on efficiency and adverse events. METHODS: A retrospective analysis was performed in 624 patients who had undergone 1. OLT between 1993 and 2003 at our transplant center. Four different regimens were used during the observation period: group 1(n=255): ATG for 10d + CsA starting on day 8 + steroid taper; group 2 (n=45): CsA starting on day 0 + steroid taper; group 3 (n=89): FK506 starting on day 0 + steroid taper; group 4 (n=235): ATG for 3d + CsA starting on day 3 + steroid taper. Efficiency was defined as freedom from acute rejection. Severe adverse events were measured by the incidence of renal impairment and death from infection or malignoma. RESULTS: The median observation period for the study population was 36 months posttransplant. Biopsy proven, clinically relevant acute rejection occured in 22%, 26%, 19% and 14% in group 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively (group 4 vs 2 p=0.05, group 4 vs 1 p=0.03). Steroidresistant rejection was significantly lower in group 4 (0%) and 1 (3%) compared to the other groups (36% and 18% in group 2 and 3, respectively). Overall less than 1% of patients died from rejection. Severe perioperative renal impairment (13%) was measured by the need of hemofiltration for at least 3 days and was not significantly different between the 4 groups. Furthermore, death from infection as well as time-related death from malignoma were comparable in all groups. CONCLUSION: ATG induction for 3 days showed an advantage concerning freedom from acute rejection, especially the rate of steroidresistant acute rejection was significantly lower. Late onset of calcineurin inhibitors in the groups with ATG induction did not show an positive impact on postoperative kidney function. Death rates from infection or malignoma were not increased with ATG induction. Therefore, concerning adverse events no advantage or disadvantage could be demonstrated for ATG induction. In summary, our data indicate that the type of immunosuppressive regimen is of minor importance in liver transplantation. Naoki Kawagishi 1 , Yorihiro Akamatsu 1 , Satoshi Sekiguchi 1 , Tatsuya Fukumori 1 , Keisei Fujimori 1 , Susumu Satomi 1 . 1 Division of Advanced Surgical Science and Technology, Graduate School of Medicine, Tohoku Univ., Sendai, Miyagi, Japan The donor shortage problem encouraged us to perform living donor liver transplantation (LDLTx) across the ABO blood barrier in Japan. The survival rate in ABO-incompatible transplantations was much poorer than in ABO-compatible recipients for the early experiences, but the introduction of novel immunosuppressive regimens and PE has yielded excellent results in ABO-incompatible transplantations. We have successfully performed two cases of ABO-incompatible LDLTx by using rituximab during and after liver transplantation. METHODS In our institution we experienced 7 ABO-incompatible recipients out of 76 LDLTx and the 6 out of 7 were alive. Case1 : A one year and 10 months old girl (blood group O) whose primary disease was biliary atresia was performed LDLTx by using the graft from her father (blood group A). She was also performed PE for twice before Tx in order to reduce titers 16 or below. Case2 : A 42 year old woman (blood group O) whose primary disease was primary biliary cirhosis was performed LDLTx by using the graft from her brother in law (blood group B). She was performed PE for seven times before Tx in order to reduce titers and was administered rituximab prophylactic during the operation because of the high titer before PE. She also had splenectomy and intrahepatic artery infusion of prostaglandin E1 and methylpredonisolone just after the operation. RESULTS Case 1: From POD 3 the serum titers and LFTs were elevated despite the plasma exchange. On POD 7 needle graft biopsy revealed the humoral rejection, and she was treated by rituximab, DSG and steroid pulse therapy. Her titers and LFTs were improved drastically and she was discharged on POD 74. CD19 positive lymphocytes in her peripheral blood were less than 1% until 3 month after Tx. Case 2 : One week after Tx the titers were elevated with slight deterioration of LFTs, but steroid pulse with PE improved the LFTs. She was discharged on POD 102 due to biliary leakage. CD19 positive lymphocytes in her peripheral blood were less than 1% until 8 month after Tx. CONCLUSION Rituximab has the possibility to become the new strategy for the ABO-incompatible liver transplantation. Immunosuppresion after liver transplantation can be associated with side-effects. We have tested the efficacity of FK506 to reverse the CyA associated adverse events in liver tx recipients. Methods 40 patients (pts), M/F ratio 31/9 ( age 32 to 60 yrs) on CyA monotherapy for at least 6 months after liver tx were switched to FK506 therapy (range 6 to 168 months). Indication for conversion to FK506 (major side effect): A) High creatinine value (>1.8) 5 pts; B) Hypertension 25 pts; C) Hyperlipidemia (tot. chol>180 mg/dl; triglyc>220 mg/dl) 4 pts; D) Hirsutism and/or hyperplasia 6 pts 3 pts in group A presented hypertension and 1 pt had high serum cholesterol levels. 7 pts in group B presented high creatinine value, 7 more pts had high serum lipid levels. Systolic/diastolic blood pressure(BP) ≥140 and ≥90 mmHg was accepted as hypertension. The FK506 starting dose was 0,05 mg/Kg/die, then adjusted to 5-8 ng/dl. For statistical analysis τ -student test for quantitative and χ 2 -test for qualitative variables were used. A p value <0.05 was considered significative. Results were examined at 3 and 6 months of treatment. Results There were 3 drop-out pts (group A, B, D). In group A mean creatinine value was 1.5±0.36 in CyA pts and 1.39±0.38 in FK506 pts (p 0.086 NS) When renal insufficiency was associated to hypertension, renal function tests ameliorated in 3 pts and normalized in 4. In group B anthypertensive therapy was discontinued in 5 pts (p<0,001%); 8 pts reduced anthypertensive treatment while maintaining normalized BP; 8 pts didn't modifiy anthypertensive therapy but normalized BP; 3 pts were non responsive. Mean systolic BP was 156±19 in the CyA pts and 127±10 in the FK506 pts; mean diastolic BP was 93±12 in CyA pts and 79±7 in FK506 pts. In total normalization or ameliotation of BP was found in 84% of pts. In group C serum lipid levels normalized in 2 pts and ameliorated in other 2. In patients with associated hypertension serum lipid levels normalized in 5 and ameliorated in 1. All patients in group D recovered. Discussion Conversion to FK506 produced systolic BP normalization in 21 pts out 25 (84%); only 5 pts discontinued anthypertensive therapy (20%). Blood pressure improvement occurred independently of an effect on renal function. Mean 30% BP reduction was determinant in discontinuing or reducing the anthypertensive therapy in 84% of pts (p<0.001). Benefits were observed in high serum lipid and cosmetic patients. Intravenous administration of cyclosporine (CsA) avoids the problem of CsA absorption dysfunction that can occur in the first few days after liver transplantation. However, 24hour infusions using C 0 monitoring have proven unfavourable in terms of efficacy and toxicity. To our knowledge, this is the first study to assess use of C 2 monitoring of CsA using 4-hour intravenous infusions, or to evaluate starting dose of intravenous CsA based on graft function. Methods: Four-hour intravenous infusions of CsA (2mg/kg/day) were given twice daily to 20 consecutive recipients of a liver allograft for a minimum of 4 days. Full CsA pharmacokinetic profiles were undertaken on day 3 post-transplant in all patients and also on day 7 in five patients. Patients received basiliximab and mycophenolate mofetil (n=11) or steroids (n=9). Results. Across all 20 patients, mean AUC 0-12 was 4,500ng.h/ mL. The period of greatest exposure was during the period 2-4 hours after the start of infusion (32% of total AUC 0-12 ). The correlation between C 2 and AUC 0-12 was 0.91, while the correlation between C 0 and AUC 0-12 was 0.43. The CsA dose/kg body weight and total CsA dose correlated only poorly with AUC 0-12 (r=0.44 and r=0.61, respectively). When patients were stratified according to initial or delayed graft function, there was a good correlation between total CsA dose and AUC 0-12 (initial graft function, r=0.84; delayed graft function, r=0.93). In patients with initial graft function, AUC 0-12 could be predicted by the formula (24.5 x CsA dose) + 454. For patients with delayed graft function, the formula was (37 x CsA dose) + 1293. Conclusions. C 2 monitoring provides a more reliable indication of CsA exposure than C 0 monitoring with twice-daily 4-hour intravenous CsA. Calculating starting dose of intravenous CsA based on presence or absence of initial graft function is a more precise technique than use of body weight. Introduction:Liver transplantation is an accepted modality of treatment for end stage liver disease. Recurrent disease is one of the most important causes of late graft loss. Recurrence of autoimmune processes, such as autoimmune hepatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis or sclerosing cholangitis, and reinfection with either hepatitis B virus or hepatitis C virus is well known. However, recurrence of sarcoidosis after liver transplantation is less well described in a relatively uncommon indication for liver transplantation. We present three cases of sarcoidosis from our institution. Patient method: Three patients received LTx for endstage liver failure from sarcoidosis. Case#1 53-year-old female underwent combined liver and kidney transplantation in July 1998. She had no known extra hepatic disease. Case #2; 63-year-old man who had known pulmonary sarcoidosis about 35 years before LTx, received a liver transplant in Oct 2001. Case #3 48 yr old male had pulmonary sarcoidosis 11 yrs prior to LTx and proven Bone marrow biopsy of non-caseating granuloma 6 years prior to LTx. All patients were followed until May 2003. All patients received tacrolimus based immunosuppression with Mycophenolate Mofetil (MMF) and steroids. Baseline prednisone was discontinued in Case# 1 after 6 months, while in case#2, prednisone (5mg/day) was continued. Results: Case #3 died seven weeks post transplantation from sepsis. Case#1 in Dec 2002 presented (53 months post LTx) with productive cough. Computerized tomographic examination of the chest revealed mediastinal and paratracheal lymphadenopathy. She also had elevation in hepatic enzyme, underwent liver and paratracheal lymph node biopsy. Both biopsies revealed non-caseating granulomatous changes suggestive of sarcoidosis. Case#2 has currently remained asymptomatic with no evidence of recurrence of disease after 19 months follow up. Conclusion: Recurrence of sarcoidosis after successful liver transplantation has been described. We suggest these patients be followed up carefully for recurrence of both hepatic sarcoidosis as well as for extra hepatic manifestation. The role of low dose steroid maintenance to avoid recurrence in this group of patients requires further consideration. January 1, 1995 and April 30, 2001 , were analyzed. Treatment groups were defined in an intent-to-treat fashion based on reported discharge therapy (MMF +Tacro + CS or Tacro + CS). Relative risks for graft and patient survival and hepatitis recurrence, defined as graft failure with cause reported as hepatitis, were evaluated using univariate Kaplan-Meier and multivariate Cox proportional hazard model (correcting for demographic and clinical covariates) methods. RESULTS: For HCV-infected liver recipients, univariate analyses demonstrated that the MMF + Tacro + CS group was associated with statistically significant improvements in graft survival (74.6% vs. 69.4%, p=0.02; see Figure 1 ) and patient survival (79.2% vs. 73.7%, p=0.002) at 4 years compared to the Tacro + CS group. In the multivariate analyses, the MMF + Tacro + CS group was associated with a reduced risk for graft loss (RR=0.84, p=0.015) and patient death (RR=0.77, p<0.001) relative to Tacro + CS alone. Univariate analyses demonstrated no differences between groups for hepatitis recurrence (6.4% vs. 6.5% at 4 years, p=0.57), or a combined endpoint of graft loss or death from hepatitis (3.1% vs. 3.2%, p=0.82) . CONCLUSION: In HCV-infected liver recipients, the addition of MMF to a Tacro + CS immunosuppressive regimen was associated with statistically significant improvements in graft and patient survival relative to Tacro + CS therapy alone, and did not increase the risk for hepatitis recurrence. Adel Bozorgzadeh 1 , Ashokkumar Jain 1 , Kerrie Lansing 1 , Randeep Kashyap 1 , Mark Orloff 1 . 1 Surgery, Strong Memorial Hospital, Rochester, NY, USA Introduction: Hepatitis C Viral infection is the most common cause of LTx in the USA. The demand for liver allografts has exceeded the supply, thus older deceased donor grafts are more frequently being utilized for life saving procedures. The outcome of LTx using older donor grafts (age > 60 years) is poor in comparison to the younger donor grafts (age < 60 years). The survival of LTx recipients with HCV infection is inferior to that of HCV negative recipients Aim: To evaluate the effect of donor age on patient and graft survival outcomes in hepatitis C positive LTx recipients. Background: There has been concern that adult living donor liver transplantation LLTx for HCV infection may lead to recurrent disease that is more severe compared to cadaveric LTx (CLTx) since the smaller sized graft regenerates and potentially may increase viral replication. The goal of the present study was to examine survival outcome and HCV recurrence in CLTx versus LLTx from a single institution. Results: 13 patients were found to be HCV positive by PCR and received hepatitis B core antibody positive livers from cadaver donors. There were 10 males and 3 females. Mean age was 50±4.6. Out of 13, two patients received core positive livers because they were critically ill, two had hepatocellular carcinoma and the remaining seven patients were positive for Hepatitis B core antibody. Survival: 4 patients died in the follow up period at 7.5,7.7,19.1 and 23.2 months post transplant from recurrent hepatitis C (n=2), recurrent HCC (n=1), and one patient from sepsis due to intrahepatic bile duct stricture with recurrent cholangitis. Retransplant: one patient underwent retransplant for HAT after 9 days. Actual current patient and graft survival at last follow up was 69.2% and 61.2% respectively. None of the patients had documented hepatitis B recurrence. Conclusion: Based on our results we feel hepatitis B core antibody positive donor grafts can be utilized in hepatitis C patients who are critically ill, and/or have hepatocellular carcinoma and/or have previous exposure to hepatitis B virus. Introduction: Induction immunosuppression with Thymoglobuline, a potent anti-thymocyte policlonal antibody, is effective in allowing a tolerogenic regimen of recipient pretreatment and low-dose postoperative immunosuppression. Effects of this approach in terms of recurrence of HCV after liver transplantation has never been investigated. Patients: we used Thymoglobuline induction+Tacrolimus monotherapy in 22 HCV patients receiving liver transplantation (Thymo group); 30 historical HCV patients (non-Thymo group) with a different Tacrolimus+steroids immunosuppression represented the comparison group. Results: Patients survival did not differ (1-year survival rate 86% Thymo group vs 93% non-Thymo, p=NS). Eight Thymo patients (40%) experienced acute rejection and 12 non-Thymo (41,4%); in Thymo, rejection grade was generally mild (25%), whereas a higher percentage (20,7%) in non-Thymo group experienced moderate or severe rejection, requiring steroids in all cases and OKT3 in two. Statistically lower levels and dosages of Tacrolimus were also possible in Thymo group, and a successful weaning of Tacrolimus monotherapy was accomplished in 40% of patients, without major rejection complications. Clinically HCV recurrence rate was similar (75% vs 62%), although with respect of AST and ALT elevation, patients in Thymo group reached higher levels than non-Thymo group (respectively Thymo group: peak AST 167,8 ± 63,5 UI/mL, peak ALT 227,6 ± 109,1 UI/ mL, non-Thymo group: peak AST 112,1 ± 49,7 UI/mL, peak ALT 167,8 ± 72,4 UI/mL; AST p= 0,006, ALT p=0,03). The Thymo group expressed statistically lower peak viral RNA load than non-thymo patients (13,2 ± 1,9 UI/mL vs 15,1 ± 0,8 UI/mL, p=0,002). The mean time to histological recurrence of hepatitis C was statistically shorter in Thymo patients (121 days (SD 54,3) vs 205 days (SD 127), p=0,04). However no significant difference was observed in mean Ishak's histological grading and staging of HCV recurrence. Conclusion: A tolerogenic regimen with Thymoglobuline pre-treatment and low-dose immunosuppression in liver transplant recipients is effective in protecting against rejection and demonstrated a positive impact on HCV viral load that deserves further investigations. Jan M. Langrehr 1 , Marcus Bahra 1 , Ulf P. Neumann 1 , Peter J. Neuhaus 1 . 1 Surgery, Charite Virchow Clinic Humboldt University, Berlin, Berlin, Germany Background: Retranplantation for hepatitis C reinfection after OLT is associated with an increasing risk for graft loss due to recurrent HCV. For this reason the indication for retransplantation in HCV-positve liver transplant recipients is still under discussion. However, retransplantation is the only treatment option for patients with severe graft dysfunction related to HCV reinfection. The aim of this retrospective study was to examine indications, risk factors and long term follow-up after liver retransplantation for hepatitis C. Methods: 28 HCV positive liver retransplant recipients were analyzed retrospectively for clinical course, graft function and long-term survival. Immunosppression therapy was based on CsA or Tacrolimus. Predictors for outcome were preoperative bilirubin, Child -Turcott -Pugh score, transaminases and preoperative viral load. Additional we performed protocol biopsies. Data were anaylzed by Mann-Whitney U test and chi-square Student´s test. Results: 28 patients (17 male), median age 52.7 ± 7.6 y, time from OLT to RE-OLT: 544 ±644 d. Indications for retransplantation were HCV recurrence (n = 17) and primarynon-function ((PNF) n = 11). Technique: OLT n = 26, living -related liver transplantation (LRLT) n = 2. Six patients received pegylated interferon in combination with ribavirin after re-OLT. Survival: 1-year survival was 65%. 5 -year survival was 40%. Survival after therapy with pegylated interferon 100% (6/6). Three of these patients showed a sustained virologic response after interferon treatment. Conclusions: Liver retransplantation is the only treatment option for patients with severe graft dysfunction related to HCV reinfection. Our single center experience shows acceptable survival figures of 65% after one year. Newer antiviral strategies shoud be established to improve the outcome of these patients. Some highly selected patients with early reinfection can benefit by long antiviral treatment with pegylated interferon after re-OLT. Michael G. Hughes 1 , Tae W. Chong 1 , Robert L. Smith 1 , Heather L. Evans 1 , Robert G. Sawyer 1 , Julia E. Iezzoni 2 , Christine K. Rudy 1 , Timothy L. Pruett 1 . 1 Surgery, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA; 2 Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA CD81 has been studied as a receptor that facilitates binding of hepatitis C virus to human cells. The expression of this protein on the transplanted liver has not been demonstrated. Methods: Serial liver biopsies in six HCV transplant recipients were immunohistochemically stained for CD81 and the RNA amplified for CD81 mRNA and 18s ribosomal RNA, to semiquantitatively determine the RNA for the protein. Findings: The amount of CD81 demonstrable on the liver allograft is not static and typically increased after liver transplantation (table 1). The ratio of mRNA for CD81 to 18s rRNA was variable and did not generate a clear pattern (table 2) . Conclusions: The amount of immunohistochemically detected CD81 on the transplanted liver changes after transplantation. This study implies that transplanted livers may vary in susceptibility to HCV infection. Background & Aims: Patients who undergo liver transplantation for hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related liver disease have a high risk of recurrent infection. Host immune response may play a crucial role in both viral clearance and prevention of HBV recurrence. In this study, we characterized the HBV-specific immune response in post-transplantation setting. Methods: T cell reactivity to HBV antigens and the frequency of HBV-specific lymphocytes in 21 liver transplant recipients were analyzed longitudinally before and after liver transplantation by a proliferation assay and enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT) assays. The serial changes of antibody against hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs) were quantified by enzyme immunoassay. Results: Patients with acute flare-up on chronic hepatitis B have shown vigorous T cell responses to HBV surface and core antigens pre-transplantation as compared with those with chronic hepatitis B and health subjects with HBV immunity. HBV-specific T cells proliferative response, however, declined significantly soon after liver transplantation, and remained at a lower level until 6 months post-transplantation, which correlated with the low frequency of HBV-specific IFN-γ secreting T cells(p<0.01). HBV-specific fraction of circulating T cells in these liver recipients expressed a T helper 1 cytokine profile dominated by the production of IFN-γ . 10 of 17 (58.8%) patients, who received liver allografts from donors with HBV immunity, have developed seroconversion to anti-HBs after transplantation. 5 subjects have shown a >100% increase in anti-HBs titer 1 week post-transplantation in the absence of any blood product transfusion. Circulating anti-HBs-secreting B cells were detected in 2 liver recipients at early stage post-transplantation. Conclusions: Suppression of HBV-specific T cell response, but not overall T cell function, was documented in the liver transplant recipients. The development of HBV-specific humoral response in patients after liver transplantation may be associated with donors' HBV immunity. Immunosuppression may increase the risk of the development of herpes zoster in liver transplantion (LT) recipients. Aim. To study the incidence of herpes zoster after LT, to identify which risk factors are associated to a higher risk of herpes zoster and to describe its complications. Patients and methods. The incidence of herpes zoster was evaluated in 209 consecutive adult LT recipients. Risk factors for its development were studied in a case-control study (2 controls per case). Clinical evaluation of those patients with herpes zoster was recorded. Results. Twenty-five (12%) patients developed herpes zoster. Actuarial 1-, 3-, 5-, 7-and 10-year incidences of herpes zoster were 3%, 10%, 14%, 17% and 18%. In multivariate analysis, the only factor independently related to the development of herpes zoster was treatment with azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil (HR: 4.20; 95% CI: 1.48-11.91; P=0.005). Eight patients (32%) had postherpetic neuralgia and 4 (16%) patients had recurrence of zoster after initial healing. Conclusions. Herpes zoster is a frequent complication after liver transplantation. Is development is related to immunosuppressive therapy. One third of patients with herpes zoster have postherpetic neuralgia. Suk-Kyung Hong 1 , Shin Hwang 1 , Sung-Gyu Lee 1 , Yeon-Dae Kim 1 , Keun-Kuk Kim 1 , Deog-Bok Moon 1 , Tae-Yong Ha 1 . 1 Department of Surgery, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan, Seoul, Republic of Korea Pulmonary complications have been one of the most common and serious problems after liver transplantation. We have reviewed the clinical courses of 132 adult-to-adult liver transplants (128 liver recipients) performed during the year 2001, in which we focused on the radiologic findings of routine chest x-ray (CXR) to evaluate the incidences and patterns of various pulmonary complications. CXR was taken 3-4 times per day routinely during early postoperative days. Thereafter, it was taken once a day till hospital discharge even when there was no evidence of lung problem. Vigorous antibiotic therapy combined anti-fungal and anti-viral agents as well as intensive lung care were applied to most recipients. Pulmonary complications detected by routine CXR were pleural effusion in 50, atelectasis in 6, pneumonia in 6, pulmonary edema in 5, and adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in 1. Six pneumonia patients and 1 pneumonia-induced ARDS patient were associated with aspergillus, tuberculosis, or enterobacter. The timing of detection of pulmonary infiltration was at 25th, 27th, 110th, 210th, 225th, 240th, and 242th day after transplantation, which implied that a large proportion was related to opportunistic infection. The clinical course of pulmonary infiltrates became rapidly deteriorated, and 5 patients out of 7 finally ceased after 2-48 days. These 5 pneumonia-induced mortality cases occupied 38% of the overall 1-year mortality. We tried to find out risk factors for pneumonia using factors as following: gender, age, Child-Turcotte-Pugh score, diabetes mellitus, preoperative amount of ascites, preoperative encephalopathy, admission route, preoperative endotracheal intubation, emergency of operation, serum creatinine, total bilirubn, hemodialysis. Last 4 factors seemed to be significant risk factors on univariate analysis. The incidence of pneumonia in our results seemed to be relatively lower than in other reports, but the proportion of opportunistic infection was high. This indicates that lung infection has been prevented effectively during early postoperative period by our prophylactic regimen, but prolonged deterioration of the liver or other organ dysfunction has finally led to pulmonary infiltration. Special attention should be paid to care of the highrisk recipients. Background: Liver transplants in infants (≤ 1 year old) remains a challenging endeavor. However, good long-term results can be obtained in this group of recipients. We present our experience with over 100 such patients. Results: Since 1982, we have performed 110 transplants in 102 infant recipients. Of these, 52 were < 1 year old, and 50 were 1 year old at time of transplant. The most common cause of liver disease in the 102 patients was biliary atresia (67%). Metabolic disorders were the second most common cause (24%), of which alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency was most common (10%). Other causes included FHF (3%), neonatal hepatitis (3%), and others (3%). Living donors were used for 10 of the transplants -deceased donors (DD) for the other 100. Of the 100 DD transplants, 74 were whole-organ, 22 were reduced grafts, and 4 were splits. With a median follow-up of 14 years, 60 (59%) of the recipients are alive. The majority of recipient deaths occurred early, with the most common cause of death being graft failure (usually due to thrombosis, PNF, or rejection) (27%). The next most common cause of death was infection (24%), often fungal in origin. The longest surviving patient is now 22 years old, is 21 years posttransplant, and is currently attending college. (J Pedriatr 139:871,2001) . Overwhelming infections, usually viral, and metabolic diseases are the most common etiologies. We are presenting a case of juvenile xanthogranulomatosis, a histiocytic disorder, which resulted in fulminant liver disease and required liver transplantation. Methods: Case History: The patient was born by vaginal delivery without previous prenatal problems. After birth the child was noted to have petechiae, brusing, and raised bluish papules. Initial platelet count was 32,000 10 3 /mcl. A negative workup for congenital infections was done. Cholestasis was present with totral bilirubin of 17.6 and direct bilirubin 12.8 mg/dl. Evaluation excluded neonatal hemochromatosis, alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency, galactosemia, and other metabolic disorders. At 16 days of age hyperbilirubinemia and elevations of serum transaminases worsened. Coagulopathy and altered neurologic status occurred. Liver biopsy showed severe fibrosis, cholestasis and macrophage-like histiocytic infiltration in the portal, perivascular and intravascular spaces. Similar histiocytic infiltrates were present on the skin biopsies. Langerhan's cell histiocytosis and neoplasia were excluded by molecular studies and electron microscopy. Liver transplant was required and was successful. Results: Follow up at 5 months of age revealed good liver function with a normal total bilirubin. No other organ involvement was present. Platelet count had returned to normal. Growth and developement were normal for age. Conclusion: Juvenile xanthogranulomatosis is usually a cutaneous lesion but may also have systemic involvement. Neonatal liver involvement is rare and previously reported cases have been fatal (Am J Surg Pathol 27:579,2003) Early biopsy and liver transplantation in this cases was successful. In pediatric solid organ transplantation, the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-related lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLD) still play a major role in posttransplant morbidity and mortality. The aim of our study was to determine the incidence of PTLD in pediatric patients following liver transplantation (LTx) who receive low-dose immunosuppressive protocols. Patients and Methods: All patients (n=269) received a dual immunosuppressive therapy consisting of cyclosporine A (initial trough levels 170-200 ug/l; trough levels for maintenance immunosuppression after one year, 80-100 ug/l) and prednisolone. 77/269 children were switched to tacrolimus therapy (5-10 ng/l for the first two years). Blood specimens of 177 patients were analyzed with a quantitative EBV polymerase chain reaction. Results: Patient survival was 90.3%, graft survival was 85.9%, and the incidence of PTLD was low (0.7%), although a significant EBV viral load was found in 42.4% of the patients. One third of those patients with a viral load of >3000 genomes/10-5 cells had clinical signs of EBV infection. 76% of the patients were seronegative for EBV prior to LTx. Conclusions: We conclude that low-dose immunosuppressive protocols significantly reduce the incidence of PTLD. In those patients, the monitoring of EBV viral load seems not to be helpful. It can be assumed that the immunosuppression in our protocol does not lead to a significant suppression of EBV-specific cytotoxic CD8+ cells resulting in a control of primary EBV infection. Liver Transplantation (LT) in children less than 10 kg is considered a high risk procedure, being contraindicated in some centers. Objective: evaluate the results of the LT in children less than 10 kg in the 2 institutions. Patients and methods: From January 1993 to December 2003, 54 LT were performed in 51 recipients with mean weight of 7.8 kg( 6-10kg). The indications of the transplants were: biliary atresia ( n=43 , 84.3%) , tyrosinemia (2), Alagille syndrome (2), A1-AT deficiency (1), autoimmune hepatitis (1), biliary cirrhosis (1). The mean age at the surgery varied from 6.7 -38 months ( mean:12.7m). Four pt received cadaveric grafts and 50 living donor grafts ( 41 parents, 6 uncles/aunts, 1 cousin, 1 brother, 1 non-related donor). In the living related LT (LRTD), segments II + III were utilized. Three pt retransplanted, 1 due to PNF ( 1 st -graft cadaveric and 2 nd living donor) , and 2 due to hepatic artery thrombosis ( 1 st graft living donors and 2 nd graft: 1 living donor and 1 cadaveric). All pts received prophylatic antibiotics and gancyclovir. The immunosuppression consisted of steroids and cyclosporine (18pt) or tacrolimus (33 pt); 4 pt each also received azathioprine and mycophenolate mofetil. Prednisone was withdrawn 2-9 months ( mean 5.7m) after LT. Results: Liver rejection occurred in 35 pt ( 68.6%); vascular complications in 12 pt (23.5%): inferior vena cava stenosis (1), hepatic vein stenosis (3), portal vein thrombosis (5), hepatic artery thrombosis (3) . Biliary complications occurred in 6 (11.8%): biliary stenosis (3), biliary fistula (3); intestinal subocclusion (3); intestinal deiscence (2); infections: bacterial(34pt, 66.6%), CMV (9pt, 17.6%), EBVrelated PTLD (4pt, 7.8%). There were significant differences between height-for-age (p=0.02) and weight-for-age (p=0.01) Z scores calculated before LT and after the minimum follow-up period of 6 m in 23 pt evaluated.The pt survival rate was 77%. Causes of death: sepsis (5), respiratory failure (3), hepatic failure (1), PNF (1), pulmonary hemorrhage (1) Background. Variations in biliary anatomy in living donor liver surgery (LDLS) are very frequently encountered. We prospectively studied a MDCT-CA protocol assessing its value in determining donor biliary anatomy as compared to standard intraoperative cholangiography (I-CA). Material and methods. From September 1999 to December 2003, 58 consecutive LDLS were performed in our institution. MDCT-CA assessment was done in 23 donors between the period June 2002-December 2003 and compared thereafter with intraoperative findings. The M/F ratio was 12/11 and the mean age was of 39±12 y (range 19-59). MDTC-CA protocol consisted on intravenous infusion of 100 mL of Iotroxinate Dimeglumine (Biliscopin®, Schering, Berlin-Germany) at a rate of 0.05mL/ sec. and CT imaging was obtained with a 4-slice Siemens VolumeZoom with following parameter settings: 120 KVp, 135 mAs, 4x1 mm slice collimation, 1.2 pitch factor, starting 15 min. after Biliscopin® infusion. Results. Preoperative variations in biliary anatomy (2 associated variations in 3 donors) were observed in 11/23 (47,8%) donors consisting on: n = 5 (45,4%) triple confluence; n = 4 (36,4%) apart drainage of RPD into the hepaticus; n = 3 (%) drainage of SIV into the RAD; n = 2 (18,2%) absent confluent for the right segments (quadrifurcation). However, MDTC-CA was unable to disclose a very difficult anatomy in the latter donors presenting a separate drainage of 4 segments into the common hepatic duct as compared to the I-CA. Sensitivity of MDTC-CA assessment was of 81,8%. Conclusions. Anatomic variations in biliary anatomy may occur up to 50% of healthy donors representing the rule rather than the exception in LDLS. Although MDTC-CA assessment is a further help for the evaluation of the biliary tree in living liver donors, its sensitivity is decreased when a separate drainage of multiple (i.e.4) biliary ducts is present. We can speculate that technical limitations as a longer delay before scanning or a poor resolution due to small bile ducts diameter could explain this shortcoming. Tung Liang Huang, Tai Yi Chen, Yu Fan Cheng, Yaw Sen Chen, Chao Long Chen, King Wah Chiu. Diagnostic Radiology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Niao-sung, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; General Surgery and Liver Transplant Program, Chnag Gung Memorial Hospital, Niao-sung, Kaohsiung, Taiwan From Jul. 2001 to Aug. 2003 , there were 31 cases in 75 living related liver transplantations (LRLT) with right liver graft and hepatic outflow reconstruction with a major right hepatic vein (HV) anastomosis in past two years. All these 31 cases were adjusting to normal waveforms and then calculated their hepativ vein flow volume (HVFV). There was no significant difference of HVFV before liver graft retrieve in donors on both two groups. But the results revealed significant clinical change after LRLT by different HVFV ratio in the two groups. There was not any case with complication of HV insufficiency in group A (>80%). On the other hand, there were 4 cases with HV insufficiency and severe ascites in group B (<80%). We had the HVFV range from 397 to 1181 ml/min. The correlated total percentages of HVFV to their original amount before graft retrieve in the donor were 56 to 130 % (mean of 102%). There were 4cases of HV insufficiency all with severe ascites persistent over 1 month with low HVFV percentages of 56 to 76% (mean of 66%) respectively, in other hand the cases without complication of per long ascites were with percentage from 75% to 180% (mean of 115%). By Fisher's exact test, there was great significant. (P value < 0.001) In conclusion, the liver graft should have a biphasic or triphasic HV waveform for an adequate and safe HV outflow; beside, the minimal required HVFV at least 80% of its original HVFV measured before graft retrieve was significant. The result will be benefit in determination of HV outflow insufficiency. Table  Conclusions : Use of T-tube during OLT doesn´t seem to be justified. Biliary anastomosis stenting is followed by an increased incidence of complications, most of them related to its use. Moreover, Hospital stay and radiological explorations are more frequently used in these patients. were used in 13 and 7 cases, respectively. Demographic and clinical patient data were comparable in both groups. Surgery time, blood loss and liver function were analyzed and compared. Our preliminary results as illustrated in the table clearly demonstrate that liver resection using the water jet is safe and efficient. It allows a contact-free and very selective dissection without major tissue damage. There seem to be several advantages over ultrasonic aspiration, like shorter surgery and transsection time as well as less blood loss. The costbenefit ratio which is of particular importance in LDLTx needs to be further explored. Background: In case of anomal hepatic arterial inflow, it can be necessary to perform revascularization of the liver allograft by iliac arterial interposizional graft. Methods: We analysed retrospectively 613 liver transplant (OLT) in a 16-year period. The hepatic artery (HA) graft group (n=101)(Group A) consisted of patients with arterial inflow based on recipient infrarenal aorta using donor iliac artery graft tunnelled through the transverse mesocolon. The control group (n=512)(Group B) consisted of transplanted patients with routine HA reconstruction. Results: Male/female ratio, donor age, indication for transplantation, the mean duration of OLT, incidence of primary graft non function, duration of follow-up, length of hospital stay were similar in the group A and B. In case of retransplantation, arterial conduit with iliac graft was adopted more frequently instead of conventional arterial anastomosis (24.8% vs. 9%, p<0.0001). The 1-, 3-and 5-year overall survival was 85%, 79% and 76% in the group B and 76%, 73% and 73% in the group A (p=ns). The 1-, 3-and 5-year graft survival was 81%, 73% and 69% in the group B and 71%, 62%, 53% in the group A (p=0.01). In case of retransplantation, the 1-, 3-and 5-year overall survival was 57%, 53%, 41% in the group B and 60%, 51%, 49% in the group A (p=ns); the 1-, 3-and 5-year graft survival was 57%, 53% and 41% in the group B and 56%, 50%, 40% in the group A (p=ns). Hepatic artery thrombosis (HAT) rate is 21.8% in group A vs. 8.6% in group B (p<0.0001). The only factor independently predictive of HAT resulted the donor age> 50 year-old (p<0.0001, RR=1.04, 95% CI: 1.02-1.05). Furthermore, arterial conduit was found to be independent predictor of early HAT (p=0.001, RR=3.13, 95% CI: 1.57-6.21). Retransplant procedure, donor age and arterial iliac conduit were found to be a significant risk factors for late HAT, at univariate analysis. At multivariate analysis, donor age> 50 year-old resulted independently associated with late HAT (p<0.0001, RR=1.05, 95% CI: 1.02-1.07). Conclusion: Arterial conduit is an alternative solution for revascularization of liver in case of retransplantation when the use of HA is not possible. In case of primary transplantation, if it is not necessary, is better to avoid arterial conduit, for poor graft survival and high HAT rate, especially in case of liver donor aged over 50 year-old. Pulmonary hypertension (PH) with mean of pulmonary arterial pressure (mPAP) >25 mmHg is frequently found during the post-operative period of orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). Objective. To compare respiratory function, ICU length of stay and 30 th day survival rate in patients evolving with PH with those not developing it, during the postoperative. Methods. Fifty-seven patients undergoing LT between January 1999 and December 2000 were divided in two groups: Group 1 (G1; n=26): without PH; and Group 2 (G2; n=31): with moderate PH. In the pre-operative period Child-Pugh's classification, pulmonary function tests, mPAP and P(A-a)O 2 were recorded. Intraoperative, warm and cold ischemic times and the amount of blood transfusion were evaluated, while mPAP, PaO 2 /FiO 2 ratio, the weaning time, ICU time and the 30 th day survival rate were considered after surgery. Results. mPAP in early post-OP was 21± 13 mmHg and 32 ± 4 mmHg in G1 and G2, respectively (p <0.0001). PaO 2 /FiO 2 was 310 ± 82 mmHg in G1 and 272 ± 84 mmHg in G2. In G1 and G2, 77% and 74% of the patients, respectively, were successfully weaned in the first 24h after surgery. ICU stay was 111 hours (45-1098) in G1 and 102 (59-284) in G2. The 30 th day survival rate was 20/26 (77%) in G1 and 26/31 (84%) in G2 . Conclusion. Our data indicate that a moderate pulmonary hypertension in the early postoperative of OLT cannot be considered an additional risk factor for pulmonary dysfunction, and increased ICU time and 30 th day mortality rate. Biliary stenosis after cadaveric whole liver transplantation is a major cause of morbidity. Surgical treatment and endoscopic stenting are part of the management. The aim of this study was to report the results of a strategy consisting in a primary endoscopic treatment followed by planned surgical anastomotic refection. METHODS From 1989 to 2002, among 464 patients who underwent a cadaveric liver transplantation with a whole liver graft and duct-to-duct biliary anastomosis, 47 (10%) experienced biliary stenosis which was anastomotic in 38 (81%). Median interval before diagnosis was 2.4 months (range 7 days-57 months) and stenosis was revealed by an increase of biochemical parameters of cholestasis in 31 (82%), angiocholitis in 3 (8%) or using radiological examinations in 4 (10%) patients. Data were collected retrospectively. Among the 29 (76%) patients considered for primary endoscopic treatment (ERCP) after exclusion of 9 patients for early operation or other drainage procedures, ERCP failed in 5 (17%) patients, requiring percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography and drainage followed by surgical treatment. Among the 24 (83%) patients who had successful stenting, 16 (67%) patients required additional endoscopic procedures including 10 (28%) cases in emergency conditions for angiocholitis. After endoscopic treatment, 9 (38%) patients had complete resolution of the stenosis with a median follow-up of 22 months (range 3-96 months). In this group, the median interval between transplantation and stenosis was 29 days (range 7-80 days). The remaining 15 (63%) patients had planned surgical refection 3.0 months (range 3 days-15.4 months) after the first ERCP. In this group, the median interval between transplantation and stenosis was 4.4 months (range 8 days-57 months). With a median follow-up of 26 months (range 3-57 months) after surgical treatment, no patient experienced biliary sepsis. CONCLUSION This study shows that the strategy of treatment consisting in ERCP followed by planned surgical reconstruction is efficient in more than 80% of cases. Planned prosthesis replacement is required in order to prevent biliary obstruction and angiocholitis. Patients with early stenosis seem to beneficiate of an exclusive endoscopic treatment. Objective: The aim of the study is to describe biliary complications observed after liver transplantation, emphasizing therapeutical approaches to these patients. Material and Method: From September 1991 to December 2003, 263 liver transplants were performed in 240 patients, 68% were male and the median age was 47 years old. Primary biliary reconstructive techniques were choledococholedocostomy with T tube (CCT) in the first 15 cases (5%), choledococholedocostomy without T tube (CC) in 204 patients (78%) and Roux en Y choledocojejunostomy (RYCJ) in 44 cases (17%). The incidence of hepatic artery thrombosis (HAT) in the study group was 20% (12 cases). In the evidence of biliary complication, patients were submitted to investigation, including Doppler ultrasonography, magnetic ressonance cholangiography and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). Possible therapeutical approaches to biliary complications included endoscopic sphincterotomy, endoscopic biliary endoprosthesis, external biliary drainage, surgical approac by Roux en Y choledocojejunostomy (RYCJ) and liver re-transplantation (Re-Tr). The overall prevalence of biliary complication was 23% (59 cases). In every case of endoscopic failure, surgical treatment with RYCJ was adopted, with adequate long-term biliary drainage achieved in all patiens. Conclusion: Endoscopic approach is iniatially a valid tool for almost all patients presenting biliary complications. Nevertheless, whether a conservative treatment fails, surgical management with RYCJ should be employed, since it poses as a definitive treatment, with excellent long-term results. Objective: The aim of the study is to assess the prevalence of HAT occurrence, defined as the one that occurs after the first post-operative month, its clinical presentation and impact on outcome. We also evaluated possible risk factors for the development of this complication. Patients and Method: We retrospectively reviewed 178 patients submitted to liver transplantation (LT), from September 1999 to December 2002, exclucing re-transplantation, patients with fulminant hepatic failure and those who survived less than 30 days. 136 patients were male and median age was 42 years old. Patients with early HAT and with late HAT were selected and evaluated regarding possible risk factors: age of recipients and donors, indications for LT, cigarette smoking, post-operative CMV infection, warm and cold ischemia times, occurrence and number of episodes of acute cellular cellular rejection and chronic rejection, presence of arterial anomaly requiring back table reconstruction. Diagnosis of HAT was performed with Doppler ultrasonography and hepatic arteriography. Data obtained in both groups were compared. Clinical course of late HAT group was also documented. Results: Late HAT was found in 9 patients (3.8%). Indications for LT was chronic hepatitis C in all patients. Median time to diagnosis was 4.88 months after LT. One patient presented with severe graft dysfunction and hepatic insuffuciency, leading to death 77 months after LT. Six patients presented with biliary complications. Two patients were admitted with bilioma and biliary sepsis, successfully treated by percutaneous drainage of the collection and biliary endoprosthesis insertion. Four patients required surgical biliary drainage, due to ischemic biliary stricture at the level of the common bile duct bifurcation. Comparing early and late HAT groups, concerning the possible risk factors evaluated, statistical analysis showed that HCV infection, cigarette smoking and chronic rejection were significantly increased in the late HAT group (p<0.05). On the other hand, survival rate (Kaplan-Meyer estimate method) of early HAT group was considerably lower when compared to the late HAT group. Discussion: Clinical presentation of late HAT has a less devastating course, perhaps because ischemic injury is minimized by collaterals formation. The main clinical presentation of late HAT is biliary complication. HCV infection, cigarette smoking and chronic rejection may play a role in late HAT development. Yasuhiko Hashikura 1 , Masahide Yazaki 2 , Toshihiko Ikegami 1 , Yuichi Nakazawa 1 , Koichi Urata 1 , Yo-ichi Takei 2 , Shin-ichi Miyagawa 1 , Shu-ichi Ikeda 2 . 1 Department of Surgery, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Nagano, Japan; 2 Third Department of Internal Medicine, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Nagano, Japan Background. Citrullinemia is a rare hereditary metabolic disorder characterized by highly elevated plasma levels of citrulline and ammonia, and is ascribed to a deficiency of argininosuccinate synthetase in the liver. More than 20 patients with adult-onset type II citrullinemia have undergone liver transplantation, showing dramatic therapeutic effects. In Japan, living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) is the standard technique of liver transplantation because of the rare availability of cadaveric donors. The feasibility of auxiliary partial orthotopic liver transplantation (APOLT) for adult-onset type II citrullinemia to overcome the problem of a small-for-size graft in LDLT has not been defined. Patients and Methods. We have recently performed APOLT for patients with type II citrullinemia. Here we present two patients: patient 1 was a 32-year-old man and patient 2 was a 43-year-old woman. Both patients suffered from hepatic encephalopathy and laboratory data showed highly elevated plasma levels of ammonia and citrulline. In patient 1, the liver graft was obtained from a patient with familial amyloid polyneuropathy as a domino liver transplant. In patient 2, APOLT was performed after graft donation from her husband. Results. The postoperative clinical courses of both patients were uneventful, and the neurological symptoms were completely resolved. The plasma concentrations of ammonia and citrulline normalized rapidly in both patients. Conclusions. APOLT can provide an adequate hepatocyte mass to correct the underlying enzyme deficiency in adult patients with type II citrullinemia. In addition, APOLT can be carried out safely to overcome the limitation of graft volume in LDLT. Shunji Narumi 1 , Kenichi Hakamda 1 , Eishi Totsuka 1 , Yoshikazu Toyoki 1 , Yutaka Umehara 1 , Mutsuo Sasaki 1 . 1 Surgery, Hirosaki University, School of Medicine, Hirosaki, Aomori [Introduction]Anastomotic stricture of the hepatic vein developed in 4 cases of livingrelated liver transplantation. Balloon dilation of stricture has been utilized for all cases but the stricture recurred and balloon dilation was required multiple times in all cases. Recently, new cutting balloon catheter has been invented for treatment of arteriosclerosis. Hereby we report preliminary results of application of this device for treatment of stricture of the hepatic vein in 2 cases. [Case 1]A 26-year-old woman with subacute fulminant hepatitis underwent living-related liver transplantation. Gaft was left lobe of the liver from her mother. Graft/standard liver volume was 42.6%. Anastomotic stricture of the hepatic vein developed 7 moths after transplantation, which had been treated by balloon dilation for 15 times in 2 to 3 months interval. She was admitted for abdominal distention on April 11, 2003 and liver function test was much worse than usual(AST 2439 IU/L, ALT 1627 IU/L, bililubin 2.2 mg/dl, prothrombin time 15.6 sec). Doppler ultrasound revealed no flow in the hepatic vein and heptofugal flow of the portal vein. Emergency angiography visualized thrombi in the middle and left hepatic vein. Thrombi was removed by balloon catheter and urokinase and stricutre of the hepatic vein was dilated by the cutting balloon (Atherotome®: Boston Scientific, 8 mm x 10 mm) following dilation by simple bigger size balloon(12 mm x 20 mm). Hepatic venous flow recovered and did not require balloon dilation for next 5 months. [Case 2] A 13-year-old boy with cryptogenic liver cirrhosis underwent livingrelated liver transplantation. Graft was left lobe from his mother. Graft/standard liver volume was 42.5%. Anastomotic stricture of the hepatic vein developed 4 months after transplantation. He has been treated by balloon dilation of the stricture biannually. Cutting balloon was used on July 2003. Follow-up angiogram revealed recurrence of the stricture 6 months later. [Discussion] Anastomotic stricture of the hepatic vein jeopardizes valuable graft and recipient. Treatment reported involves metallic stent. However, there concern risks of stent migration and thrombosis. Balloon dilation is a convenient modality but its effect does not prolong for long period. Application of cutting balloon seemed a safe, convenient device without severe complications. However, its effect was not indefinite so a cutting balloon with bigger diameter might be more useful. Kazushige Sato 1 , Keisei Fujimori 1 , Hideyuki Doi 1 , Susumu Satomi 1 . 1 Division of Advanced Seience and Technology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan PURPOSE: Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy reconstruction has been most common surgical technique in pediatric living donor liver transplantation (LDLT), even in cases of adult patient, although duct-to-duct biliary reconstruction is now standard for adult LDLT. The aim of this study was to review the biliary complications reconstructed by a Roux-en-Y loop in early and late follow-up after LDLT. METHODS: The medical records of 73 patients who underwent LDLT and have been followed since July 1991 in our hospital were reviewed retrospectively. RESULTS: 40 patients with a mean age at transplant of 1.7 years (range, 5 months to 7 years) received left lateral liver graft, 21 patients (mean age, 18.3 years; range, 2 to 56 years) received left liver graft, and 12 patients (mean age, 46.5 years; range, 38 to 59 years) received right liver graft. All patients had hepaticojejunostomy using a Roux-en-Y loop. The overall biliary complications occurred in 20 of 73 (27.4%) grafts. Complications included anastomotic strictures in 10 (13.7%), anastomotic leakages in 5 (6.8%), bile leakages at the resection surface in 9 (12.3%), cholangitis in 10 (13.7%). The biliary complication rate for left lateral grafts was 12/40 (30.0%), 4/21 (19.0%) for left grafts, and 4/12 (33.3%) for right grafts. There was no difference found in biliary complications based on type of transplanted graft. Five anastomotic leakages which were diagnosed radiologically occurred only in left lateral liver grafts and have not developed late biliary complications during outpatient follow up. All patients with biliary strictures underwent percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage, followed balloon dilatation of the anastomosis. Three of 10 patients with strictures were required re-hepaticojejunostomy. Of 10 patients with cholangitis, 6 recipients (6/73, 8.2%) had experienced ascending cholangitis frequently and occurred only in those who had biliary strictures. CONCLUSION: Biliary strictures reconstructed by a Roux-en-Y loop are found to increase the risk of several isolated episodes of ascending cholangitis and have an important effect on recipient's quality of life following liver transplantation. The celiac artery and superior mesenteric artery (SMA) are two major arteries, which arise from the anterior surface of the aorta above the level of the renal arteries. These two vessels supply almost the entire alimentary system below the diaphragm up to the midtransverse colon, including the liver and spleen. Several anomalies of the blood supply to the liver have been well documented in terms of the right hepatic artery arising from the SMA and/or the left hepatic artery arising from the left gastric artery to a complete replacement of the main hepatic artery from the SMA or a separate origin from the main aorta. However, the splenic artery is usually a constant branch from the celiac axis, arising within 2 cm of its origin that travels to the left in a tortuous fashion along the superior border of the pancreas to spleen. Replacement of the splenic artery from the SMA is not described in literature. We encountered such an anomaly in two cases. Case Report-1: 63-year-old man, who died of intra-cranial bleeding and was a deceased organ donor for liver, kidney and pancreas recovery. During procurement, the left hepatic artery was found to be arising from the left gastric artery and the splenic artery was found to be arising from the SMA (Fig.on right side) and traveling towards the upper border of the pancreas to the spleen. Case Report 2: 70-year-old female, was found to have colonic metastatic cancer in the liver and was scheduled for intra-hepatic arterial Sirspheres infusion. Before chemo embolization, the SMA was cannulated under screening controls through the right femoral artery to examine any hepatic artery anomalies however a completely replaced splenic artery from the SMA was found ( Fig.on the left) Conclusion: An unknown, undescribed anomaly of completely replaced splenic artery from the SMA was found in two cases. It is important these are identified during chemo embolization or organ procurement. Salvatore Gruttadauria 1 , Zakiyah Kadry 1 , Lucio Mandala 1 , Tommaso Piazza 2 , Antonio Arcadipane 1 , Bruno Gridelli 1 , John J. Fung 1 . 1 Tranplantation Surgery, IsMeTT-UPMC-ITALY, Palermo, Italy; 2 Facolta di Ingegneria, Universita di Palermo, Palermo, Italy Introduction: The Surgical approach to liver resection is constantly being modified and has been emphasized as a means to reduce donor risks in living donor liver transplantation. The combination of the ultrasonic dissector with monopolar cautery which employs radiofrequency and saline irrigation to crosslink collagen in tissues has been used for living donor hepatectomy in our institution without morbidity and mortality. We compared this approach to 2 similar patient groups undergoing hepatectomy for indications other then liver donation. Methods: Eight right hepatectomies and 2 left hepatectomies were performed with this combined technique for living related liver transplantation (Group A). Estimated blood lost (EBL), number of units of blood transfused (UBT), length of hospital stay (LOS), postoperative complications named biliary leaks and peak transaminase in the first postoperative week were compared with two other groups consisting of 10 patients with liver neoplasms in otherwise healthy liver who underwent the same type of liver resection as in group A. Resections were performed with crushing clamp technique in Group B and with the same combined technique of Group A in Group C. Comparisons between means were performed by ANOVA and T test. A value of P < .05 was considered to be statistically significant. Conclusion: The use of this combined surgical technique reduces the need for blood transfusion, the length of hospital stay, and the rate of biliary leaks. Moreover the combination of this two techniques have lower incidence of peak transaminases. Biliary strictures are a common complication after liver transplantation (LT) with an incidence of 5.8-34%. Several studies have shown the efficacy of endoscopic treatment of biliary strictures, however, data about the long-term outcome are still controversial. The aim of this study was to evaluate the long term efficacy and safety of endoscopic management of biliary complications after LT. In this prospective study biliary strictures were diagnosed by elevated cholestatic liver parameters and / or ultrasound demonstrating dilated bile ducts. The mean follow-up of all patients was 4.4±2.5 (0.2-11.2) years. Between October 1992 and July 2002 a total of 446 patients received 474 liver allografts. Biliary complications were diagnosed in 81 allografts (17.1%) within a mean time period of 5.4 (0.3-88) months post LT. Anastomotic strictures (AS) alone were found in 65 (13.7%) and concurrent non-anastomotic strictures (NAS) in 16 (3.4%) patients 6.4 and 4.4 months (mean) following LT, respectively. Hepatic artery thrombosis was diagnosed in 8 patients with NAS. All patients underwent repeated ERCPs (mean frequency 4.49± 3.9 [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] ). In 74 patients a balloon dilatation of the stricture was performed. The procedure was repeated with a mean number of procedures of 3.05± 2.2 (1-9) and a concomitant endoscopic stent placement was necessary in 48 patients with a change every 3-6 months. The overall serum alkaline phosphatase significantly decreased from 435.5± 391.8 IU/L (77.0-2375.0) to 218.1± 131.2 (53.0-706.0) and serum bilirubin from 4.66± 5.50 mg/dL (0.47-23.86) to 1.48± 2.42 (0.35-19 .7) in addition to improved ultrasound findings in the majority of patients. Regarding complications severe cholangitis occurred in 3 and a bile duct leakage in 2 patients. One patients died due to septic shock after dilatation. Five patients (6.2%) required a PTC, and in six (7.4%) patients surgical revision was necessary, mainly in patients with NAS. However, 72 patients (88.9%) could be successfully treated by ERCP. Moreover, the overall patient and graft survival were similar to the control group of LT patients who did not develop biliary strictures in the same period. Endoscopic interventions either with stenting or balloon dilatation alone are efficacious and safe therapeutic options for biliary complications post LT. We report a case of successful liver transplantation in a 2-year-old girl with severe persistent cholangitis after Kasai operation for biliary atresia. Infectious intrahepatic biliary cysts opened to the abdominal wall and severe abdominal distension secondary to marked increase in hepatosplenomegaly and tense ascites developed. Blood chemical findings were AST 70 U/L, ALT 46 U/L, BIL Tot 6.4 mg/dL, BIL Dir 4.2 mg/dL and CRP 9.97 mg/dL.The patient had been treated with intravenous antibiotics and fresh frozen plasma. At operation associated with abscess formation, dense adhesions between the liver and diaphragm was found. The pericardium was first opened and the graft hepatic vein was anastomosed directly to the right atrium of the recipient because of the occlusion of the recipient hepatic veins and suprahepatic inferior vena cava occlusion. She is doing well and symptom free for 4 years. Pulmonary complications are common following Orthotopic Liver Transplantation (OLT) and contribute significantly to morbidity and mortality. Noninfective pulmonary complication, including atelectasis, pleural effusion, pulmonary edema, and pulmonary embolism make up the majority of early post liver transplant respiratory complications (50%-64% of all pulmonary complications). Pulmonary edema occurs in 14% -47% of liver transplant recipient. It is diagnosed clinically by the combination of bilateral radiographic infiltrates and impaired oxygenation. Frequently, it is not possible to explain increased susceptibility of liver transplant recipients to development of pulmonary edema with conventional understanding of pathophysiologic mechanisms leading to hydrostatic pulmonary edema or ARDS. Also, clinical significance of pulmonary edema in liver transplant recipients, especially from the standpoint of allograft or patient survival has rarely been debated in the transplant literature. We hypothesized that frequently unanticipated development of pulmonary edema in this population may be a sign of allograft dysfunction or rejection. Patients with allograft failure or rejection redevelop, usually immediately, hyperdynamic circulatory state, with elevated cardiac output and significantly increased extravascular lung water. This may be a major pathophysiologic mechanism contributing to pulmonary edema formation in these patents. We conducted a prospective, observational study of 6 cases of pulmonary edema in liver transplant recipients at our institutions in the period between July 1st and Dec 31st 2003. Analysis of data showed: -None of the patients had cardiogenic pulmonary edema (echocardiogram within normal limits); -All patients were with hyperdynamic heart and circulation when presented with pulmonary edema (median cardiac index was 4.7); -The allograft biopsy in 3 patients confirmed acute cellular rejection as primary diagnoses and was appropriately treated; -In one patient pulmonary edema may have been caused with "TRALI" -Transfusion Related Acute Lung Injury-(6 units of FFP transfused), although this was not undoubted fully confirmed with laboratory studies; -One patient had biopsy confirmed recurrence of pretransplant liver disease (hepatitis c), and one patient had liver allograft failure of unknown cause. We believe that pulmonary edema, a frequently unexpected complication in liver transplant recipients, may clinically herald development of allograft failure and/or rejection. Background: Clinical studies have previously shown that post-surgical treatment of liver transplantation patients with ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) may improve the 1-year survival rate. Experimental animal studies have shown that parenteral pretreatment of rodent models may have a protective effect on bile duct epithelium and hepatocytes. Aim: The aim of our study was to investigate whether enteral administration of UDCA to both donor and recipient would be an effective way of raising the UDCA levels of the donor liver and whether this method would display a protective effect. Method: Seven (7) patients underwent treatment with UDCA and six (6) controls with placebo. Double-blind randomizing was applied. Donors were pretreated with 40 mg UDCA/kg two hours before cold perfusion. The patients were administered a similar dose during the anhepatic phase. To study the effectiveness of oral administration, UDCA levels in venous, arterial, portal blood, urine and bile were measured in the donor. To study the protective effect, levels of selected plasma indicators were measured at least once a day for the first 14 days, then at 3 months and 1 year after surgery. Bile analyses were performed during the first week after surgery. Liver biopsies were taken on day 0 and 6 after transplantation. Results: Oral administration of UDCA resulted in an enrichment of UDCA in the portal vein blood and in the bile. No significant differences were detected between the UDCA treated compared to the placebo group. Probably, the low number of patients included did not give enough power to detect such a difference. Gonzalo P. Rodriguez-Laiz 1 , Esther Mans 1 , Ramon Charco 1 , Ernest Bombuy 1 , Auxiliadora Amador 1 , Joana Ferrer 1 , Josep Fuster 1 , Pilar Taura 2 , Juan C. Garcia-Valdecasas 1 . 1 Liver Surgery and Transplantation, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 2 Anesthesia, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain Split liver transplantation is one of the available strategies to increase the donor pool. In addition, the use of livers with metabolic diseases is a well-established practice in many transplant centers (domino transplantation). The split-domino combination is an unusual procedure allowing the performance of three transplants starting off with a single cadaveric graft. We report here on the first such procedure performed in Spain, at our institution. Case report: A well selected Familial Amyloidotic Polyneuropathy (FAP) patient and a pair of size-matched ABO-identical recipients for the right and left FAP lobes were studied for transplantation. The FAP patient was a 37-year-old man, weighing 72 kg and measuring 181 cm. His liver volume by CT scan was 1508 ml, (right lobe (RL) of 963 ml and a left lobe (LL) of 535 ml). Both recipients for the FAP liver had hepatitis C cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. The LL recipient was 65 years old, 146 cm tall and weighed 38 kg (expected graft to body weight ratio (GBWR) of 1.41%). The RL recipient was 64 years old, 160 cm tall and weighed 67 kg (expected GBWR of 1.44%). We proceeded to the in-situ splitting of the FAP liver into a LL (segments 1 through 4) and a RL (segments 5 through 8), and placed a veno-venous bypass. We then started the simultaneous laparotomy on the second recipient (LL). The third recipient (RL) followed the FAP patient in the same OR. Cold ischemia times were 515 min for the cadaveric graft, 140 min for the LL and 630 min for the RL. Packed red cells requirements were 5 units, 6 units and 8 units for the cadaveric, LL and RL recipients respectively. The actual hemiliver weights were 450 grams (actual GBWR=1.18%) for the LL and 851 grams (actual GBWR=1.27%) for the RL. Vena cava preservation was performed in both recipients. The biliary reconstruction was completed with a Roux-en-Y for the LL and a duct-to-duct anastomosis with a T-tube for the RL. All three patients had a good immediate liver function, being discharged from the ICU on post-op days 3, 4 and 9, and from the hospital between the 25 th and the 34 th postoperative day. Conclusion: Domino-split liver transplantation with FAP livers is an innovative strategy that is contributing to further increase the donor pool. Moreover, this procedure has been shown to be safe and is associated with early good results. Introduction: Patient with severe aortic stenosis are increased risk for hypotension and death This report outline a case of and management analysis of aortic valve replacement after liver transplantation. Patient: 59 year old female patient OLT 5 years before for PBC cirrhosis, Child-Pugh-score C10, ABO identical, PRA 0%, compatible HLA. jmmunosupression; tacrolimus and prednisone (until the 6° month post-transplant). She had an episode of cellular rejection at 2 years after OLT, with a very good sterois response. The patient 6 months before the cardiac surgery developed dyspnea on exertion and symptoms consistents with oedema. An echocardiogram showed an ejection fraction 0.60, aortic valve velocity of 66m/s (peak instantaneous gradient, 46mmgHg), aortic valve area of 07 cm2, and minimal left ventricular hypertrophy. Left heart catheterization showed non obstructive disease on the coronary arteries and an severe stenosis of the aortic valve and mild pulmonary hypertension NYHA III. During the hospitalization the patient was managed with fluid restriction and diuretics. Evolution and Treatment: During surgery severe aortic stenosis and left ventricular hypertrophy were confirmed (the valvule was trileaflet, with substantial leaflet calcification and extension into the annulus. Aortic replacement (pericardial xenograft A-21) was used to decrease the risk for systemic anticoagulation, using the usual methods of cardiopulmonary bypass (hypothermia to 30 oC) and myocardial preservation. The patient had and immediate and excellent cardiac function and was extubated 6 hours postoperatively. She was discharged postoperative day 7. At the third postoperative day she presented fever and was done a complete work up of study of febrile patient including cultures and viral studies with negative results. Fever was presented for 14 days and disappeared without treatment. . Six months postoperatively, the patient is asymptomatic, has echocardiographically normal left ventricular systolic function and prosthetic valve, and biochemically normal liver function Conclusion: This case is an example of successful aortic valve replacement after liver transplantation without severe complications as in others centres in the world. The MELD/PELD system for liver allocation has been in place for 18 months. Several adjustments to the system have been made that makes assessment of trends in important outcome measures appropriate at this time. We analyzed rates of removal for death or too sick, for transplant, and the MELD scores at transplant in 6, 3-month time periods from implementation of MELD on 2/27/02 through 8/27/03 to determine the overall and subgroup trends in these outcome measures over time. Overall, we observed a decreasing trend in the rates for removal for death or too sick (slope=-4.96, p=0.134) that was not statistically significant. UNOS/OPTN regions 7, and 10 and candidates with acute hepatic necrosis had significantly decreasing trends for removal for death or too sick. For transplant rates, the overall trend was significantly increasing (slope=6.7, p=0.007). Subgroups of adults, candidates with diagnoses of alcoholic cirrhosis or "other", females, UNOS/OPTN Regions 6,7,10 and white candidates all had significantly increasing trends in transplant rates. In addition, the mean match MELD score had a decreasing trend over the 6 time periods that was statistically significant (slope=-0.197, p < 0.001). Subgroups of recipients showing significantly decreasing trends in MELD match score were Regions 2,3,4,7,10, blood types A and O, AHN diagnosis, Whites, Blacks and males. These data suggest that changes in waiting list dynamics resulting from the elimination of waiting time and institution of a continuous disease severity scale are having positive effects for liver allocation. Reduced rates of death and increased rates of transplant are likely due to fewer inappropriate candidates on the waiting list helping to increase the probability of transplant for the appropriate candidates. Decreasing MELD score at transplant suggests that reducing the priority for HCC candidates has lowered the MELD score at which donor organs are offered. In addition, more ill candidates are no longer superceded on the list by those with long accumulated waiting time making it possible to receive organ offers earlier in the disease progression. Continued monitoring of trends will be important for designing future liver allocation policy modifications. The recent change to the MELD system for liver transplantation was designed to better prioritize liver transplant candidates. In general, the cost of care and resource use increase as severity of illness increases. To determine if deceased donor liver transplant costs and resource use have changed since the implementation of the MELD system, we compared all hospital direct costs from one month prior to transplant to one year after transplant for 41 cases transplanted in the year preceding MELD (PRE) with 34 cases transplanted after MELD (POST) implementation. Median calculated MELD score for PRE patients was 17.0, and 23.5 for POST recipients (P=0.023). There were 9 cases of hepatocellular cancer (HCC) in the PRE and 10 cases in the POST eras (P=0.460). Overall, median direct cost and total LOS at one year were not different (PRE $93,156 vs. POST $76,137, P=0.312 and PRE 39 days vs. POST 29 days, P=0.363 respectively). There was a trend towards less cost and LOS in the POST era. Compared with the PRE period, POST recipients required fewer surgical procedures (2.40 vs. 1.94, P=0.074) and had lower median blood bank ($24,422 vs. $13,714, P=0.004) and pharmacy cost ($16,726 vs. $13,291, P=0.024), but significantly higher procurement costs ($22,991 vs. $25,589, P<0.0001). The increased procurement costs are likely due to proportionately more combined liver kidney (L-K) transplants in the POST era, but this increase was not significant (4/41 vs. 5/34, P=0.723) . When the HCC recipients are excluded from these analyses, we still observe no differences in 1-year total direct costs (P=0.51), LOS (P=0.81), and still find significant reductions in blood bank (P=0.045), and pharmacy (P=0.032) costs and increased procurement costs (P=0.002) for the POST period. Overall one-year patient (85% PRE vs. 87% POST, P=0.87) and graft (0.85 PRE vs. 0.80 POST, P=0.64) survival are not different for the two groups. We conclude that under the new MELD allocation system, despite significantly higher MELD scores at transplant, direct costs and resource utilization have not increased. Improvements in operative management, and development of better, more economical pharmaceuticals are responsible for reduced liver transplant costs, even when sicker patients are receiving transplants. Previous studies have reported on 12 month efficacy data of E, an investigational macrolide immunosuppressive. We now report follow-up long-term safety data on the use of E in liver transplantation. Patients randomized to Neoral, and E 0.5 mg bid Group I; E 1.0 mg bid Group II; E 2.0 mg bid Group III and placebo (P) Group IV were followed for 36 months. 91% of patients who received E at 1 mg per day completed the M36 visit, 72.7% of patients who received E at 2 mg per day completed the M36 visit, whereas only 33.3% of patients who received E at 4 mg per day were able to complete the full course due to an increase in adverse events. There were no dose related/statistically significant differences between treatment groups and the incidence rate of efficacy failure. A trend towards a lower incidence of death was observed in the 2 highest dosages of E. There were no graft losses or deaths in year 2 and 3, and all graft losses and most deaths were secondary to typical post-transplant complications, and none were attributed to study drug or, in particular, to hepatic artery thrombosis (HAT) or its complications. The incidence of hypercholesterolemia was proportional to the dose of E given and was 3%, 7%, 10% and 10% (P, E 1, 2, 4 mg per group). Renal dysfunction was more frequent in patients receiving E (7%, 21%, 10% and 16% in the P E 1, 2 and 4 mg group). Neoplasms were rare in all groups. Viral infections appeared associated with E dose and were highest in the two highest E dose groups (13%, 14%, 23% and 23% in the P, E 1, 2, and 4 mg groups respectively. From M3 on, mean values of alkaline phosphatase appeared inversely associated with E dose and were 298, 223, 174 and 146 IU/L in the P, E 1, 2, and 4 mg groups at M12. After an initial increase, mean creatinine values remained stable from M1 in all groups. Creatinine clearance decreased in all groups with relatively stable values from M1 onward with no treatment-related trend. Mean total cholesterol increased from baseline in all treatment groups and max. levels were generally attained at M6. Changes from baseline were generally dose-related. Mean triglycerides revealed dose-related increases and maximum values were obtained also at M6. This study demonstrated the safe and effective use of E in liver transplant patients with a dose-associated effect on serum creatinine, and levels of cholesterol and triglycerides. Patients submitted to transplantation show an increased rate of cardiovascular events possibly due to metabolic changes induced by immunosuppressive therapy. Among cardiovascular risk factors also high plasma homocysteine (HiHCY) has an indepedent role. Subjects submitted to liver transplant (OLT) frequently have an HiHCY as effect of immunosuppressive drugs but no data are available on association of HiHCY and cardiovascular events. 237 subjects with OLT dating 6 months or more were studied. 164 were treated with cyclosporine (CyA), 73 Tacrolimus (FK). Post-OLT period was higher in CyA subjects (median 51 months; range 6-164) than in FK patients (median 11 months; range 6-135). Total Hcy was assayed on HPLC with fluorescence detection. Routine laboratory data were recorded as well as history of diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidemia, overweight and cardiovascular events occurred at least after 6 months from OLT. Additional events were recorded during the study period (june 2001-october 2003) . OLT subjects showed increased Hcy levels (median 16.8 mmol/L, range 6.6-85.9) without difference between the two treatments. Also the prevalence of Hcy >15 µmol/L was similar (CyA: 60%, FK: 67%) and significantly correlated both with immunosuppressor (CyA: r = -0.167, P = 0.04; FK: r = -0.254, P = 0.035) and with creatinine levels both on Cya (r = 0.336, P < 0.001) and on FK (r = 0.214, P = 0.046). Eight heart ischemic problems (IHD) were observed, all in patients on CyA. Peripheral arteries were affected in 6 patients on CyA, while 13 patients had problems on splanchnic arteries (7 on CyA, 6 on FK). CyA patients were more frequently obese and/or dyslipidemic but half of the patients with (IHD) and 3 of 6 patients with peripheral arterial diseases (PAD) and 6 of 13 patients with splanchnic arteries problems showed only HiHCY, associated to hypertension in IHD. Although HiHCY was an independent variable related to IHD, stepwise logistic regression identified hypertension as the main risk factor associated to IHD. HiHCY was recognised by stepwise logistic regression as the risk factor more related to PAD. Cardiovascular events were frequently associated to HiHCY. The usefulness of a HiHCY lowering therapy remains to be verified. Budd-Chiari syndrome (BCs) reflects the spectrum of the diseases with variety of etiopathological and clinical characteristics of obstruction of hepatic venous outflow. Without surgical therapy the median survival is shorter than 2 years. Liver transplantation (LTx) appears one of the most effective methods of treatment, associated with 5-years survival rate over 75%. Aim of the study : to analyze the indications and the results of LTx in the patients with BCs, treated in the department in recent 15 years. Patients and methods: We reviewed 71 patients' charts, treated for BCs in the department during recent 15 years. 12 patients (16,9%) were qualified to surgical or/and radiological treatment. Among them 7 patients underwent orthotopic liver transplantation, the first performed in March 2000. BCs was relatively rare indication to LTx (3%) in our group of 240 adult liver transplant recipients. There were 2 men and 5 women, aged 23-55 years (mean 30,7). All but one were 2A UNOS group. The mean MELD score was 18,6 (ranging 12-24). The mean waiting list time was 3,7 months (ranging 1-6 months). In all of these patients the classical orthotopic method with the use of veno-venous bypass was applied. 2 patients underwent TIPS and 1 meso-caval graft for portal decompression in pretransplant period. In 3 patients fibrinolytic treatment was introduced. As a cause of the BCs in 3 patients the policythemia vera was confirmed, in 1 -the contraceptives and blunt abdominal trauma in anamnesis. In 3 patients -the BCs was cryptogenic. The policythemic patients received hydroxycarbamid prior to the LTx. Results: 6 of 7 transplanted patients survived and are still alive in good general condition. The mean follow up period is 23 months (range 2-38 months). 1 patient died on 14 postooperative day for the complications following hepatic artery thrombosis and retransplantation. 3 patients suffered from severe reperfusion syndrome, 1 required early relaparotomy for intraperitonel bleeding. All of our patients received the nutritional support (TPN/EN) in the perioperative period. All of the patients receive immunosuppression -steroids+ tacrolimus and anticoagulants. Conclusion: Liver transplantation appears an effective and valuable method of treatment of the selected patients with Budd-Chiari syndrome. U. Maggi, G. Rossi, L. Caccamo, L. R. Fassati. Centro Trapianti Fegato, Ospedale Maggiore IRCCS Policlinico -University of Milan, Milano, Italy Aim Though the decision to retransplant a patient soon after a liver transplantation (LT) isn't so complicated, due to urgent settings and the supposed absence of abdominal adhesions, nevertheless the same decision is considered problematic in patients (pts) transplanted since a long time. In this retrospective study our aim was to compare actuarial graft survival rates after early and late liver retransplantations (RET). Patients and Methods Since January 1990 through January 2004, 383 consecutive cadaveric LT were performed in 337 adult pts; 45 RET were performed in 43 patients, including 2 double RET. Early and late RET were defined according to a RET performed within or after 6 months from previous LT. Actuarial survival rates of the two groups were calculated and then compared with log-rank test. Results 27 (Group I) and 18 RET (Group II) were respectively performed within and after the first 6 months from previous LT. Mean age of pts was respectively 43±10 years in Group I and 37±11 in Group II. RET were performed after a mean time from LT of 33±36 days (median 14, range 1-127) in Group I whereas after 1576±1307 days (median 1297, range 250-5066) in Group II. Follow-up time was 3,7±4,7 years in Group I, and 3,6±4,5 in Group II. 1-5-10-13 years actuarial survival rates were respectively 62-57-57-57% in Group I and 54-54-40-24% in Group II. Fall of survival after 10 years in Group II was due to two pts who underwent respectively a late hepatic artery thrombosis and a de novo lung tumor. However, no significant difference was found between groups using the log-rank test. Discussion and Conclusion In our study there are no statistical differences of survival rates between two groups of adult patients retransplanted respectively within and after 6 months from previous LT. So the decision not to perform a late RET cannot be based on supposed worse graft survival rates of late RET. The emphasis of cancer found in the MELD system has changed the priority for organ allocation in liver transplantation. Purpose: To evaluate the impact of MELD on liver transplantation in our center and to assess any changes in outcomes, practice strategy or patient survival. Methods: Histologic, morbidity and mortality data on all patients with known or incidental tumors transplanted at our center were reviewed. Results: A total of 67 (13.8%) patients with primary liver malignancy were transplanted out of a total of 487 liver transplants performed from 1988 to 2003. In the pre-MELD era (1988) (1989) (1990) (1991) (1992) (1993) (1994) (1995) (1996) (1997) (1998) (1999) (2000) (2001) (2002) 38 (9.4%) of the 403 transplants performed had primary liver malignancy. However, in the post-MELD era (2002) (2003) a significantly higher number of the 84 transplants, 29 (34.5%), had liver malignancies. (p<.05) Conclusion: The number of patients being transplanted for primary liver malignancy has increased since the MELD system was instituted. This may in part be due to increased sensitivity of pre-operative imaging modalities. There was no statistically significant difference between the two eras in regard to poor histologic grade, > Stage II, or recurrence. There was however a significant decrease in mortality due to malignancy in the post-MELD group possibly explained by the difference in follow-up at this point. PreMELD ( Regardless of its location, viability of a transplant program is directly linked to its profitability. This is particularly true in a managed care environment. This study aims at evaluating factors influencing financial performance of an abdominal transplant program. A two-year analysis of the profit and loss statement for a transplant program at an academic institution was performed. Organs transplanted included kidneys (n=185), livers (n=59), and pancreas (n=12). Program expenses included direct and indirect expenses. Direct expenses were incurred from hospital admissions, donor work-up, postoperative care and bulk account. Indirect expenses were related to same factors and contributed to the total expenses of the program. Most of the indirect expense was attributed to transplant admissions with marked skewing toward liver admissions. Payor-mix analysis showed Medicare accounting for 40-50% of kidney recipients, and 35% of liver recipients; remaining patients being managed care. Net revenue included collections from Medicare (25%), Managed Care contracts (50%), and other payors (25%) contributing to the direct margin of the program. Total margin of the program (program profitability) was heavily influenced by direct and indirect expenses that accounted for 75% and 25% of the total program expenses. This analysis resulted in our attempts at reducing program expenses related to transplant admissions and contract re-negotiation with payors leading to increased program profitability. CONCLUSION: Compared to other biological markers the most important advantage of of CDT was the independence from the severity of the liver disease. According to this observation, CDT was identified as a very useful marker for the monitoring of an alcohol relapse in patients following OLT for alcoholic cirrhosis, as has been previously indicated However, CDT does not appear to be useful as a pretransplant screening-marker for selection of potential transplant candidates suffering from alcoholic cirrhosis. Pretransplant CDT screening is no longer implemented in the evaluation of potential transplant candidates at our center. Introduction: Shortage of cadaveric donors is traditionally the limiting factor for liver transplantation, and the cause of an increasingly growing size of the waiting lists worldwide. Purpose: To show the short length of time in waiting list in our area, which sometimes leads to a lack of candidates, and the need to offer and ship the liver grafts obtained in our institution to other teams. Patients and methods: Our Hospital runs a Liver Transplant Program for a population slightly over one million inhabitants. Our activity began 20 months ago. In this period we have performed 60 liver transplants, which account for 33 per million per year, 34% higher than the average of our country. At the time of submission of this abstract, we haven't got any single patient in our waiting list for the last 13 days. In other occasions, we haven't had patients of either blood group type 0 or A. In such occasions, donor livers have to be sent to other transplant groups. There are currently four patients undergoing studies for inclusion. Median length-of-stay in waiting list is less than 2 months. We have received in this 20-month period 14 donor livers from other centers. We have offered 7, of which only four were eventually grafted. Three patients died in waiting list, shortly after inclusion. Discussion: In our country, patients are bound to their area Hospital, although they can change residency to apply to other center. However, our first results without mortality in the first 29 cases, made patients of our area confident to apply for transplantation in our center. The proportion of donors from traffic accidents in our region is 20%, slightly lower than in our country. The activity of the transplant network of our country, in addition to our community transplant coordination, lead to a high rate of potential donor detection and generation. The policy of our liver transplant program to evaluate and accept donors and recipients near limit situations, produce a high rate of liver transplantation, without jeopardizing the results, in comparison with the rest of the country. A. Humar 1 , G. Franklin 2 , J. Ulik 2 , J. Lake 1 . 1 Surgery, Univ of MN, Minneapolis, MN, USA; 2 Lifesource, St. Paul, MN, USA Background: Reusing transplanted organs from one recipient into another potential recipient is well described. The majority of these are cases where the donor had received a transplant many years prior to the donation process. We describe a case of a patient with fulminant hepatic failure (FHF) who received a liver transplant, showed no evidence of neurologic recovery posttransplant, and who subsequently became the donor for another patient with severe chronic liver disease. Case: TB is a 36 y.o. woman who presented with FHF due to acetaminophen toxicity. She had Stage 4 encephalopathy, severe coagulopathy, renal failure, and marked elevation of her transaminases (ALT>3000 IU/ml). Within 48 hrs after presentation, she underwent an emergent liver transplant. Her neurologic exam prior to transplant was consistent with severe encephalopathy. She had an uncomplicated, smooth operative course. Posttransplant, on postoperative day #1, her coagulopathy was improving, her ALT was still markedly elevated at >3000IU/ml, and her renal function was showing some signs of improvement. Her neurologic exam at this time, however, was consistent with brain death and this was confirmed with brain flow studies. At 48 hours after transplant, the family was approached and consented to withdraw support and reuse the liver for another patient. At this time, her ALT had decreased somewhat, but remained greater than 2000 IU/ml. The second recipient was a 48 y.o gentleman with PSC and a MELD score of 38 due to hepatorenal syndrome. At the time of procurement, the liver appeared somewhat edematous, but was otherwise normal. A liver biopsy was performed prior to removal and did not demonstrate any evidence of ischemia; transaminase levels remained markedly elevated in the donor. The liver was transplanted immediately upon removal and total cold ischemic time was kept to <3 hours. The peak serum ALT in the second recipient posttransplant was 186 IU/ml. He made a rapid recovery and was discharged home on POD #11 with normal liver and renal function tests. At 9 months follow-up he is doing well with no specific problems. The donor family expressed gratitude in being able to help another individual and were relieved knowing that a valuable liver was not wasted. Conclusion: This case demonstrates the feasibility of reusing organs from previous transplant recipients in certain specific conditions. The markedly elevated transaminase levels in the first recipient just before removal of the liver for reuse were not indicative of injury to the transplanted organ. Accompanying cholangiocarcinoma (CCC) has an impact on the indication of the liver transplantation for primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC). However, preoperative diagnosis of CCC in PSC is sometimes not easy. A case of diffuse CCC diagnosed only after the transplantation is presented. Case: A 54 years old male was admitted for the progressive severe jaundice and moderately increased transaminase level. Findings of endoscopic retrograde cholangiography (ERC) and liver biopsy strongly suggested PSC involving both the extra-and intra-hepatic bile ducts, though auto-antibodies were negative. CA 19-9 was fluctuated between 130 and 240 U/ml, and all other markers were negative. Bilioenteric drainage tube was placed and jaundice improved temporarily. Living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) was finally indicated because of recurrent cholangitis and persistent jaundice. The suprapancreatic extrahepatic bile duct was resected with the liver. The wall of the choledochus was thick and rigid, but the intraluminal surface was very smooth without any tumor-like lesions. Cytology of the bile during the operation was negative, and the intraoperative frozen section of the bile duct was not examined. Left lobe from his son was orthotopically transplanted. Bile duct of the graft was reconstructed using the Roux-en-Y limb. Postoperative examination of the explanted liver showed PSC with microscopic multi-foci of CCC around the extra-and intra-hepatic bile ducts. CCC was also found in the pericholedochal connective tissue. Additional excision of the remnant choledochus and intraoperative irradiation (30Gy) to the pancreas head was done 6 weeks later. No adjuvant chemotherapy was added. Immunosuppression was kept minimal with FK506. The patient has been doing well for 6 months. Conclusion.: Accurate diagnosis of CCC complicated with PSC was only possible by the histological examination of the bile duct. Frozen section should be done in the transplantation of PSC, if there is a macroscopic involvement of the extrahepatic duct, and the donor surgery in LDLT should be started only after the result is available. Additional pancreatoduodenectomy might be another option. Marek Krawczyk, Anna Skwarek, Mariusz Grodzicki, Pawel Nyckowski, Krzysztof Zieniewicz, Bogdan Michalowicz, Jacek Pwalak, Ireneusz Grzelak, Krzysztof Dudek. Department of General, Transplant and Liver Surgery, Medical University, Warsaw, Poland Introduction: the authors present preliminary outcomes in patients with liver failure treated with Prometheus system. Material and method: Between September and November 2003, 18 FPSA procedures were performed in 9 patients with symptoms liver failure caused by: acetaminophen intoxication-2; Ammanita phalloides poisoning-2; acute transplant liver failure-1. This group also included 3 patients with decompensation in the course of chronic liver failure caused by Wilson's disease-1; postinflammatory cirrhosis type B-1; post-transplantation cholestasis-1. In 1 patient the cause of liver failure remained unknown. The patients were qualified for the procedure according to King's College Hospital criteria. The procedures were performed with Prometheus 4008H Fresenius Medical Care unit. Patient's general condition was assessed on the basis of UNOS, GCS and 4-grade encephalopathy classifications. The following parameters were determined prior to and after the procedure: serum level of ammonia, bilirubin, AST, ALT, urea, creatinine, pH, INR, prothrombin time. Heparin infusion was used for anticoagulation. Results: On the average, 2 procedures were performed in each patient. Mean duration of the procedure was 7.5 hours. Mean heparin dose for each procedure was 850U/h. 5 patients were classified as UNOS 1; 3 patients-as 2A and 1 patient-as 2B. Mean values of serum parameters determined pre-and postoperatively were as follows: ammonia: 212.2ug/ dl versus 131.3ug/dl; bilirubin: 19.42mg/dl versus 10.86mg/dl; AST: 1370.2U/l versus 573.9U/l; ALT: 2017.6U/l versus 864.4U/l; urea: 49.1mg/dl versus 22.7mg/dl; creatinine: 1.89mg/dl versus 1.2mg/dl; pH: 7.0 versus 7.29; INR: 5.43 versus 4.05; prothrombin time:45 .26s versus 36.64s. The outcomes: 4 patients died before OLTx: 3 of them died as they were waiting for the transplantation organ, 1 patient did not give her consent for the surgery. 3 patients died after OLTx-1 of them died on postoperative day 22 due to septicemia, 2 other patients died on the first postoperative day due to hemorrhagic diathesis and multiorgan failure. In one case OLTx outcome was positive. One patient did not require the transplantation after FPSA treatment. Death rate was 77.8%. Conclusions: Preliminary results suggest that FPSA-Prometheus system allows for detoxication treatment of patients with liver failure, qualified for urgent transplantation. Introduction: The authors present preliminary treatment outcomes in patient with acute liver failure in the course of Amanita phalloides intoxication, in whom Prometheus system was used. Material and method: 2 patients were qualified for the procedure on the basis of King's College Hospital criteria. The patients manifested symptoms of Amanita phalloides intoxication. {Table1}. The procedures were performed with Prometheus 4008H Fresenius Medical Care unit. Heparin infusion was used for anticoagulation. The parameters listed in table 2 were determined before and after the procedure. Results: 2 procedures with positive outcome were performed in the first patient [12 hours, average time of 1 procedure was 6 hours]. The patient was discharged on day 14, and did not require liver transplantation. In the other patient, 5 procedures were performed [36 hours, average time of 1 procedure was 7. (Purpose) Salvage liver transplantation (LT), primary resection followed by transplantation for recurrence or deterioration of liver function, has been suggested as a rational strategy. However, recent reports showed different results about it in terms of transplantability and patientsoutcomes. We performed this study in order to assess the risk and outcome of salvage LT in comparison with that of primary LT. (Methods) Among total 651 LT patients from August in 1992 to March in 2003 at our insistitution, we reviewed 170 patients (LDLT:144, OLT:26 cases) with HCC who could be followed up more than 10 months The patients were divided into salvage LT and primary LT group. The patient and tumor characteristics, intra-operative variables, postoperative courses were compared between them. Then overall survival and recurrence free survival from the time of transplantation were calculated in each group. (Results) The number of salvage and primary LT group was 12 (7.1%, LDLT 10, OLT 2 cases) and 158 (92.9%, LDLT 134, OLT 24 cases) respectively. Both group had clinically similar characteristics. However, tumor characteristics are somewhat different between two groups. The patientsdistribution of UICC stage was I (n=0, 0%), II (n=4, 33.3%), IIIA (n=2, 16.7%), IVA (n=6, 50.0%) in salvage LT and I (n=45, 28.5%), II (n=59, 37.3%), IIIA (n=21, 13.3%), IVA (n=33, 20.9%) in primary LT (P = 0.02). Intra-operative packed RBC transfusion volume was not different (12.7 and 11.7 units each, P=0.21), but autotransfusion system (Cell-saver) was used in 3 patients and the volume was about 2500 ml. Post-operative complication rate in salvage LT were higher than primary LT (P=0.01). The 5-year cumulative survival rate was 19.7% in salvage LT and 71.2% in primary LT (P=0.01), but the recurrence free survival rate was not different. Operative mortality (2 months) cases were 3 patients (25%), 9 patients (5.7%) respectively (P=0.04). However, when we divided patients by time periods, until 2000.12.31, operative mortality in salvage LT was higher than primary LT (P=0.02), but thereafter that was similar between them (P=0.54). (Conclusion) Salvage LT is associated with a higher operative mortality and a poorer outcome than primary LT. Recently the operative mortality was not different from primary LT at our institution, although most of the cases were LDLT. So, if indicated, that is sort of reasonable strategy. Introduction: Post-transplant (txp) malignancies remain a significant health problem for all solid-organ txp recipients. The best treatment of post-txp cancers continues to be problematic and challenging. As recipients live longer following organ replacement, their risk for developing cancers after engratment increases. Purpose: To characterize clinical variables of de novo cancer occurrences in a liver txp (OLT) population from a single center. Methods: A retrospective analysis was done of 498 OLTs performed in 438 recipients, from 1986 to 2002. Clinical variables, including site of tumor and histology, were recorded. Results: Of the 438 liver recipients, de novo cancer developed in 41, which included 4 patients with PTLD (post-txp lymphoproliferative disorder), giving an incidence of 9.4%. Of the 37 patients who developed solid-organ tumors, 36 were Caucasian, and 68% were male; the median age at time of cancer diagnosis was 56.1 years. Surpirsingly, 12/37 of these patients were transplanted for alcoholic liver disease, whereas only 3/37 and 2/37 required OLT for hepatitis C viral infection and hepatocellular carcinoma, respectively. Twenty-six patients had the skin as primary site of de novo cancer, whereas hepatobiliary, lung, and the gastrointestinal tract were the sites of tumor in 4, 2, and 2 recipients, respectively. Unlike for skin cancers found in renal transplant recipients, basal cell cancer was found in 54%, squamous cell cancer in 38.5%, and melanoma in 12%. The median time between txp and the diagnosis of skin cancer was 44.5 months. Eight percent of patients with de novo skin cancers died as a result of this lesion, with a median time from txp to death of 53.8 months. The incidence of death from de novo skin cancer was 0.46%. Overall, 6 recipients died as a result of de novo cancer, yielding a death rate from de novo malignancy of 1.4%. Conclusions: Skin cancers were the predominant de novo tumors reported in OLT recipients, accounting for over 70% of lesions. Basal cell cancers were found more prominently in this population than in renal txp recipients. These lesions might be more aggressive, leading to a higher incidence of death, than observed in other types of solid-organ txps. Gastrointestinal tumors were also observed as de novo lesions more commonly than expected. The asymmetric distribution of end-stage liver disease diagnoses, toward alcohol liver disease, with a relative scarcity of viral causes, is interesting. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is an invasive tumor with a high dissemination power. Its treatment depends on the stage during which it is diagnosed. Small tumors can be treated with therapies considered to be curative, such as liver transplantation (LT). Some investigators consider LT to be the treatment of choice since it eliminates not only the tumor but also hepatic cirrhosis, present in about 90% of patients. However, in Brazil the time on the waiting list for a liver transplant is about 2 years. Thus, several authors suggest the application of coadjuvant therapy until the time for LT. Objective: To assess the antitumoral effect of coadjuvant therapy with transarterial embolization (TAE) followed by percutaneous ethanol injection (PEI) prior to LT. Patients and Methods: We studied retrospectively 9 patients with HCC (a single nodule < 6.5 cm or up to three nodules, none exceeding 4.5 cm) and cirrhosis of the liver (HCV:4, HBV:1, Alcohol:3, NASH:1) who were submitted to TAE followed by PEI. To assess the antitumoral effect of the two therapeutic techniques, helicoidal computed tomography was performed before TAE, before PEI and after PEI. The therapeutic response was assessed according to WHO criteria. Results: Eight/9 patients obtained a partial response after TAE (a > 50% reduction of the tumor) and 1 remained with stable disease (< 50% reduction or < 25% increase of the tumor). After PEI, 8/9 obtained a complete response (full disappearance of the lesion) and 1 obtained a partial response. Conclusion: TAE is unable to cause necrosis of the entire tumor. A combination with PEI led to a complete response in most of the patients. For patients on the waiting list for LT, the combination of techniques may be a more effective alternative for the control of tumor than coadjuvant treatment with TAE alone. Davide Cintorino 1 , Marta Ida Minervini 2 , Gruttadauria Salvatore 1 , Fabio Vasta 1 , Angelo Luca 3 , Arcadipane Antonio 5 , Zakiyah Kadry 1 , Bruno Gridelli 1 , Giovanni Vizzini 4 . 1 Transplant Surgery, ISMETT-UPMC, Palermo, Sicily, Italy; 2 Pathology, ISMETT-UPMC, Palermo, Sicily, Italy; 3 Radiology, ISMETT-UPMC, Palermo, Sicily, Italy; 4 Gastroenterology and Hepatology, ISMETT-UPMC, Palermo, Sicily, Italy; 5 Anesthesiology, ISMETT-UPMC, Palermo, Sicily, Italy Background: Liver transplantation for treatment of HCC has been shown to have good results for patients fitting the "UNOS" criteria. Intra-arterial and ablative procedures are often used to treat the patients during the waiting time in the pre-transplant list, in order to reduce the drop-out rate due to tumor progression. Aim: to assess impact of pre transplant treatment of HCC on explanted specimens in terms of micro-vascular invasion (negative prognostic factor for post-OLT HCC recurrence). Material and methods: Between July 1999 and January 2004 twenty-two patients with HCC have been treated with liver transplant, 21 males and 1 female. CT scan-defined tumor size and vitality was used to assign pre-OLT tumor stage, explanted pathology was used to define post-OLT findings. Enrollment criteria for OLT consisted of lesions < 5 cm or less than or equal to three lesions all < 3 cm (Milan Criteria). In 19 patients HCC was associated with HCV related cirrhosis, with HBV-HDV in 2 patients and HBV in 1 patient. In 16 patients TACE was performed with farmorubicine-lipiodol emulsion, followed by gelfoam embolization. Two patients received percutaneous radiofrequency ablation. Results: On pathology examination of the 22 explanted livers, a total of 65 lesions were found. Ten patients had a single lesion (4 were incidental findings) while 12 showed multiple tumors (7 with satellite lesions). In 6 out of 22 patients, micro-vascular invasion was found in at least one lesion. Seven patients (6 treated with TACE, 1 with RFTA) were considered complete responders at the time of the transplant, according to the last CT scan findings (mean time before OLT: 29 days, range 15-64 days). Micro-vascular invasion was found in one out of 7 explanted livers of patients with preoperative radiologic evaluation of complete response to treatment (14%), and in 5 out of 11 explanted livers of patients with pre-transplant CT findings of active tumor (45%). Conclusion: Complete response of HCC to TACE or RTFA, as assessed by CT scan, before liver transplantation, could be related to a reduced incidence of micro-vascular invasion. Shin Hwang 1 , Sung-Gyu Lee 1 , Sang-Tae Choi 1 , Tae-Yong Ha 1 , Yeon-Dae Kim 1 , Deog-Bok Moon 1 . 1 Department of Surgery, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan, Seoul, Republic of Korea Preference of right lobe graft without middle hepatic vein (MHV) trunk for adult recipient and lateral segment for pediatric recipient did not lead to pay full attention to anatomical evaluation of hepatic vein branches to the medial segment (V4, S4). We experienced that S4 parenchyma without MHV trunk underwent scanty regeneration in some donors. Same phenomenon may occur in extended lateral segment grafts. To setup indication criteria for safe procurement of right lobe with MHV trunk and for secure procurement of extended lateral segment, we performed a series of studies on the anatomy of V4. The first study was how to discern the draining territory of MHV and left hepatic vein (LHV) in S4 parenchyma. We devised an intraoperative method to clamp the draining vein trunk directly after interruption of hepatic arterial flow. When the MHV and LHV trunks were isolated separately, clamping of one trunk revealed direct discoloration or counter demarcation at the surface of S4. With this method, we found that the ventral portion of S4a and the small narrow area of S4b near the interlobar margin always belonged to MHV territory and other areas were variably drained. The configuration of MHV territory was transferred to preoperative donor CT for anatomical matching and volumetry. As a second study, we analyzed the V4 tributaries using dynamic CT images and 3-dimensional reconstruction in 100 consecutive living donors. We divided the S4 parenchyma as right and left halves of S4a and S4b (S4aR, S4aL, S4bR, and S4bL) . Dominance of MHV drainage was observed in 100%, 34%, 78%, and 11%, respectively. Simultaneous LHV dominance in 3 quadrants except for S4aR was observed in 19% and the MHV territory became less than 30% of S4 volume. MHV deprivation in this venous anatomy will induce the veno-occlusive area of less than 15% of remnant left lobe volume, and such a proportion becomes spontaneously resolved without significant deterioration of liver function. For procurement of extended lateral segment, direct hepatic vein clamping may serve as a definite guide for evaluation of the veno-occlusive area in S4. Graft-recipient size matching has been a major concern in adult-to-adult living donor liver transplantation. A large right lobe, if it is twice larger than the left lobe, may not be indicated for either right lobectomy nor left lobectomy. In such a donor, right lateral sector (RLS) can be an optional graft for adult recipient, and Tokyo group have also reported their experience. Unlike their report, RLS procurement does not seem to be feasible in living donors with non-variant liver anatomy from the viewpoints of technical feasibility and complication rate. Anatomical consideration to RLS graft has two independent aspects such as RLS size and vascular/biliary anatomy. Initially, we divided the donor livers according to the type of portal confluence in the pool of 700 living donor data. The possibility of larger RLS than the left lobe was less than 10% in the portal bifurcation group (type I, 84%), 20% in the trifurcation group (type II, 10%), and 35% in the group with anterior portal branching from left portal vein (type III, 5%). Combination of RLS size and vascular/biliary anatomy revealed that nearly all of type I and most of type II are not suitable for RLS procurement. Type III or more rare portal variation would have greater chance for RLS procurement. In 10 donors with such a portal variation, we tried to harvest RLS. As we had observed that the inflow occlusion-induced territory of RLS was far smaller than that measured from right hepatic vein-oriented CT volumetry in 4 donors, so we harvested RLS graft only in remaining 6 donors. This volumetric difference was derived from right hepatic vein overriding by the peripheral branches of segment 8 glisson, of which it can be accurately evaluated after learning curve. All of type III livers revealed feasible combined anatomies for RLS procurement as single portal vein, single hepatic artery (early branching, or replacing), and single graft duct (RLS duct from left duct, separately branching, or superficially running duct from normal bifurcation). We think that type III portal anomaly will always meet the vascular/biliary anatomy for RLS procurement except for the proportional segmental volume and RLS can be an optional type of partial liver grafts only in feasible liver anatomy. Background: <Despite technical refinement in surgical techniques, and impressive results with living donor liver transplantation (LDLT), biliary tract complications, however, continue to be a significant cause of morbidity after liver transplantation. As a new trend bile ductto-duct reconstruction is now used widely in LDLT for adult patients.> Methods: <From May 2000 to end of 2002, 126 adult patients underwent LDLT. Of these, 81 patients who recieved LDLT with the duct-to-duct biliary reconstruction and were followed for more than 1 year were the subject of the study. The hilar plate of the recipient was dissected to at least the second-order branch of the bile ducts. Duct-to-duct anastomosis was performed with interrupted sutures and an external stent tube was inserted from the orifice opposite of the hilar plate.> Results: <During the observation period (median 664 days), biliary complications were observed in 26 cases (32%). The complications included bile juice leakage at the anastomosis or dissection plane of the graft in 12 patients, anastomotic stenosis in 10 patients, and tube trouble in 6 patients. Two patients had bile juice leakage followed by stenosis. Of the 26 patients, 21 required surgical revision.> Conclusions: <Our technique enabled tension free duct-to-duct anastomosis and seemed to overcome size and number discrepancy between the graft and recipient bile duct. In contrast, high morbidity rate was not meeting with our demands and expectations, which will necessitate some technical modifications in the future. The aim of this study was to identify the risk factors for graft dysfunction after adult-toadult LDLT by comparing the clinical factors of recipients, donors, and liver allografts using a database of information. In our institute, 30 adult patients underwent 31 LDLTs between January 1999 and September 2003. Four cases of fulminant hepatic failure and one case with metastatic liver tumor were excluded to avoid a heterogeneous recipient background; consequently, 26 patients with chronic liver cirrhosis were evaluated in this study. The graft liver volume (GLV) / standard liver volume (SLV) ratio was greater than 40% in all of the cases except one, in which a right lateral sector with a GLV/SLV ratio of 36.1% was used. Graft function was evaluated by measuring the serum total bilirubin level. The cases were categorized into three groups according to their postoperative graft function: group A, good graft function, in which the total bilirubin level decreased to less than 2.0 mg/dl before or on POD 28; group B, cases with a delayed graft function, in which the total bilirubin level decreased to less than 2.0 mg/dl after POD 28; and group C, cases with graft dysfunction, in which the total bilirubin level did not decrease to less than 2.0 mg/dl, resulting in progressive deterioration leading to graft loss or death. The 26 cases were assigned to the three categories as follows: A, 12 cases; B, 10 cases; C, 4 cases. We compared the demography of the recipients, donors, preoperative MELD score, graft liver weight and standard liver volume ratio, cold/warm ischemia time, operative time, and blood loss. The recipient age, graft type, GLV, SLV, GLV/SLV ratio, CIT, WIT, and preoperative albumin level were similar among the three groups. The MELD score was significantly higher in group C than in group A and group B combined (P < 0.001). The recipient age was younger in group C than in group A and group B combined (P=0.039). The donor age was younger in group A than in group B and group C combined (P=0.017). A multivariate analysis of the factors that were found to be significant in the univariate analysis showed that the MELD score was the only significant prognostic factor of graft failure. We concluded that not graft size but a high preoperative MELD score was associated with postoperative graft failure, although further study is needed to confirm this possibility. Background: In living donor liver transplantation (LDLT), we sometimes encounter the situation in which we cannot adapt direct end-to-end anastomosis between recipient hepatic artery and graft hepatic artery. Patients and Methods: Of 28 patients who underwent LDLT from August 1998 to December 2003, 4 patients (14.3%) required extraanatomical reconstruction of hepatic artery with the age at LDLT of 45, 53, 61 and 55 years, respectively. They consisted of 2 men and 2 women, and original diseases were primary biliary cirrhosis, herbal druginduced acute liver failure, hepatitis C virus-cirrhosis with hepatocellular carcinoma and hepatitis B virus-cirrhosis. All of them received right lobe graft without middle hepatic vein and hepatic artery reconstruction was performed under microscope. The reasons of extraanatomical reconstruction were intimal dissection of recipient hepatic artery in 2 cases, double graft arteries in 1 and obstruction of recipient common hepatic artery in 1. Three patients underwent hepatic artery reconstruction utilizing mobilized right gastroepiploic artery while in one case, we used recipient radial artery as the interposition graft between splenic artery and graft right hepatic artery, because the patient had received pancreatoduodenectomy for the cancer of papilla of Vater 10 years before transplantation, so that we could not adapt the right gastroepiploic artery. Results: Three patients using the gastroepiploic artery are all currently doing well with good graft function with follow-up period of 26, 16, and 10 months, respectively. Another patient using interposition graft died of multiorgan failure after the hepatic artery thrombosis which developed 8 days after transplantation. Conclusion: Extraanatomical reconstruction of the hepatic artery is useful when direct end-to-end anastomosis between recipient hepatic artery and graft hepatic artery cannot be selected. Direct anastomosis using recipient mobilized gastroepiploic artery should be the first-line in such situation. Background/aims : Living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) is a recognized option in the context of organ shortage. However, whether the sickest patients or those with less advanced liver disease should be preferentially oriented to LDLT is debated. The aim of this study was to simulate different strategies of orientation to LDLT according to recipients status using multi-states mathematical models and to determine which strategy gives the best result on an intention-to-treat basis. Patients/methods: Independant predictive factors for each of the steps following listing for transplantation were determined using Cox models in a series of 331 cirrhotic patients evaluated from 1992 to 2002. In parallel, similar models were created in a series of 128 patients who had LDLT between 1998 and 2003. The models were integrated in a global multi state-model to simulate different strategies of allocation of cadaveric and living donors in the population and to estimate their global results. Each strategy was simulated 1000 times in a random sample of 500 patients using the bootstrap technique. Results: The following strategies were simulated: no LDLT (strat 1), LDLT in a randomly assigned to 20% of the patients (strat 2), LDLT in the 20% patients at highest risk of death on the waiting list (strat 3), LDLT in the 20% patients with the highest probability of survival after LDLT (strat 4) and LDLT radnomly assigned to 33% of the 60% at highest risk of death on the waiting list (strat 5). The results of each strategy are presented in the Table. Conclusions: On an intention-to-treat basis, a strategy consisting in orienting preferentially the sickest patients to LDLT gave numerically better results than a strategy consisting in orienting to LDLT those with the highest probability of survival after this procedure. However, this benefit decreased when the fact that about 30% of the candidates can eventually have a living donor was taken into account. Overall, these results suggest that LDLT should be proposed preferentially to the sickest patients. Although metabolic response after partial hepatectomy has been well studied in animal models, there are few studies examining restoration of metabolic capacity after right hepatectomy in humans. We used 13 C-labeled phenylalanine (13 C-P) administered orally or IV in 7 living liver donors and measured exhaled 13 C-P labeled CO2 to determine the extent of metabolic impairment and time course of its return. For orally administered 13 C-P, all subjects had dramatic drops in 13 C-P metabolism 2-4 days after surgery. Two of the 7 patients had restoration of the 13 C-P metabolic capacity 4 and 7 days after right lobectomy. The remaining 5 did not achieve pre-op levels of 13 C-P oxidation by as long as 58 days after surgery for orally administered substrate. Those recovering 13 C-P metabolism had significantly higher dose recovery 60 minutes after ingestion by day 4 (0.97 vs. 3.06, P=0.033) and day 7 (1.50 vs. 5.02, P=0.031). One patient given intravenous 13 C-P exhibited only a 43% reduction of 1 C-P metabolism on day 2, 25% on day 4 and 35% on day 7 compared to an 86% reduction on day 3, 92% on day 5 and 94% on day 8 for orally administered 13 C-P (figure 1). We conclude that orally administered amino acids may are not well absorbed and/or metabolized in some subjects for weeks after partial hepatectomy whereas intravenously delivered substrates are much better oxidized by the regenerating liver. These findings may be due to impaired gut motility or portal venous flow that reduces delivery of oral agents after liver surgery. These preliminary findings have wide implications for nutrition and drug delivery in the early recovery phase for living liver donors. Study's purpose: Determination of the changes in tacrolimus pharmacokinetics after liver transplantation and elucidation of the factors influencing the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus have enable us to manage the target blood level more easily in the early postoperative period. The purpose of this study was to determine the changes in tacrolimus pharmacokinetics after living-related liver transplantation (LDLT) and to determine the factors influencing the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus in cases of LDLT. Methods: Twenty-four living donor liver transplant patients (9 males and 15 females) were enrolled in this study. Relationships of the half-life of tacrolimus (T1/2) with factors such as graft weight, ratio of graft volume to standard liver volume (GV/SV ratio), ages of donor and recipient, and biochemical parameters characterizing kidney and liver function were examined. Relations of the pharmacokinetic changes to post-transplant period, 0-10, 11-20, 21-30, and 31-40 weeks postoperatively, were analyzed. Results: The individual T1/2 in the immediate postoperative period showed great variability between patients, with values ranging from 16.3 to 107.6 hours. The mean T1/2 of tacrolimus in the immediate postoperative period was significantly (p<]0.05) long but decreased to the normal value within 1 month after transplantation (mean +/-s.d., 44.+/-26.4 hr vs 26.2 +/-20.8 hr). There was, however, a large inter-individual variability in the recovered ratio of T1/2 (T1/2 ratio: T1/2 1-10 days / T1/2 30-40 days), with values ranging from 1.08 to 2.88. The T1/2 ratio decreased significantly (p<0.05) as the age of the donor increased. During the immediate postoperative period, T1/2 of tacrolimus decreased significantly (p< 0.05) as the GV/SV ratio increased. Age of the donor was significantly (p<0.05) correlated with T1/2 ratio. A simple regression analysis revealed the following equations: Half-life (T1/2) = -58.5 x (GV/SV ratio) + 71.7, Half-life ratio (T1/2 ratio) = -0.024 x (Donor age) + 2.88. Other factors, including biochemical parameters, did not show significant correlations with tacrolimus T1/2 or T1/2 ratio. Conclusions: Graft size (GV/SV ratio) is an important factor and can influence intraindividual variations in T1/2 in the period immediately after LDLT. The age of the donor is a major factor affecting the recovered ratio of the graft to metabolize tacrolimus. (Background and Aims) The influences of lymphocytotoxic cross-match on survival or acute rejection after adult-to-adult living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) have not been fully studied and there have been some arguments about its influence. In this study, we retrospectively investigated the influence of lymphocytotoxic cross-match in LDLT and assessed the survival of recipients and the incidence of acute rejection. Material and Methods) 142 adult-to-adult LDLT were performed in adult patients in our institution between January 2003 and December 2003. Among them, HLA cross-matching tests were done in 78 cases and we analyzed their data of HLA cross-match. Recipients were 62 males and 16 females, and their mean age was 50.8±7.4 years. Most of the donors were related to the recipients. Their relationship to the patients was son/daughter in 50, siblings in 15, spouses in 10, nephews in 8, and remote consanguinity or unrelated volunteers in 16. Lymphocytotoxic cross-match was performed according to the standard National Institutes of Health technique. The cross-match test was interpreted as positive when more than 20% of the donor lymphocytes were killed by the recipient serum. Acute cellular rejection was defined as a biopsy-proven episode and graded according to the Banff schema. (Results) The results of positive T and/or B cell cross-match observed in only 4 cases (5.1%). In this series, there were episodes of acute rejection in 10 recipients (13.6%) after 1-9 months, but all of 10 had revealed negative results of T and B cell cross-match. Additionally, the results of positive T and/or B cell cross-match did not change the incidence of acute rejection. All of the recipients undergone acute rejection were treated successfully using steroid bolus therapy and survive to date. (Conclusion) According to our preliminary results, positive T and/or B cell cross-match did not give significant impact upon either the incidence of acute rejection or the survival rate in our series with 13% incidence of acute rejection and 5% mortality. Taketoshi Suehiro 1 , Mitsuo Shimada 1 , Yuji Soejima 1 , Tomoharu Yoshizumi 1 , Yoshihiko Maehara 1 . 1 Surgery and Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Fukuoka, Japan Introduction: In cadaveric liver transplantation, it has been reported that elderly recipients over than 60 years are risky. However, in living-donor adult liver transplantation (LDALT), it is unclear whether the elderly recipient risky or not risky. This time, we evaluate elderly LDALT recipients, and the risk and measure of age were considered. Patients and methods: We studied 101 LDALT except incompatible case among 126 LDLT recipients between October, 1996 and September, 2003 in Kyushu University. The recipients was divided into the elderly group of 17 recipients with 60 or more years old, and control group of 84 recipients with less than 60 years old, and a background factor, complications, and the prognosis were examined. The usefulness of LDALT to elderly people was considered. Results: The indications for the control group were cholestatic diseases (n=25), acute hepatic failure (AHF) (n=24), hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (n=21), liver cirrhosis (LC) (n=10), otherwise for the elderly group were HCC (n=8), cholestatic diseases (n=3), AHF (n=3), LC (n=3). There was no difference between control and elderly group in patient backgrounds such as age, gender, and liver function test before operation. The graft weight standard liver volume ratio is 41% in elderly group and 44% in control group. There was no significant difference in an acute rejection, biliary complications and infection between each group. Moreover, the number of small-size graft syndrome did not have the difference as compared with elderly groups (n-3, 18%), and control group (n=16, 19%). However, postoperative renal failure (postoperative creatinine level over 2 mg/dl) was intentionally regarded as 29% (n=5) of elderly group to 8% (n=6) of control groups. Although, 1, 2, and 3 year posttransplant survival of elderly and control group were 85.9, 78.8%, 85.9, 73.4%, 43.0, 73.4%, respectively. The causes of death with three elderly recipients were infection on postoperative days (POD) 53, HCC recurrence on POD 254, and lung cancer on POD 988. Conclusions: From our results, we concluded that living donor adult liver transplantation is good indication for end stage liver diseases with elderly recipients over than 60 years. We also need careful cautions for the medicine use which includes an immunosuppressant or antibiotics to postoperative renal failure for elderly recipients. Nam-Joon Yi 1 , Kyung-Suk Suh 1 , Seong Hwan Chang 1 , Seok Ho Choi 1 , Choon Hyuck Kwon 1 , Kuhn Uk Lee 1 . 1 Surgery, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea (Backgrounds) Biliary complications remain one of the most serious problems after living donor liver transplantation (LDLT). Hepaticojejunostomy (HJ stomy) has been a standard procedure for biliary recontruction. However, recently, duct-to-duct (DD) anastomosis is used more widely, because DD anastomosis has more physiologic bilioenteric continuity. (Purpose) We performed this study to evaluate safety of various biliary reconstruction for LDLT. (Patients & Methods) Between January 1999 and December 2002, 147 recipients, > 1 year postoperatively, were enrolled. HJ stomy was performed in 85 cases (57.8%) and DD anastomosis in 62 cases (42.2%). In DD anastomosis, a T-tube was inserted via CBD in 33 cases(53.2%), a internal stent tube was pushed upward in the anastomosis throughout CBD in 7 cases (11.3%), and no drainage tube was used in 22 cases (5.5%). (Results) Among 147 cases, 30 biliary complications developed (20.4%). In HJ stomy, the incidence of complication was 8.2% (7/85). The complications in HJ stomy consisted of 3 cases of bile leak, 4 cases of biliary stricture. In DD anastomosis, the incidence of complication was 37.1% (23/62). The complication rate in cases using a internal stent was 71.4% (5/7). Complications consisted of 4 cases of bile leak and one case of biliary stricture. The complication rate in cases using a T-tube was 33.3% (11/33). Complications consisted of 6 cases associated with tube removal, 5 cases of biliary stricture. The complication rate in cases without biliary drainage tube was 31.8% (7/22). Complications consisted of one accidental ligation of right posterior duct and 6 cases of biliary stricture. The complication rate was lower in HJ stomy than in DD anastomosis (p<0.05). Surgical correction of complications was more frequently needed in complications of HJ stomy than in that of DD anastomosis. Reoperation rate was 28.5% (3/7) in complications of HJ stomy. Conversion rate of DD anstomosis to HJ stomy was 8.7% (2/23). In cases of DD anastomosis without a stent, all complications were corrected by radiologic intervention. However there was no statistical significance. (Conclusion) In LDLT, the complication rate of various biliary reconstruction was 20.4%. The complication rate of HJ stomy was lower than that of DD anstomosis. For further evaluation, a controlled radomized study was needed . Background: Liver transplantation is a reliable therapeutic option for patients with fulminant liver failure (FLF). However, due to shortage of cadaveric organs and critical pretransplant condition, a certain number of patients die before undergoing the operation and perioperative brain death and postoperative neurological deficits are still problems.In this report, we elucidate the efficacy of apheresis for pretransplant management in FHF patients. Patients and Methods: From September 1997 to December 2003, 61 FHF patients were referred to our institute. Seventeen patients were not enrolled in our treatment stragety due to many reasons. The remaining 44 were initially treated with extra-corporeal apheresis when the patients developed stage II coma or higher. Treatment included plasma exchange in combination with hemodiafiltration (12-96L/day). Intracranial pressure (ICP) was monitored in the intubated patients and the mild to moderate hypothermic therapy (HT) were also carried out in patients who had ICP more than 20mmHg as a bridge until the operation. Liver transplantation was carried out when the patients deteriorated despite of these treatments. Results: Thirteen patients (29.5%) died before transplant. Fourteen patients (31.8%) recovered through apheresis. Finally, 17 patients (38.6%) underwent living donor liver transplantation (LDLTx) with a mean period of 9.8 (1 to 45) days after the onset of stage II coma. Among transplanted patients, ICP monitoring was performed in 8 (47.1%) and HT was applied in 5 (29.4%) before operation. Three-month survival rate after LDLTx was 88.2%. Any postoperative neurological deficits were observed in survived patients. Overall cumulative survival rate reaches 63.6%. Conclusion Apheresis management with HT is an effective therapeutic strategy as a bridge to liver transplantation. Hajime Yokoi 1 , Shuji Isaji 1 , Kentaro Yamagiwa 1 , Masami Tabata 1 , Hiroyuki Sakurai 1 , Masanobu Usui 1 , Shugo Mizuno 1 , Shinji Uemoto 1 . 1 The First Department of Surgery, Mie University, School of Medicine, Tsu City, Mie, Japan Currently, living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) using the right-lobe grafts is being accepted rapidly worldwide. However, detailed information on donor safety and regenerative process of the liver following right hepatectomy is not sufficient. In the present study, we evaluate our experience regarding donor outcome and liver regeneration after right-lobe donation. PATINTS AND METHDS. Between March 2002 and November 2003, 38 consecutive LDLTs were carried out in our department. Twenty-seven cases, using right-lobe graft without middle hepatic vein, were enrolled in this study. Preoperative total liver volume (TLV), graft volume (GV), and postoperative residual liver volume (RLV) were measured by computed tomography volumetry, and histological steatosis of liver was graded into none, minimal (≤10%) and mild (11 to 30%). The follow-up period of the donors was 134 to 666 days (median 337). RESULTS. The donors consisted of 13 males and 14 females, ranging in age from 18 to 62 years (39.0±14.8). The relationship between estimated GV and actual graft weight was linear(Y=177.85+0.795 * X, R²=0.812, (P<0.0001), and graft-to-recipient weight ratio (GRWR) ranged 0.83 to 1.57% (1.08±0.19). Operation time was 366±72 min. Operative blood loss was 822±572 ml. No heterologous blood transfusion was needed for any of the donors. Four donors (14.8%) had postoperative complications, but all of them cured conservatively. Postoperative hospital stay ranged 9 to 34 days (15.2±5.5). The postoperative peak values of liver enzymes were significantly higher in donors with mild steatosis (n=7) than those without steatosis (n=16) (P<0.05). Donor RLV was 40.8±6.6% of original TLV at surgery. Overall liver regeneration was 68.3±9.4% of original TLV by 1 month, 79.8±12.0% by 6months, and 97.2±10.8% by 12 months. The donors in the older group (age≥50 years) had significantly slower residual liver growth compared with those in the younger group (age<50 years) at 3 months (70.4±9.2% vs. 79.3±9.6%, P=0.0391), but no significant difference of %RLV was observed between the 2 groups at 6 and 12 months after donation. CONCLUSIONS. Right hepatectomy from living donor is a safe procedure with acceptable morbidity, and residual liver could regenerate to preoperative size of original liver volume 1 year after donation. However, some care should be taken for donors with steatosis of liver and aged donor. Aim: the aim of this study was to determine the tacrolimus blood levels achieved in recipients of LDLT in comparison with recipients who underwent whole cadaveric liver grafts. Materials and methods: From June 2002 to June 2003 10 LDLT were performed in our Hospital. This group was prospectively compared with 11 cadaveric liver transplants (CLT) performed in the same period. Tacrolimus was started in the first 12 hours after reperfusion. Intraoperatively, 1g of methylprednisolone was administered in all CLT recipients and only in 6 of the 10 LDLT. Steroids were tapered from 200 mg/day at day one to 20 mg at day 7 in all patients. Twelve hours-trough levels of tacrolimus were measured in the postoperative period three times a week. Twelve-tacrolimus hour curves were performed at days 2 and 10 postransplant. Results: No differences were found between the two groups relative to underlying liver disease, age, weight and sex. Median trough tacrolimus levels at day 10 were 14.1 ng/mL for the LDLT group, and 9.1 ng/mL for the CLT group. Median tacrolimus area under the curve (AUC) at day 10 were 185.2 ngxh/mL and 148.1 ngxh/mL for the LDLT group and the CLT group, respectively. In the other hand, median trough tacrolimus levels at day 2 were 24.3 ng/mL vs 9.9 ng/mL in the LDLT recipients with and without steroids, respectively (p<0.05). Also, median tacrolimus AUC at day 2 were 239 ngxh/mL and 179.7 ngxh/mL, when LDLT recipients with and without steroids were compared. Median trough tacrolimus levels at day 10 were 15.5 ng/mL vs 14.1 ng/mL in the LDLT recipients with and without steroids, respectively. Median tacrolimus AUC at day 10 were 237 ngxh/mL and 159 ngxh/mL in the LDLT recipients with and without steroids. A significant correlation was found between trough tacrolimus levels and AUC in the LDLT group (C.C.=0.936 , p<0.0001). Conclusion: living donor liver transplant recipients achieve higher tacrolimus blood levels in comparison with the cadaveric liver recipients. The intraoperative steroids infusion induces a higher tacrolimus level in the LDLT recipients. LIVING-DONOR LIVER TRANSPLANTATION FOR PRIMARY SCLEROSING CHOLANGITIS. Kaoru Taira 1 , Yasutsugu Takada 1 , Mureo Kasahara 1 , Fumitaka Oike 1 , Kouichi Tanaka 1 . 1 Department of Transplant Surgery, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan {Purpose} Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis (PSC) is a chronic cholestatic liver disease of unknown etiology, that advanced toward cirrhosis and liver failure. Living-donor liver transplantation (LDLT) can offer as a treatment of choice for end stage liver disease due to PSC. We analyzed PSC patients who received LDLT between living-related donor and recipient. {Patients and method} Between July 1996 and Des 2003, 27 patients with PSC underwent Living-related liver transplantation at the Kyoto University Hospital. Of the 27 patients (12 male and 15 female; mean age, 29 years), 14 (52 %) had a pretransplant history of ulcerative colitis within colectomy, anyone had a pancreatitis. At the time of liver transplantation, 16 patients had a right lobe graft (including 2 ABO-incompatible graft) and 2 patients had a whole domino graft and 1 patient had a posterior lobe graft, 7 patients had a lateral-segment graft, 1 patient had a APOLT. 21 patients reconstructed an end-to-side Roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy , whereas 6 patinets had performed duct-to-duct anastomosis of biliary tract. {Result} 22 PSC patients were alive, 5 patients were died within 1 year post-transplantation, mean follow-up was 32 months. The cause of died had considered uncontrolled infection due to sepsis and small for size graft, acute cellular rejection of ABO incompatible case. One of 27 PSC cases was found incidentally in the explanted liver. In this patient, no evidence of tumor recurrence was found during a follow-up period of 5 years, respectively. Anyone of PSC with ulcerative colitis had colectomy after transplantation. 8 patients were suspected recurrence PSC after transplantation by liver biopsy with pathological findings (Portal fibrosis with bile duct degeneration) and Computed tomography and cholangiography. 4 of 8 patients were retransplanted about 39 months after transplantation. Only 1 case was diagnosed recurrent PSC after LRLT with Graziadei et al criteria. Actuarial patient survival at 1 and 3 years was 83%, 78% respectively. We can not find no relation between suspected recurrent PSC and asymptomatic PSC cases after LRLT by HLA matching. {Conclusion} We experienced 27 cases with PSC underwent Living-donor liver transplantation. LDLT was useful for end stage of PSC. Some cases of recurrent PSC post-transplantation need more consideration in future studies. Evaluation of adult liver transplantation results according to the use of cadaveric whole (CW) graft or partial right graft either from split liver (SR) or living donor (LR) necessitate an accurate assessment of recipient pre-transplant status. The Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) system can be used to assess recipient pre-transplant risks. The aim of this study was to compare the kinetics of post-transplant graft function in three different groups, CW, SR and LR matched for pre-transplant MELD score. Methods From 1999 among 282 transplanted patients, 85 (mean age 48.2 range 16-65) who underwent liver transplantation (donor; age < 65y/o, steatosis < 20% and cold ischemic time < 720min) were matched for pre-transplant MELD score and categorized in three groups; CW (n= 47), SR (n=12) including vena cava and LR (n=26). The post-transplant kinetics for transaminase (AST), total bilirubin level (Bil) and prothrombin time (PT) was assessed on post-operative days 1, 3, 5, and 7. As shown in table, the higher post-operative AST of CW and SR might be related to a longer cold ischemic time and the higher post-operative Bil of SR and LR might be related to lower GRWR. Despite similar GRWR in SR and LR groups, and longer cold ischemic time in SR group, the SR group had a higher post-operative PT illustrating the absence of deleterious influence of cold ischemic time on early graft function. The study confirms that partial graft from SR allows good liver function. Partial graft from LR experienced delayed recovery of PT. The recovery of graft function is not only related to the graft volume but to other factors. Background: Biliary complications continue to be a significant source of morbidity in liver transplantation. Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy has been a standard procedure for biliary reconstruction in living donor liver transplantation (LDLT). Duct-to-duct anastomosis has become an accepatable alternative technique in non-biliary atresia patients. However, the role of stenting in biliary reconstruction remains controversial. This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of duct-to-duct anastomosis without a stent in LDLT. Patients and Methods: Between January 2001 and December 2003, fifty-two patients underwent LDLT with duct-to-duct anastomosis involving 5 left, 41 right and 1 dual grafts. Results: Duct-to-duct anastomosis was performed with T-tube stent placement in 11 patients and without any stent in 41. Reconstruction methods included 35 single anastomosis for one duct, 12 single anastomosis for 2 ducts (2 in 1), 4 double anastomoses for two ducts and 1 single anastomosis for 3 ducts (3 in 1). The overall incidence of biliary complications was 7.7%. Two patients developed bile leakage, which was successfully treated with percutaneous drainage, and two patients developed biliary stricture, managed with radiological intervention. No graft was lost due to biliary complications. There was significantly higher complication rate in duct-to-duct anastomosis with T tube than those without (36.4% vs 0%, p<0.01). However, there was no significant difference in morbidity in terms of the number of ducts -single vs multiple (8.6% vs 5.9%, P=1.0). Conclusion: Duct-to-duct reconstruction is a simple and feasible procedure in left or right graft LDLT. Biliary anastomosis without stent placement is a better option to reduce complications in LDLT. Background: Hepatic arterial thrombosis (HAT) after liver transplantation is one of the major complications. Although arteriography remains a standard of reference for the diagnosis of HAT, Doppler ultrasonography (US) is a useful diagnostic tool for detecting HAT and the need for urgent revascularization. Rescue of liver graft from HAT depends on its early detection. Protocol, postoperative Doppler US appears to be mandatory for early detection.Previous reports suggest that the resistive index (RI) of the hepatic artery predicts HAT. Doppler US to measure RI, however, is not routinely performed. Methods: Seventy patients under 18 years of age underwent living donor liver transplantation(LDLT) procedures at the University of Tokyo from January 1996 to December 2002. Protocol Doppler US was performed once or twice a day for 2 weeks postoperatively using a SSD 2000 or SSD 6500 (Aloka Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). The patency of the hepatic artery, portal vein, and hepatic vein was assessed. Hepatic artery flow was determined near the porta hepatis. If intrahepatic artery flow was absent, then emergent laparotomy was performed without a confirmatory angiogram. Resistive index [RI = (systolic velocity -diastolic velocity) / systolic velocity] was calculated during each examination. A total of 692 Doppler US records were collected. Changes in RI values were examined separately in patients with or without HAT complications. Results: The incidence of HAT was 10% (7/70). HAT was diagnosed an average of 6.2 days after LDLT. In patients without HAT complications (patient n = 63), average RI levels at 14 days after LDLT were 0.71 +-0.1 (record n = 625). In the patients complicated with HAT, RI decreased gradually within 2 days before the onset of HAT. RI, values of less than 0.6, predicted HAT within 2 days before the onset with 83% sensitivity and 85% specificity. Conclusions: Totally 692 Doppler US records were reviewed in 70 pediatric patients. RI was a sensitive predictor for HAT during the first 2 weeks after LDLT. Thrombectomy and re-anastomosis should be considered when RI values are less than 0.6 in protocol Doppler US. Rivka Shapiro 1 , Eitan Mor 2 , Nathan Bar-Nathan 2 , Ezra Shaharabani 2 , Gabriel Dinari 1 , Ziv Ben-Ari 3 . 1 Department of Transplantation, Rabin Medical Center, Petach-Tikwa, Israel; 2 Institute of Hepatology, Rabin Medical Center, Petach-Tikwa, Israel; 3 Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel Fulminant hepatic failure (FHF) in children is associated with high mortality rate under medical management. Emergency liver transplantation has improved the outcome for these children. However the death rate awaiting cadaveric liver transplantation (CRLTx) is high due to worldwide organ shortage. Living related liver transplantation (LRLTx) is an accepted and available measure to treat children suffering from FHF. Aim: To present our experience with LRLTx in children with FHF. Material and methods: A retrospective review of the records of children who underwent LRLTx in our center between January 1993 and December 2003. Results: Sixteen children underwent LRLTx; of them11 had FHF and 3 for elective conditions. All demographics, clinical, laboratory, surgical and postoperative complication data were reviewed. Median age was 5.17 years (range: 0.75-14.4 years). In children with FHF the King's College criteria were used for the proper timing and decision for LRLTx. Causes of FHF were: 2-acute Wilson's, 3-acute hepatitis A, 1-acute hepatitis B and 9-non A non B Hepatitis. Thirteen received left lateral segment and 3 received full left graft. All were matched blood groups. In 2 patients 2 CRLTx in each child followed primary non-function of the graft. Three children died 0.2-4 months post transplantation, because brain edema or, respiratory syncytial virus pneumonitis or sepsis. The mean follow up was 7.35 years (SE= 0.86 years). Patient and graft survival were 87.5% (SE= 8.2%) and 81.25% (SE=9.7%) respectively. Survival results appear inferior compared with those of 5 children who underwent LRLTx for elective conditions at the same period of time (100%). However, for both groups the differences in survival rates were statistically insignificant (P=>0.2) probably due to small number of cases. Although survival and outcome are inferior to those in elective situations LRLTx is a timely and lifesaving procedure for children suffering from FHF. , 2001 and December, 2002 . Age was 16 to 69 (an average of 42.9) years old, 48 males, and 52 females. As a prognosis predictior candidates for short-term survival within 30 days postoperatively, and for long-term survival the following were analysed; donor age, gender, body mass index of the donor, the graft to recipient body weight ratio, and the liver/spleen ratio calculated from abdominal CT. And recipient age, gender, serum creatinine (S-Cr) and creatinine clearance (CCr) value, UNOS status (UNOS), Child-Turcotte-Pugh classification (CTP), Model for End-Stage Liver Disease score (MELD), hemodialysis therapy (HD), infection and hepatic encephalopathy. Statistical analysis was performed using Logistic regression analysis, Logrank test and Cox proportionality hazard model for Kaplan-Mayer survival curves. RESULTS: For the short-term prognosis predictors were analyzed by single comparison test; UNOS(p=0.04), MELD≤20(p=0.02), 40≤CCr<70 (p=0.03), 20≤CCr<40 (p=0.01), CCr>20(p=0.006), infection (p=0.009) and HD (p=0.0007). For the short-term prognosis predictors were analyzed by multiple comparison test; 40≤CCr<70 (p=0.04), 20≤CCr<40 (p=0.02), CCr>20(p=0.01), infection (p=0.04) and HD (p<.0001). For the prognosis predictors over a long period were analyzed by single comparison test; 40≤CCr<70 (p=0.001), 20≤CCr<40 (p=0.01), CCr>20(p=0.0008), infection (p=0.003) and HD (p<.0001). For the prognosis predictors over a long period were analyzed by multiple comparison test; HD (p<.0001). CONCLUSION: It was suggested for every LDLT patient that prognosis prediction was possible, and renal function, infection and HD were an important factor in the prognosis prediction. Cheng-Maw Ho 1 , Ming-Chih Ho 1 , Po-Chin Liang 2 , Rey-Heng Hu 1 , Po-Huang Lee 1 . 1 Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, Taiwan; 2 Radiology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, Taiwan Purpose: Liver is known to be the organ with the power of regeneration. Patients received hepatic resections have regenerated liver noted in follow-up sonography. Partial hepatectomy is the strongest stimulator of hepatic regeneration. The process of initiation and the control of the final size of the regenerated liver has been the hot subject of research recently. The purpose of our study is to evaluate the regenerated liver volume by CT measurement after major hepatic resection in healthy donors and to realize the sequential changes of hepatic biochemical data. Materials and Methods: This is a retrospective study of adult liver donors. Donor evaluation included routines for living donor liver transplantation (LDLT). Donors underwent volumetric CT assessment of their livers before LDLT. Forty-four cases are collected and charts reviewed. Conventional liver tests are collected on the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th and 7th post-op days. Follow-up CT is performed to measure the regenerated liver volume in a period of time. Data are processed with multivariate analysis in SPSS® 11.5 software. Results: Post -op follow up mean liver volume (1308.4ml) is 87% of pre-op mean liver volume (1138.2ml). (p=0.033). The follow-up liver volume is correlated with logarithm of body weight, age, post-op follow-up duration, and HBV or HCV status. (p<0.05) Stepwise regression model will be presented. The regenerated ratio of liver volume is also correlated with the resection ratio in a linear regression model. (p=0.000) Serum GOT, GPT, total bilirubin levels are elevated earlier in post-op periods (day 1,2) than Alkaline phosphotase levels(Alp) (day 5,7). Post-operative serum total bilirubin levels in donors with right lobectomy elevated higher than those with left lateral segmentectomy. (p<0.05) Conclusion: Donors after hepatic resections for living-related liver transplantation will regain the 87% previous liver volume. This is correlated to the logarithm of body weight, age, post-op follow-up duration, and HBV or HCV status in our study. The regenerated volume of liver is correlated with the resection ratio of the original liver. Most conventional liver tests will be elevated soon after operations except Alp. This will provide more information for us to care and follow-up patients receiving hepatic resections. Further prospective studies will be followed to determine the adequately safe volume of resection for donors and predict the liver regenerated volume. Purpose: Adult-onset type II citrullinemia (CTLN2) is an autosomal recessive disorder of amino acid metabolism caused by a deficiency of liver specific argininosuccinate synthetase activity. Two cases of living related liver transplantation for CTLN2 with histologic and clinical manifestation are reported. Patients and Results: One patient was a 42-year old male. He had symptom of drowsiness at the age of 39 and followed up by psychiatrist. Plasma amino acid analysis revealed significant increased citrulline concentration at the age of 41. Genetic analysis revealed that the patient was a compound heterozygote for two known mutations. Patient became acute liver dysfunction with high ammonia concentration, and developed disturbed consciousness with cerebral edema. Emergency living related liver transplantation was performed. He got posterior segments of graft from his brother. His plasma citrulline level decreased to normal within two days and his consciousness became clear with several memory disturbances one month after operation. Histology of his explanted liver showed slight fibrous change at periportal area and slight inflammatory change of bile ducts. The other patient was an 18-year old male. His first symptom of nausea and vomiting, and drowsiness had appeared at the age of 18. Plasma amino acid analysis revealed significant increased blood citrulline concentration and genetic analysis revealed that the patient was a compound heterozygote for two known mutations. He had one episode of acute liver dysfunction with high ammonia concentration without alteration of consciousness. Auxiliary partial orthotopic liver transplantation (APOLT) using left lobe graft from his father was performed. Histologic finding of his explanted liver revealed fibrous change of periportal area with slight invasion of inflammatory cells. He had uneventful postoperative course except one laparotomy for postoperative bleeding. His plasma citrulline and ammonia level decreased significantly after transplantation. Conclusion: Two CTLN2 patients developed liver dysfunction and histologic findings of explanted livers showed fibrous change. APOLT might be feasible for patients with CTLN2 who had no preoperative brain edema. Tomohide Hori 1 , Shintaro Yagi 1 , Taku Iida 1 , Kentarou Taniguchi 1 , Shinji Uemoto 1 . 1 First Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Mie University, Tsu City, Mie Prefecture, Japan Introduction: Conventionally, serum AST, bilirubin, PT, bile flow-i.e. are used as the marker of early liver graft function. Indocyanine green(ICG) is exclusively eliminated by the liver without enterohepatic circulation, so ICG elimination tests, such as ICG R15, ICG clearance have been suggested as an early predictor of graft function. These tests are measured by a series of blood sample with subsequent laboratory analysis. More recently non-invasive techniques have become available to measure ICG concentrations in vivo. Materials and methods: Pluse dye densitometry, available non-invasive monitor, express only relative ICG concentration changes in vivo after a single bolus injection of ICG(20mg/ body). ICG concentration is displayed as a dot and draws line in the screen, therefore KICG can be calculated graphically. This test was performed in five recipients in adult. KICG was measured preoperatively and at various times up to 14days after liver transplantation. No recipient fell into mortality and underwent retransplantation. Results: A observation in this study was that in two out of five patients hyperbilirubinemia from 5.0mg/dl up appeared after postoperative 5th day and KICG in this patients showed a tendency to be lower from the early period. Conclusions; The aim of this study is to assess the usefulness of KICG as a measure of graft function, so this observation is now being tested in a larger prospective study. On January sixteenth, 2002, a liver transplantation using left liver lobe from a living donor with liver injury was successfully performed in our institution. Till now, follow-up is more than 23 months, the donor and recipient enjoy high quality of life. The donor was a 39-year-old male weighing 53kg whose blood type was A. The initial management at another hospital included recognition and repair of a liver rupture. However, the postoperative course was complicated by a large biliary leak(450ml/day). The patient was transferred to our institution where computed tomography scanning and endoscopic retrograde cholangiography confirmed the extent of the ductal injury. We thought the patient was a potential living donor for liver transplantation. So the informed consent form was signed. At laparotomy in our hospital there were severe central ruptures of the liver and break of left primary hepatic duct which was not suitable for duct-to-duct anastomosis or Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy for the manifest inflamation and edema. So the left lobe graft harvesting was performed. The left lobe(segments II)III and IV) weighed 500g and was normal by macro observation and microscopy inspection. The recipient was a 36-year-old male weighing 49.5kg with hepatitis-B related liver cirrhosis who suffered frequent variceal bleeding and massive ascites. Total hepatectomy was performed with preservation of the inferior vena cava. We performed end to end anastomosis for hepatic venous reconstruction without interrupting the inferior vena caval blood flow. Then portal vein was anastomosed end-to-end between the donor left portal vein and the trunk of recipient portal vein. The graft was revascularized and the hepatic artery of the graft was anastomosed end-to-end to the proper hepatic artery of the recipient with interrupted 8-0 prolene sutures by microsurgery. Biliary reconstruction is performed last. Continuous suturing is performed for bile duct to duct anastomosis between graft hepatic duct and recipient common hepatic duct. Stent was by 4-Fr polyethylene tube inserted transmurally through recipient common bile duct. The tube was removed 12 weeks after operation. To our knowledge, this is the first report in the literature performing liver transplantation using left liver lobe from a living donor with liver injury. In the face of serious donor shortage, the liver transplantation using left liver lobe from a living donor with liver injury was justified, although the chance is rare. TRANSIENT HEPATIC METABOLIC IMPAIRMENT FOLLOWING DONOR RIGHT HEPATECTOMY. Roman Schumann 1 , W. Heinrich Wurm 1 . 1 Department of Anesthesia, Tufts-New England Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA Introduction: Live donation for adult liver transplantation requires removal of approximately 60% of the donor liver. While regeneration apparently results in normal long-term liver function, short-term postoperative hepatic synthetic dysfunction with PT, INR and LFT elevations is well documented. Reports of increased plasma drug concentrations after extended liver resections and anecdotal evidence of enhanced postoperative donor opioid sensitivity suggest the possibility of a transient postoperative hepatic metabolic impairment in these donors. We describe a case in support of this concept. Case: A 48-year-old woman underwent uncomplicated right hepatectomy donating ∼ 50% of her liver to a sibling. Estimated blood loss was 350 cc, the INR increased from 1.0 to a max of 1.4 on postoperative day (POD) 2, and her albumin decreased from 3.8 to 2.6 gm/dl on POD 1. Prior to surgery this otherwise healthy donor was on a steady dose of 600 mg carbamazepine (CZP) daily for seizures diagnosed 6 years earlier. Her preoperative serum concentration was within therapeutic range (4-8 mcg/ml). No CZP was given on the day of surgery, but her usual regimen was restarted on POD 1. CZP was discontinued on POD 3 because of a serum concentration of 14 mcg/ml, rising to 16.6 mcg/ ml on POD 4, then slowly declining. CZP 300 mg daily was continued on POD 7 with subsequent repeated serum concentrations within therapeutic range during her hospital stay. Conclusion: Carbamazepine induces the P 450 enzyme system, is hepatically metabolized and 70% renally excreted. Sub-therapeutic drug levels for this oral agent are a common perioperative concern because of unreliable oral tolerance and intestinal absorption after abdominal surgery. CZP therapy is guided by periodic confirmation of therapeutic total serum CZP concentration assessment. The toxic drug levels in our donor are best explained by a transient hepatic metabolic impairment following her surgery. This alteration may be as common as the hepatic synthetic dysfunction following donor hepatectomy. Both conditions are still poorly characterized or understood. Their clinical implications, such as the need for postoperative dose adjustment of opioids or anticonvulsants in these patients, have not been conclusively studied. Controlled trials, investigating the consequences of acute, temporary hepatic impairment following right hepatectomy are urgently needed, to better understand the immediate postoperative changes in these donors and to improve their clinical care, safety and outcomes. Living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) is a currently available option to increase the donor pool and shorten waiting time in the list. We present a rare donor complication in LDLT that occurred in our program. Case report. A 30-year-old man without a significant past medical history was evaluated for living donation for his father. Donor physical examination, liver function tests and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were normal. Donor right hepatectomy was uneventful. The parenchymal transection was performed without any vascular inflow interruption on either side of the liver and no packed red blood cells were transfused.No thromboembolism prophylaxis was used. Follow-up ultrasonography performed routinely 48 hours after surgery showed middle hepatic vein partial thrombosis (HVT) which was confirmed by MRI . All potential procoagulant factors analyzed were normal. The patient was asimptomatic. A continuous infusion of intravenous heparin (15 UI/Kg/h) was administered for 6 days followed by subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin LMWH (80 mg/12 hours). At day 9, a decrease in the middle hepatic vein thrombus size was observed. HVT had disappeared twenty days after surgery by doppler exam, and heparin was stopped on the 40 ht postoperative day. No other complication has occurred after five months of follow up. Conclusion: HVT is a rare complication in LDLT. Postoperative management of LDL resection should include a routine abdominal doppler ultrasound at post-op days 1,2 and 7 to be able to detect early HVT. Over the years Living related liver transplantation (LRLT) has grown in popularity and in view of cadaveric organ shortage has become the primary mode of transplantation in several Asian countries. LRLT however carries an inherent risk of complications (mortality, morbidity) for the donor. A proper donor evaluation can select a compatible donor with an optimal graft quality and also inturn ensure donor safety post donation. Our protocol for evaluation of a potential donor for LRLT and complications for liver donation are reviewed. Potential donors are evaluated over IV phases starting from basic to advanced biochemical, haematological and virological investigations. The donor liver anatomy is worked out by use of CT/MRI scans. Evaluation also includes a complete physical examination and anesthetists, physicians and psychiatrist evaluation. We retrospectively analyzed, prospectively collected data of LRLT performed between February 2000 and January 2003 for donor complications. There were 16 LRLT performed during the study period. Donors (13M, 3F) were of mean age 30 (18-49) years. There were 5 donations from siblings, 2 from parents and 9 from offspring. Donated liver portions were left hepatectomy (S2-4) 4, right hepatectomy (S5-8) 5and 7 modified extended right hepatectomy (S4b, [5] [6] [7] [8] . The average weight of donated liver was 619 (380-1050) grams. Mean ICU stay was 1.06 (1-2) days and mean hospital stay was 9.12 (7-14) days. There was no mortality and no reoperation in this series. There were no biliary or vascular complications. Only 2/16 donors had morbidity requiring intervention (Incision and drainage of wound infection and drainage of abdominal collection) and 4/16 patients had wound infections requiring conservative management. Liver function tests normalized in 10.25 (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) days post donor liver resection. We believe that a thorough and complete preoperative workup helps in selecting a donor with good graft quality and avoid any surprises later and hence ensure donor safety. . to Sep. 2002 cases of LT were collected from 5 centers of Korea. Among them, 730 cases (74.8%) were related with HB. Preoperative active viral replication was noted; 45% of the recipients had HBeAg (+) and 41% had HBV DNA (+). For prophylaxis of HB recurrence, HBIG monotherapy was most frequently used in 518 cases among 730 cases (71.0%). And secondly, combination therapy of HBIG plus lamivudine was used in 189 cases (25.9%). Prophylaxis against HB consisted of HBIG infusion of 10000∼20000 IU intraoperatively, 10000 IU per day for seven days postoperatively, and following infusion of 10000 IU per week for three times. After that, hepatitis B antibody titer was checked and maintained > 500 IU/L for HBIG monotherapy. For combination therapy, lamivudine 100 ∼150 mg po daily was added for one year or more. The follow up period is from one to 4.5 years. (Results) One-year survival rate was 78-84% and three-year survival rate was 72-80% in HB recipients. Overall survival of recipients, whose original disease was HB, was similar to the other causes. Overall recurrence rate was 5.3 %. Earlier recurrence was found at just 2 months and late was at 4.5 years after transplantation. The recurrence rate according to prophylactic regimens was not different (p>0.05). However, in active viral replicators, the recurrence rate was higher than inactive replicators; HBeAg (+) recipients had 7.8 %, HBV DNA (+) recipients had 8.4% and the others had 3.6% recurrence rate (p<0.05). (Conclusion) The recurrence rate was higher in the preoperative active viral replicators than that in the others, but less than 10%. These results suggest that LT for HB associated end stage liver disease was safe with low recurrence rate if providing adequate prophylaxis even in active viral replicators. Valeria I. Descalzi 1 , Sonia M. Soria 1 , Andres E. Ruf 1 , Oscar C. Andriani 1 , Luis G. Podesta 1 , Federico G. Villamil 1 . 1 Liver Unit, Fundacion Favaloro, Buenos Aires, Argentina At present it is unclear whether the severity of recurrent HCV infection following liver transplantation (LT) differs in recipients of deceased donors (DD) or living donors (LD). Goal: To investigate biochemical, virological and histological parameters of recurrence among patients with HCV-cirrhosis grafted with DD or LD. Methods: From 02/00 (date of the 1st adult-toadult LD at our center) to 09/03, 34 consecutive HCV-positive patients underwent LT. Serum ALT, HCV RNA levels (IU expressed in log) and liver biopsy were obtained at the time of clinical recurrence and every 6 months thereafter. The METAVIR score was utilized for grading and staging of chronic hepatitis. Immunosuppression consisted of cyclosporine (DD 42%, LD 80%) or tacrolimus (DD 58%, LD 20%). Results: Severity of HCV recurrence was assessed in 28 patients who survived >6 months after LT: 16 with DD and 12 with LD (mean follow-up of 24 and 16 months respectively). Recipients of DD or LD did not differ in validated predictors for the severity of HCV recurrence including recipient age (54±10 vs 53±8 years), pre-LT viremia (5.6±0.6 vs 5.5±0.5), treated acute cellular rejection (53% vs 33%), CMV infection (5% vs 0%), time-interval from LT to clinical recurrence (3.7±3.1 vs 3.2±2.8 months) and donor age (38±18 vs 30±8 years). HCV RNA levels were similar in the DD and LD groups at the time of recurrence (6.3±0.6 vs 5.8±0.2), and at 6 (5.9±0.9 vs 6.0±0.4) and 12 months (5.7±0.9 vs 6.2±0.3) of LT. Serum ALT, obtained at the same time intervals was 193±93 vs 93±80, 162±100 vs 112±105 and 162±124 vs 94±32 IU/L respectively. A total of 72 biopsies were obtained (2.6 per pt). Only 1 patient (DD) developed cholestatic HCV disease. Biopsies obtained at 1 year after LT showed similar grading (1.9±0.9 vs 1.9±0.9) and staging (1.1±0.7 vs 1.4±0.9) in recipients of DD and LD respectively. However, the proportion of patients with F2/F3 at 1 year was higher in LD (40%) than in DD (24%) but this difference was not significant. One-and 3-year patient survivals were 90%/80% after LT with DD and 86%/80% with LD. Graft survivals were 80%/73% and 80%/73% respectively. Conclusions: 1) Severity of biochemical, virological and histological HCV recurrence was similar in recipients of DD or LD; 2) Longer follow-up is required to confirm the increased proportion of stage 2/3 fibrosis observed in LD at 1 year of LT. Atsushi Yoshizawa 1 , Yasuhiro Fujimoto 1 , Takaaki Koshiba 2 , Jacques Pirenne 3 , Yasuhiro Ogura 1 , Koichi Kozaki 1 , Mureo Kasahara 1 , Mikiko Ueda 1 , Yasutsugu Takada 1 , Koichi Tanaka 1 . 1 Department of Transplantation Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Kyoto, Japan; 2 Horizontal Medical Research Organization, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Kyoto, Japan; 3 University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Leuven, Belgium The recurrence of hepatitis C virus (HCV) after liver transplantation (Tx) remains a major problem, and immunosuppression (IS), in particular steroids, is usually thought to play a major role in recurrence of HCV. IS may also interfere with the efficacy of interferon (IFN) therapy. Therefore, liver Tx between identical twins (obviating the need for IS) may favorably influence the prognosis of hepatitis C and gives a unique opportunity to study the natural evolution of HCV after liver Tx in the absence of IS. We report one case of liver Tx between identical twins performed in a patient with HCV-related cirrhosis. Methods. A 51-year-old male with HCV (genotype 1b)-related cirrhosis and multiple hepatocellular carcinoma received a hepatic graft from his identical twin. No IS (including no intraoperative bolus steroid) was administered. Serum was examined for HCV-RNA (quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction) and transaminases. When recurrence of hepatitis was proven by biopsy, anti-HCV therapy was started. Results. Interestingly, even in the completely absence of IS, serum HCV-RNA level increased as early as post-Tx day 1. On post-Tx day 20, he showed the high-titer viremia with 10-fold increase. The liver biopsy on post-Tx day 24 for elevated transaminases revealed lobular hepatitis consistent with recurrence of hepatitis C. On post-Tx day 31, IFN and ribavirin therapy started. Serum HCV-RNA level declined within 1 week and remained negative until now (7 months post Tx) with transaminases being within normal range. A follow-up biopsy specimen of the hepatic graft shows no signs of hepatitis. Conclusions: This unique case makes two points: 1) Despite a completely IS-free environment, recurrence of HCV was rapidly encountered early post-liver Tx, demonstrating that IS is not the only determinant of recurrence of HCV: 2) In the absence of IS, an early treatment with anti-HCV agents (IFN+ribavirin) was particularly efficient in rapidly eliminating HCV. This observation suggests that reduction of IS may not necessarily prevent recurrence of HCV, but may well dramatically improve the efficiency of early anti-HCV treatments. A. Humar 1 , K. Horn 1 , A. Kalis 1 , B. Glessing 1 , M. Knaak 1 , W. Payne 1 , J. Lake 1 . 1 Surgery, Univ of MN, Minneapolis, MN, USA Background: There is concern that recips with Hep C, transplanted with partial liver (PL) txs (living donor [LD] or cadaver [CAD] split) may have an increased risk of recurrence compared to whole liver (WL) tx recips. We looked at clinical and histologic (based on protocol biopsy done 6-12 mos posttx) parameters of recurrence in recips transplanted for Hep C (only recips with minimum 6 months follow-up included). Results: Since Jan 01, we identified 40 such recips: 25 with WL txs, and 15 with PL txs (this included 9 recips with LD txs and 6 with CAD splits). Demographics between WL and PL groups showed WL recips had older donors (44 vs 32 yrs, p=0.01), longer cold ischemic times, and higher MELD scores (p<0.05). Viral genotype was similar in the 2 groups. With mean follow-up of 19 mos, 37(93%) of the recips are alive with a functioning graft: 2 patients died due to fibrosing chelestatic hepatitis (FCH) (1 in each of the 2 groups, WL and PL), and 1 due to tumor recurrence. Of the 25 recips with WL txs, 19 (76%) have histologic evidence of recurrence on follow-up biopsy. Of these 7 (28%) had recurrence with progressive fibrosis, requiring treatment with ribavarin/interferon. Another 10(40%) are on ribavirin alone for increased transaminases, and biopsy with inflammation but no fibrosis. Of the 15 PL txs, 5 (33%, p=0.02 vs. WL) have evidence of histologic recurrence; only 1 (7%, p=0.09) received treatment with ribavarin/interferon for severe recurrence with FCH. Another 4 (27%) are on ribavarin therapy alone. The lowest rate of recurrence was in the LD subgroup: 2/9 (22%) with mild histologic recurrence and no recips treated with interferon. CAD split recipients had higher recurrence rates vs LDs, though numbers are small. Follow-up biopsies in WL recips at 6-12 mos posttx demonstrated the following: no recurrence (n=6, 26%), FCH (n=2, 8%), Grade 1 or 2 inflammation (n=19, 76%), and Stage 1-3 fibrosis (n=12, 48%). Protocol biopsies in PL recips demonstrated the following: no recurrence (n=10, 67%, p=0.02), FCH (n=1, 7%), Grade 1 inflammation (n=4, 27%), and Stage 1 fibrosis (n=2, 13%). Mean Grade for the WL group was 1.17 vs. 0.29 for the PL group (p<0.001). Mean Stage for the WL group was 0.61 vs. 0.14 for the PL group (p=0.06). Conclusion: Recips of PL txs were not at higher risk for Hep C recurrence. In fact, a higher incidence and more severe recurrence was seen in WL tx recips, which may be due to risk factors such as older donor age and increased cold ischemic times. MULTICENTER RANDOMIZED HEPATITIS C (HCV) THREE TRIAL POST LIVER TRANSPLANTATION (OLT): A PRELIMINARY REPORT. Hepatitis C Three Study Group 1 . 1 Transplantation Surgery, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, TX Purpose: To assess the efficacy and safety of mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and steroid (Pred)-free immunosuppression (IS) in an effort to minimize HCV recurrence (HCVR), acute rejection (ACR) and adverse events (AE) post OLT. Methods: This is an open label, prospective, randomized multicenter study involving adult HCV-OLT recipients allocated into 3 IS regimens. Arm 1: tacrolimus (TAC) + Pred; arm 2: TAC + Pred + MMF and, arm 3: TAC + MMF + 2 dose-daclizumab, but no steroids. HCV-OLT pt (n = 312) from 17 different institutions are allocated at a 1:1: 2 ratio, respectively. Laboratory data and graft histology (LBx) are evaluated when clinically indicated and by protocol at 90, 365 and 730 days. HCVR is staged according to Batts and Ludwig. ACR is graded according to Banff criteria. Primary end-points are clinically significant: HCVR (fibrosis stage [Sg] 2 at 90 or 365 d. or Sg 3 at anytime) and ACR (Banff grade [Gr] 2 + RAI 4). Results: This report is based on Data Safety Monitoring Board assessment from November 2003. Out of 228 patients enrolled, 182 have a median follow up of 89 days. The Table summarizes the demographic characteristics patients in the 3 arms. Day 90 protocol LBx were done in 82% of the recipients. Current information on 98 patients show: HCVR (Sg 2) found in 8 pt (8.2%) at a median time of 94 days post OLT who were placed on antiviral therapy (endpoint). ACR found in 10 patients (10.2% -Gr: 2 [6]; 3 [4] ), median time of 13 days post OLT. Five patients died due to: lung failure + cancer; CVA; idiopathic lung disease; HA thrombosis; sepsis. Study withdrawal = 3 pt. Conclusions: This 90-day preliminary report suggests the safety of the steroid-free IS used (TAC, MMF, 3-dose) in the trial. The very low ACR rate is of significance, since most acute rejection occurs early after transplantation. The low HCVR is also encouraging, and may be related to the low incidence of acute rejection and steroid free therapy, but much longer followup is needed. A first interim analysis of the treatment groups will be available at the presentation. Background: Living donor liver transplantation has played important role for patients with end stage viral hepatitis because of cadaveric organ shortage. However preliminary results indicate that live liver donation might be disadvantageous for hepatitis C virus (HCV)-positive patients. Material and Methods: Twenty patients who underwent living donor liver transplantation for HCV cirrhosis was the subject of the study. All the patients preemptively received antiviral therapy consisting of interferon -alpha2b and ribavirin, which started around one month after the operation. When HCV-RNA turned negative after the therapy, the therapy was continued for another 12 months. Thereafter the patient was observed without the therapy for 6 months. The patients dropped from the protocol when they could not continue the therapy for 12 months for adverse effects Results: Five patients stopped the therapy, nine responded the therapy and the other 6 did not respond and sustained viral response ratio was 45% (9/20). There was a significant difference between responders and nonresponders in histological activity score after the therapy. The cumulated 3-year survival of the HCV positive patients was 85%, which was comparable with that of hepatitis C virus negative patients (n=93, 90%). Conclusions: Preemptive antiviral therapy after transplantation is safe and might be useful for satisfactory results after living donor liver transplantation for HCV positive patients. Ashok Jain 1 , Raman Venkataramanan 3 , Bijan Eghtesad 2 , Randeep Kashyap 1 , Barbara Yelochan 2 , Amadeo Marcos 2 , John Fung. 1 Surgery, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA; 2 Surgery, T.E.Starzl Transplantation Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; 3 Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Introduction: Hepatitis C viral infection (HCV) is the commonest indication for liver transplantation (LTx). Recurrence of HCV is uniform after transplantation. Combination of pegylated interferon (peg-INF) with Ribavirin, which is not without the side effects, has been used as anti HCV treatment. It has been recommended that patients with renal dysfunction should receive lower doses of Ribavirin in order to reduce the incidence of hemolysis. Aim of the present study is to examine the role of measurement of plasma and whole blood concentration of Ribavirin to determine this relationship to hemolysis, renal dysfunction, and treatment response. Material: The left over 34-blood sample drawn for tacrolimus level from 23 post LTx patients (who were on Ribavirin) were used to estimate Ribavirin concentration in plasma (all samples) and blood (17 samples) by HPLC. Patients clinical history and concurrent medications were evaluated. Results: There was a wide variation in the Ribavirin concentration ranging from 1.8 /l to 122.1 /l with mean plasma concentration of 48.4± 10.2 /l. There was a close correlation between the plasma and whole blood Ribavirin level (mean plasma level 42.7± 21.8 /l; mean blood level 37.5 ± 17.3 /l.) No correlation was found in the response rate (biochemical, histogical or HCV viral load), hemolysis, renal function or length of Ribavirin treatment on subsequent estimations. However the concentrations were higher when subjects were on antiretroviral agents (5 samples mean 87.3± 39.4 /l) and lower when patients were on proton pump inhibitors (11 samples mean 29.8±20.3 /l). Conclusion: Despite of the fact that Ribavirin is highly bound to red blood cells, the concentration in whole blood and plasma were similar. Higher concentrations were observed with concurrent use of anti retroviral agents and lower with proton pump inhibiter. The toxicity to the concentration could not be established in this pilot study. It appears that Ribavirin, as a parent compound may not be responsible for therapeutic effect or hemolysis. It is possible that its phosphorelated metabolite of Ribavirin may be determining factor to response rate and toxicity. Further more studies are needed to elucidate the role Ribavirin with peg-INF in recurrent HCV post liver transplantation. Kunitada Shimotohno 1 , Koichi Watashi 1 , Makoto Hijikata 1 . 1 Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Kyoto, Japan Recurrence of chronic hepatitis C is apparent in approximately 50% of HCV-infected recipients in the first postoperative year. To reduce the rate of the recurrence, patients may receive anti-HCV therapy before or after transplantation. Currently available drugs such as interferon and ribavirin is unable to eliminate HCV in the liver transplant setting, suggesting that indefinite treatment to suppress the effects of virus may be necessary. We have screened candidates for anti-HCV function and found that cyclosporin A (CsA) showed strong suppressive activity to HCV proliferation. Because CsA has been using as an immuno-supressant that targets calcineurin in patients who underwent liver transplantation, we analyzed the molecular mechanism of the anti-HCV function of CsA. Treatment the HCV genome self-replicating cells with CsA for 7 days decreased the amount of HCV RNA to undetectable levels. However, reduction of HCV RNA was not observed after treatment with FK506. The inhibitory effect of CsA on HCV genome replication was also observed in cells infected with HCV. These results suggested that CsA but not FK506 inhibited the replication of HCV genome. To clarify how CsA exerts anti-HCV activity in cultured hepatocytes, we used a reporter assay to examine the transcriptional activity of NF-AT in HCV gennomu replicating cells. Although CsA treatment suppressed NF-AT activity in T lymphocytes as reported previously, it had no effect on NF-AT activity in hepatocyte-derived cells. This suggested that calcineurin-inducible signaling pathways, including the NF-AT pathway, were not related to the anti-HCV activity of CsA in hepatocytes. This conclusion was further supported by an analysis of HCV replication using the CsA derivatives NIM811which does not inhibit calcineurin but has retains the ability to interact with cyclophilins. These data, together with the previous data obtained in hepatocytes indicated that the inhibitory function of CsA was mediated by a mechanism independent of its immunosuppressive function, suggesting that cyclophilin(s) plays important role in regulation of HCV genomu replication. Thus, identification of a cyclophilin that is essential for replication of the HCV genome sheds further light on the mechanism of HCV replication. Furthermore, our data showing an inhibitory effect of CsA on HCV genome replication highlight the importance of selecting an appropriate immunosuppressive agent in liver transplant recipients at increased risk of recurrent HCV infection. Introduction: Patients with chronic Hepatitis C (HCV) that receive liver transplantation uniformly become reinfected. The effect that inflammatory and regenerative cytokines has on HCV association with the liver has not been studied. We hypothesize that infectious HCV will associate with HepG2 cells cultured as spheroids, and this will be potentiated by the addition of interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha. Methods: HepG2 human hepatoma cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and cultured at 3.0x10 5 cells/ml in ATCC recommended medium. For spheroid formation, the cells were cultured on an orbital shaker at 55 RPM. Infectious HCV serum was added to the culture conditions for 8 hours and then washed. IL-6 (1 and 5 ng/ml) and/or TNF-alpha (1 ng/ml) were added for the 8 hour inoculation period. The cells were harvested at 3 and 5 days after inoculation. RNA was extracted. The 5' UTR of the virus was amplified by PCR and resolved by gel electrophoresis. Results: HepG2 cells assumed spheroid formation after 3 days in rotational culture. HepG2 spheroids supported viral association and persisted for 3 and 5 days after inoculation, but there was no detectable virus in the supernatant/culture medium. However, cells inoculated with virus and IL-6 at 1 ng/ml demonstrated viral association and persistence of the virus in the supernatant. IL-6 at 5 ng/ml abrogated viral association or persistence at both harvest dates. Cells inoculated with TNF-alpha permitted viral association at 3 days in culture, but there was no detectable virus at 5 days in culture. This effect of attenuating viral persistence was also seen when the cells were treated with both IL-6 (1ng/ml) and TNF-alpha (1ng/ml). Discussion: HepG2 cells modified by medium additives have been shown to bind HCV, and the induction of spheroid formation alone appears to confer a phenotype that permits viral association and persistence in our study. Viral particles persisted in the supernatant of the samples treated with low dose IL-6, suggesting either that the infected cells were releasing viral progeny or that the cytokine stabilized the virus in the medium. However, at higher doses or with the addition of TNF-alpha viral association and persistence were attenuated. These findings suggest that the regenerative cytokines can alter the association of HCV with the host in a dose dependent manner and requires further study. Background: Adult to adult living donor liver transplantation (ALDLT) is an accepted treatment for patients with end-stage liver disease. However, recipient's post-operative course is not always satisfactory because of detrimental factors, such as small for size graft. Meanwhile, it is conceivable that recipient's pre-operative condition as well as graft volume affects post-operative clinical course. We report the impact of pre-operative recipient's condition and graft size upon post-operative clinical course. Patients and Method: Between September 1997 and December 2003, 103 patients underwent ALDLT in Hokkaido University Hospital. Of the total number of liver transplant patients, twenty six pediatric patients and sixteen patients whose primary disease was fluminant hepatic failure were excluded from this study. Data from the remnant 61 transplants were retrospectively analyzed. Graft size was standardized by the ratio of graft volume to standard liver volume (GV/SV ratio). Model of End Stage Liver Disease score (MELD score) was used as index of pre-operative recipient's condition. Peak level of total bilirubin after the operation (peak T-bil) was used as index of graft function. Results: MELD score divided by GV/SV ratio was significantly higher in mortality group than in survival group. Conclusion: Not only graft size but pre-operative recipients' condition influenced postoperative recipient's condition in ALDLT. The recipient whose pre-operative condition is poor requires larger graft for uneventful course after transplantation. MELD score divided by GV/SV ratio correctly reflects the post-operative recipient's recovery in ALDLT. Background: MELD scores have been used as indicator for cadaveric liver allocation in the United States. Recently, the applicability of MELD score as predictor of the outcomes after liver transplantation was reported. It is, however, controversial whether MELD score can predict the outcomes after adult-to-adult living donor liver transplantation (LDLT). In this study, we tested whether MELD score and other preoperative variables can predict short term mortality after right-lobe LDLT for adult recipients. Methods: Between 1994 and 2003, 249 patients underwent right-lobe LDLT at our institute. A total of 204 recipients were enrolled, after excluding 45 transplantations for fulminant hepatic failure and re-transplantation. We defined a subject who died within 90 days after LDLT. All recipients were categorized into two groups according to MELD score, Group A (n=140): MELD score <25; and Group B (n=64): 25≤ MELD. MELD groups, as well as 21 preoperative variables, such as etiology, blood mismatch, and laboratory data, were analyzed by Cox proportional hazard regression method. Results: A total of 37 patients (20 in Group A, 17 in Group B) died within 90 days after right-lobe LDLT. Cox proportional hazard regression demonstrated that MELD group was a significant determinant for 90-day mortality (p=0.045, Fig.1 ). Among preoperative variables, past history of upper abdominal operation (p=0.009) was significantly associated with 90-day mortality in Group A, and treatment with continuous hemodiafiltration (p=0.017) was significantly associated in Group B. The present study demonstrated that MELD score is a good predictor for 90-day mortality in our right-lobe LDLT series. However, additional risk factors also affect the 90-day survivals of the recipients in each MELD group. This suggests that other parameters in addition to MELD score may be required to predict the outcomes after LDLT more accurately. To present an experience with the indication of right lobe graft with middle hepatic vein in adult living donor liver transplantation (LDLT). Summary background data: There remains a major controversy that the venous drainage from the anterior segment substantially depends on tributaries of the middle hepatic vein (MHV), and deprivation of such tributaries into the MHV may critically influence the postoperative graft function. Right lobe with MHV could be a resolution for the potential problem of congestion in the anterior segment. Methods: From December 2000 to October 2003, we performed 171 right lobe LDLTs for adult patients. Of these, 28 patients received a right lobe with MHV graft (16.4%). Over the period reported, technical modification in donor operation with a computer-assisted volumetric analysis according to the hepatic venous anatomy (preserving the proximal side of the MHV and the drainage vein of segment 4b to the MHV). Results: The overall cumulative 1-year graft survival rate of right lobe with MHV (n=28) and right lobe without MHV (n=143) were 82.2% and 76.8% (p=NS). The proximal side of the MHV and the drainage vein of segment 4b to the MHV was preserved in 16 patients according to the regional volume of V4b in the remnant donor liver. All of them need venous interposition graft for MHV anastomosis. Three donors experienced complications that required treatment, including 2 cases of biliary leakage and one of liver failure due to non-alcholic steatohepatitis. All patients had a patent right hepatic vein and MHV anastomosis during the follow-up period. There were no complications related to the hepatic vein anastomosis. The optimization of venous drainage in a right liver graft through the middle hepatic vein (MHV) can induce segment IV congestion in the donor. The aim of this study was to evaluate the prevalence of early segment IV congestion following MHV deprivation according to the related venous anatomy, with its consequences on biological, clinical and volumetric outcome in donors. Between 1998 and 2003, 47 living-donor liver transplantations were performed using a right graft and 11 donors without MHV harvesting (MHV-) were compared to 17 donors with MHV harvesting (MHV+). According to the left liver venous drainage, segment IV was entirely drained through the MHV in 8 (29%) patients and only partially in other cases. Biological, clinical outcome and volumetric measurement were compared according to the degree of venous congestion, defined as global (GC), partial (PC) or no congestion (NC). The remnant liver-to-body weight ratio (DRV) was calculated one week postoperatively using CT volumetric assessment divided by donor's body weight. Venous congestion never occurred in MHV-group. In the MHV+ group, 14 (82%) of patients experienced congestion which was global in 7 (50%) patients. Segment IV was entirely or mostly drained in MHV in all of them. The remaining 7 (50%) patients had only partial congestion. Among them, segment IV was equally drained through left and MHV in 4 (57%). Overall, a preserved scissural vein was often seen in patients who had partial or no congestion. Prothrombin rate was significantly lower in GC group as compared to NC group on postoperative day 1 and 5 (50 vs. 62% and 76 vs. 86%, respectively). Overall morbidity was similar in the MHV-group as compared to the MHV+ group (82% vs 53%, respectively, p=ns) and between GC, PC and NC groups (57% vs 57%vs 71% respectively,p=ns). The DRV was similar at one week in GC, PC and NC groups (1.40+/ -0.10 vs 1.41+/-0.29 vs 1.25+/-0.32 respectively, p=ns for all). CONCLUSION This study shows that early segment IV congestion in donor is common after MHV harvesting and that its magnitude and location can be predicted by the venous anatomy. Entire segment IV venous drainage through MHV is predictive of global congestion, which is associated with a decrease in early postoperative prothrombin rate. Thus, we suggest avoidance of MHV harvesting in donors with critical remnant liver volume and segment IV entirely drained through the MHV. Background. Although several reports claim that portal hypertension after liver transplantation (LT) adversely affects graft function, few reports have assessed the impact of portal venous pressure (PVP) on graft regeneration. We therefore analyzed the impact of PVP after living-donor liver transplantation (LDLT) to adult recipients on regeneration and the graft damage. Methods. Between March 2002 and December 2003, 30 adult recipients underwent LDLT in our institution. We divided them into 2 groups based on mean PVP monitored through a catheter inserted via the inferior mesenteric vein during 3 days after LT: higher portal pressure group with a PVP≥20 mmHg (Group H; n=16), and a lower portal pressure group with a PVP<20 mmHg (Group L; n=14). We compared the following in the two groups. (1) peripheral and portal venous blood hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and vascular endotherial growth factor (VEGF) levels during the 2 weeks after LT, (2) graft volume (GV) / standard liver volume (SLV) at 1, 2, 3, 4 weeks and 3 months after LT assessed by volumetry based on computed tomography (CT), (3) serum GOT, GPT, and bilirubin levels and prothrombin time (PT), (4) ascitic fluid volume. Results. Recipient characteristics such as age, MELD score, and donor age were similar in both groups. (1) The peak peripheral blood HGF level of during the first 2 weeks was significantly higher in Group H (L: 1536±754 pg/ml (mean±SD), H: 2120±1243 pg/ml; P<0.05), whereas the peak portal venous blood VEGF level during the first 2 weeks was significantly higher in Group L (L: 370±430 pg/ml, H: 47±74 pg/ml; P<0.05). (2) GV/SLV in both groups reached almost 100% one week after LT, however, at 2, 3, and 4 weeks it was significantly higher in Group H (L / H after 2, 3 and 4 weeks: 96.8%/123%, 93.6%/114%, and 97.3%/ 130%, respectively; P<0.05). There was no significant difference between the groups at 3 months after LT. (3) The peak serum GOT, GPT and bilirubin levels after LT were all higher in Group H. PT on the 3rd postoperative day was significantly longer in Group H, but there was no difference at 1 week. (4) Mean of ascitic fluid volume during the 3 days after LT was greater in Group H. Conclusion. Elevation of PVP to more than 20mmHg in the early postoperative phase after LT was associated with rapid graft hypertrophy, with higher peripheral blood HGF level and a lower portal blood VEGF level, however, it also resulted in graft dysfunction with hyperbilirubinemia, coagulopathy, and severe ascites. Adult to adult living donor liver transplantation (AALDTx) remains controversial and recent reports are contradictory regarding the cost of this procedure. We compared all hospital direct costs for recipients from one month prior to transplant to one year after transplant for 75 deceased donor transplants (DDLTx) and compared these with 26 AALDTx performed over the same time period. To calculate living donor recipient procurement costs, we captured all hospital costs for every inpatient and out patient encounter the donor had at our institution from the first donor evaluation visit to one year later. Median MELD scores were 13.0 vs. 20.0 (P<0.001) for the AALDTx and DDLTx cases respectively. Overall median 1-year costs were significantly less for the AADLTx ($63,525 vs. $86,767, P=0.022) with the only significant difference in cost centers seen in lower procurement costs for the AADLTx recipients ($17,943 vs. $21,247, P< 0.0001). We did not observe significant differences among the AADLTx and DDLTx groups for other measures of resource utilization like length of stay, and other individual cost centers (Table 1) . Overall one year patient (88% vs. 85%, P=0.213) and graft (81% vs. 85%, P=0.619) survival were comparable between the two groups. We conclude that AADLTx is a cost effective and efficacious procedure for properly selected donors and recipients because it can reduce donor organ costs. Severity of disease also may contribute to increased costs for the DDLTx group. Purpose. Activated protein C (APC) has shown anticoagulant and anti-inflammatory effects during reperfusion in animals models. We studied the interaction between APC and phagocytes in clinical liver transplantation. Methods. In 50 patients undergoing liver transplantation (LT) we measured plasma protein C (PC) and APC levels (both given as % of normal human plasma defined as 100%), neutrophil and monocyte CD 11b and L-selectin expression (relative fluorescence units) during surgery. Blood samples from inflow and outflow vessels of the liver graft were simultaneously obtained to assess changes across the graft. Samples were collected at start of surgery, before reperfusion, and 1 and 5 minutes after reperfusion with portal blood. Results. Initial PC and APC levels were 51% of normal (range 25-141%) and 110% (78-335%). During reperfusion the graft transiently consumed significant amounts of PC: portal vein 49%, (20-96%), graft caval effluent 25%, (12-76%), p=0.001. Despite this no outflow of APC from the hepatic circulation occurred. Simultaneously a marked neutrophil and monocyte activation took place within the liver graft, indicated by low L-selectin and high CD 11b expression (transhepatic ratio at all points p=0.01). During reperfusion the enhanced hepatic PC consumption was associated with moderate neutrophil and monocyte activation (R=0.377, p=0.01; R=0.389, p=0.008, respectively). All these changes were best observed during the first minute of reperfusion. 1-yr PS was 94% and 1-yr GS was 87%. Conclusion. During initial reperfusion extremely fast PC consumption occurs in the graft without hepatic release of APC, suggesting shortage of APC in the reperfused graft. The process of PC and APC consumption may be ongoing inflammatory response and lead to disturbed anticoagulation in the initial reperfusion phase. Enhanced hepatic PC sequestration was associated with reduced phagocyte activation in the graft, suggesting that activation of PC may inhibit the function of phagocytes during early reperfusion in LT. Yoogoo Kang 1 , Antonio J. Carranza 2 , Chanjong Chung 3 . 1 Anesthesiology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA; 2 Anesthesiology, Hospital Central Militar, Mexico City, Mexico; 3 Anesthesiology, Donga University, Pusan, Korea Purpose: The purpose of this retrospective study was to investigate whether the presence of fibrinolysis can be diagnosed in its early stage by comparing the thromboelastographic (TEG) progression of untreated blood and blood-treated with e-aminocaproic acid (EACA). Methods: Intraoperative coagulation profiles and TEG of 925 patients undergoing liver transplantation were reviewed after the approval of the IRRB. A blood sample taken five min after reperfusion of the grafted liver was used for two TEGs, one using 0.36 ml of untreated blood and another one using 0.33 ml of blood treated with EACA (1%, 0.03 ml). Patients (n=113) without clot formation on TEG were excluded because of potential combined effects of fibrinolysis and heparin. TEG of untreated blood showed no fibrinolysis in 339 (No-Lysis group) and fibrinolysis in 473 patients (Lysis group). Additional TEG variables (AUC, R, α, Amp) were measured at 15 and 30 min from blood sampling for early diagnosis of fibrinolysis. Results: All TEG variables improved in most patients of both groups of patients. However, an increase in fibrinolysis index (FI) and fibrinolysis time (Fa) was more dramatic in the Lysis group patients. The area under the curve (AUC) of TEG of EACA-treated blood was greater than untreated blood in both groups of patients, but its increase was more pronounced in the Lysis group patients. In conclusion, the presence of fibrinolysis can be detected within 30 min by the rapid improvement in EACA-treated blood. Introduction: This randomized prospective double-blind study was designed to test the hypothesis that the perioperative infusion of fenoldopam provides renal protection during liver transplantation. Methods: The study protocol was approved by the IRB and informed consent was obtained from all patients. Patients with initial serum creatinine levels of > 2.0 mg/dl were excluded. Patients were randomly assigned to receive an infusion of fenoldopam or normal saline. The infusion was started at the beginning of transplant surgery and continued for 24 hours postoperatively. The study drug infusion was initiated to provide a dose of fenoldopam of 0.03 mcg/kg/min in the study group. This was titrated up to a maximum dose of 0.15 mcg/ kg/min as hemodynamics permitted. Renal function was assessed by determining the patient's serum creatinine immediately preoperatively and comparing these results with a repeated analysis 24 hours postoperatively. Orthotopic liver transplantation was performed in a standard fashion with venovenous bypass. Statistical analysis included repeated measures analysis of variance followed up with 2 sample and paired t-tests. (P-value < 0.05 significant) Results: A total of 38 patients were enrolled into the study: 21 patients into the fenoldopam group and 17 patients into the placebo group. There was no significant differences in the initial serum creatinine between groups. Creatinine levels significantly increased between baseline and 24 hours postoperatively for both patient groups (p-value=0.0004). However, when comparing creatinine level of patients that received fenoldopam with those that received placebo, data demonstrated no significant differences between the two groups (p-value=0.61). Also, the interaction between time and group was not significant (p-value=0.85). (Introduction) Biliary complications including anastomotic leakage and stricture were considered as troublesome problems in duct-to-duct anastomosis of adult living donor liver transplantation. So, various technical modifications were attempted to reduce biliary complications and to perform easy and comfortable biliary recontruction in two or more ducts in graft.(Purpose) We introduced a new high hilar Glissonian dissection technique in recipient hepatectomy for reducing biliary complications in adult living donor liver transplnation and compared biliary complications between a conventional method and a new method using high hilar Glissonian dissection in biliary reconstruction. (Methods) From August 2000 to June 2003, 98 patients received adult LDLT using duct-to-duct anastomosis of biliary reconstruction in our center. They were divided into group 1 (n=70) using conventional method for biliary reconstruction of duct-to-duct anastomosis and group 2 (n= 28) using a new high hilar Glissonian dissection technique. After Pringles' maneuver, Glissonian pedicles were cut at the high hilar(intrahepatic) level. After that, the portal vein was separated from the Glissonian pedicles. Using this new technique, we could get longer portal vein, hepatic artery, and bile duct, and save the blood supply to the end of bile duct. The duct-to-duct anastomosis could be performed without tension and ischemia. (Results) There were 77 males (78.6%)and 21 females(21.4%), and their mean age was 46.4 years. Mean follow-up duration was 17.8 months. The overall biliary complication rate was 21.4 % in group 1 and 14.3% in group 2 (p>0.05). Bile leakage from anastomosis in group 1 was 4.3% , but, there was no leakge in group group 2(p>0.05). Also, stricture of anastomotic site were occurred 17.1% in group 1 and 7.1% in group 2, respectively(p>0.05). (Conclusions) Although the incidence of biliary complications was not significantly decreased statistically after introduction of a high hilar dissection technique, we consider this method as a very feasible technique for biliary reconstruction in duct-toduct anastomosis. Anatomy of the bile duct in the donor was evaluated by pre-operative CT or MR cholangiography and intraoperative cholangiography. The graft had a single orifice in 7 cases, two orifices that could be made to one with back table plasty in 8 cases. The other six cases needed two separate anastomoses. In the 4 of 6 cases, two orifices of the graft bile duct were too much separated (more than 1 cm) to be reconstructed by the stump of the hepatic ducts. For one of two orifices, stump of the recipient' cystic duct was used. All the 4 recipients were male with a mean age of 41.5 years (range 16-58). Average follow period was nine months (range 3-16). The indicated diseases were hepatitis C cirrhosis in 2, hepatitis B cirrhosis in 1 and Caloli disease in 1. All recipients were ABO-identical with donors. The anastomosis was performed by interrupted suture using 6/0 PDS with an external stent tube. Remnant of the recipients' cystic duct was left longer, and plastied to a roll for the reconstruction. The stent tube was kept unremoved at least three months after transplantation. (Results) Post-transplant cholangiography performed one month after transplantation showed a good passage in all cases without any anastomotic stenosis or bile leakage. One recipient died of chronic rejection, but the other three have been doing well without graft dysfunction. (Conclusion) Cystic duct is useful in the reconstruction of multiple bile ducts in right lobe living donor liver transplantation.  
