d58d9ce784a80a2fbd663549c1082ea3336137f0
Royal College of Physicians of Ireland Ir
Al-Ramli  Wisam Khodear  Yahya Aremu  Muyiwa El-Sayed Abdel Basset 


This supplement has received no external funding or sponsorship S172 Ir J Med Sci (2017) 186 (Suppl 6):S171-S280 Abstract Category: Case Report Background: Acquiring and honing medical knowledge, history taking ability and clinical skills are core aspects of medical training in the clinical years. Interns, who themselves have recently graduated from medical school and entered clinical practice are well placed to assume a role in education of medical students. The aim of this study was to evaluate student feedback on an intern-delivered teaching programme at University Hospital Limerick (UHL) compared to results of a similar study in 2015. Methods: Fifty interns volunteered to participate in the student teaching programme at UHL. Each intern aimed to deliver four one-hour tutorials per semester to a group of Year 3 or 4 students from the UL GEMs programme. A flexible schedule with a focus on practical skills and knowledge was created with oversight by two Lead Interns, Professor of Medicine and administrative support. Student feedback of the programme and its perceived benefits was collected using an anonymous questionnaire. Results: Overall feedback on the performance of intern tutors was extremely positive. The response rate was 61%. The average number of tutorials received was 2. Tutorials on history taking and clinical examination were cited as the most valuable. Encouragingly, 76% of students indicated a desire to participate as intern tutors following graduation. In terms of weaknesses, 38% of students identified the logistical issue of agreeing a mutually suitable timeslot for themselves and their assigned intern as the main issue inhibiting delivery of teaching. Discussion: The feedback from this study suggests that the interndelivered teaching programme was beneficial and well received. However some barriers to tutorial delivery were identified by the questionnaire. An overall review of the programme will be carried out for both interns and students at the end of the academic year, and along with this feedback will help shape the future direction of the programme. in Ireland be vaccinated with Tdap between 27 and 36 weeks gestation to protect mother and infant for the first 8 weeks of life. Aim: Quantify the uptake of Tdap vaccine among pregnant women since its introduction. Assess the level of awareness of the vaccine and its function among the same group. Identify possible barriers to vaccination. Survey antenatal staff to gauge awareness levels and communication about the vaccine's availability. Method: Mothers of inpatients in CUH paediatric department were surveyed by self-administered anonymous questionnaires. A cross-sectional quantitative and qualitative survey was carried out using retrospective analysis of mothers who had pregnancies since December 2012. Antenatal staff surveyed using another anonymous self-administered questionnaire. Results: In the cohort of 81 women, 38% (n=31) were aware of the vaccine. 19.7% (n=16) received the vaccine during pregnancy. The primary reason cited for not receiving the vaccine was that it was "Not offered". 87.5% of vaccinated women received it from their GP. 100% of those who completed the antenatal staff questionnaire (N=30) agreed that the uptake of the vaccine would improve with a poster campaign. 20% of those staff were completely unaware of the Tdap vaccine in pregnancy. The data gathered has proven that awareness directly affects the uptake (p=0.008). Conclusion: Further emphasis on increasing awareness could, according to these findings, directly increase uptake. Both healthcare professionals and patients alike lack awareness of the availability of this important vaccine. McCormack EE 1 , Hintze JM 2 1 Galway University Hospital, Galway, Ireland; 2 Department of Regenerative Medicine, Mayo Clinic Arizona, USA Objective: To identify the causes of intussusception in adults. Introduction: Intussusception is the invagination of a proximal segment of the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) into the lumen of a distal part, leading to bowel obstruction and ischaemia. It is the most common cause of abdominal obstruction, and the second most common cause of acute abdominal emergencies in paediatric patients 1 . Intussusception is, however, rare in adults, and accounts for only 1-5% of intestinal obstructions 2 . Methods: PubMed and Google Scholar were searched using the following search terms: intussusception, adults. Results: The most common identified cause of intussusception in adults was intestinal polyps. 63.4% of all causes were neoplastic, of which 40.6% were benign, 14.8% primary GIT malignancies, and 7.9% secondary metastatic malignancies. This was followed by congenital in 7.9%, including Meckel's diverticulum, Blue Rubber Bleb Nevus Syndrome and duplication of the alimentary tract. 5.9% were caused by endometriosis, 5.9% by inflammatory causes, including inflammatory bowel disease, and only 4.9% were iatrogenic. This is stark difference to the paediatric population where no aetiology is identified in up to 90% of cases. Conclusion: Intussusception is a rare cause of bowel obstruction in adults. It is most frequently caused by neoplasia, with polyps identified most frequently (16.8% of cases). A lead-point was nearly always identified, which is in direct contrast to children, where it is often absent. When a diagnosis of intussusception in an adult has been made, a neoplastic cause must be out-ruled. A comparative analysis on the fastest modality and fastest method to load multiple images when reporting on an Integrated National PACS system Banatwala M, Timoney J, Torreggiani WC. Introduction: Nimis PACS is the National integrated computerised system in Ireland for reporting radiological images. As with any system, speed in downloading images is critical to functionality. This study aims to record and compare the actual time taken to load single studies in four modalities; Plain Film Radiographs (PFR), ultrasound (US), CT & MRI. It compares loading times opening single studies versus multiple studies cumulatively. In addition, it assesses if there is any temporal relation to time taken to load studies. Aims & Method: Data was collected over 4 days; 2 mornings and 2 afternoons. Image loading times were recorded for 80 PFRs, 40 USS, 40 CTs & 21 MRIs. The time taken from clicking "open study" to the first image appearing on-screen was recorded. Results: An average of 6.29, 4.05, 5.38 and 5.93 seconds were taken to load PFR, USS, CT and MRI images respectively. It took 6.88 seconds to open PFRs in the morning versus 5.96 seconds in the afternoon. The load times for opening 5 studies cumulatively for PFRs, US, CTs and MRIs were 9.87, 13.88, 3.85 and 2.53 seconds respectively. Conclusion: PFR take the longest time to load, followed by MRI, CT and last US. Studies load 0.92 seconds faster in the afternoon than in the morning. Loading five studies at a time versus opening one study at a time took longer for both PFRs and US but shorter for MRI and CT. Overall, it is faster loading 5 scans cumulatively than loading 5 scans separately for the same patient. Introduction: Over 10,000 new cases of skin cancer are diagnosed each year in Ireland, the National Cancer Registry has estimated that this number will double by 2040. We investigated the characteristics of patients and the histology of Squamous Cell Carcinoma (SCC) lesions removed at a plastic surgery clinic. Method: Patients (N=213) were selected from histology reports in County Roscommon Hospital and their records were analysed. Demographics, lesion site, and grade were recorded. Data analysis was carried out using SPSS. Results: There was a significant positive correlation between gender and anatomical site of lesions (r = 0.254, p = 0.000). There were significant negative correlations between the histological grade of a lesion and both patient gender and lesion site (r = -0.135, p =0.029 and r = -0.123, p = 0.047 respectively). However, there was no significant correlation between patient age and grade of a lesion (r = 0.058, p = 0.353), or between age and lesion site (r = 0.074, p = 0.235), nor was there a significant relationship between nursing-home residence and lesion grade [r = -0.031, p = 0.615, F (3, 257) = 1.507, p=0.213]. Conclusions: Male patients presented with SCC lesions at a more advanced stage, and were more likely to present with lesions of the head and neck compared to females. SCC lesions of the head and neck were more likely to be higher grade than lesions on the trunk or peripheries. Age and nursing-home residence did not significantly affect the grade or site of lesions. O'Connell BN 1 , Browne GM 2 1 Cork University Hospital, Wilton, Cork; 2 Mercy University Hospital, Grenville Place, Cork. Intern South Network Introduction: Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a common, serious complication hospital patients. Its prevalence is thought to be increasing due to the increasing age, comorbidities and increasing risk factors of patients. AKI is also a known independent risk factor for morbidity and mortality. However, our understanding of AKI epidemiology is limited and estimates of incidence and mortality in a national representative sample are lacking. Aim: Describe the incidence, mortality rates, basic demographics and risk factors of patients with a primary diagnosis of AKI in Ireland over the past 5 years. Methods: This is a descriptive, quantitative study. The Hospital Inpatient Enquiry (HIPE) database was accessed, and all patients with a discharge code of AKI as a primary diagnosis as per the International Classification of Disease 10 (ICD-10) codes from 2010-2014 were identified; n=7684. Death certificate data and census data were also obtained from the Central Statistics Office (CSO) for validity purposes. Analyses were carried out using SPSS. Results: The incidence of AKI was 0.25% and the mortality rate was 11.7%. 81.1% of AKI patients were >60 years old. Chronic kidney disease (CKD), sepsis, cancer and diabetes were the most common comorbid illnesses in patients with incidence rates of 30.8%, 19.0%, 13.1% and 12.5% respectively. CKD patients who developed AKI were more likely to be admitted to the intensive care unit than non-CKD patients (p=0.020). 12% of patients needed renal replacement therapy, and these patients had higher mortality rates (14.5vs.11.4%; p=0.006). There was no statistically significant difference between mortality rates per 100,000 population between HIPE and CSO data. Conclusion: AKI is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in Ireland and there are many common conditions which predispose patients to developing an AKI. Further studies including patients with secondary diagnoses of AKI are needed to assess its true burden. Antibiotic prophylaxis is the use of antimicrobial agents to prevent infection. It is one dose given within 60 minutes before skin incision, discontinued no later than 24 hours after surgery. The agent used is dependent on the procedure and multidrug resistant (MDR) status of the patient. Antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated in all clean-contaminated surgical procedures. These are defined as non-traumatic breaches of respiratory, alimentary or genitourinary tracts. Hospital antimicrobial guidelines vary from region to region to allow for variation in sensitivities and resistance. This audit was based on chapter 26 of the University Hospital Limerick (UHL) Antimicrobial Prescribing guidelines. Aims To determine whether at University Hospital Limerick (UHL) current antimicrobial guidelines on surgical prophylaxis were adhered to. Methods Data was collected on 172 patients operated on over a five-day period at UHL. Surgical patients were located using the theatre log book. Using a retrospective chart analysis, the following information was gathered: consultant, type of surgery, prophylaxis, duration, antibiotic given, dosing time, surgery start time, prolonged procedure, blood loss >1.5L and MDR status. Inclusion criteria: patients not currently on antibiotics all surgical patients operated on (14/11/16 to 18/11/16) Exclusion criteria: currently on antibiotics offsite procedures patients with MDR status Results Of a total 172 patients who underwent surgery, 103 (60%) had prophylactic antibiotics and 69 (40%) did not. The majority of patients who received prophylaxis underwent general/gastrointestinal surgery. In 70% of cases the appropriate antibiotic was given. Compliance with antibiotic dosage was 100%. Duration of antibiotic prophylaxis was compliant in 1 Introduction Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a leading cause of maternal mortality. Although the risk of VTE increases post-planned Caesarean section, there is no international consensus regarding thromboprophylaxis in this population. All women in Ireland receive Low Molecular Weight Heparin (LMWH) thromboprophylaxis in this setting. To determine the cost incurred to our healthcare system by our safe practice of administering LMWH to all women post-planned Caesarean section. 3 Method Risk assessments were performed on women undergoing planned Caesarean section according to the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists guideline. We analysed the time and manpower costs of implementing this risk scoring against potential monetary saving, to determine the cost incurred by our own safe practice. 4 Results We recruited 306 women undergoing planned Caesarean section. According to this risk score model, 248 women (81.1%) would have received LMWH, while 58 women (18.9%) would not. LMWH prophylaxis costs €19.04 per patient. The cost of time and manpower is 3.56 ± 1.51 minutes and €3.08 ± €1.31 per woman assessed. With 65,998 maternities and a Caesarean section rate of 14.8% nationally, there is a potential total saving of €5,189.79. This study demonstrates a minimal potential of monetary benefit to a stricter model. A further cost-benefit analysis determining the cost of a missed VTE event is needed to determine whether a stricter model would be cost-effective for our healthcare system. Davis S 1 , Mohammed A 2 1 Letterkenny University Hospital, West Northwest Intern Network; 2 Letterkenny University Hospital, Department of Medicine Introduction: Lumbar puncture is a commonly performed procedure in Emergency Departments and in hospital. Yet there are many potential complications associated with this procedure, which are important when consenting a patient. Case Presentation: A 48-year-old woman presented to hospital with headache, photophobia and neck stiffness on a background of flu-like illness 2 weeks preceding presentation. Initial CT Brain was normal, routine lumbar puncture failed to demonstrate evidence of infection. She was treated as a viral meningitis with conservative management. Photophobia and neck stiffness resolved, however her headache persisted and she received a second CT Brain which showed two subdural collections along the right frontoparietal area (7mm) and left frontoparietal area (5mm.) MRI Brain, MRI Spine, and MR Cerebral Angiogram demonstrated abnormal pachymeningeal enhancement intracranially and over the cord as well as subdural collections over the cerebral hemispheres bilaterally which generated a differential diagnosis of intracranial hypotension potentially secondary to CSF leak. On day 14 of admission her headache remained refractory to treatment and she developed vomiting. CT Brain at this time demonstrated deterioration of the subdural collection with effacement of prepontine, premedullary cisterns and cerebellar tonsillar descent of 8mm below the foramen magnum. She was subsequently transferred to Beaumont Hospital for urgent neurosurgical review and shunt. Discussion: Intracerebral hypotension secondary to CSF leak is an important potential complication caused by lumbar puncture. Intracerebral hypotension requires a high degree of clinical suspicion as it has a similar presentation to typical post-lumbar puncture headaches. Retrospective audit of the Peripherally Inserted Central Catheter (PICC) associated thrombosis in patients with haematological malignancies at Cork University Hospital. Peripherally inserted central catheters (PICC) are used for administration of chemotherapy, antibiotics and blood products in patients with haematological malignancies. Although generally regarded safe, infections and thrombotic events have occurred with PICC use, necessitating study to guide future management. AIM: 1) Determine the incidence of PICC associated thrombosis 2) To identify clinically significant risk factors contributing to these complications. MATERIALS, METHODS: Conducted in Cork University Hospital, between January 2010 and June 2015 all adult patients with PICC inserted under haematology were identified. A total of 90 patients with haematological malignancies who had PICC lines were included. Data was collected using proforma sheets including included patients demographs, malignancy types, PICC size, and duration of insertion. Haematological laboratory parameters were also recorded. The main outcome measures were PICC associated thrombosis and/or infection RESULTS: In total 90 patients received 131 PICCs. Of these total PICC episodes 28.2% developed complications (n=37) leading to removal. Thrombosis was found in 14.5% (n=19) and 13.7% developed infection (n=18). Of those with thrombosis (n=19), 7 patients had Multiple Myeloma and 6 had Acute Myeloid Leukaemia. Whereas those with PICC associated infection (n=18), 5 had Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and 5 had Acute Lymphoid Leukaemia. Diagnosis was significantly associated with complication (p=0.019). PICC removal due to complications was associated with increasing PICC lumen size; 30% of 5-French PICCs necessitated removal whereas 79.2% of 6-French PICCs necessitated removal (p=0.01). Increased PICC lumen size was associated with clinically evident thrombophlebitis; 30% of 5-French PICCs displayed thrombophlebitis vs. 77%of 6-French PICCs displayed thrombophlebitis (p=0.017). CONCLUSIONS: The risk of complications of PICC line insertion is relatively high in patients with haematological malignancies. Haematological diagnosis was significantly associated with complication risk. Increased PICC lumen size was associated with higher removal rates as a result of complications and clinical signs of thrombophlebitis. Elective caesarean sections (ELCS) carry higher risks of respiratory morbidity than vaginal delivery. This is significantly reduced after 39 weeks. NICE guidelines recommend ELCS should not be routinely carried out prior to 39 weeks. Aim The aim of this audit is to examine the timing of ELCS (CS4) at University Maternity Hospital Limerick (UMHL). In addition, to record indications for these deliveries; comparing those delivered prior to 39 weeks gestation with those who completed 39 weeks. Methods 1006 consecutive births between January and April 2016 were audited revealing 333 caesarean sections. Gestation, category, and indication were recorded through chart review. Results 50% (168) were CS4. Of these, 40% (67) occurred prior to 39 weeks gestation ranging from 34+6 to 38+6, the majority (44) falling in the 38th week . 8 cases of ELCS prior to 37 weeks were found, 5 of which were admitted to NICU (total of 7 in <39 week cohort). Previous CS was the most frequent indication both pre and post 39 weeks. Other indications followed similar patterns. In those delivered before 37 weeks none were due to previous CS. Conclusion At UMHL 60% of ELCS occur after 39 weeks revealing scope for improvement. Of those that do not achieve 39 weeks of gestation, most are delivered less than a week in advance for similar indications. This pattern may be due to capacity and scheduling limitations. In cases of very early ELCS (<37 weeks) the indications recorded vary greatly and it appears that underlying medical reasons for intervention are at play. Stroke is one of the leading causes of death and disability in Europe. Sligo University Hospital admits 200-250 patients annually with a diagnosis of acute stroke or TIA. As part of the National Stroke Programme, one of the KPI (Key Performance Indicators) is admission to an Acute Stroke Unit. On occasion, acute stroke patients are admitted to the ICU. We wished to explore this cohort's demographics, outcome measures and mortality. Methodology This was a retrospective review of electronic patient records from the ICU dataset. All patients, over 18 years, admitted with a primary diagnosis of acute stroke (both Ischaemic and Haemorrhagic), were included. Results Over a 22-month period (December 2014 to September 2016), there were 38 admissions to SUH ICU with an acute cerebral event, 18 with a primary diagnosis of acute stroke. Average age 68 (SD+/-11.5). Nine of these admissions were ischaemic (50%) and 9 haemorrhagic (50%). Of these 18 patients, 4 (22%) survived to be transferred to ward level care. Two patients were transferred to a tertiary centre (11%). Average length of stay in ICU varied between groups. Patients with ischemic strokes were admitted to ICU for an average of 8.23 days (SD+/-7). Those who survived stayed for an average of 11 days (SD=/-9). Haemorrhagic Stroke patients were admitted for an average of 2.2 days (SD=/-1.4). Conclusion Acute stroke is a common disabling illness in older adults. Strokes can be ischaemic or haemorrhagic, but the most common form is acute ischaemia, accounting for over 80%. In our study, the most severe strokes, were as likely to be haemorrhagic as ischaemic, and carried a mortality rate of 78%. As the next phase of our study we wish to explore, through qualitative research, the patient, carer and nursing experience of delivering care to a critically ill stroke patient in the ICU. Introduction: All women in Ireland between 25-60 years are eligible for regular, free cervical screening with any GP registered with Cervical Check.(1) While this has its own recall system, it has shortcomings, particularly for patients who might have changed addresses or who are lost to follow up for other reasons. Aim: Our aim was to determine the number of eligible patients who were due/ overdue their smear. Additionally, we hoped to increase uptake rates by implementing a fail-safe recall system to act as a 'second safety net'. Methods: Using the practice management system Socrates, we reported all female patients between 25-60 years [cohort of n=297]. A detailed chart review was conducted including; consultation notes, MedLab results, notes/ correspondence from any previous GP and smear eligibility status using the patient's PPS number on www.cervicalcheck.ie. This enabled us to determine the date of the patient's last smear, was this due or overdue and if due, had she been reminded of this in recent consultations. Any patients seen once in an on-call context were deemed ineligible. All data was inputted into Microsoft Excel to facilitate mail merge for newly drafted reminder letters to be sent to patients. To complete our audit cycle, we re-audited 1 year later in order to determine if our new recall system had resulted in improved uptake rates. Results: Of the 297 women eligible to be part of the screening programme, 100 (34%) had no evidence of a smear within the previous 3 or 5 years. Only 21 of those women had evidence in their consultation notes of a reminder by their GP. On re-auditing 1 year later, 56 (56%) of the women sent reminder letters had subsequently attended the practice for screening, with 3 women being referred onto colposcopy for treatment. Conclusion: The new recall system resulted in an increased screening uptake rate among patients. Introduction: The geri-orthopaedic population has a high mortality in surgery due to multiple co-morbidities and risk factors, which can all adversely affect their outcomes. Aims and Objectives: Assess patient risk factors in order to reduce mortality and identify causative factors. Method: The study investigation focuses on patients admitted to the orthopaedic service of Cork University Hospital in 2014. Patients 90 years of age or older were included in the study. After retrieving the sample from a HIPE database, search, and evaluation of the data collection sheet of potential parameters commenced. Statistical analysis and inclusion/ exclusion criteria were applied. Results: 69 patients were included in the study (N=69). Following this, Six independent variables were investigated: age, gender, type of treatment, type of fracture, length of hospital stay, and complications postoperatively. The full model containing all predictors was not statistically significant in predicting death at follow-up, χ 2 = 15.622 (p = 0.209, n = 69). There was an overall mortality rate of 21.7%. 15 patients in total. Those patients who did not survive, the experience of surgical complications was present in 86.7% of cases. Conclusions: Overall, there are no clear associations between mortality and age, gender, previous history of hip fracture, the type of presenting injury, or the treatment received in this sample. The subgroup of patients who had died at follow-up is very small (n=15). New measures and criteria need to be assessed to practically predict mortality in Hip fracture patients over 90 years. Introduction: Patellar instability, characterized by recurrent dislocation, is a disabling condition that limits the functional ability and physical aspirations of patients. There are multiple anatomical structures which stabilize the patella and surgical treatment is tailored to repair the underlying aetiology in each case. Aim: To evaluate the clinical and radiological outcome of patellar stabilization procedures in patients with patellar instability. Method: A total of 34 consecutive patients (36 knees) (mean age, 26.6; range, 17-43) with recurrent patellar instability who underwent patellar stabilization surgery from June 2009 to September 2014 were retrospectively included. Type of procedure was dependant on the concomitant aetiological factors and a combination of procedures was used when indicated: tibial tuberosity osteotomy (61.76%), MPFL reconstruction (67.64%), lateral release (5.88%) and trochleoplasty (2.94%). Mean follow-up was 3 years. Clinical results were evaluated using the IKDC and Lysholm scores as well as a subjective outcome regarding overall patient satisfaction. Patellar height, TT-TG distance and trochlear dysplasia were defined using plain radiographs and MRI. Results: At follow up, 77% of patients were satisfied with the overall outcome of the procedure. The mean IKDC score was 66.7 ± 19.63, Lysholm score 74.9 ± 20.16. The mean patellar height decreased significantly (P<.05) to anatomic values. Pre-operatively, the mean TT-TG distance was 14.66mm (range, 5.97-20.18) and 81% showed evidence of trochlear dysplasia. Complications were found in 4 patients (11.1%). Conclusion: Patellar stabilization surgery is an effective method of treating patellar instability, resulting in stability of the knee in 94.4%. Thorough pre-operative evaluation is imperative to ensure these patients are receiving the appropriate treatment. Patients should be counselled regarding the likelihood of return to strenuous physical activity. Inglis S 1 , Gunnigle S 1 , O'Connor D 2 , McCormack T 2 , Murray K 2 , Waldron B 2 1 Department of Surgery, University Hospital Kerry; South Intern Training Network; 2 Department of Surgery, University Hospital Kerry Introduction: Long-term therapy with antithrombotic agents is becoming more prevalent, with an increasing number of antiplatelet and oral anticoagulant (OAC) medications available. With the use of these medications comes the burden of their associated bleeding risks, including the increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding (GIB). Aim: To assess the role of antithrombotic therapy in acute GIBs presenting to an acute surgical unit over a 12-month period. Methods: A retrospective review of a prospectively maintained database of cases presenting to the emergency department with acute GIBs over a 12month period was undertaken. A chart review of those admitted under the department of surgery was then carried out and data recorded with regards to patient demographics, clinical presentation and management. Results: 92 patients presented to the emergency department with acute GIBs over the 12-month period. Of these cases, 44 (48%) presented while on antithrombotic therapy, with 30 (33%) presenting on antiplatelet agents, 21 (23%) on OACs, and 7 (8%) on concomitant antiplatelet and OAC therapy. Of those on anti-platelets, 80% were prescribed aspirin as a single agent, 7% clopidogrel, and 13% dual antiplatelet therapy. Rivaroxaban was the most common OAC prescribed (47.5%), followed by warfarin (28.5%), dabigatran (19%) and apixiban (5%). Upper and lower GIBs represented 45.7% and 43.4% of the total, respectively, with 10.9% remaining unclear in origin. Patients on antithrombotic therapy were older on average than those not on these medications (79 vs. 61, pvalue<0.001). The majority of patients identified were stable at presentation, with similar average systolic blood pressure (125 vs. 132, pvalue 0.23) and heart rate (87 vs. 92, pvalue 0.13) in those on antithrombotic therapy compared to those who were not. Conclusions: These data demonstrate that there was a significant prevalence of antithrombotic agents in patients presenting to an acute surgical service with a GIB. Further to this, we have demonstrated the rates with which various agents were encountered. While patients on these medications were older on average, there was little significant difference in clinical presentation when compared to those on no antithrombotic therapy. However, general surgeons with the responsibility of managing GIBs need to be aware of these agents in their day-to-day practice. A 40 year old Afro-Caribbean female presented with BP of 230/ 150mmHg, headache and syncope. She has attended this hospital for eight years with severe resistant hypertension, with systolic blood pressure rarely below 190mmHg and diastolic rarely below 115mmHg despite trials of methyldopa, minoxidil and hydralazine. She has negative investigations for secondary hypertension apart from very severe obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) and obesity (132kg). She has severe left ventricular hypertrophy with persistent tachycardia despite high dose beta blockade. Coronary angiogram and renal function are normal. There is a strong family history of cardiomyopathy, hypertension and cerebrovascular accidents. She has some retrognathia, severe chronic rhinitis and nasal obstruction and very crowded oropharynx. Her OSA was not controlled on CPAP in the past despite being on the maximal possible pressure setting of 20cmH2O. She is on Bi-PAP since 2012 with some improvement but still resistant hypertension. She has family and health insurance in USA and has had several prolonged hospitalisations in New York for evaluation. Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UVPP) was proposed in 2013 but she was deemed unfit due to hypertension. She had a permanent tracheostomy in July 2013. Her hypertension immediately improved (and of course her OSA). She felt much better but she developed MRSA infection and tracheal stricture. She had nasal surgery and UVPP followed by closure of the tracheostomy in July 2014. Her OSA and hypertension relapsed immediately. Gastric banding was considered, but rejected due to high anaesthetic risk. Her hypertension improved slightly on this admission with maximum dose labetelol and she was discharged. Her ENT surgeon in the USA is suggesting major facial surgery including jaw reconstruction. However before he will consider this her blood pressure has to be well controlled for up to one year. Unfortunately, her blood pressure is not going to be controlled unless her sleep apnoea can be controlled. Thus, it appears she is heading towards another tracheostomy. In the interim she is returning to the USA in February 2017 to have a gasterostomy tube inserted, as an attempted minimally invasive weight loss procedure. This case illustrates the importance of obstructive sleep apnoea as a cause of resistant hypertension and it should always be excluded in the appropriate clinical setting, particularly in obese patients. Introduction Metastatic Spinal Cord Compression (MSCC) is a welldocumented oncological emergency. MSCC as first presentation of cancer is documented to occur in up to 23% cancer patients. 1 Case Presentation A 46year-old man was urgently transferred to GUH orthopaedic service with bilateral lower limb numbness and inability to walk. He reported a three-week history of progressively worsening hoarseness, lower back pain, right hip pain and bilateral lower limb weakness. The patient also reported a long-standing productive cough, denying haemoptysis. He reported a decrease in appetite, without weight loss. The patient was an ex-smoker of 20 years, had no previous medical history and takes no regular medications. On examination, he had 2/5 lower limb power, diminished anal tone, intact perianal sensation, intact sensation to level of L4, brisk reflexes and positive Babinski sign bilaterally. MRI Spine revealed extradural spinal cord compression at level T8-T10. Pelvic x-ray showed a pathological fracture of right femoral neck. Further CT-imaging showed the suspect primary tumour, a 6.5x2.5cm right lower lobe necrotic lung mass with extensive metastases to the spine, lymph nodes, lungs, brain and left vocal cord involvement. The patient required surgical management. He underwent T6-T11 stabilization and T8-9 decompression of the spinal cord. Three-days later he underwent a right hemiarthroplasty. Post-operatively the patients symptoms improved. He regained power in lower limbs, scoring 4/5, and his anal tone returned to normal. Sensation was intact bilaterally and his plantar response returned to normal. The patient underwent intensive post-operative physiotherapy and regained his ability to walk. He then went onto undergo chemoradiotherapy to further manage his newly diagnosed metastatic lung cancer. Discussion Early diagnosis and surgical intervention plays a crucial role in the prevention of permanent neurological impairment in patients with metastatic spinal cord compression, with greater than 80% of patients maintaining or regaining their ambulatory capacity after surgical intervention. 2 Introduction 'Doctor, can you please come and review this patient who fell?' is a common request to non-consultant hospital doctors (NCHDs). All patients who fall in hospital must have a medical review (NICE 2015) however a medication review and a bone health review is not commonly performed. The aim of this study is to explore the KAP of NCHDs in the management of a patient in the immediate post-fall period in a large tertiary teaching hospital. Methods A convenience sample of medical and surgical NCHDs were invited to complete an online or paper questionnaire over a four-month period comprising the following constructs: injury identification, preventing further falls and improving bone health. The questionnaire comprised polar, Likert scale and open-ended questions. Descriptive statistics were used. Results Our respondents (n=108: Intern: 81%;SHO: 9%;Reg/SpR 10%) reported being confident in their assessment of a fall (mean 8/10) but were not satisfied with their standard of training (mean 4/10). Most NCHDs (>90%) routinely determine mechanism of fall, blackout, pain, vitals and head trauma. Between 60-70% of NCHDs do not routinely determine hip trauma, joint tenderness or ROM, use of anti-coagulants, visual symptoms, amnesia or vomiting. Importantly, the medication record is reviewed (65%) and high falls risk medications are identified (65%) frequently. However, 57% rarely or never rationalise medications. The main reasons for this are lack of knowledge (63%), time constraints (65%), benefits outweighing the risks (80%) and reluctance to interfere with care of another medical team (86%). Only 9% always consider bone health review. Implications It is clear that intern NCHDs require more comprehensive training in post-fall assessment particularly hip assessment; neurological assessment; and medication rationalisation. Understanding falls prevention KAP of NCHDs is an important first-step in the development of education programmes and quality improvement initiatives to modify NCHD behaviours in the immediate post-fall period. A rare case of Pyrexia of unknown origin -Case report Hamid T 1 , Ali U 2 , Lee T 2 1 Medical Intern, MGH; 2 Geriatric Medicine Dept, MGH Introduction: Pyrexia of unknown origin is defined as temperature greater than 38.3°C on several occasions of more than 3 weeks duration, hence failure to reach a diagnosis despite obligatory investigations. Haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is one of rare causes of pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO). It is a rapidly progressive, lifethreatening syndrome of excessive immune activation. Prompt diagnosis and treatment for HLH is essential for the survival of affected patients. If left untreated, patients with HLH survive for only a few months, due to progressive multi-organ failure. Case presentation: We present a 75-year-old female referred by a General Practitioner for on and off febrile illness with fatigue, lethargy, nausea, vomiting and weight loss. Her past medical history involves dermatomyositis (well controlled on Tacrolimus and Imuran), convulsive episodes, ischaemic heart disease, leucopenia secondary to immunosuppressive therapy, otitis externa, cystitis and urinary tract infection. Her physical examination was normal and initial investigations were inconclusive. Further investigations showed cytopenia, high Ferritin and LDH levels. Other abnormal investigations and findings were Hypofibrinogenemia, Hyponatremia due to SIADH and mild Hypotension. Patient was transferred to Galway Hospital for specialist opinion and bone marrow biopsy which was inconclusive. HLH was suspected as the most likely diagnosis. Therefore, bone marrow biopsies were repeated which confirmed HLH, therefore treatment was commenced immediately. Discussion: Often, the greatest barrier to treatment and a successful outcome for individuals with HLH, is a delay in diagnosis. Reasons for delay in diagnosis include vague clinical presentation, rarity of the condition, limited numbers of studies and the lack of a specific diagnostic test. Therefore, it is important to consider HLH in any patient with PUO. Hence acutely ill patients or patients with suspected HLH should be referred immediately to a haematologist and a facility where they can receive HLH therapy without further delay. Appendicitis: more costly than you thought! Introduction Acute appendicitis is a commonly encountered surgical emergency. Currently, there is no diagnostic imaging protocol; it remains a clinical diagnosis. This uncertainty can lead to histo-pathologically normal appendices being removed-termed the negative appendisectomy rate (NAR). This audit aims to quantify the use of imaging in the diagnosis of appendicitis, to examine the values of inflammatory markers in appendicitis, to calculate the negative appendisectomy rate (NAR) and to calculate the average length of stay and the average cost of stay for appendisectomy in this period. Methods Data on all patients who underwent appendisectomies in University Hospital Waterford from January 2016 to September 2016 was collected. Retrospective analysis was carried out on C-reactive protein levels, white cell count, imaging findings and histopathology reports for each patient. Data was analysed using Microsoft Excel. 190 appendisectomies were carried out in the timeframe. 97 (51%) were men, 145 had positive histology for appendicular pathologies and 42 had negative histopathology reports, producing a NAR of 22%. Average WBC and CRP for the positive appendicitis histology were 13 and 53, and 10.2 and 49 for negative appendicitis histology. 36 patients underwent CT imaging and 65 patients underwent ultrasound imaging to aid diagnosis. 2 patients had mucinous neoplasm, 2 had adenocarcinoma and 3 had enterobium vermicular reported. The average length of stay was 4 days (range 1-284) and the mode was 2 days. The average cost of stay was 6197.37 (range 1250-35500) Euro. The average cost of appendicitis overall is 8697.37. The negative appendisectomy rate seen in this audit is similar to current international standards and other Irish institutions. 1 The cost of appendicitis is significant within the Irish Health system. Accurate and timely diagnosis is essential to reduce the NAR and length of stay. A 27-year-old male presented to the Mater Emergency Department with a 1/52 history of exertional dyspnoea, palpitations, productive cough, night sweats, and rigors on a background of ongoing cocaine use. Initial investigations showed deranged liver enzymes with radiographic evidence of cardiomyopathy and an ejection fraction of 15% on transthoracic ultrasound. Coronary angiogram showed normal coronary arteries. However, a right suprarenal mass was visualised on abdominal ultrasonography. Urinary catecholamines and adrenal imaging [MRI, CT, MIBG] confirmed the diagnosis of catecholamine-induced cardiomyopathy secondary to pheochromocytoma. The patient was admitted for management with alpha-& beta-blockade prior to right adrenalectomy. Full investigation for metastases (CT TAP, MIBG] and related conditions (TFTs, Calcitonin, Sestamibi scan) returned negative. At induction of anaesthesia, he suffered a cardiac arrest. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed for 25 minutes with intensive care support in the form of Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation. The adrenalectomy was completed the following day with ECMO support. His post-operative course was complicated by a right cerebellar/ brainstem ischaemic infarction and lower respiratory tract infection. He was discharged 3 weeks post-operation. At three-year follow-up, he is clinically stable on Ramipril 7.5mg OD and Bisoprolol 5mg OD with an ejection fraction of 50%. Genetic screening did not identify a mutation. This audit was undertaken to review the standard of inpatient prescriptions written by medical doctors in the paediatric unit of University Hospital Limerick. Correct prescribing is essential to patient safety and wellbeing. A prior audit was done in December 2015 and results were compared. Aim The aim of the audit is to examine current standards of safe prescribing, with the objective to raise awareness of safe prescribing. Methods and sampling A total of fifty kardexes were selected at random and examined on the Sunshine and Rainbow wards in November. Results -General Addressograph sticker: 100% (n = 50). Weight recorded: 100% (n = 50). Admission date recorded: 84% (n = 42), up from 80%. Allergy status recorded: 92% (n = 46), up from 78%. Patient name on every used page: 28% (n = 14) down from 54%. Patient chart number on every used page: 16% (n = 8) down from 54%. Results -Drugs Generic name used: 80% (n = 152), up from 78%. Dose clearly stated: 92% (n = 179), down from 100%. Frequency clearly stated: 88% (n = 171), down from 93%. Route clearly stated: 95% (n = 184), same at 95%. Start date: 97% (n = 189), up from 83%. Prescriber's name in block capitals: 19% (n = 37), up from 0%. Conclusion While many areas are improving, others have worsened, particularly patient identification on every used page. Main areas to improve on are identifying all individual pages in a drug Kardex, use of generic names and clear, and legible prescription signatures. Recommendations Re-education of medical and nursing staff re proper prescribing protocol and re-audit in November 2017. Margiotta F b , Ni Laighin C a , Mc Guane C a , Ismail MR a , Ismail KI a , Imcha M a a University Maternity Hospital Limerick, Limerick, Ireland; b West North West Intern Network NICE guidelines recommend Full Blood Count (FBC) as a routine preoperative test for Caesarean Section (CS) 1, 2 . We aimed to audit local practice of pre-and post-op Haemoglobin (Hb) testing and explore the Estimated Blood Loss (EBL) recorded during the same procedures. 100 elective (CS4) and 100 emergency caesarean sections (CS1, CS2, CS3) performed between January and April 2016 were studied. CS category and EBL were obtained by chart review. Pre-op and post-op Hb was obtained from the laboratory online system. Pre-op Hb was available in almost 100% of cases. Post-op Hb was checked in 91% of emergency CS, rising to 96% for elective. The mean pre-op Hb for all categories of CS was 11.8 g/dL, while post-op Hb was 10.6 g/dL. Post-op Hb was taken on average 1 day post-op. There was a significant difference between pre-op and post-op levels of Hb across all categories with a mean drop of 1.5. A significant difference (p<0.001) was also observed between the drops in Hb recorded in emergency and elective categories. There was a significant difference (p=0.007) between mean blood loss estimates in Emergency and Elective CS. Estimates were highest for CS1 (mean 681), and lowest for CS4 (mean 523). In this sense, EBL reflected the general trend indicated by the hb levels recorded. In conclusion, NICE recommendations for pre-op FBC was met in all elective CS and in all but one emergency CS. Post-op testing was also achieved in most cases. Post-op Hb levels were significantly lower after all CS. The drop in Hb levels seen in emergency settings was significantly higher than during elective surgery. EBL were higher in emergency CS compared to elective The Galway Races is a horse-racing festival held in Galway, Ireland every year starting the last Monday of July. The festival is popular amongst locals and tourists with several events held in town. OBJECTIVE To determine whether toxicology related presentations to the UHG ED are more frequent during Race Week and how they compare to toxicology related presentations during a week with no special events. METHODS All intoxicated patients from 25/07/2016 -31/07/2016 were identified retrospectively. Intoxication included alcohol, illicit, prescription and OTC drugs. The ED notes were then reviewed. Intoxicated patients from the control week from 01/08/2016 -07/08/2016 were also identified retrospectively and the ED notes reviewed. RESULTS There were 76 toxicology related presentations to UHG ED during Race Week (6.4% of 1189 registered patients) and 25 toxicology related presentations during the control week (2.3% of 1102 registered). During Race Week, the majority of presentations were due to alcohol intoxication only (N=65, 86%), most patients were in their 20s or 30s (34% and 21% respectively) and 46 (61%) were male. 44 of the presentations occurred between midnight and 06:00. During the control week, alcohol intoxication accounted for the majority of presentations (N=15, 60%), the majority of patients were in their 20s or 40s (28% and 28% respectively) and 17 (68%) were male. CONCLUSION/RECOMMENDATIONS This audit confirms that Toxicology related presentations to UHG ED increase exponentially during the Race Week. There is a need for increased staffing and vigilant bed management to counter the increased number of patients. St. Vincent's University Hospital, UCD Intern Network 2 Midlands Regional Hospital Tullamore Abstract Retropharyngeal haematoma is an uncommon occurrence, which may cause rapid life-threatening airway obstruction 1,2 . This rare entity has a number of different causes including cervical-spine trauma 3 , intra-thyroid bleeding 4 , rheumatoid arthritis 5 , surgery 6, parathyroid adenoma 7 and foreign body ingestion 8 . It may also occur spontaneously in patients with bleeding diathesis and those on anticoagulation therapy 9 . We report a case of spontaneous retropharyngeal haematoma in a 52-year-old female. She presented in May 2013 with progressive dysphagia following a meal, which included a fish finger. She strongly denied ingesting fish bone. None of the aforementioned causes were present. Her medication list was noted to contain daily aspirin (75mg) and she has a known history of hypertension. On clinical examination she was notably anxious but there were no signs of respiratory distress and her vital signs were stable. The right side of her neck was tender with no evident swelling, neck mass or crepitus. She was Capp's triad sign negative. CT imaging revealed an extensive retropharyngeal fluid collection (20cm x 6.5 cm), which tracked inferiorly to the right superior mediastinum, down to the level of the carina, displacing the oesophagus to the left for which drainage was radiologically advised. Procedure: A longitudinal neck incision along the anterior border of the right sterno-mastoid muscle was used to reach a large retropharyngeal and mediastinal haematoma. The patient's symptoms were successfully relieved via drainage within 48 hours. She was asymptomatic at 2 and 4 weeks post-operatively. Discussion: This case is unique for the lack of classic causes of retropharyngeal haematoma. The patient had no history of trauma or foreign body ingestion. Arguably, the only significant risk factors for this extensive bleed were hypertension and aspirin therapy. Absence of an obvious, congruent history can make diagnosis of this life-threatening condition difficult. Nevertheless, acute progressive dysphagia requires emergency investigation. Clinical details: Following this, referral was made to the Rotunda for further scanning. USS in the Rotunda at 25+5 did not reveal an obvious foetal anatomical abnormality, although profile views showed a flattened foetal face. On repeat scan in the Rotunda at 34+5, 3D evaluation showed an abnormal profile with a strong suspicion of micrognathia, making a diagnosis of Stickler syndrome likely. The decision was made to transfer care to the Rotunda, to allow for optimal neonatal management, specifically the potential complications of a difficult neonatal airway. Discussion: Stickler Syndrome, also known as hereditary progressive arthro-opthalmopathy, is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder of connective tissue, affecting an estimated 1/7500 newborns (1) . It results in orofacial deformities, ocular manifestations, hearing loss and joint problems. Affected individuals characteristically display a flattened facial appearance and often the Pierre-Robin sequencecleft palate, glossoptosis and micrognathia. Stickler syndrome has 5 subtypes, with Type 1 (STL1) responsible for approx. 70% of reported cases (2) . The most common mutated gene is the collagen gene COL2A1. The mutation in this case was carried on the paternal side. Antenatal diagnosis primarily involves ultrasonography, and in certain familial cases, genetic testing. For those displaying the Pierre-Robin sequence, the mother may present with polyhydramnios, which should prompt investigation for a foetal swallowing difficulty. On detailed anatomy scans, profile views can reveal the flattened facial appearance and micrognathia. Genetic testing can also be performed, by chorionic villus sampling or on amniotic fluid (3) . It can be useful in certain familial cases, when the pathogenic variant is known (4) An 11 year review of the changing prevalence of Pre-eclampsia in the East of Ireland R Horgan, C Monteith, L McSweeney, E Kent Background: Pre-eclampsia (PET) remains one of the leading direct causes of maternal death and is defined by RCPI as the presence of Hypertension (a systolic BP >140mmHg or a diastolic BP > 90mmHg) and proteinuria > 1+ on urinalysis. PET is internationally quoted to affect 2-3% of all pregnancies, rising to 5-7% in nulliparous women. With the increase in maternal age, body mass index and co-morbidities affecting individual risk we sought to assess if there was a local change in the incidence of PET. Methods: This is a retrospective review performed of two Dublin tertiary maternity units (Rotunda and Coombe) via interrogation of the annual reports between 2004-2014. Data from the National Maternity hospital was excluded as comparable data was unavailable. Results: During the study period a total of 181,329 women were delivered of whom 7755 (4.2 %) had a pregnancy complicated by PET. We noted a fall in the overall incidence during the study period of total pregnancies affected by PET from a peak of 5.8% in 2006 falling to 2.6% in 2013. When assessing the rates in nulliparous women alone the overall rate was 4.6% for the 11 year study period. There was a similar reduction from a peak of 5.3% in 2005 to a trough of 3.3% in 2014. Discussion: Despite anticipating a potential rise in PET rates due to increases in known risk factors such as advancing maternal age, BMI and complex co-morbidites. This study has demonstrated the converse with a reduction in our PET rates. Eisaka A 1 , Anjum S 2 , Stack J 3 , Barry, M 4 . Cryopyrin Associated Periodic Fever Syndrome (CAPS) is a rare multisystem disease associated with a mutation in NLRP3 gene (1) . This case demonstrates a patient attending James Connolly Memorial hospital with recurrent exacerbations of multisystem symptoms over a 15 year period, whom subsequently was diagnosed with CAPS. Case Description: Patient X, a 48 year old female, presented in 2012 with recurring symptoms over the preceding 13 years of fatigue, arthralgias of small and large joints of upper and lower limbs, with an associated skin rash on trunk and limbs, and xerostomia. On initial investigations she had raised inflammatory markers and a Neutrophilia, despite a negative autoimmune screen. An initial diagnosis of Connective Tissue Disease was made. She was initiated on immunosuppressant medications, initiating with Steroids and then adding Hydroxychloroquine, Methotrexate, and Etanercept from which all failed except Prednisolone. Subsequently, she developed blurred vision and a persistent global headache. On review in JCMH, examination revealed papilloedema with raised opening pressure of an otherwise normal LP. She was commenced on Acetazolamide with no improvement. She was given diagnosis of Benign Intracranial Hypertension and underwent VP shunting in Beaumont Hospital. During this admission a skin biopsy revealed urticaria and a temporal artery biopsy showed no evidence of giant cell inflammation. In 2014, she developed sensorineural hearing loss and was started on Rituximab. Despite a 6 month course, no improvement was noted. Further PET CT revealed increased bone marrow activity diffusely and mild increase in uptake in the femoral and popliteal arteries bilaterally. MRI of both hips showed multiple bilateral infarcts of distal femurs. At this point in 2015 auto-inflammatory/periodic syndromes were considered. Genetic tests were sent which came back positive for NLRP3 gene mutation consistent with CAPS. Discussion: This case report outlines the diagnostic and treatment challenges that present when facing a rare and complex case. It highlights how the advances in genetic testing and new biologic treatments can significantly improve patient outcomes. IL-1 inhibitors now have become the treatment of choice for CAPS such as Canakinumab (Anti 1L-β) and Rilonacept (IL-1 trap) infusions every 2 months. 1. Diagnostic criteria for cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS) -Jasmin B Kuemmerle-Deschner 1 Abstract: The international best practice for length of stay post-total laparoscopic hysterectomy (TLH) in a tertiary gynaecology oncology referral centre is currently 1-2 nights. We proposed analysing discharge patterns with reference to this international practice among 100 consecutive patients undergoing TLH in an Irish tertiary referral centre to identify if Irish standards correlate. The study analysed 100 consecutive TLHs performed in the Mater Misericordiae University Hospital for length of stay, age, BMI, surgical indication, and whether histology was benign or malignant. Data from our internal patient database was then used to identify reasons for prolonged length of stay. Of 100 cases analysed, 57 were malignant while 43 were benign. 44% of benign cases were risk reducing. Only 18% of patients stayed 1 night. The range of stay was 1 -12 nights, mean stay 2.8 nights and median stay 2 nights. Of those who stayed more than 1 night the causes were as follows: 57% no cause cited; 17% pain; 7% infection; 7% anticoagulation; 4% patient preference; 3% major complications; 3% drug reactions; 2% nausea. Mean length of stay for TLHs indicated for malignancy was 3.2 nights versus 2.3 nights for benign cases. Mean length of stay for risk reducing surgery was 1.7 nights. The mean length of stay post-TLH currently exceeds international best practice. Optimizing postoperative pain control seems to be of predominant importance in reducing duration of stay. Indeterminable causeswhich we extrapolate are most likely due to patient preference rather than clinical indication -merit further investigation. We have begun distributing patient information leaflets which clearly delineate expected standard length of stay pre-operatively and plan to re-audit 6 months post-introduction. Haemolytic Uraemic Syndrome: a 3 county 5 case series in 24 days Sharkey C 1 , Twomey J 1 1 Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital Limerick. Mid-West Intern Training Network Introduction: Haemolytic Uraemic Syndrome (HUS) is a microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia documented as a triad of thrombocytopenia, haemolytic anaemia and acute renal failure. Although recognised as one of the most common causes of acute renal failure in children, the incidence rate in Ireland is relatively low at just 2.41 cases per 100,000 children per year. 1 Case presentation: We present a case series of 5 children who, over a 24 day period, presented to a regional paediatric unit and were all subsequently diagnosed with HUS. Geographically, these cases spanned a considerable distance over 3 counties. Patients aged between 11months and 8 years. Amongst the cohort were two siblings, whose only identifiable risk factor was a visit to a petting farm prior to admission, with the remaining cases having had no obvious exposure to recognised risk factors. All five patients had diarrhoea associated HUS (VTEC positive, varying strains), four presenting with bloody diarrhoea. Central, colicky abdominal pain was an additional presenting complaint in two patients, vomiting in three with associated decreased oral intake. Reduced urine output was reported in two. Worryingly, one child had had no urine output in 24 hours. All five patients ultimately required transfers to tertiary paediatric units. Four of these patients required peritoneal dialysis, two required ICU admissions, indicating the severity of the disease. Conclusion: This case series details an unexpected and, to date, a largely unexplained surge in a serious childhood disease in a regional setting. It also highlights the diversity of presentation, clinical course and treatment options in HUS. At present, there is no local guideline for the management of HUS which may need to be reviewed. The speciality of Anaesthesia commenced in 19th century with the use of ether. Despite more than 100 years of practice, the speciality remains relatively unknown amongst the general population. Numerous studies from across the world have reported a lack of knowledge of Anaesthesia and the role of the anaesthetist in the hospital (1, 2) . Data from a tertiary referral centre in Ireland also show limited perception (3) . We wish to evaluate whether this applies to a hospital setting in rural Ireland. Aim: To understand the general population's perception of Anaesthesia and the role of the anaesthetist in a peripheral hospital in Ireland. Method: Data was collected from 100 postoperative patients via an anonymous questionnaire. A written consent was obtained by the principle investigators prior to filling the questionnaire. The cohort included all patients above 18 years of age who have had recent surgery, in Mayo University Hospital requiring general anaesthesia. Results: The results of our survey showed a poor understanding among respondents to the role of the anaesthetist in their care. Only 54% knew the anaesthetist was a type of doctor, with 18% unaware that they played a role after the initial administration of the anaesthetic. A mere 15% knew that the anaesthetist played a role in the decision to give blood, despite the possibility of blood products being explained when consent was obtained for the procedure. 64% of patients expressed an interest in learning more about the role of the anaesthetist, with 96% of these saying an information leaflet at preoperative assessment would be beneficial. Conclusions: Our results clearly demonstrated a lack of awareness among patients going for surgery to the role of the Anaesthetist. We also showed a majority (64%) would like to know more about the specialty. In the future we hope to create an information leaflet, hand it out at the preoperative clinics, and re-audit post operative patients. Staphylococcus aureus is a gram-positive cocci, usually seen in clusters. It is commonly implicated in soft tissue infections and osteomyelitis but rarely associated with polymyositis. We report the case of a 50-year old lady with a background history of hypertension and depression who initially presented to the emergency department with left shoulder pain. She was tender with reduced range of movement and she was discharged home with a diagnosis of a rotator cuff injury. She represented back to hospital after one week with an increase in intensity of the pain and a new swelling around the sternoclavicular joint. This swelling extended down to the left breast and up the neck towards the left temporomandibular joint. There was associated erythema around the sternoclavicular joint. She was commenced on high doses of benzylpenicillin and flucloxacillin. An ultrasound scan revealed marked subcutaneous oedema and inflammatory changes overlying the left sternoclavicular joint and extending into the neck and chest with evidence of myositis. CT neck and thorax showed septic arthritis of the sternoclavicular joint and myositis. She deteriorated and flucloxacillin was changed to vancomycin. There was concern of necrotizing fasciitis, due to the extent of the infection, and she was seen by plastics, orthopaedic, cardiothoracic and ear, nose and throat surgeons. Clindamycin and tazocin were added. Blood cultures grew methicillin sensitive staphylococcus aureus and she was switched to flucloxacillin and clindamycin with clinical improvement. MRI neck showed an inflammatory phlegmon centred on the left sternoclavicular joint with associated myositis of the adjacent left pectoralis and sternocleidomastoid muscles. Inflammatory markers improved on antibiotics and she was discharged home on cefazolin through outpatient parenteral antibiotic therapy programme. This case illustrates the unpredictability and unusual presentation of staphylococcus aureus infections. It also highlights the importance of cooperation between different disciplines on improving patients' outcomes. Introduction: ISBAR (Identify-Situation-Background-Assessment-Recommendation) is a framework that is often used to plan and structure communication. It is known that suboptimal communication may compromise patient safety 1 , and the ISBAR technique allows us to focus our communication and is useful in preventing the omission of vital information 2 . Aims: We hypothesize that the ISBAR framework is under-utilized and as a consequence, communication of vital information may be omitted. We aim to determine the rates of compliance with the use of the ISBAR communication and which subsections are most commonly left out. Methods: The interactions of 52 phone calls were noted by the call receiver (interns, SHOs and RMOs) and assessed to determine whether or not they fulfilled the criteria a) identification of the caller, call receiver and identifying the patient b) introducing the situation at hand, c) giving a background of the case, d) offering an assessment which may include a summary of the relevant information and e) offering or requesting a recommendation. These were noted immediately after the termination of the phone call and collated in a database using Microsoft excel. Results: Of the 52 calls, 27% (n=14) were deemed to have fulfilled all of the elements of ISBAR communication. The most commonly omitted subsection was supplying a background, with only 42% of calls (n=22) containing this information. Most calls identified the situation and requested a recommendation (87%, n=45 and 83%, n=43 respectively). 73% (n=38) included an assessment. Notably, only 52% of calls included an identification of the caller (n=27). Conclusions: We have found that the calls included in this study rarely contained all elements of the ISBAR communication framework. This may lead to errors in communication and ultimately compromise patient care. We plan to perform a re-audit after completing an information session on ISBAR in an effort to promote effective communication techniques. 2. Hohenhaus, S., Powell, S., and Hohenhaus, J.T. Enhancing patient safety during hand-offs: standardized communication and teamwork using the 'SBAR' method. Am J Nurs. 2006; 106 (72A-72B) *co-first authors A 3 month evaluation of routine TSH level testing of patients admitted to an Irish private Hospital -An analysis of over 2300 individuals Marmion C, Yates A, Coen S, Bonnet F, Griffin M Abstract Introduction: Thyroid disease is common in the community and thyroid function tests are the commonest endocrine assay performed in the laboratory. Hypothyroidism is the most common endocrine disease affecting 5% of the population. Published data in regard to the appropriateness of thyroid hormone replacement therapy (THRT) doses shows a disappointing number of patients achieving euthyroid status which is the biochemical goal of therapy. Preliminary data from the Beacon Hospital suggests that over 20% of all thyroid function tests performed in our laboratory are not within normal range and this warrants further exploration. Methods and Materials: The Beacon Hospital admission database was queried to identify all patients currently on THRT during a 3 month period . We compared this with the laboratory data base to record who had routine TSH levels performed on admission. Of those admissions with abnormal TSH, their records were examined to identify a change in Levothyroxine dose or an endocrinology review. Results: There were 2368 admissions during the 3 month period. 221 (9.33%) of those were on Levothyroxine for THRT. 78 (35.29%) of the patients on THRT had routine TSH levels tested on admission. 61 (78.20%) had a TSH level within normal range. 17 (21.79%) had abnormal TSH results. Of those with abnormal TFT'S, 5 of 17 (29.41%) had their dose of levothyroxine altered, and 4 of 17 (23.53%) had an endocrinology review. One had a normal TSH on repeat TFT's. One of the patient's charts was of unknown location, and one patient was RIP before a dose alteration or endocrinology consult could be done. Conclusion: The majority of patients on THRT did not have routine TSH levels on admission. Routine TSH levels on admission led to beneficial therapeutic changes or expert review in only one tenth of the patients tested. Results: A total of 1116 intern tasks were recorded over 30 days. The top four most common requests were; 1. Chart Medications 28% (n=314), 2. IVC 20% (n=224), 3. Patient Reviews 19.6% (n=219) and 4. Phlebotomy 16% (n=182). Of the 314 requests to Chart Medications, 20% (n=62) were for intravenous fluids (IVF), 18% (n=56) insulin, 16% (n=51) analgesia, 7.3% (n=23) night sedation, 7% (n=22) laxatives, 6.7% antibiotics (n=21) and 5.7% (n=18) warfarin. Of Patient Reviews, a breakdown of 241 conditions were identified; 14% pyrexia (n=33), 12% blood pressure related (n=29), 10% pain (n=24), 9.5% abnormal lab values (n=23) and 7.5% high early warning score (n=18). Of note within Phlebotomy there were 42 vancomycin levels, 15 blood bank requests and 14 as part of serial data. Conclusion: The findings of this research highlight the most common oncall requests for interns at UHL. This will provide a useful guide to enhance training of future interns. We would recommend that similar studies be repeated on a larger scale, including other hospital sites. This case report illustrates the presentation of a 26 year old gentleman who had a two to three year history of palpitations that occurred regularly, lasted a prolonged period of time and which occurred with exercise. He had no medical history of note and no family history of sudden death or congenital cardiac abnormalities. ECG showed evidence of preexcitation. Transthoracic ECHO estimated a left ventricular ejection fraction of 20% and the presence of a dyskinetic septum. Right ventricular ejection fraction was also assessed and was found to be decreased. Further cardiac MRI assessment reported atria of normal size and volume with normal valves, however both end diastolic volume and end systolic volumes were increased to 297mL and 208mL respectively. He was diagnosed with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome and dilated cardiomyopathy. This case presents a conundrum in establishing the precipitating cause of decreased cardiac function; did the dilated cardiomyopathy cause the WPW or vice versa? Learning points of this case include diagnosis and management of Wolff-Parkinson-White as well as diagnosis and management of dilated cardiomyopathy in a young male with no concurrent co-morbidities. In 2008 The Royal College of Surgeons of England published a list of guidelines that outlined the relevant information that a good quality postoperative note should include. Tallaght Hospital relies on hand written post-operative notes for trauma and orthopaedic surgery with headings for the date, surgeon, assistant, theatre assistant and signature. The purpose of this study was to assess compliance with the recommended guidelines in a cohort of post-operative notes. Methods Over a three month period 50 post-operative notes were audited in terms of the RCSEng guidelines of date and time, elective/emergency, names of surgeon and assistant, name of theatre assistant, operative procedure, incision, operative diagnosis, operative findings, problems/complications, extra procedure and reason for same, tissue removed/added/altered, prosthesis and serial numbers, closure technique, anticipated blood loss, DVT prophylaxis, detailed post-operative care instructions, and signature. The overall legibility of the notes was assessed as was the grade of the doctor who wrote the notes. Results All notes recorded the procedure and date performed but none recorded the time it took place. The pre-operative diagnosis was not recorded in 66% of cases. While 86% of notes recorded the incision used, only 40% documented the operative findings. In 15% of notes the prosthesis implanted was not identified and only 10% of signatures were accompanied by the authors' MCRN. No notes audited recorded the anticipated blood loss but 92% documented the closure technique employed. The adherence to the RCSEng note guidelines remains variable. This variability appears to be constant between grades of the doctors writing the notes. In an era of increasing accountability and litigation it is essential that all practitioners are advised of the RCSEng guidelines and that all efforts are made to ensure maximal compliance. Al Rubayawi A.S, Aslam A, Nath N.D, Harding B West North West Intern Network, Portiuncula University Hospital Introduction: Duodenal diverticulum is the 2 nd most common diverticula involving the Gastrointestinal tract. The true incidence is unknown and only 10% are symptomatic. Acute symptoms include melena, severe abdominal pain, jaundice and vomiting. Chronic complaints are related to stasis-induced steatorrhea and intractable abdominal pain. Case presentation: A 78 year-old-male was brought by ambulance from a nursing home to the Emergency Department with epigastric pain, lethargy for 4 days and one episode of vomiting. He had no nausea, change in bowel habits, weight loss or any stigmata of a gastrointestinal bleeding. He was an ex-smoker with a 75 pack year history and had a significant previous alcohol use. He had an unremarkable examination except for mild epigastric tenderness. His bloods showed significant increase in serum amylase, deranged liver enzymes tests as well as raised white cell count with a neutrophilia. The Glasgow score of 2 for acute pancreatitis was calculated, for age and raised WCC. His CT abdomen illustrated two large duodenal diverticula measuring up to 5 cm in diameter with periluminal inflammatory and infective changes concerning for duodenitis. The uncinate process of pancreas showed some peri-pancreatic fat stranding, suggesting pancreatitis. Severe diverticulosis of the sigmoid was also noted. He was resuscitated adequately and supportive management and antibiotics were started. Discussion: A diverticulum is a herniation of mucosal and submucosal bowel wall layers through a muscular defect. Two types of Diverticulum exist; True and Intraluminal diverticulum. A true diverticulum is an acquired herniation of mucosal and submucosal bowel wall layers through a muscular defect. 70% of true diverticula are located medially in the 2 nd part of duodenum and 26% in 3 rd and 4 th part of the duodenum. Its complications are rare but may be very severe such as mass effect on adjacent structures, inflammation in the ampullary region, jaundice, acute pancreatitis, intestinal obstruction, diverticulitis, perforation and GI haemorrhage Background: VTE is a common preventable cause of morbidity and mortality in hospitalised medical patients. These patients, often with one or more risk factors, have an overall 8 increased risk of developing VTE during or post hospital admission.Timely and appropriate VTE Thromboprophylaxis is an important quality indicator of Hospital performance. Health Care workers are well positioned to become active leaders and innovatory responsive in reducing human suffering. A VTE Thromboprophylaxis audit was conducted to determine the practice pattern in Sligo University Hospital. Objectives: To determine administration of VTE prophylaxis in medically admitted patients and compare to Sligo University Hospital Guidelines. Criteria/Standards: Guideline for VTE thromboprophylaxis from time of admission into Hospital from ED/AAU Methodology :This retrospective audit was undertaken on patients who presented to the Hospital between the 4 th October and 4 th November 2016 (100 cases). Data was collected on the administration of VTE Thromboprophylaxis. The data was collected by two SHO's and 1 Intern using a Performa. Data was analyzed and a report was compiled by the Clinical Audit Support Team (CAST). Results: 100 patients were recruited with a male to female ratio of 56:44. The mean age was 69.9 years. 55% of patients were audited on day 1 of their admission with that figure rising to 80% by day 5. The audit identified 96 ( 96%) patients with 1 or more risk factors for VTE. A total of 71 ( 73.9%) of the at-risk patients were indicated for VTE therapy, 66 ( 68.7%) for thromboprophylaxis, 5 (5.2%) for therapeutic treatment. Of the 71 indicated for treatment, 61 ( 85.9%) were receiving treatment as per guidelines Conclusion: 85 (85%) patients were found to be correctly following Sligo University Hospital guidelines in terms of correct type, dosage and appropriate indication for thromboprophylaxis. While high, there is much opportunity for improvement. Introduction: Anterior urethral injuries can result from blunt trauma to the perineum characterised by a straddle injury. These cases are best dealt with in a tertiary referral centre due to the complexity of the injury sustained, the technical challenges associated with a repair and the potential long-term outcomes. Case Report: We report the case of a 44 year old male who was presented to another emergency department with perineal pain and difficulty voiding following a bicycle accident at 2am. He reported falling onto the saddle pole. He is HIV + with no other past medical history. At the time of presentation a single attempt was made at urethral catheterisation with unsatisfactory drainage of urine and a suprapubic catheter was inserted. He was subsequently referred to the Mater Hospital (National urethral service) for definitive management of the presumed urethral injury. While awaiting assessment, he presented to MMUH emergency department with bruising of perineum and some discharge from a perineal wound following blunt trauma sustained while in bed with his male partner. An MRI pelvis was performed which showed a superficial pelvic haematoma-he was managed conservatively with intravenous antibiotics. A retrograde and antegrade urethrogram showed complete disruption of the bulbar urethra with extravasation of contrast.f the patient and appropriate bladder drainage often requiring suprapubic catheter insertion. Following a planned interval of three months, he underwent a single stage urethroplasty via a perineal incision with a high bulbo-penile end to end anastomosis. He was discharged home with urethral and suprapubic catheters. Subsequent peri-catheter urethrogram demonstrated no extravasation of contrast and he had a successful trial without catheter. He will be followed up in the clinic with uroflowmetry to assess for any evidence of urethral stricture. Discussion: This case report demonstrates the complex nature of urethral injuries which often have long-term issues with urethral stricture disease. We would strongly advocate the management of such cases in a tertiary referral centre following initial stabilisation o A retrospective review of hypernatraemia dehydration in breast fed neonates Introduction Neonatal hypernatremic dehydration (NHD) can be a complication of inadequate breastfeeding in infants and may lead to adverse consequences such as cerebral edema, convulsions, venous sinus thrombosis, intracranial hemorrhage, renal failure and disseminated intravascular coagulation. We observed previously healthy breast fed neonates admitted with feeding problems and hypernatremic dehydration in the first week of life. Aims Our objective was to document and identify factors predisposing to hypernatraemia dehydration in breast fed neonates. Methods This was a retrospective study where babies with hypernatraemic dehydration were identified by an electronic search of the Hospital In-Patient Enquiry (HIPE) system between 2012 and 2015. Premature babies and babies with co-morbidities were excluded. Statistical analysis was completed using Microsoft Excel 2011. Data were reported as median and range. Results Ten neonates with NHD (median plasma sodium 150.5 mmol/L; range 147-155 mmol/L) were identified during the study period. Four neonates presented with mild hypernatremia (plasma sodium 146 -149mmol/L) and six with moderate hypernatremia (plasma sodium levels 150-169 mmol/L). Six babies were female and eight of ten were instrumental or caesarean section deliveries. Five babies were described as having prolonged labor or a difficult delivery. The median age at presentation was 78.5 hours (range 52-100 hours) and the median weight loss was 11.3% (range 9.2-16%). The presenting complaints were weight loss greater than 10% (n=7), jaundice (n=4), poor feeding (n= 2) and dehydration (n =2). Eight presented from the post-natal ward and two babies were admitted from home. Investigations found that three neonates had elevated blood urea and two patients presented with hypoglycemia (median 3.4 mmol/L; range 1.8-3.8). Maternal characteristics include six first time mothers and all mothers received peri-operative anesthesia via epidural or spinal routes. Breast feeding assessments on the postnatal ward were all reported as going well prior to presentation. The median duration of hospitalization was 2.5 days (range: 1-6 days). Conclusion Breast feeding neonates presenting with hypernatraemic dehydration did so between day 3 and day 5. Factors that may contribute to NHD identified by this study include primiparity, instrumental and cesarean section delivery due to prolonged or difficult delivery. Breastfeeding assessments need to combine robust objective and subjective criteria including regular baby weight monitoring in a high risk group. Introduction: The safe delivery of blood and blood products is dependent on the identification of the correct patient and labelling procedures to ensure the right blood is delivered to the right patient. Currently the HSE incorporates the guidelines set out by the National Blood Users group 1 . It is vitally important to ensure knowledge and 100% adherence to guidelines involved in the pre-analysis phase of blood transfusion (i.e. sample collection, patient identification, sample labelling and appropriate ordering of blood products) to avoid the potentially catastrophic consequences of blood transfusion errors. Aims: The aim of this audit was to monitor if the above guidelines in regards the intern's role in blood transfusion were adhered to and if not what can be done to rectify such practice to minimise poor transfusion practice, while increasing patient safety in regards safe prescribing of blood and blood products. Method: An electronic questionnaire was administered to the current 2016 cohort of interns at the University Hospital Limerick. The questionnaire focused on the collection process of blood used for analysis in the hospital blood bank. Results: The survey response rate among interns was 56.6% (30 out of 53). Surgical interns represented 53.33% of respondents, Medicine 43.33% and paediatrics 3.33% of respondents. Results indicate only 20.00% of them always verbally check and label beside the bedside, the patient identity, 30.00% sometimes 16.67% rarely and that 23.3% never do so. A total of 36% of interns have been contacted by the blood bank at some point regarding a sample labelling error. 67% do not know the procedure for checking of blood before administration. 68% do not know the indications for CMV negative and irradiated blood products. Only 50% are aware the HSE has published guidelines on blood transfusion procedures and 17% do not know the difference between a group and hold vs a crossmatch. Discussion: Results indicate there is a clear divide between clinical best practice and clinical practice among interns at the University Hospital Limerick in the area of transfusion medicine, which needs urgent review to ensure safe delivery of blood products and ensure patient safety. Currently 100% of interns have completed an accredited haemovigilance programme before commencement of clinical practice. Most concerning is the improper pre-analytical labelling of samples which poses a serious risk to potential wrong blood administration if follow up checks are to fail. The ongoing aim is to know implement retraining among interns via intern teaching sessions to improve the safety of transfusion practice in the University Hospital Limerick with a future follow up audit to assess improvement in practice. Facial nerve palsy in the West of Ireland: Exclude Lyme Borreliosis Conlon K, Allen N Department of Paediatrics, National University of Ireland & Galway University Hospital, Ireland Introduction: Lyme disease is the most common vector-borne infection in temperate climates, such as Ireland. It is spread through tick bites, and may be endemic to areas with suitable habitats. The West of Ireland, in particular Galway, is one such endemic area. In 89% of cases, erythema migrans is the presenting complaint of Lyme disease, however, unilateral facial nerve palsy is a significant first symptom in 3% of all cases of Lyme disease. In this case series, two children from Galway with unilateral facial nerve palsy were subsequently found to have lyme disease. Teaching points are discussed. Cases: Patient 1: a 7-year old boy who presented to ED with a 5 day history of left-sided facial nerve palsy. The patient was seen by the GP three days prior to admission, and was treated with steroids and acyclovir for presumed Bell's Palsy. On examination, a macular, erythematous, blanching rash was noticed on the neck, upper trunk and back, with no target lesions. A history of insect bite one month prior to admission was noted. Vital signs were normal and apart from lower motor neuron facial palsy, examination was normal. Serological testing for Lyme disease was performed. Patient 2: a 7-year old boy who presented to ED with a 1 day history of left-sided facial droop. There was no history of insect bite or rash or other systemic symptoms. Aside from the left facial nerve palsy, neurological and systems examinations were normal. Although a provisional diagnosis of Bell's palsy was made, routine blood count and film, electrolytes and serology for Lyme disease tested. In both cases, Ig and lineblot testing confirmed a diagnosis of Lyme disease. Both patients were re-assessed for signs of meningism or other neuropathies, and none were found. Following the IDSA guidelines, a 21day course of oral amoxicillin was prescribed; doxycycline is the first-line antibiotic, but it is not recommended in patients under 8 years of age. At one month follow-up, Patient 1 had unresolved left facial nerve palsy. Patient 2 had begun to show signs of resolution prior to beginning antibiotic treatment, and his facial nerve palsy had resolved by one month follow-up. Discussion: Unilateral facial nerve palsy is the third most common presentation, after erythema migrans and acute arthritis. Signs of meningitis or multiple cranial neuropathy require CSF investigation and intravenous antibiotics. Antibiotic therapy does not shorten duration of facial nerve palsy but prevents further complications of Lyme disease. A previous report by Allen and Jungbluth demonstrates how untreated lyme disease can progress to neuroborreliosis (15% of cases) with potentially devastating consequences including stroke. Therefore, in endemic areas, including Galway, unilateral facial nerve palsy should prompt lyme serology even in the absence of tick bite or erythema migrans. The overall outcome for lyme disease facial nerve palsy is positive but not all cases resolve. Objective: To report a case of Meningoencephalitis and septicaemia with an unusual presentation in a previously healthy immunocompentent patient. Patient and Methods: A previously healthy 59 year old male was brought to Emergency department by Garda after being found wondering in the street with severe confusion, agitation and partially clothed. A collateral history was obtained and described a well man, who's only sign of illness has been a headache and some nausea the previous week. No medical history of note, and not currently taking any medication including any recreational drug. On examination, he was found to be extremely delirious with a temperature of 39.8 o C. There was definite neck stiffness, and flexion of arms on neck flexion however no rash was present. The patient was clammy, and clinically septic and stuporous. His pupils were found to be equal and sluggishly reactive to light, and he had movement in all four limbs with increased tone and bilateral extensor planter response. Resuscitated in ED, and required sedation, intubation and ventilation. Clinically a diagnosis of Meningoencephalitis was made. Blood culture and septic screen were done and commenced on Ceftriaxone and Aciclovir intravenously. Following an urgent CT Brain, which was normal, he was transferred to ICU and a Lumbar Puncture was performed. Blood cultures returned positive for gram positive Bacilli, and it turned out to be Listeria, same grown in the CSF culture also. A final diagnosis of Meningoencephalitis and septicaemia secondary to Listeria Monocytogenes was made. The patient's antibiotic regime was optimised with high dose Amoxicillin with Gentamicin. The patient later made a full recovery. Conclusion: This case report describes an unusual presentation of Listeria Monocytogenes infection in a previously healthy gentleman. Listeria Meningitis manifesting itself as confusion and agitation is very rare and not documented in current literature. Trans-perineal radical prostatectomy, popularised in the early 1900's is now a relatively obsolete treatment for prostatic malignancy, having been superseded by the retropubic approach in the 1960's. We report the complex case of a 52 year old gentleman with histologically confirmed organconfined prostate adenocarcinoma (pT2c). This is on a significant background history of an increased risk of de novo malignancy due to failing bilateral renal transplantation whilst on immunosuppressive therapy and end stage renal disease as a result of biopsy-confirmed transplant recurrence of nephrotic syndrome. Investigation of this patient's prostate specific antigen (PSA) returned at 7ng/dL (age-specific upper limit of normal is 3.5ng/dL) with a benign prostate gland on clinical examination. Subsequent transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) guided biopsy of the prostate revealed 2 cores of Gleason grade 3+3 prostate adenocarcinoma. Local staging with multi-parametric magnetic resonance imaging of the prostate confirmed organ confined disease. Suitability for placement on the national renal transplantation waiting list requires documentation of no current active malignancy. Although suitable for active surveillance, this patient required active surgical management of the malignancy in order to facilitate eligibility to return to the national renal transplantation waiting list. This posed a challenging management decision as the bilateral renal transplantations were anastomosed to the internal iliac vessels bilaterally rendering it almost impossible to access the prostate from the standard retropubic approach. Since the advancement of robotic and laparoscopic techniques in urological surgery, few specialists in the urological surgical community have experience in the trans-perineal approach to prostatectomy. In this complex case, we highlight the benefits of using an old surgical method to adapt to a newly evolving area of post-transplant prostatic malignancy. Introduction: Recent research has suggested a link between sleeping position and ophthalmic conditions such as retinal vein occlusion and glaucoma. Our study aimed to determine whether or not this link held true for diabetic retinopathy. Purpose: To investigate the relationship between preferred sleeping position and retinopathy severity in patients with diabetes. Design: Retrospective, cross sectional study. Methods: The study enrolled 135 patients who were attending the Diabetic Retinopathy Treatment clinic in Cork University Hospital. Each patient completed a questionnaire regarding their diabetes, preferred sleeping position, and relevant medical conditions. The retinopathy grade was recorded for each eye and data analysed using Stata statistical software package. Results: Of the 135 participants in the study, 44 (32.6%) preferred sleeping on their right, 38 (28.2%) on their left, 48 (35.6%) varied between positions or did not know, and the remainder, five, (3.7%) slept on their back. Of the 37 (27.4%) patients with asymmetrical retinopathy grades, 13 (35.1%) preferred the lateral decubitus position on the same side as the more severely affected eye, while 12 (32.4%) preferred the lateral decubitus position on the opposite side (p=0.641). When comparing the 46 (34.1%) patients with asymmetrical maculopathy grades, 15 (32.6%) preferred the lateral decubitus position on the same side as the eye which had maculopathy, while 12 (26.1%) preferred the lateral decubitus position on the same side as the eye which had no maculopathy (p=0.698). Conclusion: The results do not suggest a relationship between preferred sleep side and diabetic retinopathy severity. Thus patients with asymmetrical retinopathy do not need to be consulted regarding their preferred sleeping position, and there are likely random or as yet unidentified factors responsible for this asymmetry. Further research in this area with a larger number of participants may be warranted to better understand the pathophysiology of asymmetric disease. Background Diuretics are commonly used in General Practice. There are many side effects associated with diuretics including electrolyte imbalances. There are currently no definitive local guidelines on the frequency of electrolyte monitoring, with regular, routine monitoring being recommended. The aim of this audit was to assess electrolyte-monitoring practices in patients on long-term loop diuretics in one General Practice. Methods Patients on repeat prescriptions for loop diuretics were identified from the practice's computer records, with exclusion of expired prescriptions and transferred/deceased patients. A total of eighty-four patients were identified, their medical records were then individually checked to identify if electrolyte levels had been monitored in the last twelve months. If levels assessed, any abnormalities in electrolyte levels were noted. The electrolyte-monitoring rate over the preceding twelve months in this general practice was 55.95%. Electrolyte abnormalities were detected in a number of patients (14.89%) in this audit. Conclusions Current electrolyte monitoring levels of loop diuretics was 55.95% in this General Practice. The identification of electrolyte abnormalities in some cases highlights the clinical relevance of monitoring electrolyte levels. Many factors may help to improve electrolyte-monitoring levels, including General Practitioner and patient awareness and involvement. Updated computer software with reminders of when monitoring is due should be incorporated into all general practices. Ultimately the development of definite local guidelines on the frequency of monitoring would set a standard and improve electrolyte-monitoring rates. Audit: Use of Caprini Score as a standardisation method of VTE prophylaxis in elective surgery Talty M 1 , Barry K 1 , Enright R 1 , Duggan M 2 1 Department of Surgery, Mayo University Hospital; 2 Department of Anaesthetics, Mayo University Hospital Introduction: Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a common and preventable cause of morbidity and mortality in elective surgical patients. In practice, prescription of VTE prophylaxis is often variable between doctors. NICE guidelines recommend risk-stratification of patients and appropriate prescription of mechanical and/or pharmacological prophylaxis thereafter. (1.) Mayo University Hospital introduced the Caprini Score system as a means of standardisation of VTE prophylaxis practice in 2015. (2.) This scoring system has been validated for use in multiple fields of surgery, although it is not in widespread use in Ireland. (3) (4) (5) Objectives: Our primary objective was to assess adherence to VTE prophylaxis in Mayo University Hospital, among elective surgical patients. Method: Data was collected on all general surgical patients undergoing elective operations during a 12 week period from 11 th July 2016 to 30 th September 2016, excluding paediatric patients. Data collected included: patient identifiers, operation performed, pre-assessment/ outpatient review prior to surgery, anticoagulation received pre-operatively and post operatively, and Caprini score if calculated. Results: In total there were 201 elective surgical admissions over the 12 week period. In total, 47 Caprini Scores were performed, (23% of elective surgical patients). On analysis, 16% of patients in July had a score, 19% in August and 32% of patients in September. Concentrating on those patients seen in the pre-assessment clinic, 27% had a score calculated. On further inspection, of those patients who were surgically reviewed at preassessment clinic, 28 out of a total 36 patients had a Caprini Score (77%). Conclusions: Overall, the introduction of the Caprini score has failed as an intervention. Scores were performed in less than a quarter of all patients. However they are being performed at a higher rate in patients surgically reviewed at preassessment clinic. Lack of awareness among NCHDs, time restraints, cumbersome nature of the scoring document and unavailability of the document on the wards have been suggested as possible barriers to compliance. Audit findings are to be presented at departmental case conference, ahead of a possible re-audit. References Introduction: McArdle's disease, or Glycogen Storage Disorder Type V, is caused by a deficiency in myophosphorylase, an enzyme which breaks down glycogen in skeletal muscle, resulting in impaired muscle functioning and exercise tolerance (1). The estimated incidence of McArdle's disease is 1 per 100,000 population (2). Case: A 33 year old man, with a previous diagnosis of McArdle's disease, presented with a twelve-hour history of painful thigh swelling. He described feeling unwell for the previous three days and noted dark discolouration of his urine following a period of increased physical activity. On examination his thighs were extremely tender and swollen. Urine dipstick was positive for blood and protein. Admission creatinine kinase was >400,000u/l, creatinine was 155umol/l and urea was 7.9mmol/l. Serum transaminases were raised, with AST 2572u/l, and ALT 517u/l. Also of note serum phosphate was 2.24mmol/l, LDH was 3895u/l and uric acid was 571umol/l. Intravenous sodium bicarbonate 1.26% was commenced. However, urine output decreased to 16mls/ hour on the first day. Over the next three days creatinine increased to 784umol/l and urine output remained low, necessitating commencement of intermittent haemodialysis. The patient continued dialysis for five weeks after initial presentation, until kidney function recovered. Discussion: McArdle's disease can lead to rhabdomyolysis as muscles cannot metabolise glycogen during exercise, causing cell injury and release of cell contents into the circulation including myoglobin, CK, LDH and phosphate (3) . This case highlights the danger of acute kidney injury developing in severe rhabdomyolysis. This kidney injury is caused by a combination of hypovolemia causing renin-angiotensin-system activation with vasoconstriction, direct tubular injury from myoglobin oxidative injury, myoglobin protein complex obstructive injury and cast formation from damaged tubular cells (4) . Management is with fluid resuscitation, urine alkalization with sodium bicarbonate and in severe cases renal replacement therapy (3). Introduction: A case report of a 72-year-old haemodialysis (HD) dependant gentleman with recurrent CVC sepsis and immature left Brachiocephalic Arteriovenous Fistula (AVF). Case description: A 72-year-old gentleman, with a background of HD dependant end stage kidney disease (ESKD) was admitted feeling generally unwell. He was disorientated, febrile, hypotensive and hypoglycaemic. The area surrounding his left femoral tunnelled central venous catheter (CVC) was erythematous with a purulent exudate. Diagnosis: Septic shock due to an infected CVC. He was transferred to ICU for inotropic support, his CVC was removed. A 3-month admission follows. During which he had 2 ICU admissions for septic shock secondary to infected CVC's with highly resistant organisms; sensitive only to ceftolozane/tazobactam(1). His options for vascular access were poor but infected lines had to be removed. He suffered severe oedema and hyperkalaemia. 8 CVC's, 4 temporary; and 4 tunnelled were placed on this admission. 7 of these were placed in 2 sites; right femoral vein or left femoral vein. Either HD was unsuccessful through the CVC, or the CVC quickly became infected. Difficult neck anatomy and an immature left AVF made internal jugular (IJ) CVCs unfavourable. But, with no other options for HD, a left IJ CVC was placed, potentially compromising his AVF. However, this line caused venous obstruction and severe left arm oedema. CVC's were not a long-term option. The potential maturation of his AVF must be considered. Fistuloplasty has been performed, showing some promise. Case discussion: Ideal access for IHD is through an AVF(2). However this can't always be achieved. As demonstrated by this case, reliance on CVC's for HD is a challenge. Vascular access in ESKD patients is of huge importance but often very poor and indwelling IV CVC pose a significant infection risk. ( Background: Neurology has previously been described as a difficult specialty for medical students, with this phenomenon being described as 'neurophobia'. In University College Dublin final year students undergo an intensive week of large group neurology tutorials. This audit aimed to investigate whether these tutorials were effective in furthering the students' confidence at and knowledge of neurology. The topic was previously audited in 2015. Methods: All final year medical students in University College Dublin (UCD) were invited to participate. Data was collected using an online questionnaire and distributed via college email addresses. One 'pre-teaching week' questionnaire and one 'post-teaching week' questionnaire were sent. The questionnaire consisted of two parts, firstly, a section where students rated their confidence with various aspects of neurology on a scale of 1-10. Secondly, a section on multiple choice questions to assess technical knowledge The aim was to assess the level of knowledge before and after the teaching week to observe any differences. Findings: Total numbers of students emailed were 243. 124 (51% of) students responded to the 'pre-teaching week' questionnaire. 101 (42% of) students responded to the 'post-teaching week' questionnaire. 81% of students who responded to the first questionnaire went on to complete the second. Results from the questionnaires highlighted a marked increase in students' confidence levels in all aspects of neurology following the tutorials. The performance in the multiple choice questions remained largely the same, with some questions showing small improvements. The majority of students found the week of tutorials helpful in "understanding" the specialtytherefore combatting the 'neurophobia' previously experienced. Conclusion: Large group tutorials are an effective way of delivering specialist teaching to undergraduate medical students. This teaching modality could be effective in other areas of the curriculum. Additionally online questionnaires appear to be an effective way of surveying students over multiple clinical sites. A curious case of lower gastrointestinal bleed in a 28-year-old gentleman Hingum A 1 , Ahmed A 2 , Myers E 2 1 NUI Galway, West North West Intern training network; 2 Department of Surgery Galway University Hospital Introduction: Acute bleeding per rectum is a common cause of hospital admissions. In a large south Californian maintenance organization, the yearly incidence of acute colonic bleeding was found to be 20 to 30 per 100, 000 1 . Cagir et al. reported that globally lower gastro-intestinal bleeding accounted for 1 -2% of hospital admission via emergency services and 15% of these would present as massive bleeding with 5% requiring surgical intervention 2 . Schmulewitz, Fisher and Rockey, further document that only 5% of lower GI bleeding is of small bowel origin 3 . Case report: A 28-year-old gentleman presented to the emergency department with fresh bleeding per rectum. He consumes 10 units of alcohol a week and has a 2 pack years smoking history. His examination was unremarkable with a normal gastro-intestinal exam and an unrevealing digital rectal exam. Haemtological investigations showed a haemoglobin level of 9.7 g/dl. Oesophago-gastro-duedonoscopy revealed mild gastritis and colonoscopy showed the presence of grade II haemorrhoids. As no acute cause of gastro-intestinal bleeding was identified, a CT scan was subsequently ordered which revealed an incidental pelvic lesion in the retrovesical pouch. Further imaging studies with MRI showed a 6 x 7 x 9 cm complex solid cystic mass in the pelvis, located between the base of the bladder, indenting the base but without evidence of invasion. It was considered thus to be a malignant appearing pelvic mass of unknown aetiology. The mass did not appear to be fixed as it changed position within the two imaging studies and taking into account the presenting symptom and the age of the patient a working diagnosis of a gastrointestinal stromal tumour (GIST) within a meckel's diverticulum was made. The mass was removed by an elective laparotomy after consensus at a multidisciplinary meeting. Histological analysis of the mass was however negative for a GIST and demonstrated the presence of a small bowel neoplasm of smooth muscle origin. Discussion: Tumours of the small bowel are uncommon; the majorities that do occur however are malignant and symptomatic. Benign tumours, however, frequently cause no symptoms and may be discovered as an incidental finding at laparotomy or post-mortem 4 .The leiomyoma is a tumour of smooth muscle, common in the uterus but rare elsewhere. It is reported to form between 18% and 43% of all benign small bowel tumours 5, 6 . Croom and Newsome 6 also described three different modes of presentation of small bowel leiomyomata: (i)haemorrhage, (ii) obstruction and (iii) as an unexplained abdominal mass. Gastro-intestinal haemorrhage, which may be torrential or slow is probably the commonest presenting feature of a small bowel tumour 4 . A Case Report "A Case of Felty's" Mathews L 1, Ryan B 1 (supervising consultant) 1  A 59 year old lady, NH, presented with a two month history of fatigue. She reported anorexia and 17kg weight loss over 3 months. She also reported epistaxis and easy bruising. On further questioning she admitted a long history of arthralgia, confined to her left ankle. Past medical history was significant only for splenic abscesses secondary to a perforated colonic diverticulum. On physical examination she was underweight and had palpable hepatosplenomegaly. She was pancytopaenic (Hb 6.4, Plts 96, WCC 0.8, Neuts 0.3, Lymphs 0.4). CT TAP confirmed hepatosplenomegaly with her liver measuring 19cm and spleen 19cm. A focally ill-defined hepatic lesion was identified on MRI as well as heterogenous splenic enhancement with small infarcts which was concerning for a lymphoproliferative disorder. Bone marrow aspirate was non-diagnostic. An autoimmune screen revealed positive Rheumatoid Factor (RF) which had on previous testing been negative and anti-CCP at a titre of >340. IgG, IgA, IgM were all elevated. On this basis a diagnosis of Felty's syndrome was made. Treatment with IV Methylprednisolone, alendronic acid, septrin and valganciclovir was commenced and NH reported to feel less fatigued within 2 weeks of treatment. She was discharged and is due to be seen back in clinic in one months' time. This case represents an unusual presentation of Felty Sydrome and highlights that cases often do not present typically. Felty syndrome (FS) is a potentially serious condition that is associated with seropositive Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA). It affects 1-3% of the RA population. It is characterized by the triad of RA, splenomegaly, and graulocytopenia. (BMJ Best Practice). This case did not present with the typical triad. The lack of a diagnosis of RA along with the presence of hepatomegaly, pancytopenia, and the background of splenic abscesses made the diagnosis less obvious. Creating a supportive buddy system for newly appointed interns -the 'nanny' intern programme Ellard R 1 , Quirke S 1 , Mongan O 1,2 , Byrne D 1,2 1 West Northwest Intern Training Network; 2 National University of Ireland, Galway Background: The entry of new interns onto clinical sites is a challenging transition associated with an increase in medical error. In the UK, one study found that death rates were 6 percent higher on changeover day. . A Medical Council intern stakeholder study (2016) found that most interns felt very unprepared and unsupported during their first on call experiences and were concerned about the risks their inexperience could potentially pose to patient safety. Furthermore, the impact of the transition on interns' wellbeing is concerning, with up to one third of interns meeting the threshold of experiencing pathological levels of stress. Aims: To develop a support network of experienced (outgoing ) interns to mentor and ease the transition of the new (incoming) interns for the month of Julyknown as the "nanny" or "buddy" intern programme. Methods: "Nanny" interns are recruited from a pool of intern volunteers at the end of their internship. They work for the month of July alongside the new interns, providing support and mentoring , skills training and working night shifts. Results: The "nanny" intern programme is now in its 4 th year. In 2016, 10 nanny interns were recruited and worked for the month of July covering night shifts and performing teaching duties during the day. All of the new incoming interns (n = 80) strongly agreed that the nanny intern programme was helpful and that it improved their comfort and confidence levels. Conclusions: The popularity of the programme has grown in recent years as junior doctors recognise the importance of clinical leadership, mentoring and teaching. The nanny intern application process is now a competitive one. Medical Manpower in Galway University Hospital have been supportive of funding the programme, recognising its impact on intern wellbeing and on patient safety. The success of the programme in GUH has led to its implementation on other intern training sites nationally. Introduction: This report details the case of a 70 year old man who underwent a complicated salvage radical prostatectomy for radioresistant prostate cancer. Complications from this technically challenging procedure would ultimately lead to significant morbidity and prolonged hospitalisation. Case Description: This patient underwent a salvage radical prostatectomy with bladder neck reconstruction after a TRUS biopsy revealed widespread recurrence of prostate adenocarcinoma previously treated by external beam radiation therapy. One month later he was referred back to this tertiary centre complaining of markedly deteriorating mobility and bilateral groin pain since the operation. He was investigated for possible Cauda Equina syndrome before being discharged with pain specialist and physiotherapy referrals. He subsequently re-presented to ED almost two months later with frank haematuria, elevated inflammatory markers, and severe lower abdominal and bilateral groin pain. This was accompanied by weight loss of over 20 kilograms since his initial surgery and no improvement in his mobility in the intervening period. A CT abdomen/ pelvis showed the presence of multifocal intramuscular abscesses in the adductor compartment of the thigh bilaterally and in the lower part of the rectus abdominus, as well as widening of the pubic symphysis with fluid and air and destruction of the local fibrocartilage. Additional imaging showed that these collections tracked from a residual defect in the anteroinferior bladder just anterior to the site of the prostatic urethra. What followed was a protracted and challenging hospital admission with multiple complex infective exacerbations before achieving adequate urinary diversion and symptomatic relief. Discussion: This case emphasises the technical challenges and potential for complications associated with operating on previously irradiated tissue. Though rare, the unexpected sequelae of the surgery in this case should be considered by clinicians and surgeons, both before undertaking such salvage procedures and when faced with similar morbidity in the post-operative period. Introduction Pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis (PCI) is a pathologic condition defined as infiltration of gas into the wall of the gastrointestinal tract. The pathophysiology of the condition is unclear yet rupture of the cysts can lead to the appearance of pneumoperitoneum. 1 Treatment in most cases is conservative. 2 Case Description A 65 year old female presented with a four day history of foul smelling vomitus, diarrhoea, and diffuse abdominal pain. On examination the patient was apyrexial, heart rate 84, respiratory rate 19, SpO2 96% on room air, GCS was 15/15. Abdomen was soft but tender throughout, with positive bowel sounds. Faecal occult blood test was negative. Of note she had a history of learning disability, schizophrenia and connective tissue disease, with no collateral history available. On admission inflammatory markers were raised, and lactate 0.9. No abnormal findings on electrocardiogram. A chest x-ray and plain film abdomen were suspicious for a perforated viscous, with frank pneumoperitoneum and advised surgical review. CT abdomen confirmed previous radiological findings and appearance of sub-diaphragmatic free air in the abdomen. Collectively these findings resulted in the patient undergoing emergency laparotomy. Surgery uncovered extensive bullae of air exiting from the diaphragmatic hiatus in the upper abdomen in a distribution relating to the CT appearance. The patient was closed with no subsequent surgical intervention, and managed medically. Discussion An acute abdomen is a feature indicative of a potentially life-threatening intra-abdominal pathology, often requiring surgical intervention. In this case the abnormalities seen radiologically were at odds with the clinical findings. The radiographs and CT hinted towards a perforation, but the clinical presentation, to reach such a conclusion was less compelling. Radiology whilst an extremely useful tool must be considered amongst all investigations and assessments to avoid unnecessary procedures. Introduction: Aortic dissection is defined as separation of the layers within the aortic wall as a result of an intimal tear. It most commonly originates in the ascending and descending aorta. It then propagates down due to high pressure blood flow through the aorta. Summary of the case: This is the case of a 77yo male, with a background history of Hypertension and Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease presented to a peripheral hospital with worsening dysuria for one month. He was referred to the urologists and on examination he was found to have a phymosis. This was surgically repaired by circumcision under local anaesthetic, and the procedure was successful. On day 1 post operation he was complaining of 'chest straining' and severe chest pain. On investigation, his ECG showed sinus rhythm with tachycardia. His troponin level was 14 and his D-dimer was 2000. A CT-Pulmonary Angiogram was performed which showed that he had a Type B aortic dissection. He was then transferred to a Vascular tertiary referral centre where a CT peripheral angiogram was performed to assess the extent of the dissection. This revealed that the dissection extended into the abdominal aorta as far as the common femoral arteries bilaterally and there was a tortuous, juxtarenal AAA of 6.8cm in diameter. The true lumen was compressed by the false lumen at multiple sites. The patient was admitted to ICU for strict blood pressure control while a plan for intervention was devised. It was decided that the dissection would be repaired in two stages in an aim to reduce the risk of morbidity and mortality. A TEVAR was performed initially, to repair the thoracic aortic dissection. This operation was successful and he was discharged on day 6 post-op with no complications. Eight weeks later the patient had a follow up CT angiogram. This showed that the left common femoral artery originated from the false lumen and the aneurysm had grown in size to 7cm. As the dissection had extended as far as the common femoral arteries (CFA) bilaterally it was decided that he was for aortobi-iliac grafting, this would require access from both CFAs. An EVAR was performed and a bifurcated stent graft was placed in the infra-renal aorta with stent extension as far as the common femoral arteries. The patient was transferred to ICU post op and had ICP monitoring and hourly neurological observations overnight to check for any signs of spinal cord ischaemia. There were no signs of neurological deficits present and patient was transferred to the ward on day 1 post op. He continued to improve and mobilised well, on day 5 post surgery the patient was discharged without any signs complications. Discussion point: Aortic dissection extending to the infra diaphragmatic aorta has a high incidence of morbidity and mortality. By performing the procedure in two stages the am is to allow collaterals to build up in the interim, thereby decreasing the risk of spinal cord ischaemia. This case demonstrates a way in which to manage this challenge and could be replicated in the future. The aims of this audit were: to assess whether GUH reaches the 90% treatment target rate and where eGFR was measured at 30-59ml/mi to review: use of nephrotoxic medications; use of renal ultraound imaging and assessment of proteinuria in the clinic. Methods: Medical records of all patients attending the HIV clinic in GUH for the past 12 months were reviewed, and relevant clinical data were extracted from the notes and electronic database. Data were coded and pseudonymised in Microsoft Excel. The results were primarily descriptive. Results: 272 patients were registered as attending GUH for HIV care in October 2016. 260/272 (96.9%) were on HAART; clinical data were available for 252/260 patients. 193/260 were on TDF and 59/260 were on ATZ. 42/260 of patients on treatment had a renal USS at some point. 21/260 patients had an eGFR <60; 3/21 were on TDF and 3/21 were on ATZ. 10/21 (47.6%) had a renal USS and 12/21 (57.1%) had urinary protein/ creatinine ratio measured. Conclusions: GUH meets the UNAIDS 90% treatment target. A high proportion of patients are on TDF or ATZ containing regimens, but the rates of renal impairment seen are low. In those with a low eGFR approximately half had appropriate renal investigations. As a result of this audit a protocol has been instituted for the assessment of patients with low eGFR while on HAART; this will be re-audited in 12 months time. Although hepatotoxicity following paracetamol overdose is well studied data regarding cardiotoxicity is minimal. This link has been the subject of several case reports 2 3 . This case provides an interesting example through the use of serial data. Description: A 42 year old female presented to the ED with an intentional paracetamol overdose of 35x500mg tablets, giving paracetamol concentration by body weight (47kg) of 372mg/kg. Above 150mg/kg is a toxic dose 4 . N-acetylcysteine infusion was started -5.5 hours after original ingestion. Clinical examination was normal, vital signs were normal. ECG was NSR 91bpm, no ischaemic changes. Liver and renal function tests were normal throughout hospitalisation. ECG #1 was normal at admission. Troponin T #1 was raised at 126 ng/ mL (normal range 0-14ng/dL) ECG #2 was normal, Troponin T #2 was 145ng/mL, 16 hours later. ECG #3 showed T-Wave inversion (TWI) in V2, Troponin T #3 was 84ng/mL, 24 hours after admission. ECG #4 showed TWI in V2/3/5/6. Troponin T #4 was 42ng/mL, 36 hours after admission. She reported no cardiac symptoms and remained haemodynamically stable. Dual Anti Platelet Therapy was commenced. Her only cardiac risk factor was a 20 pack year history of smoking, she quit 3 years ago. An echocardiogram was ordered, showing apical akinaesia. Coronary angiogram showed mild left ventricular hypokinaesia -ejection fraction decreased at 45-50% -bisoprolol added. Cardiology opinion maintained the cardiac dysfunction was likely a direct result of the paracetamol overdose. Troponin remained stable. Discussion: This case demonstrated through the use of serial data and cardiology investigation a possible direct link between paracetamol toxicity and cardiac insult. Cardiac damage should be considered in the work up of patients presenting with paracetamol overdose. We present the case of a 51-year-old female patient who attended our service with an 18-month history of nasal congestion, postnasal discharge, midfacial pressure symptoms and occasional small-volume epistaxis. Following initial review and examination, MRI scan was completed which highlighted a 3.2cm x 2.4cm x 3.5cm well-defined lesion in the right perivertebral space at the level of C1. Endoscopic postnasal space biopsy was performed, which confirmed nasopharyngeal schwannoma. Following multidisciplinary discussion and consultation with the patient, a combined-approach, endoscopic transnasal and transoral resection was performed. Pre-operative radiology, as well as intraoperative imaging are utilised to demonstrate the operative approach to this challenging, uncommon pathology. Schwannomas are benign, slow-growing tumours arising from nerve sheath cells. Provided complete resection is obtained, schwannomas can present a low risk of recurrence post-operatively. Though commonly found in the head and neck region, just 4% of schwannomas occur in the nasal cavity. We highlight the unique case of a large schwannoma occurring in the postnasal space, which presented a considerable operative challenge with many learning points. Introduction: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the commonest cardiac arrhythmia with a prevalence of ≤9% in the elderly population. This case concerns the thromboembolic sequelae associated with AF and the clinical importance of adequate anticoagulation to reduce the incidence of the morbidity and mortality of thromboembolism. Case Description: A 71 year old lady presented with acute onset of a cold, painful right leg with progressive paraesthesia. Clinical examination revealed a cold, discoloured limb with absent femoral and distal pulses. Background medical history included valvular atrial fibrillation (managed with warfarin and bisoprolol), non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus, hereditary haemochromatosis, IHD: anterior STEMI 2012 managed with PCI, dilated cardiomyopathy, IgA paraproteinaemia and Barrett's oesophagus. She had been discharged from hospital 5 days prior following conservative management of acute cholecystitis. Pertinent laboratory investigations revealed a sub-therapeutic INR of 1.2 (target 2.5-3.5), cholestatic liver function tests and raised inflammatory markers. Clinical diagnosis of acute-on-chronic limb ischaemia was confirmed on CT angiogram of the lower limb, showing complete occlusion of the right common iliac, external iliac and internal iliac arteries, superficial femoral artery, popliteal, anterior tibial, posterior tibial and peroneal arteries. She underwent right femoral and popliteal selective embolectomy (along with 4 compartment fasciotomy) with perioperative unfractionated heparin infusion. Post-operative complications included episodes of fast AF and difficulty maintaining therapeutic anticoagulation. Discussion: This case highlights the importance of appropriate anticoagulation in the perioperative period, particularly in the setting of valvular AF. It emphasises the utilisation of different methods of anticoagulation and their appliance to clinical practice. With regard to current literature, I reviewed the comparison of anticoagulation agents in AF. A two-month audit examining patient transfers from a model 4 to model 2 hospital Transfer of patients between hospitals is dictated by differing expertise capacity among facilities and patient preference. Since the implementation of the Acute Medical Programme (AMP) in 2011 there has been a clear delineation of hospital services established on the facilities, resources and local factors. In line with the AMP, model 2 hospitals provide in-patient diagnostics and rehabilitation for low-risk medical patients. A bi-directional patient flow between hospitals according to patient needs exists. Methodology: We conducted an observational study evaluating consecutive patient transfers from a model 4 hospital to a model 2 hospital for eight weeks during the months of August and September 2016. Information was collected from patient records: age, presenting complaint, investigations and treatments required on site, estimated length of stay and use of multidisciplinary team. Results: 72 patients were admitted to the model 2 hospital. The median age of the patients was 77years (64.5-86 years). The most common presenting complaint was infection, accounting for 42% of all admissions. Over 80% of patients received basic diagnostic tests including X-ray and blood analysis. 30% of patients presenting with neurological complaints required a CT brain scan in model 2 hospital. On arrival 1/3 of patients required CT or MR imaging. 77% of patients admitted availed of allied health professional input; 89% of allied health care provided involved more than one specialty. Conclusion: Many of the patients transferred to the model 2 hospital were complex elderly patients (median age of 77years) with many co-morbidities and significant social issues. This is reflected in the high usage of higher-level diagnostic tests and AHP care use. With our ageing population the demands on a model 2 hospital will continue to grow. This study will help inform refinement of policy and resources for the future. A 58 year-old right-handed female presented to ED with a bifrontal throbbing headache preceded by visual disturbance and associated with nausea, vomiting, photophobia and confusion. With a background of migraine with aura, she was discharged home following normal bloods and CT brain. She represented nine days later with persistent headache, vomiting, worsening confusion, word-finding difficulties and rambling speech. Medical team on call commenced acyclovir for possible encephalitis. Neurology consult was obtained who found her to be encephalopathic with mild right facial droop, generalised hyperreflexia with Hoffman's reflex and crossed adductors bilaterally. Gait was ataxic. Constructional apraxia was evident on clock-drawing. Lumbar puncture revealed a mononuclear lymphocytosis, with increased CSF protein and ACE. Bloods were significant for an SIADH and ESR 29. MRI Brain showed hyperintensities in the brainstem, frontal white matter and both thalami. She was treated empirically with IV methylprednisolone, showing improvement. Serial MRIs revealed progression with small acute infarcts and pontine haemorrhage. Transoesophageal echo detected a patent foramen ovale with right-to-left shunt and aneurysmal septum. She was commenced on dual anti-platelets and discharged on tapering steroids. She represented after weaning steroids with headache associated with vomiting, facial droop, dysarthria and confusion, requiring retreatment with IV methylprednisolone. MRI brain showed increase in bilateral white matter lesions and perivascular enhancement with several small acute infarcts. Following normal cerebral angiogram, a brain biopsy was obtained, which showed non-necrotising granulomatous angiitis consistent with primary angiitis of CNS. Cyclophosphamide was initiated as per CYCLOPS protocol. She has since improved. Granulomatous angiitis of the CNS is a rare vasculitis of unknown aetiology 1 . Clinical presentation includes stroke, seizures, encephalopathy and headache. A diagnostic challenge that requires a high degree of suspicion, it is rapidly fatal without treatment and often only diagnosed at autopsy 2 . Laboratory studies, neuroradiology and angiography are inadequate for diagnosis, requiring tissue confirmation 1 Background: Psychiatric illness is a leading cause of morbidity/ mortality in the perinatal period. The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) and the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) both recommend locally defined referral pathways from maternity services to mental health services, alongside training in perinatal mental health for maternity staff. Objectives: To assess knowledge of current referral pathways from University Maternity Hospital Limerick (UMHL) to local mental health services and to assess levels of training in accordance with RCOG & NICE guidelines. Design/Methods: An anonymous 6-part questionnaire with Yes/No answer options was circulated to all obstetric doctors, antenatal and postnatal midwives in UMHL. Theatre and labour ward midwives were excluded as they generally do not refer to psychiatric services. In total, 19 Doctors and 36 Midwives participated. Results: 21% of doctors vs 55.6% of midwives were aware of referral pathways to mental health services (χ 2 =6.019, p=0.014). Only 38% of postnatal midwives were aware of these pathways in comparison to 78.6% of antenatal midwives (χ 2 =5.546, p=0.019). 47% of doctors and 55.6% of midwives know how to access mental health services. Only 47.6% of postnatal midwives know how to access these services in comparison to 71% of antenatal midwives. 26% of doctors and 8% of midwives reported ever receiving training in perinatal mental health issues. Conclusions: There is a clear lack of knowledge among doctors and postnatal midwives, in particular, of referral pathways from UMHL to local mental health services. There is insufficient knowledge on how to access mental health services, in addition to lack of education in perinatal mental health issues among UMHL staff. Clarification will be sought from local mental health services regarding specific referral pathways. Based on this we will run perinatal mental health training for doctors and midwives followed by a re-audit in 6 months-time. Anaemia has been shown to be a public health problem with significant adverse health consequences [1] . Intravenous iron offers a rapid means of iron repletion and is superior to oral iron in many circumstances [2] . Ferinject (ferric carboxymaltose) is generally preferred in St. John's Hospital (SJH) over other preparations for its shorter transfusion time, higher elemental iron equivalency (1g), and lack of need for a test dose [3] . Aims: (1) To investigate if patients were appropriately worked up for Iron Deficiency Anaemia (IDA). (2) To calculate if correct dose of Ferinject was given. (3) To see if follow up was organised, if required. Materials and method: This is a retrospective study on all administrations of Ferinject over a two month period (Jul-Aug 2016) in SJH. We gathered the following data: Hb, MCV, MCH, haematinics, ferritin, weight, blood film report, as well as information on oral iron prescriptions and recent RCC transfusions. Results: 32 patients received Ferinject in this period. 25 (78.1%) of these had confirmed IDA based on: low Hb, low serum iron, low ferritin, high TIBC, low transferrin saturations, and blood film showing microcytic and hypochromic cells with absence of target cells [4] . 31 (96.9%) of patients received the correct dose of Ferinject initially, however only 7 of the 20 patients (35%) requiring further Ferinject were properly followed up according to SPC [5] recommendations. 4 (13.3%) patients had been prescribed oral iron before receiving Ferinject. Conclusion: From the data we can conclude that physicians are good at recognising and treating IDA, although it remains important to fully investigate a patient to outrule other causes of anaemia (B12, folate, thalassaemia, etc…). The number of patients receiving adequate initial doses was excellent, showing that a relatively expensive drug was not overprescribed. However, a role for education and awareness in follow-up exists based on the data.  Clarke J University Hospital Waterford MP is a 38 year old gentleman who presented to University Hospital Waterford Emergency Department with a two week history of left flank pain, fevers, chills and vomiting with associated weight loss of two stone over a six week period. The patient also had a cough productive of green sputum present for three weeks. In terms of relevant negatives, there was no recent foreign travel, no sick contacts, no intravenous drug use and no antibiotic treatment prior to admission. There was no medical history of note. He was on no regular medications and has no known drug allergies. There was nothing of relevance in his family history. MP's social history was significant for a 25 pack year smoking history. He consumes 8 units of alcohol per week. Currently he works as a machine driver and denies any occupational asbestos exposure. He lives with his partner and has no children. On examination MP appeared cachectic. There was globally reduced air entry of the lungs on auscultation that was worst at the left base. He had a boggy, tender mass over the left renal angle on palpation of the abdomen. MP's bloods showed a raised ALP, Gamma GT, CRP, white cells and platelets. He was hyponatraemic and also had a low Hb. A lactate was 1.2. A CT-TAP showed a necrotic lesion in the left lung base. There was a suspicious nodule in the liver. A left flank collection was seen relatively superficially. This case had a wide differential diagnosis including TB, HIVor primary lung malignancy. Clinically the collection was a cold abscess. Management initially included out-ruling the above causes. Ultrasound guided drainage of the abscess under Interventional Radiology was performed. As per Microbiology advice MP received 4 weeks of high dose IV benzylpenicillin followed by 6 months of oral Amoxicillin. Background: Research has consistently found that high percentages of interns feel under-prepared to begin working in a hospital and lack the skills necessary to perform their job, particularly in acute care situations. Protocols and check lists can be useful tools to facilitate decision making and communication. Aim: To identify the "ward calls" that interns find challenging and to develop an application to support preparation and decision making when assessing unwell patients. Methods: A questionnaire circulated to WNW interns(response rate 45%) and a focus group identified 14 common topics involving the assessment and management of unwell patients, that interns are called to review. A team of interns, NCHDs and educationalists formulated a series of stages and actions for the intern to work through upon receiving a ward call: Prepare, Assess, Fact Find, Manage. A collaborative approach with review cycles and collation of feedback was used before final sign off on content by senior expert clinicians. Additional evidence based practice protocols and guidelines were sourced to support each topic. Results: The Steth-O-Cope application, built with 14 initial ward calls covering topics such as high temperature, abdominal pain, fast heart rate, shortness of breath, was tested on intern users(n = 10) and revisions made to reflect feedback. The beta version was developed with additional functionality added such as a task creation section and the ability to set reminders while the gold version will be developed for Android and launched on the Google Play Store in January 2017. Conclusions: The adoption of an evidence based, iterative and collaborative approach to the development of the support application Steth-O-Cope is one of the strengths of this application. The pilot research informing the content was critical in ensuring the application addressed intern training needs. User rate and feedback will be collated using Google Analytics in 2017. O'Sullivan M, Quinn S, Slattery E Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital Galway, West North West Intern Network Case discussion: 59-year-old lady presented to the ED with acute right upper quadrant abdominal pain on a background of deranged LFTs and cholelithiasis. The pain was 10/10 in severity and associated with vomiting & 'dark' urine. She denied any change in bowel habit, chills or fevers. She was a non-drinker. On examination she was jaundiced, there were no other abnormal findings. Her medications included; nitrofurantoin, solifenacin, paracetamol & NSAIDS; dexketoprofen, naproxen and celecoxib. On admission, her LFTs revealed cholestasis (GGT 339, ALT 952, ALP 229, Bili 105) with evidence of synthetic dysfunction (Albumin 32, INR 1.6) which had worsened from her baseline. An ultrasound and MRCP suggested the possibility of a Mirizzi Syndrome. An ERCP was within normal limits. At this point, an intrinsic liver disease was felt to be the most likely aetiology. A non-invasive liver screen was non-contributory. She then proceeded to a transjugular liver biopsy (due to coagulopathy) which revealed mixed patterns suggestive of a drug-induced liver injury. While awaiting biopsy result, she decompensated with ascites. Repeat ultrasound & CT findings were consistent with cirrhosis and portal hypertension. A medication compliance history revealed that she had been taking nitrofurantoin since 2011 for UTI prophylaxis. Nitrofurantoin is associated with chronic liver injury in 1/1500 1 . This combined with an idiosyncratic adverse reaction to NSAIDs (link with liver injury in 1-10/100000 prescriptions 2 ) which she had taken in the weeks prior to her admission is thought to have caused an acute-on chronic liver injury. Her ascites was managed medically with diuretics and the offending drugs were discontinued with some resolution of underlying liver biochemistry. She was subsequently discharged for close outpatient monitoring. Discussion: This case highlights the importance of regularly reviewing a patient's medication history. It is important to investigate the underlying cause of conditions such as UTIs to minimise prolonged and potentially indefinite treatment which can cause adverse effects. Abstract Background: Interns on-call (IOCs) are frequently asked to interpret xrays without an accompanying radiologist's report. Aims: The aim of this study is to assess the level of basic x-ray interpretation training in medical schools and interns' degree of confidence interpreting such x-rays whilst on-call and without radiology reports. Methods: A questionnaire was distributed to interns in the Mid-West Intern Network (n=50). The questionnaire explored methods of teaching used and satisfaction levels with teaching of basic radiology in medical schools. Additionally, the level of confidence interpreting basic, commonly-encountered x-rays (especially chest and abdominal films) on-call and interns' receptiveness to further formal radiology teaching as part of the intern training programme were considered. Results: The response was 76%. All Irish medical schools and one British school were represented in the study. 38% of respondents reported some formal training in radiological interpretation at medical school. 27% reported no formal training, whilst 59% encountered radiological interpretation as merely part of problem-based learning or clinical skills sessions. 97% of interns have been asked to interpret an x-ray whilst on-call and without a radiologist's report. 13% are confident interpreting these x-rays. Identifying correct nasogastric tube (95%) placement and identifying lobar pneumonia (71%) on chest x-rays are the most confidently interpreted x-rays by IOCs. 26% are confident interpreting abdominal x-rays. 100% of IOCs questioned believe they would benefit from further x-ray interpretation tutorials. Abdominal x-ray interpretation is the x-ray type most-requested for further training (55%). Conclusion: The level of and methods of radiological interpretation teaching in medical schools appears to vary considerably. 97% of IOCs have been asked to interpret x-rays whilst on-call and without a radiologist's report, but only 13% are confident in doing so. 100% of interns feel they would benefit from further formal teaching. Key words: Medical school • Intern training • Radiology • X-ray Interpretation Farrell G, Tierney S The Adelaide and Meath Hospital Introduction: A case of Mesenteric Ischaemia, admission was due to left scapular pain. Case Description: Mr MR is a 64 year old gentleman, referred to AMNCH by his GP with a 2 day history of moderate left scapular pain radiating down left arm, and mild periumbilical pain, on a background of a 45 pack year smoking history, 80 units of alcohol weekly, hypertension and hypercholesterolaemia. There were no cardiac symptoms, and no bowel symptoms. Physical exam was unremarkable. Initially he underwent investigation of his shoulder pain -MRI C-spine showed cervical spondylosis, and disc protrusion at C6/C7, giving a working diagnosis of radicular pain. The abdominal pain worsened, became constant, and was exacerbated by eating. His lactate was 2.2. A surgical review suspected chronic pancreatitis/mesenteric ischaemia, prompting a CT Angiogram, showing obstructing thrombus in the SMA and stenosis of the coeliac trunk. A diagnosis of mesenteric ischaemia was made. The vascular team started an unfractionated heparin infusion. Day 11 post admission, the patient had an ileomesenteric bypass to the superior mesenteric artery from the left common iliac artery, using the left long saphenous vein. Post-operatively he remained on the heparin infusion, and Clopidogrel 75mg was started. An episode of bilious vomiting was the indication for a CT 3 days post-op. The findings were suspicious for mesenteric ischaemia. The patient was clinically stable, however, and conservative management was advised His heparin infusion and Clopidogrel were discontinued, and Warfarin was commenced. On day 8 post-op, MR tolerated a light diet, progressed well, and was discharged 26 days post admission. Discussion This case illustrates the value of a complete history and the vital role that Radiology plays in the diagnosis and intervention in a case of mesenteric ischaemia, as timely intervention is crucial. A turbulent tackle : A novel surgical approach to a rugby related jejunal perforation O'Sullivan D, O'Shea R, Gaffney B, Aherne TM, Sweeney KJ Department of Breast and General Surgery, Galway University Hospital Introduction: Viscus perforation in the context of blunt-force abdominal trauma is in itself a rarity. Within a sporting context, it is especially rare. Herein, we report a novel laparoscopic surgical approach to the management of a traumatic jejunal perforation sustained through a shoulder blow on the playing field in a previously fit and healthy 28-year old. Description A 28-year old gentleman with no significant medical history presented to Emergency Department with severe left sided abdominal pain and vomiting following abdominal trauma during a rugby match. Clinical examination revealed localised left-sided peritonism. The patient was afebrile and haemodynamically stable throughout. CT imaging demonstrated tiny foci of free air adjacent to a focal segmental thickening of the jejunum distal to the ligament of Treitz. Laparoscopy was performed which revealed evidence of an early adhesional mass forming in the left upper quadrant. An extensive washout was undertaken and a wide-bore free drainage system was placed along the left paracolic gutter. An immediate symptomatic response was noted in the post-operative period with near complete resolution of pain and full mobility the next day. Conclusion/ Treatment Rugby union is increasing in physicality both in the professional and amateur arena leading to a wide spectrum of potential injury. Our case highlights laparoscopy as a safe and effective treatment modality for hollow viscus perforation. To our knowledge, the washout and drainage technique has yet to be described in the context of a sporting injury as shown in our report. Introduction: The mumps virus causes an acute, self-limiting viral syndrome. Prior to the introduction of the MMR vaccine in Ireland (1988), mumps primarily affected the paediatric population. However, almost all of the elderly population would have been exposed to the virus and thus would be expected to have immunity. Case presentation: An 84-year-old female nursing home resident presented to her GP with a one day history of unilateral facial swelling, with associated nausea & vomiting. Apart from attending hospital for an outpatient xray 9 days prior to presentation, she had no known exposure to sick contacts. Vaccination history: flu and pneumococcal vaccines administered as per national guidelines. Examination revealed an enlarged and tender parotid gland. There was a high clinical suspicion of mumps, however the patient was treated with oral co-amoxiclav to cover for possible bacterial infection and paracetamol PRN. IgM serology sent in the convalescent stage of the illness confirmed the diagnosis of mumps. The patient's symptoms improved significantly within the first week. Droplet precautions were used by the nursing home staff & the patient did not have any contact with other residents. No other residents were infected. Informal contact tracing performed by the GP did not reveal any source of the infection amongst nursing home staff, their families or visitors to the nursing home. Discussion: This case highlights an unusual presentation of mumps. Mumps is highly infectious and spreads rapidly among susceptible people living in close quarters. Control of transmission is challenging since the virus is present in saliva days before clinical parotitis occurs and viral shedding can occur in asymptomatic individuals. In instances such as this case, droplet precautions are recommended. Methods: a working group comprised of 1 consultant, 7 NCHDs and 3 pharmacists discussed possible factors contributing to prescribing error in MMUH and potential solutions were generated. Data were collected on the types of drugs prescribed by NCHDs during a single working day, whether they were prompted to prescribe these and the time taken to prescribe. Four data sets were taken during normal working hours, two during on call shifts. Results: Data on 36 prescriptions were collected of which 11 were discharge scripts and 25 hospital drug charts. 11 prescription were issued while on call (of which, four were rework prescriptions). 75% of the prescriptions were prompted by another person: this varied significantly between intern and SHO prescribers, with 94% of intern prescriptions being prompted compared to 60% of SHOs. Nursing staff were the commonest prompters, alerting NCHDs in 48% of prompted prescriptions; including all prescriptions by on-call interns. Another doctor was consulted in 27% of prescriptions; in 5.4% of cases a hospital protocol or book was consulted. The commonest drugs prescribed were analgesics (16%), anticoagulants (13%), insulin (8.5%) and antibiotics (5.5%). Factors identified as contributing to error included difficulty accessing relevant information, pressure to prescribe quickly and interruptions while rewriting Kardexes. Possible improvements ranged from Kardex alterations (eg. a page for anticoagulation) to enabling remote access to prescribing info throughout the hospital. Conclusions: We have highlighted a number of issues with regards to NCHD prescribing. Solutions identified to reduce medication errors and improve prescribing efficiency include increasing remote access to information, addressing the time spent on call doing re-work prescriptions and lending further support to interns. All parties agreed electronic prescribing should be the ultimate goal. Introduction: This is the case of an 87 year-old female with a left middle cerebral artery infarct admitted to UHL. While ischaemic stroke is a common condition, this case captures several important practical medical as well as ethical issues. It highlights key learning points regarding the prevention and management of ischaemic stroke and end-of-life care. Case description: A previously well, 87 year-old female living independently in sheltered accommodation, with a history of asymptomatic atrial fibrillation treated with aspirin, was brought into the Emergency Department after being found on the floor of her unit, possibly having been there for 24 hours. On admission, the patient had a GCS of 11, right hemiplegia, her gaze was deviated to the left and she had marked expressive and receptive dysphasia, and dysphagia. The picture was further complicated by respiratory distress due to pulmonary embolism, rapid atrial fibrillation and aspiration pneumonia. While the exact time of her collapse was unknown, it was beyond the time limit for IV thrombolysis and IA thrombectomy. Over the course of three weeks in UHL, the patient slowly stabilised, with improving consciousness and cardiorespiratory function, a partial recovery in swallow, but with persistent right hemiparesis and severe speech and language difficulties. After discussion with next of kin, she was discharged to a nursing home with a "Not For Resuscitation" status. Discussion /conclusion: This case highlights key learning points relating to the prevention and management of ischaemic stroke; more specifically, the management of a major predisposing factor such as asymptomatic atrial fibrillation and the overall approach to acute stroke therapy and its timing. The treatment of stroke complications such as pulmonary embolism (and its associated risks), infection, swallowing and speech are discussed. Finally, ethical issues and decisions regarding resuscitation status and end-of life care are highlighted. Eagle syndrome, which is due to calcified stylohyoid ligaments or an elongated styloid process, may manifest as chronic throat pain or classically, with pain on swallowing or flexing the neck laterally. These symptoms are thought to be due to either arterial or cranial nerve impingement. The use of modern imaging modalities that allow for 3D reconstruction have aided the diagnosis enormously. We present a patient who sustained blunt trauma to the neck during a sports related injury. He presented to ED with dysphagia and throat pain worsening over a number of days. He was admitted to the ICU for close observation given his high risk airway. Plain film X-rays delineated air in the retropharynx, further confirmed by CT. His CT demonstrated bilateral calcified stylohyoid ligaments resulting in a ring of bone at the superior aspect of his larynx. He had a fracture at the stylohyoid junction, likely resulting in posterior laceration of the pharyngeal wall. He was treated conservatively and made a full recovery. This likely would not have occurred without his anatomical curiosity. Treatment options, the current stance in the literature as well as 3D reconstructions of our case are discussed. Panton-Valentine Leukocidin (PVL) is a virulence factor produced by <2% of Staphylococcus Aureus. It causes skin and soft tissue infections, and severe invasive infections in otherwise healthy patients in the community, namely: necrotizing haemorrhagic pneumonia, necrotizing fasciitis and osteomyelitis. A 23-year old male presented to the Emergency Department with a 3 day history of a large abscess on his left hand. In the preceding 4 months, he developed acute abscesses on his shoulder and groin, which were responsive to oral Flucloxacillin. The current abscess was the largest to date. There was no history of IV drug use, diabetes or recent travel. On examination, there was a 6cm circumferential abscess on the dorsum of the left hand producing green pus, with associated cellulitis. He was systemically well. White cell count and CRP were mildly elevated. Screening tests for immunocompromise, including HIV, were negative. X-Ray of the left hand showed no osteomyelitis. Wound swabs grew Staphylococcus Aureus. An uncomplicated incision and drainage was performed. He was treated with oral Flucloxacillin and discharged. At follow-up in Infectious Disease clinic, microscopy and gram stain taken at the time of incision were positive for PVL, which was Penicillin and Clindamycin resistant, and Flucloxacillin/Methicillin sensitive. Although the hand abscess had healed, he had developed a 1cm abscess on his shoulder. He reported his girlfriend had developed a similar abscess. Subsequently, a targeted history revealed the patient's risk factors included: close contact and sharing contaminated items such as towels and razors. It was decided to proceed with decolonization. Chlorhexidine bodywash and Mupirocin topically to each nostril was prescribed. Other advice that was given included: covering infected skin with a dressing, which should be changed regularly, regularly wash hands and wash towels daily in hot water. At follow up post decolonisation, the abscess had fully healed and he had no recurrences. This case describes a rare case of a PVL infection in an immunocompetent patient, and illustrates the importance of an early diagnosis. Appropriate informed consent is a cornerstone of good Medical Practice as defined by The Medical Council 1 .We performed a survey of Interns in Ireland. Objective: to ascertain Interns' experience seeking consent and adherence to Medical Council guidelines. An anonymous survey was distributed to all interns.192 responded. 89.1% consented for surgery regularly.91.8% were expected to consent and 66.7% felt under pressure in doing so.63% agree that they should be consenting given adequate training, but only 1.2% received training on consent as interns, with 64.9% receiving training in university. Medical Council guidelines state"As the treating doctor,you will have a full understanding of the procedure or treatment,how it is carried out and the risks attached to it".Our results demonstrated that 82.5% are unaware of any policy regarding consent in their hospital and 62.4% are unaware of national guidelines.The Council's Guide to Professional Conduct further states"You should not delegate any part of the consent process to an intern unless the procedure is a minor one with which the intern is very familiar and the intern's medical supervisor has clearly explained the relevant information about the procedure to them".In our study 16.4% reported senior colleagues explaining the procedure to them.None were regularly observed when consenting and 92% had never witnessed the procedure. This study has demonstrated that current practices regarding Interns seeking consent are suboptimal.We hope this will prompt Colleges to address the deficiencies identified and enact appropriate change to ensure adherence to Medical Council's Standards of Practice and enhance patient safety and quality of care. Abdominal wall hernias are a common surgical problem. The increasing intra-abdominal pressure attributable to the gravid uterus means they frequently occur in pregnant women. There are however, unique challenges facing surgeon with regard to the diagnosis and treatment of parastomal hernias in pregnancy. We present a unique case of parastomal hernia leading to recurrent bowel obstruction. A 36-year old G1P0 female with a history of Ulcerative Colitis presented at 28 weeks gestation with abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and reduced stoma output. This was her second presentation with signs of bowel obstruction, the first having resolved spontaneously 10 weeks previously. Clinical examination revealed a small parastomal hernia, with a small bowel obstruction diagnosed on MRI. Conservative management was effective and she was discharged with advice to self-reduce the hernia. Two days later, she re-presented with raised inflammatory markers. Repeat MRI displayed an inter-loop abscess in the RIF. The patient was optimized for early delivery and underwent a Midline C-Section, with delivery of a healthy male fetus. This was immediately followed by small bowel resection, refashioning of loop ileostomy, RIF drainage and repair of parastomal hernia. Recovery was complicated with intra-abdominal collections. The patient was discharged 12 days postpartum, and her baby boy spent 6 weeks in the neonatal ICU. This case illustrates the challenging manner that pregnant patients pose to the general surgeon. Obstruction in pregnancy has been associated with high morbidity and mortality. Parastomal hernias are a rare cause of obstruction evidenced by a lack of case reports in existing literature. Presentation can mistakenly be attributed to that of a normal pregnancy, delaying diagnosIs and treatment. MRI is the safest imaging modality with lowest radiation exposure. Management should be guided by gestation of fetus, and relative risk to the mother. In the 3 rd trimester, hernia repair with concurrent C-section is the optimal treatment of those with a symptomatic abdominal wall hernia. Open reduction and internal fixation of the humerus and debridement of the wounds was initially performed. A left ulnar nerve defect of 9.5cm was identified. The soft tissue loss measured 15cm by 9 cm and there was open communication with the elbow joint. Forty eight hours later the patient underwent definitive reconstruction. This involved sural nerve grafts and a free anterolateral thigh flap. The patient was discharged from hospital 10 days later with a plan for intensive physical and occupational therapy. Discussion Modern major trauma care requires a timely, coordinated, multidisciplinary team approach. Complex composite defects pose significant reconstructive challenges. The case we describe required both Orthopaedic and Plastic/Reconstructive specialities, nerve grafts and free tissue transfer to ensure an optimal patient outcome. Various options for reconstruction of such severe injuries are discussed. Murray SE 1 , Ryan D 1 1 Department of Emergency Medicine, University Hospital Limerick Abstract ntroduction: Intracranial Haematoma is a recognised complication of trauma related minor head injuries. Computed tomography (CT) remains the imaging modality of choice in patients presenting to the emergency department (ED) with a head injury to exclude intracranial bleeding. The aim of this audit was to review appropriate use of brain CT imaging in the ED and assess compliance with the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) and Canadian CT Head Rule head rule (CCHR) head injury clinical guidelines. Methods All CT brain scan requests made by ED doctors over a one month period (August 2016) were identified. Charts were reviewed for a total of 41 patients who underwent brain CT scanning. The CCHR and NICE clinical guideline 176 were used as the standard of care. Data from the 41 patients was collected to perform a retrospective audit to assess which patients qualified for a brain CT by fulfilling one or more criteria from either guideline or from both. Results 36 patients who underwent brain CT imaging were identified. The average age of the patient sample was 55 years with 20 male patients (55.5%). At least one of the NICE guideline criteria and one of Canadian Ct head Rule criteria was fulfilled in 94.4% of patients who underwent brain CT imaging. 2 patients did not meet criteria for either guideline. 1.32 of the NICE criteria and 1.29 of the CCHR criteria were fulfilled on average. Discussion ED consultants appropriately refer patients for brain CT scans following minor head injuries and adhere to NICE and Canadian head injury guidelines. Conclusion Utilisation of guidelines in the ED can help doctors effectively identify patients who would benefit from brain CT imaging in a trauma setting while allowing doctors to safely discharge patients who do not fulfil imaging criteria. Young C 1 , Casey M 2 1 Intern, St James' Hospital; 2 Consultant Geriatrician, St James' Hospital A 76-year-old man was admitted under Medicine for the Elderly with dyspnoea, low oxygen saturation levels, and loss of consciousness. His past history included an STEMI in 2006, Atrial Fibrillation and previous episodes of pneumonia. He was worked up for community-acquired pneumonia, and a possible PE. His CT brain was normal. On day three of his admission, he became acutely unwell in the early hours of the morning, with a troponin rise, right sided chest pain, fast A. Fib, respiratory distress and non specific T wave changes. A diagnosis of NSTEMI was made. Repeat CXR showed progression of his pneumonia to ARDS. Echocardiogram showed an ejection fraction of 20-25%, with a BNP of over 20,000. His antibiotic regimen was escalated and he was transferred to the ICU. While there he began requiring increasing levels of Noradrenaline to maintain his blood pressure. He was started on Dobutamine, which was stopped due to an episode of unstable A fib. His A.Fib resolved after two DC cardioversions, and was further treated with Amiodarone infusion. One week after his admission he was diagnosed with severe RSV infection. Unfortunately, he failed to make any significant recovery in ICU, with increasing Oxygen and Noradrenaline demands. He passed away on day 8 of his admission. This case illustrates the severity of RSV pneumonia in the elderly population, as well as our current inability to actively treat RSV infections in at risk populations. While palivizumab has been employed in at risk paediatric groups for passive resistance, there is as yet no vaccination available for at risk elderly people 1 , who are frequently unable to mount an appropriate immune response. A recent study in The Netherlands proved that RSV vaccination would be cost effective, particularly if applied to high risk groups 2 . Peritoneal tuberculosis is an uncommon extrapulmonary site of mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. It typically occurs following reactivation of latent peritoneal foci previously spread from a primary lung lesion 1 . Onset is insidious, and symptoms may be ongoing for months prior to presentation, making diagnosis challenging. A high index of suspicion is required, particularly in patients from high risk areas. Case Presentation We present the case of a 32 year-old lady from Afghanistan who presented with a two week history of abdominal pain and pyrexia. Physical examination was significant for left iliac fossa tenderness. Mantoux and Quanteferon tests were positive for tuberculosis. She was found to have a raised CA-125 (120U/mL). Chest x-ray demonstrated an old calcified granuloma in the right lung, while pelvic ultrasound revealed fluid in the Pouch of Douglas. Subsequent computed tomography revealed ascites with peritoneal nodularity and a 4cm rim calcified structure in the right adnexa. Differential diagnosis was between that of peritoneal tuberculosis and ovarian carcinoma. Laparoscopy was performed, and extensive pelvic adhesions were seen, most consistent with ovarian carcinomatosis. Although Zeihl-Neelson stain was negative, biopsy results revealed florid, well defined granulomas and no evidence of malignancy. The patient was commenced on empiric treatment for tuberculosis on the basis of biopsy results. Conclusion Peritoneal tuberculosis presents clinicians with several diagnostic and treatment challenges. Clinical presentation may resemble that of intraabdominal malignancy, and alterations in tumour markers may further confound diagnosis 2 . Disappointingly low yield of Ziehl-Neelson staining, and delay in tissue culture reports provide further difficulty with timely diagnosis 3 . Peritoneal biopsy is useful as results are often prior to mycobacterial cultures being available. Abstract A fifty two year old female patient was transferred from a psychiatric hospital, with a two day history of acute confusion and unsteady gait. Her background was significant for chronic depression. Neurological examination revealed disorientation and ataxia. Routine blood investigations including FBC, CRP, U/E and LFTs were normal. CT brain and MRI brain studies were unremarkable. A lumbar puncture was performed which showed lymphocytosis (WCC 1 st bottle 103, 3 rd bottle 45) and a raised protein level (87). No organisms were seen. Treatment was started with IV acyclovir which was discontinued after three days because of acute kidney injury. The patient developed worsening encephalopathy with confusion, anxiety and upper limb cerebellar signs on examination. Aciclovir was restarted and renal function was monitored closely. Evaluation for other causes of encephalitis was performed. Serum Anti -Hu, Yo, Ri, VGKC, ANA, ENA, ANCA, PR3, myeloperoxidase, and GBM antibodies all returned negative. HSV PCR also returned negative. Two weeks into admission the patient had two grand mal seizures and was commenced on phenytoin and levetiracetam. MRI Brain was repeated and showed high signal in the medial temporal lobes bilaterally with extension into the right thalamus indicating progressive encephalitis. EEG studies showed periodic lateralised epileptiform discharges. Lumbar puncture was repeated and CSF samples were sent to Oxford University laboratory for further evaluation. Serum and CSF NMDA receptor antibodies returned positive which confirmed the diagnosis of NMDA encephalitis. Treatment was commenced with high dose intravenous steroids, IVIg and later plasma exchange. The patient has shown a significant clinical improvement after five sessions of plasma exchange to date manifest by being orientated in time and place and walking with assistance. Investigations continue to out rule possible underlying malignancy such as ovarian teratoma. NMDA receptor antibody needs to be considered as a cause of encephalitis where other aetiological causes have been investigated. NDMA only accounts for 4% of cases of encephalitis 1 but effective treatment yields successful outcomes in the majority of cases. Protein C deficiency has an estimated prevalence of 0.2-0.5 percent(1). The incidence is increased tenfold in patients with venous thromboembolism (2) . These individuals are more likely to develop thromboembolic events earlier in life compared to the general population (3) . The risk of arterial thrombosis and stroke is less certain, however considering the devastating effect stroke may have, thorough investigation is still warranted(4). Case Discussion We present the case of a previously healthy 16 year old male, who presented with acute onset expressive dysphasia and right sided weakness. CT angiogram of brain demonstrated a left middle cerebral artery thrombus, with subsequent magnetic resonance imaging confirming a left basal ganglia infarct. His motor symptoms had resolved entirely at this point. Further history revealed he had undertaken a strenuous rugby training session the previous day. Extensive laboratory and radiological investigations followed including a Transcranial Doppler with Bubble Study. This demonstrated a small patent foramen ovale with a degree of shunting. Furthermore, haematological testing revealed mild Protein C deficiency, with a reading of 59 U/dL. The patient has made an excellent recovery, with only slight deficits in higher level speech. Conclusion One of the proposed mechanisms in this case is that a Valsalva Manoeuvre during rugby training allowed the small patent foramen ovale to open, allowing a paradoxical embolus to occur. Protein C deficiency alone has not been shown to increase risk of arterial thrombus but it may be a factor in the presence of a PFO particularly in this case where no other aetiology has been found. Background & Aim: Radiology is a core part of the diagnostic process, providing clinicians with an expert opinion. When in the request a clinical question is posed, a specific answer should always be given in the report. There is research to show that many doctors may not read the report in full and skip straight to the conclusion. As a result, we wish to audit the rate at which this question is directly answered in the conclusion of the radiology report in SVUH. reports did not answer the clinical question directly in the conclusion. In all of these cases, the clinical question was answered in the body of the report and an alternative diagnosis was offered in the conclusion. Conclusion: The CT reports reviewed in this audit provide a direct answer to the clinical question in the conclusion in over 96% of cases. In all of the cases, the clinical question was answered in the body or the conclusion. This demonstrates excellent quality reporting in regard to answering the clinical question in this sample taken in SVUH. Purpose of study: Peer teaching (PT) has become increasingly popular. PT may offer benefits for students, tutors, and institutions. Although resistance to PT has been identified among faculty, research has typically focused on students' experiences and perceptions, rather than those of the peer tutors or senior doctors/medical faculty. The current study comprised a comprehensive, multi-perspective evaluation of a near PT programme delivered by interns to final year medical students in the Republic of Ireland. Study design: This study employed a mixed methods design, using both interviews and questionnaires to assess students' (n=130), interns' (n=49), and medical faculty or senior doctors' (n=29) perceptions of the programme. Results: All three groups were emphatic about the programme's benefits, although senior doctors and faculty reported significantly more positive attitudes than the other groups. Mean ratings of the programme's value, out of 10, were 8.2 among students, 8.2 among interns, and 9.1 among senior doctors and faculty. Challenges identified were largely organisational in nature. Perceived benefits for students included the informality of the teaching sessions, increased opportunities in the clinical environment, and improvements in exam preparedness. Perceived benefits for the interns included improvements in knowledge and teaching ability and experience as a role model. Conclusions: PT programmes have been posited as an 'easy fix' to growing numbers of students. However, it is apparent that PT has substantial value outside of this. Future research that conducts economic evaluations of such programmes, and that collects objective data on teaching quality and student learning would be of much interest An audit on the assessment of bladder and bowel continence on inpatients in the acute medical assessment unit An 82 year old gentleman was admitted to Galway University Hospital with bilateral arm weakness and loss of sensation following a complex nighttime fall at home which resulted in his arms becoming separately caught in both his bedside locker and a rail attached to his bed. His homehelp carer found him the following afternoon, describing his position between the bed and the locker as 'like a backwards crucifixion'. Description/case presentation: On returning from the bathroom at 2am, the patient, a single farmer, lost his balance and fell forward, with his left hand becoming lodged in a partially opened drawer of his bedside locker, and his right arm getting caught between the mattress and bed rail. For twelve hours, he remained in this position with his arms abducted and extended, his chest pointed towards the ceiling and his knees flexed and suspended two inches from the floor. He reports feeling a stretch under his axillae, and then his arms 'went dead'. The panic alarm on wrist was inaccessible as he could not free either arm. He was BIBA to GUH A&E, with 0/5 power and 0/5 sensation in his Upper Limbs bilaterally, rhabdomyolysis and a secondary AKI. Despite extensive radiological work up, there was no indication of nerve root avulsion on either CT C-Spine, or MRI Brachial Plexus. Extensive oedema was evident on both. Nerve conduction studies identified a severe peripheral nerve injury and prognosis is likely very poor. Discussion/conclusion: Permanent total bilateral upper limb weakness represents a devastating injury in a previously independent farmer, and significant challenges to all involved in his care: neuropathic pain control, mobilisation assistance, rehabilitation, and not least diagnosis. Teratomas are germ cell tumours often composed of several cell types derived from the three germ layers. They range from cystic lesions that are benign and well-differentiated (mature) to those that are malignant and solid in nature (immature). The authors present the case of a 45 year old lady presenting with left iliac fossa discomfort. She was otherwise healthy with no significant medical history. She reported no weight loss and no change in appetite, menstrual cycle or bowel habit. Ultrasound scan revealed a left ovarian 10.4 x 8.7 x 7.7 cm dermoid cyst with a typical appearance. Further investigation with CT and MRI revealed multiple liver lesions which appeared subscapular and all contained some fat. Appearances were suggestive of previous rupture of a dermoid with peritoneal spread and deposits on the liver surface. Metastatic disease from a malignant dermoid was deemed a possibility, although this would be more likely to produce intraparenchymal liver lesions. It was thus impossible to out rule metastasis disease based on imaging alone. Liver biopsy revealed lymphangioma. However, this also did not definitively out rule that the other liver lesions were not indeed metastatic. The case was discussed at a multi-disciplinary gynaeoncology meeting and the patient was subsequently scheduled for laparoscopic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy combined with a liver resection under the hepatobiliary team. Post operative histology of the ovarian mass revealed a mature cystic teratoma with lesions on liver interpreted as being similar in origin. No immature tissue was noted. The patient had an uneventful post-operative course and was discharged home on day 6. This case represents an interesting combined surgical approach and exemplifies multi-disciplinary team work as radiological, histological and surgical intervention were all required to come to an accurate diagnosis. Investigation into the adherence of NCHD's with recommended hospital/national guidelines for blood culture sampling A 51-year-old male presented to the Emergency Department with a oneday history of sudden onset right-sided renal angle pain radiating to the groin with associated urinary frequency, nausea and emesis. A noncontrast CT KUB showed an obstructing 4mm right vesico-ureteric junction (VUJ) calculus, an obstructing 1.5cm right pelvi-ureteric (PUJ) calculus and a non-obstructing 1.2cm calculus in the lower pole of the right kidney. Given the acute obstruction and the large stone burden, a two-phase multimodal approach was used. For treatment of his acutely obstructing stone, he underwent a right rigid ureteroscopy, fragmentation of the 4mm calculus and JJ stent insertion. Management of his remaining stone burden was discussed at a multidisciplinary radiology meeting. Treatment options were flexible ureterorenoscopy with laser fragmentation or percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL). Due to the location of the lower pole calculus and the tight infundibulopelvic angle, PCNL was recommended. Percutaneous access was established through the right lower pole infundibulum, with an angle of tracking that enabled access to both the lower pole and PUJ calculi. He underwent successful PCNL with complete stone clearance, and was discharged three days post-operatively. Urolithiasis is a common urological presentation and this case illustrates that the management of renal calculi can be complex. Although there are international guidelines on the management of renal and ureteric calculi, complex cases require careful consideration of individual patient characteristics, stone burden and location. Multidisciplinary team input is critical in deciding the most appropriate treatment modality. Contraception counselling in women of child-bearing years prescribed psychotropic medication Coen S 1 , Noonan A1 ABSTRACT INTRODUCTION: There are risks and benefits to taking psychotropics during pregnancy. A previous audit found that 17% of women of child-bearing years were counselled regarding contraception in the previous year. Following this, a form, which prompted reviewing psychiatrists to discuss contraception with patients, was placed in each file of women of child-bearing age, with the standard being that contraception should be discussed with all women of child-bearing years prescribed psychotropics. Additionally, as a health promotion measure, we aimed to discover the number of women aged 25 and over with whom cervical smears were discussed. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Our outpatient database was used to identify all women from 18-50 years old. We examined their records to identify those on psychotropic medication, if they received contraception counselling and if 25 years old or over, whether cervical smears were discussed. Introduction: Pneumopericardium is a rare phenomenon that refers to a collection of air or gas within the pericardial cavity. It is most frequently associated with barotrauma in preterm infants who spend prolonged periods of time on mechanical ventilation, as well as individuals who sustain penetrating thoracic injuries. Case Description: PD is a 51 year old male with squamous cell lung cancer who underwent a left upper lobe sleeve lobectomy with mediastinal lymph node dissection. The patient's medical background was significant only for a solitary left kidney from birth, however he had a 20 pack year history and continued to smoke up until his diagnosis. His post-operative course was complicated by respiratory sepsis, for which he received antibiotics and non-invasive ventilation. On post-operative day 19, he collapsed on the ward. On examination, he was dyspnoeic with muffled heart sounds, a tachycardia of 142 beats per minute, blood pressure of 99/62mmHg, a fever of 39 0 C and SpO 2 of 85% on room air. An ECG revealed fast atrial fibrillation and his chest Xray was significant for a large pneumopericardium with worsening pneumonia. Subsequent echocardiogram and CT thorax confirmed the diagnosis and the patient was quickly transferred to the catheterization laboratory where emergency pericardiocentesis was performed, followed by drain insertion. Symptomatic and haemodynamic improvement was noted immediately. Subsequent investigation did not yield an exact aetiology. Discussion: There are very few published cases of pneumopericardium in patients following lobectomy or pneumonectomy. In those described, artificial ventilation at the time of the event was common, and points of air entry were identified in the pericardium. Although often asymptomatic, once there is evidence of haemodynamic compromise in these patients, mortality is as high as 56%. This case highlights the need for vigilance in the post-operative period, as well as the importance of timely intervention in such patients. Arterial dissections may happen at any age, though it is a valid differential for stroke in the young. This case highlights that: 1) a left vertebral artery dissection may present with symptoms mimicking a left MCA ischaemic infarct; 2) that MRI can be normal in acute stroke; and 3) that lifting heavy weights may have been causative in this case, especially in a person who has no features of increased risk for arterial dissection. A 44 year old male council worker presented to the E.D. after complaining of right sided weakness. He had been lifting loads of 40 kg for prolonged periods. The weakness worsened over the next few hours though there was no facial asymmetry. He had felt light headed, with no headache, dizziness, chest pain, dyspnoea, or palpitations. He had paraesthesia over the dorsum of the right foot. This was the first time this had happened. His medical history included renal cell carcinoma, and ulcerative colitis. He was not on any medications. On initial assessment in the ED he had right hemiparesis, with increased tone and 4/5 power on the right upper and lower limbs. His Romberg sign was negative. Of note, he also had right arm pronator drift. The rest of his examination was unremarkable. An urgent CT Brain was normal. Initial diagnosis was left MCA territory ischemic event; so he was commenced on aspirin and statin, and admitted to the acute stroke unit. Further evaluation showed diplopia on left lateral gaze, and right hemiparesis. There was no facial asymmetry. Features were consistent with brain stem stroke. Subsequent MRA brain showed a high signal intramural ring consistent with left vertebral artery dissection. Even though clinically our final diagnosis was brain stem stroke, the MRI did not show any diffusion weighted restriction defect to support it. Nor did it show any abnormality or ischaemic event in the left MCA territory, which was the initial diagnosis in the emergency department. Can cost-consciousness be taught to NCHDs? He was admitted for endoscopic ultrasound (EUS), which revealed a filling defect in the common bile duct (CBD). Subsequent Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) showed a dilated CBD, which tapered sharply indicating an obstruction. A sphincterotomy was performed without adequate drainage and a stent was inserted in the pancreatic duct and CBD. He was discharged with a view for follow-up ERCP in four weeks. He re-presented to the ED two days later with another episode of pain and hyperamylasemia but no other adverse indices and was later discharged with adequate analgesia. During the follow-up ERCP the stents were removed a balloon trawl extracted a small stone from the CBD. He has had no episodes of pancreatitis since discharge. Discussion: Gallstones remains the modal aetiologic factor for pancreatitis. MRCP, although widely relied upon, has as little as a 70% sensitivity for choledocholithiasis. Endoscopic ultrasound may have greater sensitivity, particularly for sludge or non-polymerised sludge aggregates. ERCP remains the Gold standard of both diagnosis and therapy, but sphincterotomy and balloon trawl is necessary for maximal sensitivity. As EUS is a safer procedure, it should be the next investigation for recurrent acute pancreatitis if MRCP is negative. Introduction: Gitelman's syndrome was first described in 1966 as a subtype of Bartter's syndrome. It is thought to be associated with mutations in the SLC12A3 gene, impairing the function of the sodium chloride co transporter of the distal convoluted tubules in the kidneys. This leads to excessive loses of electrolytes, most notably, potassium and calcium, but serum magnesium can also commonly be affected. Here, we examine the case of a lady with new onset hypocalcaemia and metabolic alkalosis, who's undiagnosed Gitelman's syndrome was exacerbated with the commencement of a thiazide diuretic. Description/case presentation: A 59-year-old Irish lady presented to medical services with symptoms of generalized weakness, constipation, nausea and poor oral intake for four days. Initially she was managed by her GP for diverticulitis, with no improvement following a four-day course of antibiotics. Serum measurements of renal function revealed a severe hypokalemia and blood gas showed that she had a poorly compensated metabolic alkalosis. She was commenced on potassium replacement, and her diuretics were optimized to minimize potassium losses. While initially slow to respond to IV therapy, her potassium, calcium and phosphorus returned to normal ranges with resolution of her presenting symptoms. Discussion/conclusion: It is important in patients presenting with hypokalaemia to include Gitelman's as a differential and to ensure that they do not have associated hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis, and hypocalciuria, which could indicate this syndrome as a cause. This case also highlights the importance of evaluating renal profile serum tests before the commencement of diuretic therapy. Aim: To evaluate the use of MRI brain in elderly (>80 years) in-patients and assess its impact on management. Method: We retrospectively audited 35 patients, above the age of 80, who have had a CT brain and a MRI brain in the same admission. A simple data collection tool was constructed to record the clinical indication and key findings of the scans and their impact on management. Waiting time between CT brain and MRI brain was also recorded. Results: There were 4 major indications of MRI brain: 21 cases of evaluating for stroke where symptoms had persisted despite a negative CT brain. 12 of these cases had a positive MRI brain. This, however, resulted in no major change in management, as plans continued to revolve around stroke rehab and regaining functionality where possible. 5 cases of evaluating calcifications seen on CT brain. 2 of these were positive for tumours with no major changes in management. 4 cases of MRI brain requested along with MR Angiography and Venography. There was no intervention due to the MRI brain directly. 2 cases of evaluating cranial nerve palsies, both negative. Majority of the CT brain were performed on the same day as order, while the average waiting time for a MRI brain was 4.2 days. Conclusion: 1. The majority of requests are for evaluation of stroke symptoms in the presence of an inconclusive CT. MRI helped confirm clinical diagnosis of acute stroke in 12 cases and did not change management in any of the 21 cases. 2. There is a need for increasing radiology resources to reduce waiting times and minimise delay in discharges. 3. Conversely, there is a need to establish better imaging pathway protocols for elderly patients with suspected stroke. Introduction: Stress is a well acknowledged problem amongst healthcare staff and is associated with a number of negative outcomes that impact both the healthcare provider and the patient. Staff working in the Emergency Department (ED) are particularly vulnerable to stress, and this is of no surprise given the unpredictable and challenging nature of the ED. Aim: To investigate 'real time' stress levels experienced by staff in the ED and also to explore reasons identified that influence stress levels. Methods: A quantitative cross-sectional study design was used. Staff working in the ED in Cork University Hospital were invited to complete a short questionnaire on an iPad during their work shift. Perceived stress levels were measured using a visual scale analogue (VAS) 'stressometer' Participants were invited to complete the questionnaire more than once over two weeks. Results: A total of 508 questionnaires were completed. The mean stress level was 37.4 out of 100. 41% of the completed questionnaires indicated mild stress, 25% indicated moderate stress and 23% indicated severe stress. Median stress levels were statistically significantly different between professions, χ 2 (10) = 25,403, p=0.003. There was no statistically significant difference between locations within the ED and median stress level, χ 2 (9) = 15. Excess alcohol consumption is one of the greatest public health problems in Ireland at present and attacks all strata of society and age groups impinging on all aspects of society including both behavioral and medical problems. In order to increase public awareness of all aspects of the dangers of excess alcohol consumption, a study of alcohol related deaths in the Cork and Kerry region was undertaken for the year 2012. The aim was to establish a baseline of the many wide and varied ways that alcohol can directly cause or contribute significantly to the death of both young and old alike. A total of 810 post mortem reports from the year 2012 were surveyed. 187 (23.09%) were implicated alcohol related deaths of which 140 had blood alcohol levels at the time of post mortem. 87.17% of alcohol related deaths were male and 12.83% were female and overall had an average age of 49.37 years. On inspection of the post mortem reports, 5 main categories were identified in which alcohol related death could be incorporated. These included organ damage, misadventure, accidental death, suicide and criminal causation. On analysis of the results, the highest proportion of deaths related to alcohol, were due to organ damage, which accounted for 41.18% of deaths. This encompasses Cardiac (19%), liver (10.16%), pancreas (1.6%), gastro-intestinal tract (5.88%), lung (3.74) and brain (0.53%). Suicides also accounted for 25.67% of alcohol related deaths, which is also a significant proportion of these deaths. The results highlight a definite and substantial role of alcohol consumption in sudden deaths in various aspects. Awareness of the extensive effect alcohol can have on the human body, which can be both chronic or acute in nature is in need of address. Retrospective study on achievability of R0 margin resection after polypectomy Our lady of Lourdes Hospital, Drogheda Introduction: Colonic polyps are removed endoscopically by various methods. The size and the type of the polyp generally decides the way in which a polyp will be removed. Diminutive polyps <1cm in size are usually removed by cold snare, pedunculated polyps are removed by hot snare whereas sessile and superficially elevated polyps are removed by endo mucosal resection technique (EMR). Irrespective of the method in which polyps are removed the goal of a polypectomy is to achieve a R0 margin meaning that the margin does not contain polypoid material. Objective: We aimed to determine the achievability of R0 clear margin after various methods of polypectomy. We also wanted to look at if any method was superior to others in obtaining a R0 resection margin. On admission, her resting peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 93% on room air. Chest radiography, routine bloods, ECG and cardiac enzymes were normal. D-dimer was raised. Computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) found no filling defect, no pulmonary masses, infiltrates, or consolidation, and pleural spaces were clear. Her dyspnea progressively worsened. On the third day, a portal vein thrombosis was discovered on CT abdomen-pelvis, and therapeutic low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) was commenced. The following day, SpO2 was 78% on room air and arterial blood gas analysis revealed pH 7.488 and PaO2 6.77kPa. Coronary angiogram showed normal coronary arteries and echocardiogram found no structural heart defect, with left and right heart pressures within normal range. A ventilation/perfusion scan revealed multiple sub-segmental perfusion defects in both lungs with normal ventilation. The patient's condition continued to deteriorate and she passed away 9 days after admission. Considering the constellation of progressive dyspnea, investigation findings, and renal cell cancer, the differential diagnoses were evolving venous thromboembolism, and tumour emboli. Pulmonary tumour embolism is a rare, end-stage, manifestation of malignancy that has a poor prognosis 1 . It is most commonly associated with renal cell carcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma 1 To assess if the national guidelines and policies for obtaining a valid consent were being followed. Design/Methods -A prospective audit on 33 patients who underwent a surgical procedure under GA in Sligo University Hospital in November 2016. An anonymous patient questionnaire identical to the one distributed in the previous audit was given to patients on the day of or day before discharge. Results -61 % of patients in cycle 2 were offered additional sources of information eg, leaflets, drawings compared to 50% in cycle 1. The associated risks and complications were better explained in cycle 2 (97% vs. 84%). 53% received information about alternative treatment options in cycle 1 versus 48% in cycle 2. Overall the amount of information provided to the patients in each aspect was better appreciated by patients in cycle 2. Conclusions/Action Plan -Our findings showed that most patients were satisfied with the amount and quality of information provided during the consent process. However, certain areas need improvements and another auditing. In our opinion some low cost targeted interventions and a multidisciplinary approach can lead to significant improvement and better patient satisfaction. There was a 14% overall rate of "inadequate" liver biopsy specimens. Post liver transplant specimens were disproportionately represented in the "inadequate" group (47% of total inadequate); the number of portal tracts required for diagnosis is particularly important in this group of patients. Core biopsies of parenchymal liver tissue using a 16G needle had a similarly higher rate of inadequate samples compared to biopsies using n 18G needle. Introduction: Cerebral venous stroke is a dysfunction of the brain caused by thrombosis in cerebral veins or thrombosis in the sinus of the dura mater. It is a rare but potentially fatal cerebrovascular condition. Pregnant women are at greater risk because of their hypercoagulable state. Case Report: TM is a 24 year-old lady Gravida 4 Para 2+1. She presented with a 2 week history of headaches at 37 + 4 weeks gestation. The pain radiated into the left side of her ear and was associated with nausea and vomiting, dizziness and light sensitivity. She was initially diagnosed with otitis media and started on oral antibiotics. She re-presented two days later with worsening symptoms and was admitted for treatment with intravenous antibiotics and analgesia. Due to the fact that she was not improving, an MRI of the Brain was requested. This showed a cerebral transverse sinus vein thrombosis. She was transferred to a tertiary centre and had haematology input. She was commenced on unfractionated heparin and this was stopped the next morning to facilitate induction of labour. She had a vaginal delivery of a male infant weighing 3.22 kilos. Around the time of labour she was treated with prophylactic low molecular weight heparin. She was recommenced on therapeutic anticoagulation on day two postnatal and will require one year's anticoagulation in total. Discussion: Cerebral transverse venous sinus vein thrombosis is a rare event but identifying and treating it in pregnant women is essential. CADASIL. Case report of a 64-year-old male with recurrent TIAs and strong family history of stroke disease The diagnosis of acute appendicitis is challenging, particularly in the paediatric population. Atypical presentation in this age group, nonspecific symptoms and a wide range of differential diagnoses add to this challenge. ( Introduction: Madelung's disease is a rare disease characterised by benign, symmetrical lipomatous tumours predominantly affecting the head and neck region. It has been found to be associated with excessive alcohol use. Although the condition is considered benign in nature, this case report aims to explore the potential catastrophic consequences it can incur on both an individual's mental and physical health if left untreated. Case Report: We describe the case of a 49 year old man initially presenting with multiple, painless masses of his head and neck. These were found to be benign lipomatous tumours and a subsequent diagnosis of Madelung's disease was made. Due to the benign nature of the condition, no intervention was deemed necessary and the patient was discharged having undergone no treatment. Over the following years, the psychological effect of these growing masses resulted in social exclusion and excessive alcohol use which had a detrimental effect on the patient's health. He developed alcoholic liver disease, requiring liver transplant and subsequent re-transplant for acute cellular rejection. Furthermore, the synergistic effect of immunosuppressive drug toxicity and hypertension led to the development of renal failure and eventual renal transplant. It was at this point, now aged 63, the patient re-presented to his doctor and a referral to the plastic surgery service was made. Following extensive work-up, he underwent initial de-bulking procedures. Despite the requirement for further procedures down the line, the beneficial psychological effect was immediately evident. The patient feels great, claiming he can now leave the house without 'scaring children. Introduction: Diogenes syndrome, also known as senile breakdown or senile squalor syndrome, is a rare behavioural disorder characterised by extreme self -neglect, domestic squalor and unnecessary hoarding 1 . Often observed in the condition is social withdrawal, refusal of external help and unawareness or concern over their living conditions 2 . The estimated annual incidence of Diogenes syndrome is 0.05% in people over 60 years. It is frequently associated with other mental illnesses such as schizophrenia and frontotemporal dementia 2 . Case: An 82 year old gentleman was found at home, soiled, with no electricity, running water or heating. His home was filled with debris and refuse. His hygiene and self care was extremely neglected and on presentation to the emergency department he was confused,disorientated and hypothermic with a temperature of 33.9°C. Chest X-ray revealed a right lower lobe pneumonia and he had an acute on chronic kidney injury, Urea 17 and Creatinine 210. His mobility was markedly off baseline and he was refusing all oral intake. Collateral history from family members revealed that this behaviour had been ongoing for the last 10 years, despite several hospital admissions for recurrent infections. CD repeatedly refused any efforts from family members to improve his social situation and despite family intervention, several months after returning home CD would revert to living in extremely poor conditions. He was reviewed by Old Age psychiatry and the diagnosis of diogenes syndrome was suspected. Discussion: Morbidity and mortality is largely increased in patients with Diogenes syndrome, with some case reports noting a 46% death rate within 5 years 2 . This highlights the importance of suspecting and recognising this condition which is notably poorly described throughout the literature. The surgical management of phaeochromocytomas is challenging due to the intra-operative release of catecholamines upon tumor manipulation. A well-structured medical protocol is vital to decrease morbidity and improve outcomes in these patients. The phenomenon of "overblockade" whereby the patients suffer significant postural hypotension post operatively is a complication of this medical management. Aim: To establish the effective alpha and beta blocker dosage required to avoid hemodynamic fluctuations in the peri-operative phase and to investigate the efficacy of hydration therapy in restoring normal blood volumes to prevent postural hypotension from "over-blockade". Introduction: According to the Prevalence of Epilepsy in Ireland Report there are currently 37000 people living with Epilepsy in Ireland and approximately 25% of these are women 1 . Epilepsy is an important reproductive consideration for female patients from menarche through to menopause. It is recommended that all women of childbearing age undergo regular contraceptive counselling due to the risk of foetal malformations with certain anti-epileptic drugs. The suitability of contraceptive choice may also be impacted by the pharmacodynamics of particular anti-epileptic drugs. Epilepsy is the most common neurological problem affecting pregnancy, therefore patient education and liaison with epilepsy specialists is vital in ensuring maternal and foetal health. Methods: A practice based search was carried out to identify the number of female patients between the ages of 10-52, diagnosed with epilepsy to whom anti-epileptic medications are currently prescribed. Medications included sodium valproate, levetiracetam, lamotrigine, topiramate, trieptal, zebinix and lacosamide. Results: 14 patients were identified from 7000 patients and a chart review completed, which revealed that 10 patients (71.4%) were currently using contraception. Patients who were not actively using contraception were invited to attend for an epilepsy review in an attempt to identify their contraceptive needs. Conclusion: Women of childbearing age are an important patient cohort for primary care physicians. Due to the multifactorial considerations involved in the management of these patients, regular contraception and pre-conceptual counselling should be offered to all women currently prescribed anti-epileptic medications. Counselling should commence at diagnosis and continuously offered at regular intervals throughout adulthood. The ultimate goal in management of these patients is optimisation of epilepsy control and to ensure foetal and maternal health. Sometimes it is a zebra, a case report Mohan S, Naseem F Midland Regional Hospital Portlaoise, University College Dublin Intern Network. Introduction: Wilms tumour is the most common renal malignancy in childhood 1 .The most common presentation is with an abdominal mass 2 , but other presentations include abdominal pain and it is recognised that Wilms tumour can occasionally present as an acute abdomen 3 . Case: This is the case of a 5 year old boy who presented with acute right iliac fossa pain. On examination his abdomen was soft, tender in the right iliac fossa with rebound and guarding. He was apyrexic with stable vitals. He had a background of surgically corrected coarctation of the aorta, and hypertension controlled with atenolol. Laparoscopic appendicectomy was planned for suspected acute appendicitis. However, on abdominal examination under anaesthesic a ballotable mass in the right upper quadrant was palpated and surgery was suspended. Subsequent imaging with ultrasound and computed tomography revealed a right intrarenal mass, consistent with a Wilms tumour, which had likely ruptured. Biopsy confirmed a Wilms tumour. He received neo-adjuvant chemotherapy, with a future plan for restaging, surgery, and possible radiotherapy. This case highlights how the acute abdomen, and in particular right iliac fossa pain can result from more unusual causes than those that initially spring to mind. It also reminds us of the importance of the abdominal examination in the acute abdomen, and that even in children tumours should be considered.  All patients undergoing elective surgery should attend a pre-admission clinic that is focused on preparing the patient for their surgery. Safe and effective surgical and anaesthesia practice requires an optimized patient 3 . Patients may require routine laboratory blood investigations blood tests as part of their assessment. However, these tests are costly and every effort should be made to protect healthcare resources, including identification of inappropriate blood testing. Aim To undertake an audit to assess whether blood investigations are repeated inappropriately on admission, following pre-assessment clinic. Method All patients who presented to the pre-assessment clinic over a 5 week time period were included. We checked who had routine bloods performed at the pre-assessment clinic (as were deemed appropriate testing as per local guidelines [2] . Stercoral colitis is an inflammatory colitis following faecal impaction, in which ischemic pressure necrosis of the colonic and rectal walls can occur due to increased intraluminal pressure [3] . This in turn may lead to the formation of a stercoral ulcer and, ultimately, colonic perforation. A 68 year old man presented to the Emergency Department with acute epigastric pain, generalised guarding and rigidity with a background history of chronic constipation. Plain film of the abdomen demonstrated faecal loading and dilated loops of small and large bowel, with no evidence of colonic perforation on the chest radiograph. Pneumoperitoneum was demonstrated on CT abdomen/pelvis and following patient resuscitation, an emergency laparotomy was performed. A large perforation was found in the sigmoid colon with multiple faecalomas scattered throughout the large intestine. An emergency Hartmann's procedure was carried out and the patient experienced no major complications post operatively. Discussion Stercoral perforation is an infrequent but grave complication of chronic constipation predominantly seen in elderly patients, with a mortality rate of up to 35% [3] . The sigmoid and rectosigmoid colon are the most susceptible areas to stercoral colonic perforations due to the reduced diameter of the colon and perilous blood supply, with 74% of stercoral perforations occurring in this region [4] , as in this case. Although infrequent, it is important to be cognisant of this condition particularly in elderly patients presenting with an acute abdomen on a background of chronic constipation. Our study aimed to discover rates of compliance with routine antenatal anti-D prophylaxis (RAADP) at 28 weeks gestation following its introduction to routine practice at University Hospital Galway. Background: Prior to the development of anti-D immunoglobulin the incidence of Rh D alloimmunization was 16% in rhesus negative women. With the introduction of post-partum administration of anti-D, this rate fell to 1-2%. A further reduction in the sensitization rate to 0.1-0.3% was achieved with routine antenatal prophylaxis during the third trimester. Methods: Our study was designed to review patients who were Rhesus negative at booking and review whether they received RAADP. We reviewed each patient who booked at an antenatal clinic in February & March 2016, RAADP was introduced as a routine antenatal intervention in January 2016. We reviewed the laboratory references to see who received RAADP and reviewed the charts of those who did not. Results: A total of 601 women booked antenatally in February and March. 12.8% of these were Rhesus negative. Of the total number of rhesus negative women, 14.28% experienced early pregnancy miscarriage or failed to carry the pregnancy to completion. Of the remaining 66 women, 10 (15%) did not receive prophylactic anti-D in accordance with the guideline. 5/10 refused despite strong clinical reasoning, 1/10 was to receive a bilateral salpingectomy and did not need RAADP. 1/10 husband rhesus negative. Reasoning was unclear in the case of three patients. Conclusion: In the two months following introduction of RAADP, compliance rates of 85% were achieved. Fusobacterium nucleatum is an anaerobic spore-forming gram negative bacillus and is the most commonly found of the genus fusobacterium. It is present in larger amounts in adults with a tenfold increase in their numbers in periodontal diseased sites (i.e. poor dentition). It has been implicated in a variety of human diseases including periodontitis, colonic cancer, empyema, bacteraemia with distal seeding and preterm births. We report a case of a 51 year old man with background of alcohol excess and poor dentition secondary to dentophobia who presented to emergency department with a one-week history of right thigh pain and swelling, fever, night sweats and unintentional weight loss. On admission, d-dimers, white cell count and C -reactive protein were elevated. Deep vein thrombosis was excluded. There was a collection consistent with an intramuscular haematoma on ultrasound of right thigh. His chest x-ray showed a focal area of consolidation and effusion in the left lower zone. CT thorax showed a loculated empyema. This empyema was managed using ultrasound guided drainage with chest drain left in situ. Culture of the pleural fluid grew fusobacterium nucleatum. His thigh swelling failed to resolve after several weeks. MRI thigh revealed that the collection previously seen on ultrasound was more consistent with an abscess with underlying osteomyelitis. He had ultrasound guided drainage of this collection. Pus was drained and there was no growth. He had a peripherally inserted central catheter placed for management with outpatient antibiotic therapy. His antimicrobial changed from Tazocin to clindamycin and benzylpenicillin in consultation with infectious diseases team. Our patient had empyema most likely through oropharyngeal route and osteomyelitis and thigh abscess through haematogenous seeding to a distant site. Patients with distal infections should have their dentition assessed and oral cavity normal flora should be considered as possible pathogenic agents. A 45 year old male presented to the Emergency Department following 6 days of persistent hiccups. He had been prescribed chlorpromazine, with no improvement in his clinical condition. He was otherwise asymptomatic. His past medical and surgical history was significant for a brain aneurysm, which was operated on, and he had a ventriculoperitoneal shunt in situ. CT Thorax showed a left lower lobe necrotic mass, which was inseparable from the local pericardium. A lung tumor was suspected. Representative Lymph nodes in his mediastinum were biopsied and showed no evidence of malignancy. He was subsequently treated for an inflammatory mass and made a full recovery. Discussion: Hiccups are generally benign, self-limiting and serve no known physiological function. However, this case demonstrates that prolonged hiccups can be a symptom of a more serious underlying pathology and they necessitate a thorough medical evaluation. The results of the initial audit were presented to staff in the ED. After an awareness campaign within the ED, the audit was repeated in late November. In the initial audit 55 patients reported pain. 12 patients (22%) received analgesia within 20 minutes of initial assessment. 20 patients (36%) had a pain score recorded. 4 patients (20%) received the recommended analgesia based on their recorded pain score. In the re-audit, 64 patients reported pain. 30 patients (47%) received analgesia within 20minutes of initial assessment. 40 (64%) had a pain score recorded. 21 patients (53%) received the recommended analgesia based on their recorded pain score. Conclusion: Our audit and subsequent awareness campaign led to more patients receiving analgesia within the recommended time frame. There were improvements in documention of pain scores, and in selection of analgesic agent. Twelve hours following her first transfusion she developed respiratory distress, with an O2 saturation of 85% on 100% oxygen. She had a positive fluid balance of 1.5 litres. It was considered overload due to the large transfusion and was given IV furosemide 40mg. Non-invasive ventilation was commenced but she deteriorated further, requiring intubation and ventilation. The possibility of a TRALI was questioned and blood was sent for HLA matching. Discussion: It is hypothesised that TRALI is caused by the action of donor antibodies against recipient leucocytes and occurs in a two-hit mechanism. Neutrophils are sequestered and primed in the lung. They are activated by a factor in the blood product, damaging the pulmonary endothelium. Anti-leucocyte antibodies are thought to be responsible and neutrophils are primed due to underlying clinical conditions. Chronic alcohol abuse is one risk factor in this case. Conclusion: TRALI is a recognised but underdiagnosed complication. In a critically ill patient with activation of the massive transfusion protocol, respiratory distress may point to diagnosis of transfusion associated circulatory overload (TACO). However, it is important that TRALI is considered as an alternate diagnosis. In line with guidelines inpatient colonoscopy in our unit is decreasing. Inpatient colonoscopy still has high rates of poor preparation, failed caecal intubation and low polyp detection compared to outpatient colonoscopy. Inpatient colonoscopy should be reserved for a minority of select patients. Enright D 1 , Honan D 2,3 Wexford General Hospital is a peripheral Irish hospital with approximately 1,800 births per year. We reviewed the epidural rate, the rate at which multiple attempts at achieving effective epidural analgesia was required, and the epidural complication rate over a one-year period. METHODS A retrospective audit of labour analgesia database records was conducted, from 01 November 2015 to 31 October 2016. An 'event' was identified as a complication of epidural anaesthetic, or the need for multiple attempts at same. The rate of events was compared between usual working hours (08:00 -18:00) and on-call hours (18:01 -07:59). There were a total of 1,821 births in the aforementioned timeframe. 677 of these patients sought epidural analgesia, giving an epidural rate of 37.18%. 41 events were identified (incidence of 6.06%). Multiple attempts at achieving epidural analgesia were required on 28 occasions (4.14%). A lumbar puncture was unintentionally performed on 7 occasions (1.03%). Other issues reported included the need to re-site the catheter (3 occasions), ineffective analgesia (1 occasion) or the need for frequent top-ups (2 occasions), and hypotension (1 occasion, extent and outcome not documented). The rate of events during usual working hours was 6.43%, and 5.88% for on-call hours. The time of epidural was not specified in 18.17% of cases. CONCLUSIONS A retrospective audit over a one-year period at a peripheral Irish hospital found the overall incidence of events to be 6.06%. There was no significant difference in the rate of event during usual working hours and oncall hours. There is scope for better note-keeping of epidural activity. Background Paediatric patients frequently require sedation for imaging procedures. Sedation in this population has a dual function; its purpose is to achieve immobility for a better quality test and to alleviate stress on the child. Sedation with a pharmaceutical agent is not without risk, one of these being the failure of sedation. The risk of sedation failure is not only inconvenient for the child and their family, it also has health economic implications, necessitating further imaging appointments, admissions and in some cases progression imaging under general anaesthesia. Most importantly, however, sedation failure can lead to delayed diagnoses. In 2010, NICE published CG112 outlining guidelines for Sedation in children and young people. These guidelines, however, focused heavily on sedation in an emergency setting and for painful procedures and gave little guidance on elective sedation for imaging and mildly painful procedures. There are currently no uniform clinical practice guidelines available in Ireland for paediatric procedural sedation although individual hospitals have developed individual guidelines. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of Chloral Hydrate for procedural sedation among a paediatric population at Cork University Hospital (CUH) and compare the failure rates with a previous study undertaken in the department in 2014. Methods A retrospective chart audit was undertaken. Ethical approval was sought and granted from the Hospital Quality and Patient Safety Committee. Current hospital policy in CUH limits the number of charts requested for a retrospective audit to 100. The charts of 100 patients who underwent MRI, CT, MCUG, Bone Scan or Mag III Scan, from 1 st January 2016 were audited. There was no age or weight criteria applied. Any patient admitted for the above procedures who declined sedation was excluded from the study. rheumatoid arthritis who develops pulmonary sarcoidosis and granulomatous interstitial nephritis secondary to treatment with TNF-α inhibitor Adalimumab. He presented with a markedly elevated creatinine level, dyspnoea, dry cough, weight loss and fatigue becoming progressively worse over the previous month. Blood results showed a markedly elevated urea and creatinine level with inflammatory markers within their normal reference ranges. Initial investigations included a full septic, vasculitic and connective tissue screen. His vital signs began to deteriorate, with oxygen desaturation requiring supplementation and recurrent spiking of temperatures. Physical examination found decreased air entry bilaterally but was otherwise unremarkable. Radiological findings showed fine nodular and interstitial patterns present in both perihilar areas with a ground-glass pattern leading to a broad differential diagnosis of pulmonary diseases including sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, atypical infection and malignancy. Subsequently he was isolated until tuberculosis had been excluded. A new working diagnosis of pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) was investigated as increased oxygen supplementation was required and a series of broad-spectrum antibiotics commenced. He became notably more delirious and agitated as his acute kidney injury (AKI) continued to deteriorate necessitating haemodialysis. Whilst serum calcium and angiotensin-converting enzyme levels were raised, tests had been inconclusive requiring further invasive investigations. An endobronchial ultrasound with biopsy showed non-caseating granulomata in keeping with a diagnosis of sarcoidosis and granulomatous lymphadenitis whilst a renal biopsy showed granulomatous nephritis. Steroid therapy was commenced and he was discharged to continue haemodialysis twice weekly as an outpatient until his AKI resolved. This case illustrates a series of rare complications of TNF-α inhibitors that can cause a rapid, serious decline in health whereby patients receiving therapy for autoimmune conditions should be educated for early warning signs of a developing condition. We achieved our aim of auditing the analgesia prescribing trends in the treatment of major spine surgery. In a number of areas of the protocol, alternative opioid analgesia was used to the recommended; this is partly due to the availability of Tapentadol on certain wards and the familiarity of other forms of opioids. The aim on completion of this audit is to educate the department and implement a greater compliance with the protocol. Case report: The complications of the complications of uncontrolled insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. McGeary J, Conlon P The complications of uncontrolled diabetes mellitus are well reported however these complications can further progress to cause unexpected acute life threatening events. A 73-year-old male presented with a progressively worsening left hallux ulcer, fever and rigors. His background history included insulin dependent diabetes mellitus, hypertension and gout. The left hallux displayed necrosis with bony protrusion and a 3cm x 3cm slough with erythema present. The left lower limb was cellulitis from the necrotic hallux to the knee. Admission bloods showed a significantly raised creatinine level with a vastly elevated C-reactive protein (CRP). Initial treatment involved managing the acute kidney injury whilst consulting with orthopaedic surgery, vascular surgery and rheumatology physicians departments regarding a possible diagnosis of osteomyelitis. His renal function improved with aggressive treatment however during admission he developed swollen, extremely tender joints in his upper limbs with significant lower and upper limb oedema. The left hallux was amputated and a considerable amount of purulent discharge drained from the left foot following surgical lancing at three points. Culturing of the amputated hallux grew Streptococcus Dysgalactiae. Despite intervention, he continued to remain febrile and vital signs began to deteriorate despite concurrent prescriptions of benzylpenicillin, flucloxacillin, metronidazole and piperacillin/tazobactam as per the advice of the department of infectious diseases. It was felt he had developed septic arthritis in multiple joints along with displaying signs of transient ischaemic attacks verified following an MRI brain. An echocardiogram showed cardiac vegetations sourced to the initial infection of the hallux, with infective endocarditis disseminating septic emboli to the brain and joints requiring aggressive treatment and a further prolonged admission by the infective diseases department. This case demonstrates how the complications of a chronic disease can progress and the necessity of a diverse multidisciplinary approach for successful management in what was a complex and misleading admission. underestimate of the true burden of sepsis in Ireland. 1 The purpose of this audit was to assess the clinical compliance with the National Clinical Guidelines in Sepsis Management in the Emergency Department. Methods: A manual retrospective review of adult admission charts which fulfilled the sepsis criteria on dates between 01/06/2015-30/06/2015. The data was analysed and focused on the compliance factors. Times from when patients were seen to when factors of the protocols were applied were calculated. Interquartile ranges were calculated in Microsoft® Exel® 2011. Results: There is no IT system in place for patient's charts; everything is documented manually in the paper 'blue charts'. 50% of blood cultures had no plan documented, no time documented and no result documented. 78% of cases had a plan for bloods to be taken but no time as to when they were taken and no result in the chart. 71% of the cases had no plan for lactate analysis documented, no time documented and no printout result present in the chart. 50% of the cases that theoretically required oxygen therapy had no documented plan or administration. 85% of the cases had fluid administered and a time documented. Antimicrobial therapy and time administered were documented in 74% of cases. Out of the cases that had a time documented, the majority of the 'Take 3-Give 3' protocols were within the hour (55-80%). Conclusions: Management of sepsis in the department appears to adhere to the guidelines. Documentation appears to be the main issue in this audit. Educating physicians on the need for documentation and highlighting the Sepsis 6 management plan to all staff may be suggestions for consideration. References Introduction: The Global Rating Scale (GRS) was created as a quality improvement and assessment tool for gastrointestinal endoscopy service in the UK in 2004. Patient experience is one of the major aspects of assessing endoscopy service quality. 1 This cross-sectional study at the Midland Regional Hospital aims to compare endoscopist and patient assessment of comfort during colonoscopy using the Modified Gloucester Scale. Such knowledge allows the endoscopy unit to monitor this one aspect of colonoscopy quality. Materials and Methods: The 54 patient filled Modified Gloucester Scores were manually collected from the 26/2/14®26/4/14 and cross-matched with the score given by the endoscopist during the procedure. This was then inputted into a spreadsheet in Microsoft® Exel® for Mac 2011. The data was analysed using SPSS. The Wilcoxon matched pair signal rank statistical test was used to look for comfort score differences between the groups. Results: Fifty-four patient forms were analysed using SPSS. For more than half of the sample (29 of the 54), there was no difference in the two scores so the median difference is zero. There was no significant difference between the two sets of scores (p=0.23). Conclusion: The results suggest that there was no difference between the two sets of scores. This implies that there was no discrepancy between the scores recorded by both endoscopist and patient on the level of comfort during the procedure. Introduction: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a rare, variably inherited disorder affecting connective tissue. There are now more than 10 phenotypes of this heterogeneous condition described. The vascular system is affected specifically in EDS type IV, which was first described in 1967. Patients are susceptible to both aneurysm formation and spontaneous rupture of nonaneurysmal vessels resulting from extreme vessel fragility. A mortality rate of 50% has been described for patients with EDS type IV with vascular complications. Case: We describe a rare case of a previously fit 28-year-old male who presented to the emergency department with a three-day history of acute onset sharp, progressively worsening upper abdominal pain. His family history was significant in that his father died at age 40 from an intracranial haemorrhage. Clinical examination was positive for tenderness and guarding in the epigastrium. He was hemodynamically unstable upon arrival and responded well to fluid resuscitation. CT scan revealed haemoperitoneum secondarily to a 2.2cm splenic artery aneurysm. In addition, there was an unusually ectatic right common iliac artery measuring 1.8cm noted. These were both treated successfully by transcatheter coil embolization through a percutaneous femoral artery approach. The patient made an uneventful recovery and was discharged home well on post-op day 10. In the following 12 months, the patient represented on two separate occasions with additional ruptured visceral aneurysms necessitating further embolization of the same. The patient was referred to a clinical geneticist who made the diagnosis of EDS type IV. Discussion: The management of these patients can be extremely hazardous, with a high mortality rate reported for operative and noninvasive intervention. A multitude of treatment modalities exist for the management of visceral aneurysms in EDS. A high level of clinical suspicion is warranted in order to make a timely diagnosis of EDS type IV. Baynes D 1 , Spooner L 2 1 Baynes D, WNW Intern Network, Galway University Hospital 2 Spooner L, Emergency Department, Galway University Hospital Abstract Category: Case report Introduction: A more unusual and not as well documented side effect of long-term steroids is spontaneous Achilles tendon rupture. It is seen particularly in the elderly cohort of patients who take long-term steroids for systemic diseases. 1 Description: A 71-year-old gentleman presented to the ED with a fourday history of pain and swelling of the left foot. The patient described a feeling of a 'stone' in his shoe. There was no recent trauma, pedal pulses were present and he was unable to weight bear on that leg. The ankle was acutely swollen, exquisitely tender, erythematous and warm to touch. The painful area extended from mid gastrocnemius to base of the toes. He was unable to move the joint. A 27 year old male with Asperger syndrome presented to the emergency department with a four week history of cough and lethargy. He reported one episode of minor epistaxis 5 days prior to presentation. He denied any further bleeding, easy bruising or other symptoms. Examination was significant only for pallor and sinus tachycardia (120bpm). Investigations revealed: haemoglobin 4.8g/dl, platelets 53x10 9 /L, white cell count 2.2x10 9 /L, neutrophils 1.1 x10 9 /L and lymphocytes 1.1x10 9/L . Reticulocytes were significantly reduced: 9.1x10 9 /L (0.56%). Prothrombin time was elevated: 20.7sec as was bilirubin: 34umol/L. Coombs test, tTG and IgA were negative. Haematinic studies showed elevated iron (46umol/l) and transferrin saturation (>90%). Vitamin B12 and ferritin were within normal ranges but a markedly low folate (<1.5 ng/ml) was noted. A nutritional history exposed he had been subsisting solely on Coco pops, pizza and Pringles. Intravenous folinic acid was given and oral folic acid provided as maintenance therapy. He was transfused with 2U of red blood cells and 1g of fibrinogen. He was also given vitamin K for a presumptive deficiency causing his coagulopathy. Dietetic input deemed him a moderate refeeding risk and he had replacement of thiamine, potassium, magnesium and phosphate with careful electrolyte monitoring. His stay was complicated by a temperature spike on day 2. He was covered initially for neutropenic sepsis and then treated for an identified respiratory source. The reticulocyte count post folate replacement demonstrated an excellent bone marrow response (249.2x10 9 /L, 11.81%). Close nutritional support is ongoing. The overarching principles of the 2016 EULAR gout guidelines have a significant focus on lifestyle and preventive medicine with patient education as well as systematic screening for associated comorbidities playing an important role in the overall management of gout. This audit was a retrospective study of outpatient department consultations conducted by doctors at the Rheumatology service in Manorhamilton, Co Leitrim. Its main aim was to investigate the extent of documentation of the various aspects of the three overarching principles. A pre-existing database of more than 100 symptomatic patients with high uric acid levels was obtained and used in order to select the audit sample. This database was collected based on patient attendences to OLHM between January 2011 and August 2016. The patients were sorted in decreasing order of level of uric acid. The 25 patients with the highest uric acid levels were selected for the study. The first 30 consultations, often with more than 1 consultation per patient, encountered in the medical charts with a working diagnosis of gout were selected. The results show that overarching principle A which focuses on patient education (includes 1 item) was documented on 0/30 occasions; overarching principle B which focuses on lifestyle advice (includes 7 items) was documented on 0/30 to 5/30 occasions, depending on the item in question; and overarching principle C which focuses on screening of associated comorbidities (includes 6 items) was documented on 1/30 to 26/30 occasions, depending on the item in question. This shows that the documentation of individual items of the overarching principles was largely poor. A number of interventions have been suggested in order to improve documentation in a manner which facilitates the adherence to most recent guidelines. Following these interventions, a re-audit is planned which will complete the audit cycle. Lane C, Casidy E. Hypoactive delirium was most common subtype. The clocks were ineffective in delirium prevention. Thyroid storm is a thyrotoxic crisis, in which there is an acute release of thyroxine (T4) and tri-iodothyronine (T3). Incidence amongst hospitalised patients is 0.20 per 100,000. Clinical manifestations include tachycardia, pyrexia and gastrointestinal symptoms. Mortality rates are reported to be 20% -30%. We present the case of a 23 year old lady admitted electively for laparoscopic adhesiolysis and excision of endometriosis, on a background of stage four endometriosis. Her past medical history was significant for anxiety. She was noted intraoperatively to be tachycardic despite minimal blood loss. She was managed with fluid resuscitation. Immediately postoperatively, she became increasingly tachycardic at 155/bpm, hypertensive at 160/90mmHg, pyrexic to 38.1°C, as well as nausea and vomiting. An urgent full blood count and septic screen were sent, as well as thyroid function tests. Her blood results revealed Hb 11.6g/dl, an elevated fT4 of 68.0 pmol/L (12-22) and a low TSH of < 0.05mU/L (0. 3-4.2) . Diagnosis of thyroid storm on a background of undiagnosed hyperthyroidism was made. Metoprolol and carbimazole were commenced and the patient was observed in the Post Anaesthetic Care Unit. An isotope thyroid scan demonstrated findings consistent with Graves' disease. With treatment, the patient's condition stabilized and she was discharged day 3 post op. A 2016 study found a higher prevalence of Graves' disease in endometriosis patients. It is postulated that this may be related to autoimmune factors and interestingly Anti Nuclear Antibody positivity has been found to be elevated in both groups. This association should be considered in endometriosis patients. Investigation of changes in quality of life following transcatheter aortic valve implantation in a single centre Rivaroxaban is a Novel Oral Anticoagulant used in prevention of stroke and emboli in adults with non-valvular atrial fibrillation and treatment of DVT and PE. Clinical monitoring is recommended for the duration of therapy, especially in renally impaired patients, due to the risk of haemorrhage. The aim of this audit was to investigate compliance with Rivaroxaban safety recommendations. This includes a follow-up appointment in the outpatient clinic of the prescribing practitioner to monitor the risk of haemorrhage and a blood test by the patients' primary care physician to check renal function. Patients were contacted directly via their provided contact phone number and asked a series of questions to assess their experience with Rivaroxaban. The population for this audit were patients who were prescribed the drug in the outpatient setting. Twenty four patients taking Rivaroxaban were recruited for the study, however nine of these were excluded. 87% of patients included in the study were still taking Rivaroxaban at the time of the study. 100% of those report full compliance, 62% had their renal function checked by their primary care physician after starting the medication and 38% had a return consultation in the outpatient clinic. 13% of the participants were no longer taking the drug due to the side effects, half due to bleeding and half due to a rash. Only one of the participants experienced bleeding while on Rivaroxaban and was subsequently switched to Warfarin. In order to improve the percentage of patients who are seen in clinic after commencing Rivaroxiban I recommend a mandatory followup appointment in the outpatient department or anticoagulation clinic. This would give the prescribing physician the opportunity to review the patient and any side effects or compliance issues they may have. Browne E 1 , Rogers C 2 1,2 Case report: Ms X, a 42 year-old nulliparous woman with a 23 year history of treatment-resistant schizoaffective disorder, was admitted involuntarily to the psychiatric unit with psychosis secondary to medication non-compliance. In the past she had failed to reach full recovery on an array of antipsychotic drugs. Raised serum prolactin levels were noted on a number of occasions over the years. On admission Ms X had an inverted left nipple, present for a few months. Radiological investigations revealed a locally invasive non-metastatic ductal carcinoma with positive axillary nodes, and left mastectomy with axillary clearance was recommended. Initially Ms X was reluctant to agree to surgical intervention, as she exhibited delusions that healthy eating and natural supplements alone would cure her. However once her mental state had improved, and it was felt she had capacity to understand fully the nature of the diagnosis and proposed treatment she consented to same. The surgery itself was uncomplicated and she recovered well afterwards. At the time of writing she was awaiting further treatment with radiation therapy and chemotherapy. Discussion: The link between antipsychotics (both typical and atypical) and hyperprolactinaemia has long been established 1 . Prolactin is secreted by lactotrophs in the anterior pituitary gland, and antipsychotics block D2 receptors on lactotrophs, thus blocking inhibition of prolactin secretion 1 . Hyperprolactinaemia is thought to be associated with various pathological conditions, including breast cancer, and the relationship between the two has been explored 2 . To date studies have been equivocal, and the role of prolactin in breast tumorigenesis remains unclear 3 , with other risk factors such as nulliparity, lifestyle factors and obesity thought to have more relevance 4 . This is an interesting case in light of ongoing research in the area. Ms X's management also raised important ethical questions regarding the management of a patient with reduced capacity who refuses lifesaving treatment. Background: Potentially inappropriate prescribing (PIP) in the elderly is associated with morbidity, mortality and adverse events 1 . Objectives: The aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence of potentially inappropriate medication use on discharge from a specialist age related healthcare hospital service in Ireland. Methods: A retrospective cohort study of patients aged greater than 65 years discharged from a geriatric unit in a tertiary hospital in Ireland between 2014-2016. Patient records were analysed for medical history, pre admission medications and discharging prescriptions. Beers and STOPP criteria were applied to ascertain the number of PIMs (Potentially inappropriate medications). Results: One hundred patients aged 65 or older were included in the study, 54 females and 46 males. Overall, using STOPP criteria, 67% were prescribed a PIM on their discharging script. Applying Beers to discharge prescriptions, 64% of patients were discharged with a PIM. Seventy-nine patients had their pre-hospital medications pre reconciled by a clinical pharmacist. Of those definitively commenced in hospital, the most common PIM were PPIs (15%) according to STOPP. Using the Beers criteria, of those commenced in hospital, the most common were psychotropic PIMs BDZ and non BDZ (2.5%) and antipsychotics (2.5%). Conclusion: Despite being part of an elderly specialist service, older patients are still prescribed inappropriate medications, whether it commenced in hospital or in a repeated script. Applying Beers or STOPP criteria routinely may give scope to improve care. Introduction: We report a case of massive silent feto-maternal haemorrhage (FMH). Clinical Details: The patient presented at 35+4 with a two day history of reduced fetal movements. Her antenatal course had been largely uneventful. At booking she was found to be rhesus negative and she had one hospital presentation at 20+2 following a minor abdominal trauma. She was well, Kleiheuer was negative, she received prophylactic anti-D and was discharged. On presentation at 35+4 her CTG had a pathological pattern with markedly reduced variability and late decelerations. An emergency caesarean section was performed. At delivery the infant had a haemoglobin of 3.5 and massive silent FMH was diagnosed. Discussion: Massive FMH is a rare phenomenon, presenting in 1/5000 deliveries. [3] Fetomaternal haemorrhage refers to the passage of fetal blood into the maternal circulation either before or during delivery. [1] [3] Although the placenta is considered a barrier separating maternal from fetal circulation, bidirectional passage of a small number cells across the placenta is a physiological process and occurs commonly at delivery without clinical consequence for mother or baby. [1] Clinical manifestations are dependent on the volume of blood loss; potential outcomes include non-reassuring fetal heart patterns, neonatal haemodynamic instability, fetal or neonatal anaemia, hydrops fetalis, intrauterine or neonatal death. A high index of suspicion is required in those presenting with reduced fetal movements. Urgent fetal assessment with ultrasound, CTG and laboratory tests to detect FMH should be considered, as this rare condition can have devastating outcomes. A 77-year-old female presented with a 4 year history of non-progressive dysphagia to solid foods accompanied by episodes of food bolus obstruction that became more frequent over the previous year. There was associated weight loss of 2 stone over the last 6 months and regurgitation of food. Past medical history significant for colorectal cancer managed with subtotal colectomy and end ileostomy formation. Physical examination was unremarkable. A barium swallow was performed and demonstrated an extraluminal compression on the posterior left lateral aspect of the proximal oesophagus. An OGD was done to exclude malignancy with biopsies demonstrating normal oesophageal squamous mucosa. Manometry and pH studies were not tolerated by the patient. This was followed up with a CT thoracic angiogram which showed an aberrant right subclavian artery passing behind the oesophagus causing compression and complete obliteration of the oesophageal lumen. This finding is consistent with dysphagia lusoria, a term used to describe vascular compression of the oesophagus. The patient was managed conservatively with diet and lifestyle modifications, and was commenced on proton pump inhibitor therapy. Aberrant right sided subclavian artery is a relatively common variant of aortic arch branching, occurring in 0.5% -2% of individuals 1 . It is usually asymptomatic but in cases where it does cause symptoms, surgical repair may be indicated 2 A 60-year-old lady presented to MMUH with a 1 week history of left partial, painless vision loss. This was acute in onset, commencing as a "smudge" in her left central visual field and eventually progressing to a "dark fog". No associated jaw claudication, scalp tenderness or neurological deficit however the patient reported a 6 week history of intermittent left fronto-parietal headaches. Right eye was unaffected. Past medical history is significant for diet-controlled hypercholesterolemia. On examination, only abnormalities detected were a left central scotoma and relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD), with reduced visual acuity 6/9. Initial empiric treatment included prednisolone 60mg OD, aspirin 75mg OD, atorvastatin 40mg OD. Stroke work-up was negative and a range of bloods, including CRP and fibrinogen, were normal. ESR was mildly raised at 22. Temporal artery US, performed following failed left temporal artery biopsy, showed no evidence of vasculitis. As this case did not fulfill the criteria for giant cell arteritis (1), non-arteritic anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy (NAION) was diagnosed by exclusion. The patient had mild improvement of visual acuity and was discharged on a tapering dose of prednisolone with discontinuation of aspirin. She was due for follow-up in ophthalmology and stroke clinics. Discussion Acute vision loss can be a frightening experience for a patient. It is important to have a low threshold for urgent empirical treatment with corticosteroids if there is any suspicion of arteritic ischaemic optic neuropathy in order to prevent bilateral vision loss, which can occur in days to weeks in 50% of patients(1). However, not all acute vision loss is arteritic in nature. NAION is damage to the optic nerve secondary to vascular insufficiency and is the most common acute optic neuropathy in those over 50 years of age (2) . Treatment includes control of vascular risk factors to prevent sequential vision loss. This case highlights that: 1) vertebral artery dissection may present with symptoms mimicking MCA ischemic infarct; 2) that MRI can be normal in acute stroke; and 3) that lifting heavy weights may have been causative in this case; especially in someone who has no features of increased risk for arterial dissection. A 44-year-old male presented to the ED after complaining of a right-sided weakness. He had been lifting loads of 40kg for prolonged periods. The weakness worsened over the next few hours though there was no facial asymmetry. He had felt light headed, with no headache, dizziness, chest pain, dyspnoea, or palpitations. He had paraesthesia over the dorsum of the right foot. This was the first time this had happened. His medical history included renal cell carcinoma, and ulcerative colitis. He was on no medications. On initial assessment in the ED, he had right hemiparesis, with increased tone and 4/5 power on the right upper and lower limbs. His romberg sign was negative. Of note, he also had right arm pronator drift. The rest of his examination was unremarkable. An urgent CT brain was normal. The initial diagnosis was left MCA territory ischemic event; so he was commenced on aspirin and statin, and admitted to the acute stroke unit. Further evaluation showed diplopia on left lateral gaze, and right hemiparesis. There was no facial asymmetry. Features were consistent with brain stem stroke. Subsequent MRA brain showed a high signal intramural ring consistent with a left vertebral artery dissection. Even though clinically our final diagnosis was brain stem stroke, the MRI did not show any diffusion weighted restriction defect to support it. Nor did it show any abnormality or ischemic event in the left MCA territory, which was the initial clinical diagnosis in the emergency department. Traynor R 1 , Niall D 2 1. Dr Robyn Traynor, Midlands Regional Hospital, Tullamore, UCD; 2. Ms Dorothy Niall, Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon, Midlands Regional Hospital, Tullamore Aim: It was observed that patients who underwent elective knee replacement with increased Body Mass Index (BMI) seemed to be at higher risk of complications in comparison to those with a lower BMI. Our aim was to correlate the rate of postoperative complications and BMI in a cohort of orthopaedic patients following total knee replacement. Methods: A retrospective analysis was performed of all elective Total Knee Replacements undertaken between January 2016 and October 2016 in Midlands Regional Hospital, Tullamore. There were 86 patients in total. 7 were excluded, as BMI had not been recorded, giving a total of 79 patients. Patients were divided into categories based on their BMI. 16% were considered healthy BMI, 20% were overweight and 62% were classified as obese. Complication rates were determined through examining patient notes from the beginning of the postoperative period until their 6week outpatients appointment. Results: The rate of complications was 0% in patients with a BMI less than 18.5, 23% in individuals with a BMI from 18.5-24.9, 31% in patients with a BMI of 25-29.9, 36% in patients with a BMI of 30-34.9 and 0% in those with a BMI of greater than 40. The most frequently observed complications were superficial infection, decreased range of movement and joint instability. Infection was more common in those of higher BMI. 8% of patients considered healthy weight had an infection while 13% of obese individuals had a postoperative infection. Conclusions: Patients with a BMI of 25-34.9 were at higher risk of postoperative complication in comparison to those with a healthy BMI (18. 5-24.9 ). This is most evident in relation to postoperative infection. Of note, patients with a BMI of greater than 35 were at lower risk of postoperative complication. This, however, may reflect selection bias and the low numbers in this category. Further evaluation of this cohort is warranted. Nurdin N 1 , Sheehan G 2 , Joomye J 2 Staphylococcus aureus bacteraemia is a dangerous infected associated with significant morbidity and 11-43% mortality. I This case demonstrates the complex metastatic nature of staphylococcal infection, the need for prolonged antibiotics and high clinical suspicion to avoid overlooking complications as these may present non specifically in the context of critical illness. Case Report: The patient is a 69 year old female with a 30 year history rheumatoid arthritis well controlled on methotrexate. She presented initially with persistent pain following right wrist fracture with profound neutropenia. Four blood culture sets were positive for MSSA bacteraemia and a large infected haematoma was found at fracture site which required wash out and external fixation. Initially antibiotic therapy was with intravenous flucloxacillin and clindamycin, however, this was changed to ciprofloxacin, linezolid and rifampicin due to rising inflammatory markers and ongoing pyrexia. CT TAP day 16 showed bilateral psoas abscesses causing right hydronephrosis. MRI spine day 29 subsequently revealed extensive osteomyelitis in cervical, thoracic and lumbar spine, with lumbar spinal discitis, oedema and high grade spinal canal stenosis. Bone scan showed further dissemination with osteomyelitis in the right foot and septic arthritis in the left shoulder. Repeated echocardiogram showed no evidence of infective endocarditis. Recovery was slow and complicated by; quadriplegia secondary to spinal canal stenosis and critical illness myopathy, hypercalcaemia as a result to immobilisation and osteomyelitis, opioid toxicity, NSAID induced pancolitis and severe malnutrition. A prolonged 4 month course IV antibiotics was necessary given the severity of infection and persistent elevation in CRP. Flucloxacillin alone was used after 1 month combination treatment. This was changed to oral cephalexin in September due to flucloxacillin induced liver injury, which is currently ongoing pending radiological resolution and normalisation in CRP. The patient has made a remarkable recovery, with substantial improvement in motor power allowing her to live independently at home. A 26 year old male presented with 3 day history of increasing left groin pain and difficulty mobilising. He had no significant medical history, no history of trauma and was apyrexic with no systemic symptoms. On examination he had severe hip pain on passive flexion and rotation. His infection markers were raised. His working diagnosis was septic arthritis of the hip joint and IV antibiotics were commenced. Initial MRI pelvis showed a moderate left hip effusion. Ultrasoundguided aspiration yielded a haemorrhagic viscous fluid. At open washout of the joint the capsule and cartilage appeared normal, but there was dark synovium behind his femoral head which was excised and sent for histology. Post washout, pain improved significantly, inflammatory markers normalised and mobilising was pain-free. His joint aspirate showed pus cells but no organisms grew. A MRI of his left hip was then performed demonstrating a focal mass-like synovial thickening posterior to the left femoral head neck junction consistent with focal pigmented villonodular synovitis (PVNS). The patient was discussed at an MDT. Giant cell tumour of tendon sheath was considered but thought unlikely as the tissue was within the hip joint. Antibiotics were stopped, with a plan to repeat an MRI in 6 weeks time. A wide range of differentials should be considered for joint pain other than septic arthritis, especially in young patients with no risk factors. It highlighted that rare conditions may present with common symptoms and that appropriate investigation is essential. PVNS is a rare, benign, but potentially locally aggressive and recurrent condition characterized by synovial proliferation and hemosiderin deposition inside the joints, tendon sheaths, and bursae. It's prevalence is approximately 1.8 cases of intra-articular disease per 1 million population. Kenny S, Donnellan P Department of Medical Oncology, Galway University Hospital Case A 62-year-old lady presented with three-month history lower back pain associated with worsening bilateral leg weakness, which had been worsening over past two months. She had a background history of early stage non-small cell lung cancer (Pt1a N0 adenocarcinoma) in 2012 for which she had left lower lobectomy with no adjuvant therapy. On exam power was 3/5 in the right leg and 4/5 in the left leg associated with reduced coordination. On admission MRI Brain/ Spine showed multifocal T2 intensity in the thoracic spine with hyperintensities in the right frontal, left frontal and right parietal areas. At this stage, while concerning for malignancy, the differential also included infectious and inflammatory etiology such granulomatous disease/sarcoid. Following this patient had lumbar puncture which showed high protein and monoclonal bands. Histology of her CSF showed atypical cells but was not conclusive for malignancy. The patient also had a PET scan at his time showing uptake in bihilar and precarinal lymph nodes. EBUS was performed which revealed non caseating granulomas. As this point diagnosis was still inconclusive. The investigations at this point were consistent with both neurosarcoid and malignancy. The patient then underwent a brain biopsy of left occipital enhancing lesion which confirmed metastatic adenocarcinoma consistent with non-small lung cancer. The patient is currently being treated with whole brain radiotherapy and intrathecal chemotherapy. Discussion Non small lung cancer is one of most common malignancies and commonly metastasizes to the brain. However this case was extremely unusual in that this patient's original malignancy was early stage making her very unlikely to present with a recurrence. The usual five year and ten year survival with early stage primary cancer is 77% and 70% respectively (Martini et al., 1995) . Also interestingly, this patient had solely brain/ leptomeningeal metastases without spread anywhere else. There is one other reported case like of isolated brain metastasis as a late recurrence of non-small cell lung cancer and that was a T2 tumour as compared to T1 in this case. The femoral artery is most commonly involved due to the close proximity of the femoral vein (1). A 36-year-old male presented to the Emergency Department with a twoday history of pain and swelling in the right thigh and inguinal area. His background history was significant for intravenous drug use and Hepatitis C. On examination he was febrile and tachycardic. As part of the initial investigations, a Doppler Ultrasound was performed. It showed a right above knee occlusive deep venous thrombosis. He was initially treated with therapeutic anticoagulation and intravenous antibiotics. As there was a noticeable groin swelling, it was thought the patient had an abscess. Ultrasound groin demonstrated minimal vascular flow, which was consistent with an abscess. He underwent a CT Venogram for further evaluation of his DVT. This showed a pseudoaneurysm of the profunda femoris artery, which was not previously visualised. Before these results were communicated, the patient sneezed on the ward and began haemorrhaging from the pseudoaneurysm. He lost approximately 500mls of blood. He was brought to theatre for emergency surgery. The femoral triangle was inoperable and the bleeding was definitively managed with ligation of the external iliac artery. The femoral artery was oversewn. He received intravenous antibiotics for two weeks post surgery. Discussion: Although femoral artery pseudoaneurysms are an infrequent clinical condition, they should be borne in mind in an at risk population. Treatment options include excision, ligation and debridement of the pseudoaneurysm with either routine, selective or no re-vascularization (1) . Review of the literature shows that ligation and excision of the pseudoaneurysm without re-vascularization is safe and effective in this patient population. INFANT Centre, Cork University Maternity Hospital, Cork Introduction: Preterm birth is a key determinant of neonatal brain injury. Neuromonitoring of cerebral oxygenation and neurological activity may detect antecedents to preterm brain injury. Aims: To determine in infants < 32 weeks; 1. normative values of regional cerebral oxygenation (rScO2) using NIRS, 2. the relationship between rScO2 and adverse outcome, 3. to examine the relationship between rScO2 and quantitative EEG. Methods: This was a prospective observational cohort study of infants <32 weeks. Part 1: Infants were monitored using NIRS with a neonatal probe in the first 48 hours of life. A composite measure of death and any abnormal cranial ultrasound finding was used to define adverse outcome. Part 2: In the same cohort, EEG was simultaneously recorded along with NIRS in 8 infants. EEG burst and Inter-burst Intervals were correlated with NIRS. Results: Part 1:127 preterm infants, median gestation 29 (26.92-30.71) weeks and median weight 1.14 (0.87-1.46) kg were evaluated. 85 infants had a good outcome while 42 infants had an adverse outcome (GM-IVH, PVL or death). There was a non-significant increase in rScO2 values for those with good outcome 79% (76-87%) versus 77% (72-79%), p >0.05. Part 2: Pearsons correlation between rScO2 interquartile range and number of bursts per minute r = -0.60 (CI: -0.91 to -0.12) was significant. Conclusion: This is the first study to establish normative values of cerebral oxygenation in preterm infants using a neonatal probe. Preterm infants with low rScO2 had poorer outcomes. Furthermore, a reciprocal relationship between neurological activity and hemodynamic changes was determined. Read Between the Lines: A Case Report of an Interstitial Hernia Introduction: An interstitial hernia is one where the hernia sac is located between the layers of the abdominal wall. Incidence of interstitial hernias has been reported to be between 0.08 and 1.6% (1). A 49-year-old woman presented to the Emergency Department with a sudden onset of right lower back pain. The pain radiated to the right iliac fossa and groin. There were no associated symptoms. On examination, the patient was afebrile and haemodynamically stable. Her abdomen was soft with associated rebound tenderness in the right iliac fossa. There was no evidence of herniae and her cough impulse was negative. Bowel sounds were present. At this point the provisional diagnosis was renal calculi. Haematological investigations were within normal limits. CT KUB was performed, which showed fluid filled mildly dilated small bowel measuring up to 2.9 cm in a right inguinal hernia. The patient was taken to theatre for emergency repair of the right-sided hernia. An open inguinal incision was performed. At this point, it was seen that the hernia sac was located between the layers of the external oblique and internal oblique muscles. Small bowel was located in the sac. The small bowel was dusky but there was no evidence of ischaemia. The small bowel was reduced back into the peritoneum and the defect was closed. The patient had an uncomplicated post-operative course. Discussion: Interstitial hernias can be difficult to diagnose clinically. They are easily misdiagnosed as the clinical symptoms can vary. There is little in the literature regarding the optimal management. However, most authors recommend an oblique inguinal approach because it provides good exposure and facilitates dissection of the sac. Immunotherapy is fast becoming the front-runner in the systemic treatment of desmoplastic melanoma. Anti-CTLA-4 monoclonal antibodies such as ipilimumab and newer anti-PD1 agents like pembrolizumab have shown promising results in melanoma therapy, but these immunotherapeutic options are not without risks. Neurotoxicity has been reported in approximately 1% of cases. An 80 year old male presented with progressive ataxia, lethargy, a decline in cognitive function and new onset dystonia which had been present for the previous 10 days. The patient was taking pembrolizumab for the treatment of locally recurrent desmoplastic melanoma. A CT brain was performed which showed no intracranial metastatic deposits. The patient was believed to have posterior cerebellar ataxia as a consequence of the autoimmune effects of pembrolizumab. The pembrolizumab was held and the patient was begun on 75mg of prednisolone daily, following which he had a marked improvement in mobility, coordination and cognitive function. The patient was originally diagnosed with desmoplastic melanoma BRAF wild type on the left occipital scalp which was excised in December 2013 followed by adjuvant radiotherapy. The patient had multiple local recurrences and excisions with repeat radiation until February 2016 in which he was started on CTLA-4 monoclonal antibody ipilimumab. His cutaneous metastasis continued to grow irrespective of the treatment. The possibility of a delayed response to the immunotherapy was communicated to the patient and the lesion gradually decreased in size from 3.5cm at its largest to 1.4cm over the following weeks. Pemrolizumab was introduced in June 2016 and the patient had a remarkable response within his well-known scalp lesion. CT TAP showed no metastatic disease and the patient had a complete clinical remission in the scalp. He then developed autoimmune neuropathy in October 2016 and the pembrolizumab was held. This case illustrates the efficacy of immunotherapy in the treatment of desmoplastic melanoma but it also highlights the risk of immune related adverse events.  A 70-year-old gentleman presented to the ED following an unwitnessed fall at home in the setting of a partially treated urinary tract infection (UTI). A background of extensive smoking and oral cancer was noted in the history but the staging and treatment was unclear. Although the patient was alert and fully orientated, he was a poor historian. On inspection, a low BMI was noted and a scar following the right anterior cervical chain was visible. A diffuse expiratory wheeze was heard on auscultation with no focal consolidation or crepitations. He was saturating well at 96% on room air and reported no recent respiratory symptoms. Laboratory tests revealed a leucocytosis, neutrophilia and a raised CRP which were presumed to be linked to his ongoing UTI. A chest x-ray revealed multiple small nodular opacities throughout both lung fields. The initial differential was between miliary TB or metastatic lung disease. He was isolated with airborne precautions pending further imaging. Information transfer between his original hospitals took several days to organise. This ultimately revealed that this patient previously had oral squamous cell carcinoma (T2N0M0) treated with excision, radiotherapy and chemotherapy. In addition, he had undergone three previous lung biopsies between 2013-2015 which demonstrated fibro-inflammatory change and were not for further investigation. Over the course of the two days that this patient waited in isolation for his Quantiferon result and CT scan, his clinical condition deteriorated to the extent that metastatic disease or a second primary became the main differential. The decision was made to involve palliative care and to make him comfortable. This case highlights the importance of reliable and timely information flow between hospitals, the impact it can have on improved quality of patient care and also illustrates the difficulty in attaining accurate early diagnosis of non-specific lung lesions found on chest x-ray. Somers E¹, Ismael G¹, Larkin J¹ ¹Department of Colorectal Surgery, St James's Hospital, Dublin 8, IRELAND Abstract A 42 year old man with a history of intravenous opiate abuse was brought by ambulance to the Emergency Department with peritonitis following a shooting. On arrival, the patient was alert and self-ventilating with BP 103/74, pulse 96, respiratory rate 18 and Sp02 98%. He had a midline bullet entry wound in the epigastrium 2cm below the xiphisternum, with a corresponding exit wound in the right lumbar region. He also had two superficial bullet wounds in the right shoulder and right forearm. His abdomen was distended, with features of peritonitis present. Following fluid resuscitation, antibiotic administration and crossmatching of blood, computed tomography revealed significant pneumoperitoneum with intraperitoneal free fluid and a complex duodenal injury. There was also a grade 5 right renal injury with loss of perfusion of the interpolar region and lower pole, with large right perinephric haematoma, and fracture of the right transverse process of the L3 vertebra and a right psoas haematoma. At laparotomy, the bullet was found to have obliquely traversed the stomach and duodenum, with anterior wounds to the antrum, pylorus and second part of duodenum, with a posterolateral duodenal wound created en route through the retroperitoneum. The duodenum was fully kocherised and each injury was primarily repaired with interrupted 3/0 PDS sutures. Integrity was confirmed by insufflation of the stomach and duodenum via the nasogastric tube. The perinephric haematoma had not enlarged during this time so it was decided to manage this conservatively. He was maintained on parenteral nutrition until day 5 when a contrast study showed the stomach and duodenum were intact. He required percutaneous drainage of a sympathetic right pleural effusion and developed a postoperative pneumonia which responded to intravenous antibiotics. He was discharged home, well, four weeks post surgery. Testes cancer usually presents as a firm swelling in the scrotum. It is the most common solid tumour in men aged 20-45 years old. Metastases from testes cancer usually follow a predictable pathway-with first site of metastasis to the retroperitoneal lymph nodes. We present the case of a 40 year old French gentleman presented to the emergency department with a one year history of large painless scrotal swelling. He had an associated non-productive cough and right chest wall tenderness. He was a non-smoker and had no significant past medical history. He was single and had no children. On examination he had a firm smooth hard swelling of the right testes 12cm in size. The left testes were atrophic. There were no palpable lymphadenopathy, but there was right, upper chest wall tenderness. An MSU was clear. Routine bloods were unremarkable. A scrotal ultrasound demonstrated an 11.6cm heterogenous mass consistent with a neoplasm. Testicular tumour markers were significantly elevated βHCG 13397, AFP 16146 and LDH 543. A chest X ray revealed a cannonball opacity in the right upper zone concerning for a pulmonary metastasis. Staging CT TAP confirmed a 7.5cm pleural mass with destruction of the adjacent 3 rd rib, along with a 3cm pulmonary nodule in the right mid zone and a small nodule at the left costophrenic recess. The patient underwent a radical orchidectomy via a scrotal approach as the mass was too large to remove via an inguinal incision. The tumour histology was a mixed germ cell tumour comprising of 50% teratoma, 25% yolk sac and 25% seminoma. The tumour was confined to the tunica and staged as pT2. Tumour markers began to decrease by day 5 (βHCG 8847, AFP 13997 and LDH 439). Following MDT discussion, he was commenced on adjuvant chemotherapy (after appropriate work up-audiometry and pulmonary function assessment) and has commenced his first cycle (4 in total) of BEP-Bleomycin, Etoposide, Cisplatin. He was offered sperm banking prior to commencing chemotherapy. Kelly S 1 , Smith D 1 , Forde H 1 1 Department of Endocrinology, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin 9 Diabetic Ketoacidosis (DKA) is a medical emergency characterised by hyperglycaemia, hyperketonaemia and an associated metabolic acidosis. Although an uncommon presentation in older patients with no previous history of diabetes, DKA can represent numerous underlying aetiologies including pancreatitis and pancreatic malignancy. A 71 year old lady presented to Beaumont Emergency Department with a two week history of malaise and lethargy, six weeks postcholecystectomy (indicated for cholelithiasis). She described anorexia and 7lb unintentional weight loss over the previous month. One day prior to admission she developed vomiting and generalized abdominal pain, but denied osmotic symptoms. Regarding family history, her daughter developed Type 1 diabetes mellitus in her teens. She had no history of excess alcohol consumption. On examination, she was hypovolemic and tachycardic. Her abdomen was soft, with generalized tenderness but no guarding or rigidity. Of note, she had no features of obstructive jaundice. Initial investigations were consistent with severe diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). She was commenced on an intravenous insulin regime as per Beaumont Hospital DKA management protocol. Blood and urinary amylase were significantly elevated, and a modified Glasgow Score of 2 was calculated indicating mild acute pancreatitis. The patient improved rapidly with correction of her acidosis, and was transitioned to subcutaneous insulin. Further investigation revealed a glycated haemoglobin of 10.1% . Islet cell antibodies, insulin antibodies and glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies were negative. Computerised Tomography (CT) of the pancreas was arranged, and demonstrated a 3.3cm mass in the uncinate process of the pancreas. Fine needle aspiration confirmed pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The tumour was deemed unresectable following surgical assessment, and she recently commenced chemotherapy. In conclusion, this case demonstrates the importance of having a high index of suspicion for pancreatic pathology in older patients who present with features of new onset insulin deficiency and we would advocate pancreatic imaging when investigating similar cases. Gastric Carcinoma recurring as an isolated breast secondary after three years from curative treatment. Case report and literature review. O'Donnell S 1 ; Abd ELwahab S 1 ; Auchuraz N 1 ; Lal A 1 1 Mid-Western Breast Unit, University Hospital Limerick, Limerick Extra-mammary tumour metastases to the breast are extremely rare accounting for less than 2% of all breast lesions. Breast secondaries were reported with lymphoma, melanoma, ovarian carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma, colonic adenocarcinoma and gastric carcinoma. Stomach cancer metastases to the breast are very rare, with an incidence believed to be around 2.1% of all breast secondaries. The presentation is usually quite similar to breast primary; therefore clinicians need to keep an open mind when discussing histology as additional immune-histopathological tests are usually necessary to fully diagnose the cancer. Our case was a 55 years old female who was treated for gastric signet ring carcinoma in 2013. She was referred to our breast clinic three years post curative surgical and chemotherapeutic management of her stomach cancer with a right breast lump with oedema and thickening of the overlying skin. She was thought to have inflammatory breast carcinoma; however, further histological tests demonstrated signet ring cells consistent with metastatic gastric carcinoma. Radiological staging tests confirmed single isolated breast secondary with no other metastatic lesions. To best of our knowledge, this is the only case of isolated breast secondary from gastric tumour. In this report, we reviewed the literature; discussed patient presentation and management, including breast metastectectomy. The British Society of Gerodontology have published guidelines for the Oral Healthcare of Stroke Survivors. (1) It highlights the risk that poor oral health poses for stroke survivors and emphasises the importance of including oral care measures in post stroke care protocols. The National Stroke guidelines do not reference dentistry specifically which is confounded by a paucity of evidence for staff led interventions in this area. (2) The combination of stroke-related and pre-existing risk factors for poor oral hygiene can negatively impact nutritional status and also increase the risk of aspiration pneumonia which can have repercussions for rehabilitation and functional outcomes. (3, 4) Aim The aim of this audit was to identify risk factors, both stroke-related and pre-existing, for poor oral health in all post-stroke patients admitted to the Acute Stroke and the Rehabilitation Units across UCHG, with a view to developing an Oral Care pathway for this patient cohort. Results 25 patients in total were identified, 12 (48%) in the acute stroke unit and 13 (52%) in the inpatient rehabilitation facility. 13(52%) had either dysphasia, dysphagia or both, secondary to their stroke. 23(92%) were prescribed medications with oral side-effects. 6(24%) were taking fortified diet supplements. 14(56%) had a significant smoking history. 13(52%) had dentures, with 2(8%) having new problems with their dentures since the stroke. 4(16%) had been to a dentist in the last year. Conclusion Our audit identified that this cohort of patients is at increased risk of oral health problems due to both prescribed medications and physical complications following their stroke. The majority of patients did not have a recent or upcoming dental assessment. This information emphasises the need for an oral healthcare protocol as part of the stroke management pathway which will be developed following a planned education session to be delivered to our multidisciplinary colleagues. Diagnosis, prenatal treatment and follow up of twin reversed arterial perfusion sequence occurring in a monochorionic diamniotic twin pregnancy: A case report Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, Letterkenny University Hospital Abstract Category: Case report Intern Network: West/Northwest Introduction: Here a case of twin reversed arterial perfusion sequence occurring in a monochorionic diamniotic twin pregnancy with successful radioablation treatment is reported. TRAP (Twin Reversed Arterial Perfusion) sequence is a rare syndrome seen in monochorionic twin pregnancies. It occurs in just 1% of monochorionic twin pregnancies. (1) This TRAP sequence case was diagnosed at 12 weeks of gestation. Description/case presentation: At 12 weeks a 23 year old para 1 woman presented for a 12 week ultrasound scan where a monochorionic twin pregnancy was suspected, with demise of fetus. The ulstrasound demonstrated a live fetus which measured equal to dates. The other fetus measured 8+5 weeks, but had an atypical appearance. Follow-up ultrasound showed a monochorionic twin pregnancy with one live fetus equalling dates and one fetus that had the appearance of an acardiac twin. There was no identifiable vascular connection. At 15 weeks and 4 days ultrasound indicated the acardiac twin measurements had increased. No cardiac activity was observed. Lower limbs were apparent but other structures could not be visualised. The patient and her partner were counselled regarding surgical and conservative management options. At 16+6 weeks gestation, radio frequency ablation was performed in the UK. The procedure was uncomplicated and the patient was discharged on that day. More detail on outcome required. No chromosomal abnormalities on genetic testing of second fetus were suggested. Weekly follow up in national maternity hospital followed. Discussion/conclusion: TRAP is considered to primarily result from an abnormal placental arterial to arterial anastomosis.(2) Characteristically the outcome is an a cardiac twin and a pump twin. The pump twin is in general smaller and viable, and the acardiac twin is unstructured and nonviable. Methods: A retrospective study carried out on 50 randomly selected patients (10 patients from 5 different consultant surgical intake) presenting with a chief complaint of RIF pain between May and July 2016. Patient demographics, presenting complaint, early warning score (EWS) and investigations on admission, provisional diagnosis, time seen by senior doctor, in-patient management, and operative findings were analysed. Results: A total of 50 subjects were evaluated, 42% were male vs. 58% female. 83% of female patients were of childbearing age. Localized RIF pain was present in 96% of patients, of whom 90% had a provisional diagnosis of appendicitis. EWS ranges were 84% (0-1), 12% (2-3), 4% (4-6), and 0% (>7%) on admission. Haematological investigations requested on admission included FBC (98%), CRP (98%), Amylase (62%), LFT (74%), U&E (94%), and Lactate (80%). 100% of female patients of reproductive age had β-hCG test on admission. 96% of patients had a urinalysis on admission. 36% of patients had an ultrasound abdomen vs. 38% had a CT abdomen requested on admission. Time seen by senior doctor was 20% (0-119mins), 50% (120-240mins), 12% (241-480mins), 14% (12-24hrs) and 4% (>24hrs). 28% of patients were conservatively managed vs. 72% had laparoscopic appendectomy vs. 4% open appendectomy. 89% of appendectomy were positive for appendicitis. Conclusion: This audit demonstrates a good compliance to the standards set by the ASGBI 2014 Commissioning Guide. This audit will be presented at the Quality improvement forum at LUH to increase awareness of performance with regards to care of patients with RIF pain. The audit cycle will be completed in 1 month to assess for improvement in patient care. Computer based semi-automated audit of all HbA1c levels in a Type 1 paediatric diabetes service O Connell E 1,2 , Mayne P 1 , Hawkes C 1 , Murphy C 1 1 Department of Endocrinology, Children's University Hospital, Temple St; 2 UCD Intern Network Background: Standards of care, multidisciplinary team ratios and HbAic (measure of glucose control) targets in childhood type one diabetes mellitus (T1DM) are well established. Use of electronic data management systems is limited in Republic of Ireland and manual audit is laborious and may be inaccurate. Development of an electronic audit tool would facilitate clinical audit to identify deficits and target quality improvement initiatives for children and adolescents with T1DM Aim: to systematically audit all HbA1c results reported in children (< 16 years) with T1DM in a single centre to identify all affected patients, assess compliance with best practise guidelines in terms of monitoring frequency (aim > 3/year) and to identify patients with poor control who may benefit from intensive intervention. Methods: All HbA1cs results from 2015 were exported electronically from the clinical laboratory system. Non type 1 patients (Type 2 DM, Cystic fibrosis related diabetes, metabolic patients) and results within 3 months of diagnosis were excluded. The mean annualised individual HbA1c and the total centre mean and median HbA1c were calculated. Results: A total of 316 patients with T1DM identified. The median age was 12 years and median HbA1c was 66 mmol/mol. Forty-eight % of patients met the target of >three HbA1cs determinations, 42% had three and 10% had two. Target HbAic was only achieved in 9% of patients (< 54 mmol/mol) with a further 35% achieving levels between 54-64. Ten % had very suboptimal control of >80mmol/mol. Conclusions: This system of semi-automated data collection enabled creation of a clinically meaningful dataset that facilitated audit of key performance indicators. Patients failing to meet targets were identified, and new baselines established for comparison with future performance. Capture of electronic data facilitating audit has a key role in optimising care and should be prioritised for national rollout. Introduction: Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is a progressive, autosomal inherited condition with an estimated prevalence of 1:2500-5000, a male predominance and, traditionally, a predilection for people from the Mediterranean basin of Italian and Greek descent (1). This disease was first identified by a team of cardiologists in France in the 1970's (2) . It is attributable for almost 20% of sudden cardiac death (SCD) (3) and is the leading cause of SCD in the Venetto region of Italy(4). Description/case presentation: A 39-year-old gentleman presented to hospital in April 2016 with palpitations, chest tightness and shortness of breath which began at his work in a local butchers shop. This was the fourth such episode in 4 months with the duration of symptoms ranging from 30 minutes to 15 hours. On admission, a ventricular tachycardia of 188 bpm was identified and chemically cardioverted successfully. ECG highlighted a broad complex tachycardia with left-bundle-branch morphology while echocardiography identified a reduced ejection fraction of 40%, delayed diastolic relaxation and impaired right and left ventricular systolic function. Cardiac MRI revealed extensive, non-ischaemic fibrosis involving both the left and right ventricles confirming ARVC(5). Subsequently, genetic screening was conducted. His 18 year old daughter, who was entirely asymptomatic, has since been diagnosed with ARVC and consented to the insertion of an Implantable Cardiac Defibrillator. Discussion/conclusion: Notably, four clinical phases exist (4): 1. Silent phase 2. Appearance of arrhythmias; 3. Appearance of structural abnormalities 4. Onset of heart failure The high prevalence of ventricular arrhythmias is out of proportion to the extent of ventricular dysfunction and dilation. This is a key finding that may suggest a positive diagnosis. The identification of ARVC in this gentleman's daughter may prove crucial as ARVC-associated SCD is more common in adolescents and young adults and can be precipitated by exertion (6) . A case of giant small bowel diverticulum in a young man Nicholson E 1 , Travers J 1 , Ejaz T 1 1 Midlands Regional Hospital, Mullingar UCD Intern Network Case Report Introduction: A diverticulum is an outpouching in the gastrointestinal tract wall, usually the colon. Typically 5-10mm in size. 'True' diverticula involve all wall layers. Acquired small bowel diverticula are rare entities, especially ileal (15%). Mean age of presentation is 64. Most are asymptomatic and found incidentally. While aetiology remains unclear, many possible causes are reported in literature. A 24-year-old man presented with dull, right lower quadrant, nonradiating pain increasing in intensity over the past month with associated nausea. No diarrhoea, constipation or weight loss. He reported a longstanding history of intermittent mild abdominal pain and excessive flatus since infancy. Previously, abdominal massage could alleviate symptoms. No abnormality detected on prior investigation. Past history included duodenoduodenostomy for atresia, aged 2 months. An abdominal x-ray showed a large gas-filled small bowel outpouching of unclear aetiology. A CT confirmed a 10x7cm saccular pouch in the mid-distal ileum, filled with faecal matter and contrast. Barium followthrough showed contrast passing freely with no evidence of obstruction. Clinical history and imaging were consistent with giant small bowel diverticulum. Initially managed conservatively with analgesia, intravenous fluids, PPIs and laxatives; symptoms remained unresolved and a laparotomy was performed. 5cm of small bowel, including the diverticulum (which was located along the mesenteric border) was resected with primary anastomosis. No perioperative complications occurred and the patient was discharged home. Conclusion: This was an unusual presentation of a diverticulum given the patient's age, its location and size. The majority of ileal diverticula are Meckel's, congenital 'true' diverticula. Although extremely rare, there are reports of presentation in adults. A cardinal finding in Meckel's Diverticulum is the antimesenteric location, ruling out this diagnosis in this case. No specific management guidelines exist to date, although laparotomies are commonly performed in acute settings to avoid complications: diverticulitis, obstruction, haemorrhage, volvulus, perforation, malabsorption or sepsis. Ward C 1 , Houlihan D 1 , Bourke M 1 1 Liver Transplant Unit, Saint Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin UCD Intern Network Background: Transplantation for certain patients with HCC represents an excellent treatment option with 5 year survival of over 75% in patients selected using the conventional Milan criteria (1). However, there is a growing body of evidence indicating that these criteria may be too restrictive and the use of expanded criteria can produce comparable 5-year survival (2, 3). Aims: To determine whether the outcomes in patients transplanted for HCC within and outside Milan criteria are acceptable. Are current selection criteria in the unit too restrictive? Methods: Patients transplanted for HCC between 2001 and 2016 were identified in the St. Vincent's liver transplant database. For each patient transplanted for HCC, their imaging was analysed using PRP to ascertain tumour size prior to transplant. In the case of multiple tumours the aggregate size was used. If a patient received loco-regional therapy (LRT) the diameter of the tumour pre-LRT was used. Using this information the patient was categorised as within or outside the Milan criteria. A Kaplan Meier curve was generated using SPSS statistics to compare survival outcomes between the two groups. Results: There were 108 patients transplanted for HCC in SVUH during the period. Based on radiological diagnosis 86 patients were categorised as within Milan and 22 outside the Milan criteria. When comparing the groups we found that there was no statistically significant difference between the two groups in terms of survival (P=0.121). The estimated 5-year survival was similar between the two groups (64% outside Milan, 74% inside Milan) and comparable to the NHSBT standard. Conclusion: The difference in outcomes between those transplanted for HCC within and outside the Milan criteria was not statistically-significant and survival for both groups was comparable to the NSHBT standard. This supports the consideration of the use of expanded criteria. With the first published case being documented in 2007, [1] and limited further acknowledged cases being noted, this makes this pulmonary involvement in systemic lupus erythematous extremely rare. We present the second documented case of acute granulomatous lupus pneumonitis. Case description: A 56 year old woman who presented to our respiratory clinic with generalised and nonspecific symptoms of aches and pains with progressively worsening dyspnoea on exertion. She had a background history of COPD, non obstructive coronary artery disease and gastritis. An initial CT thorax showed patchy consolidation with an interval CT thorax showing worsening multifocal airspace opacification. This was followed up with a bronchoscopy and transbronchial biopsy with granulomatous pneumonitis being diagnosed through histopathology. Further investigations were organised to illicit the cause of the generalized aches, pains and Raynauds syndrome symptoms experienced during winter. This returned a positive lupus serology of ANA positive with a titre of 1600 in a speckled pattern, anti-dsDNA positive with a titre of 800 IU/ml and P-ANCA positive. Discussion: This case highlights a rare and infrequently documented example of pulmonary manifestation of SLE. We found a female patient having initially presented with respiratory symptoms, being diagnosed via histopathology with granulomatous pneumonitis and subsequently being found to have positive lupus serology. Background: This case review explores the potential diagnostic and therapeutic challenges when faced with a patient with sudden onset, isolated paranoid ideation in the context of ongoing physical illness. Description: The patient, a 63 year old lady, was admitted for neoadjuvant, CROSS regimen, chemoradiotherapy for non-metastatic oesophageal adenocarcinoma. She was NPO due to severe dysphagia and was receiving TPN. She was referred to the Psychological Medicine Service on week 4 of the 5 week regimen due to paranoid thoughts. She believed the cleaners and nursing staff were "bad mouthing" her and plotting to kill her. The patient denied this. Collateral histories were taken from family members who she phoned regularly expressing these beliefs. She attempted to abscond on multiple occasions. Of note she was receiving high dose steroids weekly, prior to chemotherapy and was on a morphine pump. She had no previous psychiatric history and there were no other psychotic symptoms, symptoms of confusion or fluctuating consciousness. She was placed on 1:1 special and started on orodispersible olanzapine 2.5mg. As investigations a septic screen, MRI-Brain, autoimmune screen were all carried out all were negative for a cause of the paranoia. Olanzepine was titrated up to 10mg with little effect on the delusions. On review of the medications it was noted that she was on Eltroxin for hypothyroidism. Her TFTs showed her to be hypothyroid. The patient admitted to having great difficulty swallowing this tablet and often refluxed afterwards. On referral to the Endocrine team, her eltroxin was increased and the paranoid thoughts settled within days. Discussion: Although rare, hypothyroid induced psychosis should be considered when a patient presents with psychotic symptoms and a history of hypothyroidism. It may present with any of the psychotic symptoms, but suspicion and paranoia tend to be the most common presenting complaints. Introduction: Immunotherapies are utilized for the targeted treatment of cancer, however, unlike traditional agents, their side effect profile is not predictable, and therefore difficult to diagnose. This case focuses on Nivolumab, a checkpoint inhibitor of PD-1. Case description: 66-year-old female, presenting 4 months post-commencement of the immunotherapy drug, Nivolumab. Complained of confusion, tiredness, and intermittent nonspecific leg pain for the previous week, and vomiting for the past two days. Also reported a two-week history of generalized weakness and two recent falls, neither associated w/ LOC or trauma. Diagnosed September 2015 with NSCLC, invasive adenocarcinoma, CK7 and TTF1 positive, cTXN3M1b (cervical adenopathy, LN involvement, CNS metastasis), stage IV, EGFR and ALK negative. Underwent right posterior fossa craniotomy and resection of metastasis; whole brain radiotherapy and four cycles carboplatin/pemetrexed. Pemetrexed discontinued in April, second line palliative therapy commenced with Nivolumab. On examination -grossly normal, some pain on moving lower limbs. Laboratory findings showed high calcium and phosphate levels. Hypercalcaemia was treated with fluids, zolendronic acid, antiemetics. CT TAP + brain, MRI brain + pituitary, isotope bone scan showed stable disease w/ nil cause. Following initial treatment, developed BP 88/60 mmHg, SpO2 86% RA (98% on 4L). Reported 'lightheadedness', confusion, nausea, and was hypophonic. Also generalised pain w/ constant pain in right upper limb. Further investigations showed decreased cortisol and vitamin D3 levels and a positive ANA. Short synachten test supported a diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency, with the hypercalcaemia secondary to the low cortisol. It was thought this may be resulting from treatment with nivolumab, therefore was treated as nivolumab toxicity. Upon discontinuation of therapy, along with high dose steroids, the symptoms resolved. Discussion: This case demonstrates one of the many generalised side effects of immunotherapies, despite their targeted nature. These do not follow a pattern or time period, unlike traditional therapies. A 74 year old male was admitted from the heart failure clinic with a Hb of 7.1g/dl, complaining of intermittent melena and recent weight loss of 10kg. Past medical history included ischaemic cardiomyopathy, coronary artery bypass graft, reduced left ventricular function, iron deficiency anaemia, atrial fibrillation with left atrial occlusion device insertion. The patient is an ex-smoker of 40 pack years. Examination revealed bibasal crepitations and was otherwise normal. Iron deficiency anaemia was previously investigated with OGD, colonoscopy and small bowel capsule endoscopy, all of which were normal. CT TAP showed mediastinal lymphadenopathy, likely secondary to infection, and cirrhosis. Haematinics revealed microcytic anaemia, characteristic of iron deficiency anaemia. Other bloods, including a liver screen were normal. Faecal occult blood was positive. 1 unit of Red cells was transfused with the aim to keep Hb >9g/dl to prevent cardiac decompensation. Daily transfusions were required. Repeat OGD showed antral gastritis and colonoscopy showed patchy mucosal erythema and a 15mm polyp. Polypectomy was performed and no site of active bleeding was identified. A push enteroscopy which extended to the proximal jejunum was normal. CT mesenteric angiogram showed large superior mesenteric vein varices with bleeding evident on delayed imaging. The diagnosis was confirmed with mesenteric angiogram. Transhepatic superior mesenteric venography and embolization was not carried out due to the risk of venous infarct. Congestive hepatopathy secondary to heart failure is the most likely cause of portal hypertension in this case. Bisoprolol was switched to a non selective beta blocker and clopidogrel was discontinued. Hb has since stabilised with the most recent Hb being 10g/dl on oral iron supplementation. Superior mesenteric vein varices proves a diagnostic challenge due to the obscurity of its presentation and current management is guided only by previous case studies. It should be considered a differential in obscure GI bleeding. Introduction: Acute liver injuries can be the result of many different insults, from drug induced to hypotension. This case depicts an 81 year old gentleman who suffered one such injury and the exact cause is still unknown. Case: Male admitted through ED in SJH with a 1/52 history of being "generally unwell", worsening dyspnoea on exertion, frequency and urgency of urine, and confusion. A known arteriopath with a background including Ischaemic heart disease, Hypertension, T2DM, prior TIA, Parkinson's and Diverticular disease. Physical exam was notable for a temperature of 38.5 and mild crackles in his right lung base, with bilateral lower limb oedema .Urine dipstick showed protein, blood and leukocytes. IV Augmentin was commenced, aimed at both uro-and respiratory sepsis. A rapid deterioration over the following days ensued, the most striking of which was a progressive elevation in transaminases. Having been normal on admission, they reached levels as high as >6000 AST and >4000 ALT. Lactate continued to rise also. Having initially ruled out ischaemic bowel & acute cholecystitis as possible causes, Mr. G was treated as having ischaemic hepatitis. He was commenced on an N-Acetyl Cysteine infusion. Case Discussion/Conclusion: Despite having been treated for ischaemic hepatitis, no cause was ever found. No episodes of hypotension were recorded, no evidence of MI, and no evidence of haemorrhage. His treatment with Augmentin was also considered as a possibility for deranged LFTs but he received just 2 doses; it was discontinued after the first initial LFT rise. Following discussion with the Hepatology team, it was proposed that just a small fall in the patient's blood pressure may have been sufficient to result in such a picture, especially given his history of arterial disease. Determining the exact cause of acute liver injuries is a challenge, particularly in the elderly, while prognosis is guarded. hyperkalemia were stopped, however despite this, the potassium levels remained elevated. On further analysis, thrombocytosis was discovered, leading to the diagnosis of pseudo-hyperkalemia. Upon discharge, the diagnosis was explained to the patient as was the need to inform the laboratory and phlebotomy services regarding correct procedure in checking serum potassium in the future. However, some time later this gentleman presented once again to the Haematology service, with unexplained hyperkalemia. Further investigations were carried out & treatment protocol for Hyperkalemia was initiated until eventually the true condition was unmasked. Hyperkalemia is a potentially life threatening medical condition that requires immediate medical intervention; pseudohyperkalemia is a benign condition that warrants no intervention. It should be suspected in patients presenting with serum elevated potassium and platelet levels without concomitant electrolyte imbalances. Failure to recognize this condition can lead to inappropriate laboratory investigations, unnecessary treatments and anxiety for both patient and physician. Education is paramount in managing this condition. The patient, phlebotomist and laboratory need to be made aware of this condition. Venipuncture needs to be performed without the use of a tourniquet and the sample delivered to the laboratory within one hour for testing. Failure to inform the relevant services of this condition can lead to the over investigation and senseless wasting of resources, better spent elsewhere. Recent accurate recording of the surgical patient's weight/mass allows the presiding anaesthetist to tailor effectively the dose of anaesthetic drug and muscle relaxant for surgery, optimising outcomes and minimising morbidity and mortality. In addition, Body Mass Index BMI (kg/m2) can be an important objective indicator of a patient's likely ease of intubation. Difficult tracheal intubation contributes to significant morbidity and mortality during induction of anaesthesia 1 . Other complications associated with higher BMI include difficulty establishing IV access and the provision of specialised equipment e.g. suitable operating tables, large BP cuffs, large tourniquets, portable ultrasound machines, anaesthetic ventilators capable of PEEP and pressure modalities, and ramp positioning to improve lung mechanics 2 . The need to have onsite of senior anaesthetic personnel experienced in escalating care in the obese patient is also a consideration. Such challenges facing anaesthetists are increasingly common, owing to the growing prevalence of obesity in the general population, and the ability to predict these potential complications constitutes safe management for those patients at higher risk. In view of the importance of BMI and accurate recording of patient weight in those undergoing anaesthesia, we decided to prospectively audit existing record taking practices against the recommended recording systems already in place in our hospital. We believe there are a number of obstacles to satisfactory record taking in the pre-operative anaesthetic workup. These include documentation in imperial units (as opposed to metric units which should be used), whether surgery is emergency or elective, and whether height and weight are recorded at all by the time the patient has reached the anaesthetic room. We anticipate that current record taking in the area of BMI and weight may be improved if these obstacles are quantified and highlighted by the audit process and presented to the relevant parties involved, both in theatre and on the ward. Introduction: Management of persistent pneumothorases in an elderly population can present the difficult dilemma of balancing appropriate intervention with sensible risk avoidance [1] . This case study demonstrates the benefit of persevering with conservative chest drain therapy in contrast to hastily progressing to surgical intervention. Case: Mr JH, an 82 year old male, was admitted to GUH on October 17th 2016 with a right upper lobe pneumothorax on a background of interstitial lung disease. During the first 18 days of admission, two chest drains (12French and 18French) failed to allow lung reinflation. Rigid bronchoscopy with endobronchial valve insertion was unsuccessful in occluding the air leak. At this stage, standard management of pneumothorax would suggest timely surgical intervention to improve patient outcomes. In consultation with cardiothoracic surgeons, it was agreed that Video-assisted Thoracoscopy would be an appropriate next step. However, on consideration of benefits to risks, this procedure was postponed. A third chest drain (24French) was inserted revealing a 1300ml/min air leak on 10cmH2O suction. Within eight days the leak had reduced to 300ml/ min. Chest x-ray showed consistent marginal resolution of the pneumothorax. The chest drain was removed following a leak-free interval of 72hours. The patient remained in hospital for a further week. On discharge, the pneumothorax had dramatically resolved, save a small portion of the right upper lobe superior to the clavicle. Discussion: This case shows that in the setting of pneumothorax in the elderly population conservative management using a wide bore chest drain may be a more appropriate management than surgical intervention. Said population is quite high risk for such procedures and hence it is ideal to avoid them if possible. The above case study shows that continuing with chest drain management may prevent the need to resort to surgical management.  A standardised tablet-based questionnaire was distributed among haemodialysis and kidney transplant patients (n = 163), via the audits authors. The questionnaire encompassed, uptake of the vaccine, awareness of eligibility, patient comorbidities, and if applicable, the reason for not receiving the influenza vaccine. The response rate was 62% (102/163). Among the study population, n = 102, 75.49% of patients were aware of the need for yearly influenza vaccination. The overall immunisation rate in the study population was 64.71%. The immunisation rate results were further subdivided into haemodialysis and kidney transplants patient populations. The rates for these groups were 60.29% and 73.53% respectively. Conclusion Immunisation rates among study population are below NIAC and WHO recommendations. Rates of immunisation among the haemodialysis population were significantly lower than those in the kidney transplant population. Due to these results, the authors recommend distributing the influenza vaccine, among patients in clinic or the dialysis unit. The incidence of drowning in Ireland is approximately 140 annually. The aim of our investigation was to explore attitudes towards drowning and its prevention among the Irish sailing community. Methods We distributed a short questionnaire of 6 questions Irish Sailing Association Instructors via Facebook. There were 85 respondents. Using a likert scale respondents answered questions in relation to drowning, contributory factors, preventative measures and the management of drowning incidents. Results 87% (n = 74) of correspondents strongly agreed it is important for them to wear a personal flotation device (PFD) when on the water, and 97% (n=82) strongly agreed it is important for their trainees to wear PDFs. 38% (n=32) of instructors would not feel comfortable instructing trainees who did not know how to swim, compared with 48% (n=41) who would be comfortable in doing so. 46 %( n=39) respondents answered yes to having gone sailing under the influence of alcohol. Of the 20% (n=17) that answered yes to being involved in a drowning, 2 respondents directly attributed alcohol to being the cause of the drowning incident. Discussion Optimal pre-hospital care is a significant determinant of immersion victim outcome worldwide (1, 2) . Accidental drowning can strike both the experienced and inexperienced. No available data suggests that an increased swimming ability decreases drowning risk, however PFD use can prevent 1 in 2 drowning deaths. (4) One study reported swimming failure only contributed to 5.4% of drownings, with cold shock, hypothermia, post-rescue collapse and cardiac events considered as the cause in the majority of cases (3) . Alcohol is associated with 27% of drownings, with one-third of these incidents deemed intentional. Alcohol increases the probability of ending up in the water, and impacts survival once immersed. (5) . Introduction: Extensive palatomaxillary defects have dramatic consequences for speech, deglutition, mastication, and cosmesis. Traditional methods of reconstruction, such as locoregional flaps, alloplastic material, and prosthetic devices often fall short of providing meaningful and functional reconstruction of these defects. Case Description: A 63-year-old male, ex-smoker, presented with difficulties with intraoral obturator prosthetic use and was assessed for formal reconstruction of his midfacial defect. Four years previously, he underwent extirpative oncological resection of a sinonasal carcinoma with postoperative radiotherapy. He is an ex-smoker of 4-years duration, and recent investigations reveal no locoregional disease recurrence. He presented with absence of the nose, hard palate, premaxilla and a right maxillary deficiency. In this case, we describe the use of a free fibula osteocutaneous microvascular flap to reconstruct the palatomaxillary defect in this patient. Conclusion: This case describes the current concepts in the reconstruction of large composite midfacial defects with an emphasis on the role of free tissue transfer, including the factors to be evaluated when choosing this reconstructive method, indications of specific donor sites, and the technical procedures involved. Duffy, B. 1 Watson A. 2 Sarcoidosis is a systemic granulomatous inflammatory condition of unknown etiology. Renal insufficiency is not commonly reported, but typically results from hypercalcaemia and hypercalciuria. The most common histological pattern seen is granulomatous interstitial nephritis. We present a case of Sarcoidosis with pulmonary involvement, renal stones, acute kidney injury and interstitial fibrosis, tubular atrophy and microcalcifications on renal histology. A 40 year old presented following a six-month history of shortness of breath on exertion, dry cough and unintentional weight loss. Initial investigations revealed elevated Calcium (3.39mmol/L), Urea (16.4mmol/L), Creatinine (257μmol/L), Serum ACE (100units/ml) and old calcified lymphadenopathy on chest radiograph. CT thorax revealed bilateral calcified hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy and two small nonobstructing calculi in the left kidney, highly suggestive of Sarcoidosis. Renal US demonstrated increased corticomedullary differentiation suggesting structural renal disease. Renal and endobronchial biopsies were performed in an effort to obtain a histological diagnosis. Renal biopsy revealed tubular atrophy (50%), and tubulointerstitial fibrosis (50%) with numerous calcifications. Direct immunofluorescence was negative for IgA, IgG, IgM, C3, kappa and lambda chains. No granulomas were identified on renal or pulmonary biopsy. Vasculitis and autoimmune panels were negative, which in addition to renal biopsy results were in keeping with a diagnosis of Sarcoidosis. Despite the absence of granulomatous disease on histological samples, the patient was treated as having Sarcoidosis. He was admitted for intravenous hydrocortisone and intravenous fluid hydration. His Creatinine settled from 257μmol/L to 173μmol/L and his Calcium corrected from 3.54mmol/L to 2.64mmol/L. He was continued on oral prednisolone and his symptoms improved markedly. Clinicians often rely on biopsy results to guide management, but histology can often be inconclusive or nondiagnostic due to sampling issues when looking for focal lesions. Bergin N 1 , McCarthy P 2 1 Intern, University Hospital Galway, WNW network; 2 Professor, Department of Radiology, University Hospital Galway Patients in ICU and other higher care units are among the most common population in which supportive lines and tubes are sited. These provide more reliable access for administration of nutrition, medication, oxygen etc. Despite their potential benefit, these lines and tubes are considered foreign bodies and vigilance for associated complications is essential for optimum patient care. Incorrect placement is one of the main causes of complications; one which can be quite easily identified by radiographic means. The aim of this audit is to determine the rate of tube/line misplacement in adult higher care units in University Hospital Galway. All chest xrays carried out on patients in ICU, HDU, cardiothoracic ICU and CCU over a one month period were analysed. The presence of lines/ tubes in all radiographs was recorded and their position determined. The dataset was created within Impax imaging software. Misplacement was pre-defined for each type of line/tube as follows: (1) NG: Tip sub-diaphragmatic, at least 10cm beyond gastro-oesophageal junction, (2) ET: Tip lying 5cm +/-2cm above carina, and (3) CVC: Tip lying in the SVC or at the cavo-atrial junction. Single observer analysis was used to determine (a) prevalence of each tube and (b) the rate of misplacement. A total of 531 individual chest xrays were analysed from 143 different patients, with results as follows: Prevalence: ET tube: 28.8% NG tube: 41.6% CVC: 58.8% Rate of misplacement: ET tube: 17.3% NG tube: 3% CVC: 7.7% The high rate of ET tube misplacement is concerning in light of the associated complications. Further analysis is warranted to determine time lag between identification of misplacement and correction thereof. There kidneys are also important and in this case dialysis was required. Over 10 Introduction While the geriatric population grows, and with it the number of chronic comorbidities amongst patients, polypharmacy is increasingly prevalent in geriatric inpatient settings. This study evaluates the medications of 74 geriatric inpatients, concentrating on those taking 10 or more drugs. The primary objective of this study was to ascertain data on the numbers and types of medications of each patient, and to review the necessity of these drugs. This was an observational cross-sectional study, compiling the medications of 74 patients. The patients were then categorised into those taking ≥5 medications, ≥10, ≥15 and ≥20. The primary endpoint was the percentage of patients taking over ten medications. Additional endpoints were the mean number of drugs per patient; percentage of patients in the higher categories of ≥15 and ≥20 drugs; and most frequently occurring classes of drugs amongst this population. Results 74 patients were included, 64 aged >65. The number of patients taking 10 or more drugs was 38 (51%), and the numbers taking ≥15 and ≥20 drugs were 12 (14%) and 2 (3%), respectively. 36 people (49%) were taking <10. The mean and median number of drugs per patient was 10. The most frequently prescribed drugs were supplements (14%), antihypertensives (10%), laxatives (9%), analgesics (8%); and anticoagulants, PPIs, and antidepressants (5% each). Conclusion 51% of this group of patients were taking ten or more drugs, with 14% taking fifteen or more. It is known that this number of medications is associated with an increased incidence of adverse effects. This audit highlighted the need for medication reviews in half of the selected patients, and while several medications were subsequently discontinued as a result, it showed that given the patient cohort in question, and nature of medications most frequently used, that polypharmacy is largely unavoidable. A complex case of Pervasive Refusal Syndrome: diagnostic and therapeutic challenges encountered in a psychiatric inpatient unit Carter E 1 , Whyte I 2 1 Intern, Linn Dara Child and Adolescent Mental Health Service Inpatient Unit, Dublin South East Intern Network; 2 Consultant Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist, Linn Dara Inpatient Unit Introduction: Pervasive refusal syndrome (PRS) is a rare paediatric psychiatric disorder characterised by food refusal, social withdrawal, school refusal, refusal of mobilisation, verbalisation and self-care and an active resistance to help, in the absence of organic or psychiatric illness which can explain the symptoms 1 . This complex case provided a set of challenges in terms of diagnosis and treatment in an inpatient setting. Case: A 14 year old girl presented with a two day history of food and fluid refusal, on a background of unexplained psychiatric symptoms which began aged 12. Symptoms evolved over time and most recently included a one month history of social withdrawal, school refusal, disturbed sleep pattern, low mood, poor self-care and reduced verbal communication. Previously symptoms involved periods of over-sexualised behaviour, obsessional tendencies and aggressive outbursts. This was complicated by the diagnosis of neuro-inflammatory brain lesions in the frontal and temporal lobes, two years previously. Clinical examination and blood results were normal. Although the patient's symptomatology continued to evolve in the context of significant psychosocial stressors, brain lesions appeared stable on MRI. The patient was admitted to a psychiatric inpatient unit for observation to gain diagnostic clarity surrounding her presentation. Discussion: The patient's medical history proved challenging in out-ruling an organic cause for her presentation. During the admission, the patient displayed a marked refusal to engage with clinicians, a feature consistent with PRS, which made it difficult to diagnose/ out-rule any co-morbid psychiatric conditions such as depression. Recommended treatment of PRS involves intensive multidisciplinary input in an inpatient unit 2 . In this case, attempts at intense intervention in an inpatient setting were countertherapeutic and caused an increase in symptoms of PRS including food refusal, further placing the girl at risk. In the interest of patient safety, it was decided that therapeutic interventions should continue in the community. Adequate maintenance fluids and electrolytes for fasting surgical patients is essential. Prolonged or improper therapy can put patients at risk of volume overload or electrolyte disturbance. NICE have developed a guideline on routine maintenance fluid prescription using estimates of requirements based on patient weight. Most surgical patients should have 25-30 ml/kg/day fluid, 1 mmol/kg/day of sodium, potassium and chloride and 50-100g/day glucose. Patients rarely need more the 3 litres of maintenance fluid a day. Aim To undertake an audit comparing maintenance fluid prescription in surgical patients in SUH over 24 hours of being nil by mouth with the goldstandard guidelines set out by NICE to investigate whether these guidelines are being adhered to. Objectives · To investigate if fluid prescription in surgical inpatients in Sligo University Hospital is following the gold-standard · To investigate if patients are receiving fluid in excess to their maintenance requirements · To investigate if changes can be made to our practice to better guide fluid prescription Method This audit was undertaken in collaboration with consultant surgical staff 1. 49 Surgical patients who had been NPO for 24 hours were selected for the audit 2. The level of fluid intake over these 24 hours was investigated along with parenteral sodium, potassium and glucose intake 3. The patient's weight, if available, was identified Results Of 49 surgical patients who are nil by mouth from late October to November 2016 8 had weight measured and noted in the chart. All of these 8 were receiving fluid at a rate >30ml/kg/day. Of the other 41 patients, 3 had been prescribed >3L/day and 31 exactly 3L/day. Discussion With unknown weight of the patient, it is not possible to use the NICE guidelines in determining optimal rates of parenteral fluid intake. The results of this audit should prove there is a need for more consistent guidelines for maintenance fluid prescription and better documentation of patients' weights to uphold a good prescribing standard in SUH. A large proportion of the patients observed are being administered more fluid than is needed to meet their fasting requirements. We can further the objectives of this audit by looking at electrolyte intake and fluid rates tailored to the weight of the patient in the future. A 69-year old woman was admitted to Midlands Regional Hospital, Tullamore in August 2016 with caecal perforation secondary to diverticular disease. She had a Hartmann's procedure with resection of a small bowel segment and was transferred to ICU. While in ICU she had a number of complications including AKI and ARDS, the latter of which required intubation and ventilation, and later tracheostomy. The patient had a slow ventilator wean, and was eventually discharged to the ward after 38 days in ICU. On discharge to the ward, she had a tracheostomy in situ and was unable to walk due to critical care myopathy. Her subsequent care is an excellent example of the interdependence of the members of the multi-disciplinary team, which in this case included her primary surgical team, medicine for the elderly, radiology, nursing, physiotherapy, ENT specialist nursing, psychiatry of later life, speech and language therapy, dietician and, not least, the patient's own family and the patient herself. With regard to this interdependence, on the one hand this patient's many medical complications during her recovery (which included LRTI, UTI, norovirus, gout, hypercalcaemia, and intra-abdominal collections) impacted significantly on physiotherapy, tracheostomy wean, ability to deliver nutrition, and mood and motivation. On the other, each of these latter aspects of care and rehabilitation were critical to preventing further medical complications andas is the aim at the time of writingto getting this patient home by Christmas. O'Neill G 1 , Hussain F 1 , Shoenfeld J 1 , Davis S 1 , Aremu M 2 1 West Northwest Intern Network, Letterkenny University Hospital, Letterkenny, Co. Donegal, Ireland; 2 Department of General Surgery, Letterkenny University Hospital, Letterkenny, Co. Donegal, Ireland Objectives Analysis of on-call bleeps received by Interns at Letterkenny University Hospital (LUH). Methods All interns were invited to participate in an audit of bleeps received while on-call over a 20-day period. Interns were provided with a proforma of information to be collected for each bleep. This was then analysed to determine the most common bleeps received while on-call. Results A total of 326 calls were logged over the 20-day study period. The most common bleeped tasks were for reviewing patients, charting medications, and cannulation. These three tasks represented 183 (52.5%) of the total bleeps recorded. 62 (19.02%) of bleeps were to review patients, 53 (16.26%) charting medications, and 44 (13.5%) IV cannulation. Conclusion The three most common tasks comprised more than half of total bleeps received. These areas represent key targets for implementation of efficiency measures such as electronic prescribing and transfer of tasks. We intend to present these findings at the Letterkenny University Hospital Quality Improvement Forum in order to initiate targeted efficiency interventions. One such proposed intervention would be electronic prescribing as this would decrease the need to be physically present on the ward requiring a prescription. Another potential intervention would be implementation of a prioritized task management system which would allow NCHDs on call to prioritize tasks as they are received. We plan to re-audit the bleeps received after targeted intervention. Shields M¹, Halloran R² ¹Dr Maura Shields, Medical Intern, Galway University Hospital, Newcastle, Co Galway; ²Dr Rita Halloran, General Practitioner, Claddagh Medical Centre, Galway Background: Non-vitamin K oral anticoagulants (NOACs) first became available in Ireland in 2008. They are an alternative to warfarin in patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation (NVAF) and in the treatment of venous thromboembolism (VTE). Renal function needs to be regularly monitored in patients taking NOACs. Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) is acceptable as a measure of renal function for most medications; however it is recommended in current Galway University Hospital prescribing guidelines that creatinine clearance, which is a more accurate representation of renal function be calculated using the Cockroft-Gault equation for NOAC prescribing and dosage adjustment. Aims: To gather data regarding the appropriateness of NOAC dosing in a cohort of patients in a Galway City general practice. Methods: Using the Socrates database, all patients currently taking a NOAC (rivaroxaban, apixaban and dabigatran) were identified. Relevant clinical data on these patients was gathered. The GUH prescribing guidelines for NOACs was checked against each patients individual dosage of NOAC. Results: 50 patients at the time of audit were currently taking a NOAC. Of 27 patients on rivaroxaban, 4(14.8%) were on a higher dose than recommended in the GUH guidelines. 4 of 21 (20%) of patients on apixaban were on a lower dose than recommended. 2/2 (100%) of patients on dabigatran were on the correct dose. Overall 16% of patients were on an incorrect dosage of NOAC. Conclusion: It is important that the renal function of patients taking NOACs be checked regularly and guidelines be consulted to ensure that they are on an appropriate dose. Smith S, O' Dwyer, AM Introduction: A case presentation about the psychiatric side effects of high dose steroids in haematological malignancies, the management options available and the complications that can be associated with these management strategies. Case: A gentleman in his fifties with Acute Myeloid Leukaemia, being treated for graft versus host disease with high dose prednisolone, developed steroid induced mania and was started on olanzapine. The patient remained elated on high dose olanzapine leading to the addition of haloperidol. The patient began to develop extra pyramidal side effects (EPSEs), namely parkinsonian gait, rigidity and akathisia. The haloperidol was discontinued over two days and a benzodiazepine was started which resulted in marked improvement in the EPSEs. The patient, whose mood remained slightly hypomanic went on to develop neck dystonia and his shuffling gait worsened. This was treated by tapering and discontinuing the olanzapine dose. Anticholinergic medications were added; first procyclidine, which was unsuccessful, and finally benztropinewith time the dystonia settled. Throughout this treatment the patient's prednisolone dose was being decreased. When the dose reached 20mg OD he developed symptoms of severe depression; the decision was made to proceed with nonpharmacological management. Discussion: This case highlights rare side effects of commonly used psychiatric medications such as olanzapine induced dystonia. It also discusses the different anticholinergic options in the treatment of antipsychotic induced EPSEs and dystonias. Finally, non-pharmacological management is often neglected as a treatment option, we explore this further. The audit involved 41 patients over 4 weeks in November 2016. We reviewed clinical notes to ascertain if Well's score and D-dimer were documented. A patient questionnaire was developed to identify if adequate patient education was received. Results 6 (15%) patients had confirmed DVT. Well's score was calculated in 16 (39%) of all cases, with 13 (81%) of these scoring >2. D-dimer was measured in 27 (66%) of cases. 24 (59%) patients were anticoagulated prior to US. Only 8 (33%) of these patients were educated on bleeding risk and 9 (37.5%) were advised to seek medical attention in case of head injury/trauma/uncontrollable hemorrhage. 1 (4%) patient experienced adverse consequences secondary to anticoagulation. 28 (68.3%) were advised to seek medical attention if they developed symptoms of PE. 24 (58.5%) were advised to attend US department at the allocated time, however 10 (24.3%) patients were unaware that they were to register at ED thereafter. Conclusion Well's score for DVT should be calculated in order to appropriately stratify patients for US Doppler. D-dimer is frequently measured, although not always clinically appropriate due to low specificity. Patient education could be improved with an information leaflet including US appointment time and location, advice on anticoagulation risks and when to seek medical attention. Such leaflets would streamline patient flow in the DVT Pathway, reduce ED waiting times and ensure that all patients receive pertinent education. Following intervention we will re-audit. Introduction: Resection of intraoral cancers involving the mandible, pose significant reconstructive challenges due to the complexity of the anatomy and the necessity for an acceptable cosmetic outcome. The use of virtual surgical planning allows for the creation of a customised solution, based on the patient's own pre-operative anatomy, in order to achieve excellent reconstructive results. We describe our experience of this emerging technology in a recent case. Case Report: A 78-year-old lady presented with an intraoral squamous cell carcinoma located along her alveolar margin at the level of her lower left first bicuspid. Pre-operative CT confirmed local disease with invasion into the mandible. A PET scan revealed no positive lymph nodes, with no evidence of distant disease. She was counseled on her options and elected for surgery. She was planned for a midline lip split, left hemi-mandibulectomy, bilateral modified radical neck dissections and free fibular osteocutaneous flap reconstruction. Pre-operatively, she underwent a planning CT of her head and neck with ultrafine image slices of 1.5mm, in order to accurately define her mandibular anatomy. She also underwent CT angiogram of her contralateral lower limb to assess vessel patency and to out rule abnormal arterial supply. These scans allowed for computer aided 3D reconstruction of the patient's mandible, from which a customized contoured locking bridging plate was manufactured. Preoperative osteotomy planning was also possible with custom-made osteotomy jigs. This method allowed for an efficient and accurate reconstruction of the patient's defect using her pre-surgery anatomy as a template. The customized contoured plate facilitated a reconstruction with a good cosmetic result and an excellent dental height match to her remaining teeth. Conclusion: Virtual surgical planning aids in complex mandibular reconstruction resulting in shorter operating times and customised facial reconstruction with excellent cosmetic results. Objectives: Measure of implementation of transfer of task (TOT) protocol in Letterkenny University Hospital (LUH) as evidenced by intern on-call bleeps. Methods: All medical and surgical interns were invited to participate in an audit of bleeps received while on-call over a 20-day period. Interns were provided with a proforma of information to be collected for each bleep including reason of bleep. This information was then correlated and compared against the current TOT protocol: IV cannulation, phlebotomy, discharge, and IV drug administration. Results: A total of 326 calls were logged over the study period. A total of 62 (19%) of all bleeps received were for tasks that fall under the TOT guidelines. Of these, 71% were for cannulation, 24% were for phlebotomy, and 5% were for discharges. Of note, there were no bleeps regarding IV drug administration highlighting successful task transfer. Conclusion: SIPTU, the IMO, and the HSE agreed for TOT to commence in January 2016. While timescales were to be implemented locally, implementation was due to have occurred by March 31st 2016. 1 This audit of tasks demonstrates that despite progress achieved regarding TOT, much work still remains. Successful TOT is dependent on achieving buy-in and supporting training of nursing and ancillary staff. It is essential that TOT is implemented on a national level in order to prioritise patient safety. The Mermaid Syndrome, officially known as Sirenomelia, is a rare and fatal congenital anomaly. Sirenomelia has an incidence of 1 per 100,000 births. It has a greater chance of occurring in males than females at a ratio of 3:1. (1) Characteristic features include fusion of the lower limbs to varying degrees, genitourinary and anorectal atresia, sacral agenesis, and anomalies of the thoracolumbar spine. (2) The associated complications with kidney and bladder development and function result in sirenomelia being incompatible with life. Maternal diabetes increases the risk for sirenomelia with around a fifth of fetuses with this condition being born to diabetic mothers. (3) (4) Infants with this condition can be classified from Type I to Type IV corresponding to the number of bones present in the lower limb. (5) Given the rarity of this condition, it is particularly interesting that three cases were identified in UMHL in 2016. The first case was a 28 year old lady, gravida 6 para 4+1, found to have no fetal heart beat and ventriculomegaly on US at 20+2 weeks gestation who was then admitted for induction of labour. The second case was a 34 year old primigravida who went into spontaneous labour at 34 weeks. Upon delivery, the fetus was found to have no heartbeat, one lower limb and ambiguous genitalia. The third case was a 32 year old lady, gravida 5 para 2+2. On US at 18 weeks oligohydramnios was noted. The kidneys, bladder and right lower limb could not be visualized. At 27 weeks, US revealed no liquor and Potters syndrome was thought to be the most likely diagnosis. A plan was made for Induction of Labour at 36 weeks. A live infant was delivered who lived for one hour and one minute. Performance feedback for quality improvement Tuthill E 1 , O'Flaherty C 1 , Butler R 1 , Connaughton J 1 1 Midlands Regional Hospital Portlaoise, Co. Laois Introduction: Urinary Tract Infection (UTI) is common amongst medical patients and is the third most common healthcare associated infection in Ireland, with a point prevalence of 15%. [1] Inappropriate use and duration of antimicrobials is well recognised and responsible for the emergence and spread of antimicrobial resistance. Aim: This study aimed to analyse cases of urinary tract infection in a regional hospital in Ireland; to determine if the appropriate investigations were being carried out in a timely manner, and also to ascertain if antibiotics were being prescribed according to local best practice guidelines and adjusted appropriately based on sensitivity reports. Method: Data was collected retrospectively from 21 recent patient admissions where a UTI was diagnosed. Data included the following parameters: symptoms and signs; presence of a urinary catheter; urine dipstick results; urine culture and sensitivity results and the antibiotics prescribed. Results: 81% of patients had urine cultures sent. Mean time from diagnosis of UTI to urine collection for culture was 1.6 days. 80.9% of patients were prescribed the correct empirical antibiotics according to local guidelines. 85.7% of patients with a positive urine culture were treated with appropriate antibiotics after sensitivities became available. Conclusion: Results were used to evaluate current practice, provide performance feedback and implement changes in practice via a number of interventional strategies; ultimately with the aim of improving the management of UTIs in hospital patients. A 59 year old male presented in May 2014, one week post knee replacement with a widespread erythematous scaling skin eruption involving > 90% of his body surface area. He was systemically well, with no palpable lymphadenopathy. Medications included thyroxine and some postoperative analgesia. He had no skin history of note. He was admitted, his medications held and investigated for potential causes of an exfoliative erythroderma. The initial clinical picture suggested pityriasis rubra pilaris (PRP) which was supported by diagnostic skin biopsies. Viral screening for HIV, Hep B and Hep C were negative. There was minimal improvement following intensive in-patient topical treatment and high dose oral retinoids. Addition of TLO1 phototherapy and subsequent transition from retinoids to methotrexate yielded intermittent improvements but he continued to flare and suffer severe itch. A short trial of Ustekinumab also proved ineffective. Three further sets of skin biopsies over the next year which showed features overlapping between psoriasis and PRP but no features of Cutaneous T Cell lymphoma (CTCL). He had no secondary symptoms but due to lack of therapeutic response and some mildly atypical lymphocytes on his blood film, T-cell receptor gene rearrangement studies were requested. Both his skin and blood demonstrated a clonal T Cell population. He has no circulating Sezary cells. PET CT demonstrated scattered nodes on imaging, felt to be reactive based on indeterminate histology from nodal biopsy. A trial of PUVA photochemotherapy was ineffective due to the challenge of dose escalation on background erythematous skin. Bexarotene treatment has been complicated by rapid escalation of triglycerides and cholesterol on three occasions despite optimization of his hypothyroidism, fenofibrate and statin therapy. This case highlights the diagnostic challenges in newly presenting erythrodermic patients, the recalcitrant nature of this patient's disease and complications of third generation retinoid therapy. Our patient's erythrodermic CTCL is likely to progress to systemic disease and warrant more aggressive chemotherapy. Compliance to antibiotic prescription regulation by medical practitioners in an acute hospital in the West of Ireland To determine the compliance of medical practitioners to local antibiotic prescribing guidelines. Patient safety and antimicrobial stewardship are essential aspects of appropriate patient management. Drug prescription kardexes are designed to strengthen these key aspects. We audited kardexes to assess our compliance to local antibiotic prescribing guidelines. Methods In a cross-sectional 1-day audit, 161 drug prescription kardexes from 7 wards were studied (ICU, Gynaecology, Elderly Medicine and 4 medical and surgical wards). Wards with higher patient turnover rates were excluded for logistical purposes. We recorded whether the following sections were completed: patient allergies/no known allergy, indication for treatment, start and stop dates of treatment, prescriber signature(s) and MCRN (Medical Council Registration Number), and prescriber contact details. Of the 161 patients studied, the majority were admitted under medical teams (n=141). 68.9%(n=111) patients had an allergy status recorded and of those, 14.4%(n=16) were not signed by the documenter. 59%(n=95) of patients were prescribed antibiotics, of which, 65%(n=62) had no indication for treatment documented and in 23%(n=22) no prescriber contact detail(s) were listed. 1.1%(n=1) had no prescriber signature, contact details or MCRN provided and antibiotics were administered. In 90.5%(n=86) of antibiotic prescriptions the prescribers' MCRN was not provided. When indications for antibiotic treatment were documented, 100% were accurate as per clinical notes. 4.2%(n=4) of prescriptions included a stop date for treatment. Conclusions Our audit highlighted a deficit in compliance with antibiotic prescribing guidelines, representing a risk to patient safety and antimicrobial stewardship that could be improved. Re-auditing after appropriate intervention is warranted. Background: Primary brain tumours are classified by their histological/ molecular characteristics and account for less than 2% of invasive cancers in Ireland (1) . Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) is the most common of these (40%) and the most aggressive. Median survival is 16 months from diagnosis and unlike other cancers, distant metastatic sites have only been reported in isolated case reports (2) . Case report: A 48 year-old man presented in April 2014 with confusion and visual disturbances and found to have a mass in his right parietal occipital lobe on CT and MRI imaging. He was diagnosed with a GBM, WHO Grade IV. His tumour was MGMT methylated and no IDH1 mutation was present. He underwent three debulking surgeries between 2014 and 2015 and required a ventriculo-peritoneal (VP) shunt in April 2015 for acute hydrocephalus. He was initially treated with temozolomide/radiation (STUPP protocol), followed by nivolimumab/ ipilumab (clinical trial). Clinically and radiologically however, he had disease progression and started bevacizumab in May 2016 with good response. In September 2016 he presented with reduced appetite and right flank pain. On examination, he had a temperature of 38.2 o C and was tender in the right flank, proximal to the VP shunt scar. Investigations revealed elevated inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein 265mg/L, white cell count 12.9 x10 9 /L, neutrophils 8.5 x10 9 /L). A CT abdomen/pelvis revealed a 2cm hypoattenuated liver lesion. He was treated for a suspected liver abscess with piperacillin/tazobactam with resolution of his pyrexia and biochemical improvement. Re-imaging showed a persistent lesion in his liver however. Biopsy of the lesion proved to be metastatic GBM. Temozolomide was added to his chemotherapy regime, he was discharged and followed in the Oncology day ward. Discussion: Cases of GBM with extra-cranial metastases are extremely rare (0.5-2%) (2) , which is thought to be due to the unique presence of the blood brain barrier and the absence of lymphatic drainage. With newer therapeutic strategies and the improving prognosis in patients with GBM there is an increased likelihood of distant metastases developing. In this case, we suspect that the VP shunt was the most likely mechanism of spread, given the location of his metastatic deposit. This route is rare and only reported in isolated single case series of just two patients (3) . This case highlights the need for increased awareness for spread of GBM disease extra-cranially, particularly in the setting of VP shunts. considerations have led to efforts to save functional splenic tissue. Three cases of splenic injury were admitted in a 4-month period and were deemed suitable for conservative management. Cases 1: 25-year-old male admitted following a blow while playing football. Ultrasound and CT imaging showed laceration of lower pole and lateral spleen close to the hilum and trace perisplenic fluid. On day six of observation, patient became acutely hypotensive with a drop in haemoglobin necessitating urgent open splenectomy. Postoperatively, pneumococcal, meningococcal, Hib and influenza vaccination was arranged and lifelong daily prophylactic penicillin commenced. 2: 77-year-old male with history of CLL presented following an eightfoot fall onto left side. Following initial ultrasound, CT showed splenomegaly with multiple intraparenchymal haematomas with evidence of active arterial extravasation. An episode of hypotension and a drop in haemoglobin was treated with blood transfusion and fluids. No further intervention was required. 3: 25-year-old female presenting following fall onto a metal bar. CT demonstrated multiple splenic lacerations with an intact capsule. Subsequent studies showed stable appearance and no active haemorrhage. Patient was discharged after seven days. Discussion: Secondary haemorrhage in initially stable splenic injuries is a life-threatening complication. Patient selection is crucial to attenuate this risk. Acute deterioration in initially stable cases is difficult to predict based on CT grading. There is a lack of consensus regarding thresholds for surgical intervention when haemoglobin falls. Clinical observation is successful in the majority of stable injuries 1 however close attention for changes in haemodynamic stability, haemoglobin or changes on imaging may prompt need for intervention. Following splenectomy, careful follow up, adherence to a strict vaccination schedule and lifelong antibiotic prophylaxis is vital to reduce the risk of overwhelming infection. Introduction Chest x-rays are commonly used in the Emergency Department(ED) to assess patients. However, chest x-rays are associated with radiation exposure, costs and use of manpower. This study will evaluate if chest xrays are being over performed in Galway University Hospital, Emergency Department. Methods An observational study was carried out over a two-day period in the ED in University Hospital Galway from the 18 th to the 19 th of November. Patients notes were studied for information regarding the indication for the chest x-ray, if the patient was admitted to hospital and if the chest xray was requested in the notes. The PAC system was used to access request information and radiologist report. "Radiation Protection 118 Referral Guidelines For Imaging" issued by European radiology and nuclear medicine in conjunction with the UK Royal College of Radiologists was used to determine if the chest x-ray was indicated. The data was collected onto an Excel Spread sheet and analysed. Of the 318 patients who attended the ED over the two days 18%(n=58) patients had chest x-rays. 78%(n=45) of indications on the request matched details on patient note, 13%(n=8) details did not match, however, 9% had no clinical notes. 67%(n=39) of the chest x-rays were indicated, 33%(n=19) were not. 33%(n=19) of these patients were discharged by ED while the remaining 67%(n=39) were admitted. 84.5%(n=49) of the chest x-rays performed were reported by the radiology department as normal. Discussion There is a large number of chest x-rays being order in the ED with a significant proportion not indicated and a clear majority of x-rays reports returning as normal. In conclusion further teaching to ED staff should be provided in the appropriate ordering of chest x-rays. Introduction: Neuroendocrine Hyperplasia of Infancy (NEHI) is a rare form of childhood interstitial lung disease (chILD), which was first described in 2005 [1] . Its incidence and prevalence are unknown [2] . Case reports suggest that NEHI usually first manifests before the age of two years [3] . Typical features include failure to thrive, tachypnoea, chest retraction, crackles and hypoxia [3] [4] . Diagnosis can be made by computed tomography (CT) imaging in the appropriate clinical context [5] . Case Presentation: A 10 month old female was brought to the emergency department because of vomiting, diarrhoea, fever, decreased oral intake and decreased urination. Her weight centile had dropped from between the 25 th and 50 th at birth to between the 0.4 th and 2 nd centile. Her fontanelle was sunken. No cyanosis was present although moderate respiratory distress in the form of tachypnoea, grunting and increased work of breathing was noted as were crackles in both lung fields. Chest radiograph revealed hyperinflation. She received intravenous fluid therapy. During her admission, her capillary oxygen saturation fell frequently to 86-91%. Mean overnight oxygen saturation was 91%. She required nasal oxygen therapy to maintain an oxygen saturation greater than 94%. No evidence of coeliac disease, respiratory synctial virus infection or cystic fibrosis was found on investigation. A bilateral groundglass appearance was found on CT imaging of the chest. The patient and her family were informed of the diagnosis of NEHI and home nocturnal oxygen therapy was organised. Conclusion: NEHI is a rare condition within the spectrum of chILD with an unknown natural history. Prompt recognition of NEHI may enable timely diagnosis and improve disease management and prognosis [3] . Somatostatin analogue therapy can alter the long-term outcomes in other diseases characterized by an increase in neuroendocrine cells [6] whether this is the case for NEHI remains to be determined. Cholecystectomy is indicated in patients who present with gallstone pancreatitis, to reduce the risk of recurrent gallstone related complications such as recurrent pancreatitis, cholecystitis, cholangitis or biliary colic. The British Society of Gastroenterology recommends that all patients with biliary pancreatitis should undergo definitive management of gallstones during the same hospital admission, unless a clear plan exists for definitive treatment within two weeks of admission 1 . Similar recommendations have been made by IAP/APA Acute Pancreatitis guidelines, which recommends that cholecystectomy during index admission for mild biliary pancreatitis is safe and recommended 2 . The recommendations were demonstrated with the PONCHO trial, which showed that same-admission cholecystectomy was safe and reduced risk of gall-stone related complications, as compared with delaying surgery 3 . We proposed this audit to examine the impact of the PONCHO trial on practices regarding same-admission cholecystectomy in mild gallstone pancreatitis. Our hypothesis is that the release of the PONCHO trial has led to a change in practice at UHG. Admission details were identified using Hospital Inpatient Enquiry System (HIPE) data and clinical notes covering a one year period. Results and Discussion Our findings show that same admission cholecystectomy is not routine, and rarely occurs in practice. Of those presenting with gallstone pancreatitis, 90% did not undergo same admission cholecystectomy, with the majority being booked for theatre at a later date. There are inherent problems with this practice, as one fifth of patients awaiting cholecystectomy were readmitted during the audit period with gallstone related disease. These findings have implications relating to healthcare expenditure and increased morbidity. This audit had highlighted the need to re-evaluate same admission cholecystectomy practice in UHG. Comparison of number and type of bleeps received by medical and surgical interns at Letterkenny University Hospital. Methods All medical and surgical interns were invited to participate in an audit of bleeps received while on-call over a 20-day period. Participants were given a proforma to collect a standardized dataset from each shift. This information was then collated and analysed. Results A total of 326 bleeps were logged over a 20-day study period by 11 medical and 6 surgical interns. Of those bleeps 248 (75%) were recorded by medical interns and 78 (24%) bleeps were surgical interns. There was a daily average of 27.6 bleeps recorded by medical interns compared to an average of 13 by surgical interns. The three most common medical bleeps were: Review Patient (19%), Chart Medications (17%), and Cannulation (10%). The most common surgical bleeps were: Cannulation (25%), Review Patient (18%), and Chart Medications (14%). Conclusion Current staffing levels at LUH allocate one surgical and one medical intern on call nightly with the recent addition of a second medical intern for a halfday on weekends. Notably, most surgical patients are located on one ward whereas medical patients are distributed throughout the hospital. Because of this, surgical interns recorded fewer beeps on average than their medical counterparts. This data could be used as evidence to demonstrate the heavy call load experienced by interns at LUH. This data will be fed back to local Medical Manpower to help shape future staffing policy. Papillary thyroid cancers make up 80% of thyroid cancers. They have been shown to encompass several tumour types with specific genetic mutations, which signal through the MAPK pathway. BRAF V600E accounts for approximately 60% of these mutations. This case follows a gentleman with recurrent PTC, first treated in 1995, who 21 years later, is benefitting from targeted therapy based on these recent molecular diagnostic breakthroughs. Case A 45-year-old gentleman presented to SVUH with a right-sided neck lump in 1995. He was otherwise asymptomatic with no past medical history. Following work-up he was diagnosed with PTC (Thy5) and treated with a total thyroidectomy. Histology showed multi-focal, node positive disease and he received radioactive-iodine-ablative therapy and thyroxinesuppressive therapy. He remained disease free until 2009 when he presented again with a right-sided neck lump. Fine needle aspirate biopsy showed recurrent disease, which was treated with a modified right-sided neck dissection and radioactive-iodine. Following further recurrence in 2014 he received more radioactive-iodine. In 2015 he presented with a right-sided neck lump again positive for recurrent disease, but no longer iodine avid. Molecular diagnostics showed it to be BRAF V600E positive and he was referred to medical oncology following MDT discussion. In January 2016 he was started on Lenvatinib, a multikinase inhibitor. At his most recent OPD appointment, the node was no longer palpable and there were "no cervical lymphadenopathy or masses" on imaging. Discussion The incidence of thyroid cancers in the US has tripled in the last 40 years. At the forefront of treatment has been surgical intervention and radiation therapies. Recent developments in molecular diagnostics have provided us with another treatment option, but with trials on these adjuvant therapies in their early stages, it remains to be seen if this patient can be used as a benchmark for future thyroid cancer patients. Ashe C 1 , O' Sullivan S 2 1 Midwest intern teaching program, University Hostpial Limerick; 2 Department of Anaesthesia and pain medicine, University Hospital Limerick Steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune disorders is a well documented -if rare -phenomenon. 1, 2 A case is presented of a 79-year-old male who was found unresponsive at home. Family members reported aggressive behaviour following excess alcohol consumption the evening prior to presentation. There was no history of head injury and no prodromal features. The patient had depressed level of consciousness, with a GCS of three on arrival to the ED. Examination revealed spontaneous jerky dyskinetic movements most prominent on the right which increased with noxious stimulus. Withdrawal from noxious stimulus, only of the left lower limb, was the only purposeful movement elicited. Bilateral upgoing plantar reflexes were noted. Pupils were equal and reactive to light and accommodation. Corneal reflexes were intact, but with no blink response to threat. The patient was intubated for airway protection and admitted to ICU. No acute changes were found on CT or MRI imaging of his brain. Routine bloods and toxicology screening were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples on both the day of admission and subsequently two days later were within normal limits and both CSF and blood cultures were negative. EEG was unremarkable. Autoimmune screening including anti-nuclear (ANA), anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic (ANCA), anti-Yo, anti-Hu, anti-Ri, anti-GQ1B, anti-VGKC and anti-TPO antibodies were negative. Thyroid function tests were also within normal limits. By day five there was no improvement in neurological status despite the absence of further sedation and an empiric three day course of IV methylprednisolone was commenced. On day six an obvious improvement in responsiveness was observed and by day eight our patient was extubated, awake, alert and had no further dyskinetic movements. Though no definitive diagnosis was made, this case highlights the potential benefits of empiric IV steroid use in cases of diagnostically ambiguous coma after the definite exclusion of an infective cause. A comprehensive audit of inpatient prescribing in a regional Geriatric and Stroke service Byrne C 1 *, Flynn L 1 *, Ghafar M 2 , Walsh T 2 , O'Caoimh R 2 , Mulkerrins E 2 , O'Keeffe S 2 , Robinson S 2 Introduction: Numerous guidelines (1) (2)(3)(4) and laws (5) dictate how drugs should be prescribed. The concept of "generic prescribing" is regarded as the safest and most cost effective methods of prescribing available (3) . It is the method of prescribing recommended in most circumstances by numerous national and international organisations (2, 3) . Despite this, there is a relative paucity of data examining whether best practice is being achieved. Important features of a legally valid prescription include a signature, date, and medical council registration number (5) . Local prescribing recommendations (6) also suggest including a start date, proposed review date, bleep number and an indication as to whether the patient was on this medication pre-admission. Method: An observational study was undertaken of drug kardexs of all inpatients in a busy regional geriatric service. Data were recorded detailing the presence of signature, medical council number (MRCN), bleep number, indication for the medication, it's start date, proposed review date and use of block capitals in prescribing were also obtained. Results: In total, 78 kardexs were analysed yielding a total of 857 individual medication prescriptions. Of these 73% (n=623) of medications were prescribed generically. Bleep numbers were included in 61% (n=525). MRCN was provided in 81% (n=692), while medications were signed for and prescribed in block capitals in 97% (n=832), and 82% (n=701) prescriptions respectively. Start dates were recorded in only 36% (n=310) of cases. Conclusion: While the rate of generic prescribing was relatively high (73%) compared to other audits (7) , there remains a need to promote greater adherence to the practice of generic prescribing in line with international recommendations. The audit highlighted some prescribing practices to improve on, in particular the lower than expected recording of bleep numbers, and medication start dates. Other areas which may improve medication safety would be an increased recording as to whether this was a new or repeat prescription. Scheduled NCHD training and re-audit is required. Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital Limerick 1 Background Adolescence is the least understood, least researched and therefore the least resourced of the 7 ages of childhood. Adolescent years are unique, and experiences such as stays in hospital may prey on vulnerabilities and effect emotional development. Gynaecological pathologies are common among the adolescent population (ovarian cysts, menorrhagia, amenorrhea). Fortunately severe and life-threatening complications are rare, however admission to hospital as an inpatient is not uncommon for investigation to exclude other surgical and oncological pathologies. Aims Our objective was to ascertain whether teenage patients admitted to UHL were housed in age appropriate wards. Methods For our study we chose the cohort of patients admitted with gynaecological morbidities over the 10 year period 01/07/2006 and 01/ 07/2016 and then looked specifically at the 14, 15 and 16 year old age group. Data was obtained from the HIPE (Hospital Inpatient Enquiry) electronic database. Of the 331 patients admitted with gynaecological pathologies over the 10 year study period, 206 were aged 14, 15 and 16 years. Of these only 17% were admitted to an age appropriate ward, meaning 83% were housed on inappropriate wards, which include male and female medical and surgical wards. The majority of patients with gynaecological morbidities aged 14, 15 and 16 years were housed in inappropriate wards. Our study highlights the need for a specific adolescent ward in our institution. Case Report: One in a million -Acquired haemophilia A: A case report Lavelle M 1,2 , Flood Z 1,2 , Daly T 2 1 School of medicine, University College Dublin Intern Training Network; 2 Department of Medicine for the Elderly, Mater Misericordiae University hospital A 92-year-old female presented to the emergency department with reduced vision in the left eye. An IV cannula was inserted into her right antecubital fossa as part of her workup and subsequently removed. Following discharge, she developed a large hematoma at the venepuncture site with tracking of blood through the right upper limb. In the days following discharge, she was noted to have spontaneous bruising on her thigh, buttocks and left chin, spreading to her neck and chest. There was no history of trauma, no prior coagulation disorder and no contributing past medical history. Laboratory investigations revealed an isolated prolonged APTT 115.4 seconds and a haemoglobin drop from 10.7g/dL to 7.6g/dL. Repeat APTT remained prolonged at 96.8 seconds and a full haematology screen revealed a pan-acting inhibitor with FVIII level <1% on factor assay. A diagnosis of Acquired haemophilia A was confirmed with an inhibitor titre >100 BU. Acquired haemophilia A is a rare but serious condition with a reported incidence~1.48/million/year. 1 It is a caused by the development of autoantibodies, most frequently IgGk4, directed against coagulation Factor VIII. 1, 2 The disease can often lead to life threatening bleeding thus early recognition, diagnosis and prompt treatment is required. 1 It is reported as bimodal in distribution, firstly in young woman postpartum with a second peak among the elderly, often associated with malignancy or drugs. Treatment goals include control of acute bleeding and eradication of autoinhibitors by immunosuppressive therapy, however in the elderly, concomitant comorbidities often limit aggressive therapy. 2 This case report aims to examine the literature surrounding optimal immunosuppressive regimens to achieve complete remission in this rare but potentially life threatening condition. Oesophagectomies resect the oesophagus and restore gastrointestinal continuity. They are a technically challenging operation associated with a number of recognised complications. One of the rarer complications involves diaphragmatic herniation, occuring in <1% of open oesophagectomy patients. They rarely require intervention and the median time to diagnosis is 2 years. Here we have the case of a 57 year old gentleman who presented with this rare complication acutely. Mr. MK is a 57 year old man admitted for a transhiatal oesophagectomy for a salvage resection of an upper oesophageal SCC post radical chemoradiotherapy. His initial post operative course was relatively smooth with an expected elective admission to ICU. On the fifth post operative day the patient suffered significant respiratory distress requiring reintubation. While his symtpoms were clinically suspicious for an LRTI radiological imaging revealed something unexpected. CT revealed herniation of transverse colon into left hemi thorax. The decision was made to reoperate. During surgery it was found that there was a closed loop obstruction of the transverse colon with subsequent infarction and perforation. This case provides an interesting case of an unusual surgical complication and the opportunity to discuss a number of points. The impact of major complications on patient's long term morbidity and mortality The impact of patients baseline comorbitities on developing and surviving complications The surgical management of diaphragmatic hernia. McDonald I 1 , Holian J 1 1 St. Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin Mid-Leinster Summary: MB is a seventy four year old female Belgian national who presented to the emergency department with a ten-day history of shortness of breath, productive cough with green sputum and a three-day history of diarrhoea and vomiting. Her background history was significant for hypertension, total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and a recent pneumonia with previous antibiotic treatment from her GP. On exam she had right mid and lower zone dullness to percussion and right-sided coarse crackles on auscultation. She had evidence of end organ damage, oliguria, and a diagnosis of respiratory sepsis complicated by septic shock was made. She was commenced on intravenous antibiotics and was admitted. During her admission she developed a decreased consciousness level, increased confusion and myalgia. Her diarrhoea reoccurred and became bloody with diffuse abdominal tenderness. Her platelet count decreased and her lactate dehydrogenase increased and she developed new ecchymosis and acute renal failure. On blood film schistocytes were present and haemolytic uremic syndrome was diagnosed. MB was transferred to the intensive care unit, ventilated, a vas-catheter was placed, continuous renal replacement therapy commenced and she received four litres of fresh frozen plasma. Her initial stool cultures from the emergency department taken due to her history of diarrhoea were verotoxin E. coli O157:H7 positive. MB On her admission history it was noted that her diarrheal illness had started after eating soft cheese bought from a supermarket. Hemolytic uremic syndrome is a microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia disease characterized by haemolytic anaemia, acute kidney failure and thrombocytopenia. It is most commonly caused by shiga toxin producing E. coli normally found in contaminated water, meat or produce. As MB did not have risk factors for the other two sources, this cheese is the most likely source of the E. coli. Acute severe pulmonary oedema associated with severe mitral regurgitation Case: A 58 year old lady with a medical history significant for hypertension, dyslipidaemia and chronic kidney disease presented to a regional hospital with a short history of cough and flu-like symptoms. She was tachypnoeic and tachycardic; ECG and bloods were normal and chest X-ray showed patchy bilateral infiltrates. A diagnosis of community acquired pneumonia was made. She subsequently deteriorated with dyspnoea and haemoptysis requiring increasing respiratory supports and eventual admission to ICU for intubation and ventilation. She became progressively hypoxaemic and was transferred to MMUH for multidisciplinary input and consideration for ECLS. On arrival she was poorly oxygenated despite maximal supports with blood stained secretions, no significant signs of shock and dense bilateral pulmonary opacification on X-ray. VV ECLS was initiated for presumptive ARDS. There was rapid improvement in hypoxaemia and resolution of respiratory acidosis. Following stabilisation a TOE was performed, which showed severe eccentric mitral regurgitation with a flail segment on the posterior leaflet. Acute severe pulmonary oedema secondary to mitral regurgitation due to myxomatous degeneration and cord rupture was diagnosed. A prosthetic valve and IABP were placed. VV ECLS with mechanical ventilation were continued postoperatively -good gas exchange was achieved with low flow ECLS due to improving lung function. On the 4th postoperative day CXR showed improvement in pulmonary oedema and TOE showed good LV function with no shunt. The IABP was removed, VV ECLS was stopped; the patient maintained good gas exchange and was decannulated a day later. Respiratory support was subsequently weaned. Recovery was complicated by critical care myopathy; the patient improved with physiotherapy and on the 21st postoperative day was discharged to the ward. Discussion: This case demonstrates acute pulmonary oedema and respiratory failure associated with severe mitral regurgitation and the effective use of ECLS as a bridge to definitive diagnosis and treatment. Acute severe pulmonary oedema associated with severe mitral regurgitation. Hayden Case: A 58 year old lady with a medical history significant for hypertension, dyslipidaemia and chronic kidney disease presented to a regional hospital with a short history of cough and flu-like symptoms. She was tachypnoeic and tachycardic; ECG and bloods were normal and chest Xray showed patchy bilateral infiltrates. A diagnosis of community acquired pneumonia was made. She subsequently deteriorated with dyspnoea and haemoptysis requiring increasing respiratory supports and eventual admission to ICU for intubation and ventilation. She became progressively hypoxaemic and was transferred to MMUH for multidisciplinary input and consideration for ECLS. On arrival she was poorly oxygenated despite maximal supports with blood stained secretions, no significant signs of shock and dense bilateral pulmonary opacification on X-ray. VV ECLS was initiated for presumptive ARDS. There was rapid improvement in hypoxaemia and resolution of respiratory acidosis. Following stabilisation a TOE was performed, which showed severe eccentric mitral regurgitation with a flail segment on the posterior leaflet. Acute severe pulmonary oedema secondary to mitral regurgitation due to myxomatous degeneration and cord rupture was diagnosed. A prosthetic valve and IABP were placed. VV ECLS with mechanical ventilation were continued postoperatively -good gas exchange was achieved with low flow ECLS due to improving lung function. On the 4th postoperative day CXR showed improvement in pulmonary oedema and TOE showed good LV function with no shunt. The IABP was removed, VV ECLS was stopped; the patient maintained good gas exchange and was decannulated a day later. Respiratory support was subsequently weaned. Recovery was complicated by critical care myopathy; the patient improved with physiotherapy and on the 21st postoperative day was discharged to the ward. This case demonstrates acute pulmonary oedema and respiratory failure associated with severe mitral regurgitation and the effective use of ECLS as a bridge to definitive diagnosis and treatment. Background: Oral anticoagulants are indicated for thromboembolic conditions, including stroke prevention in non-valvular atrial fibrillation and the prevention and treatment of venous thromboembolism. Data for the month of October 2014 showed that the cost of warfarin treatment for 30,620 patients was €0.4million with a further cost of €1.5 million for 16,272 treated with direct oral anticoagulants (DOAC's). We aimed to investigate anticoagulant prescribing practises in older adults at our institution. Methods: The audit was performed on a single afternoon in all geriatric wards in a single purpose built building for medicine for elderly. The kardexes of 110 patients were evaluated for anticoagulant prescribing using the HSE medicines management programme. Results: The average age of patients was 82.7 years and 53 were female. Twenty-five (22.7%) were on anticoagulant therapy (Apixaban 13, Rivaroxaban 5 and Warfarin 7). Indications for therapy were Atrial Fibrillation in 23 patients and deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism in another two. Three patients had complications which included rectal bleeding, a subacute subdural haematoma and a right arm haematoma. Five patients (20%) were incorrectly prescribed therapy. This included three who were on sub-therapeutic doses, one where treatment was not reviewed after 3 months for a below the knee DVT, and one where warfarin was held after a minor rectal bleed (despite having a long term stable INR and no further investigations) Conclusion: The commonest oral anticoagulant (72%) used in older adults at our institution were DOAC's. Serious complications from therapy including the risk of intracranial haemorrhage need to be carefully considered in the 'older' old person. In particular, attention should be given to renal function and body weight when prescribing DOAC's. The decision to stop anticoagulation after bleeding needs to carefully balance risks/benefits after appropriate investigations. Duration of therapy for thromboembolic events should be clearly established and reviewed. Hallucinations -A case highlighting the challenge of differentiating between psychotic and non-psychotic causes Introduction: Patients presenting with hallucinations can pose a significant challenge in terms of diagnosis. Although hallucinations are associated with psychiatric conditions, in particular primary psychotic disorders, they can also be found in a range of organic brain conditions. Case description: A 76 year old man presented to A&E reporting that he could hear the voice of his 'guardian angel'. After initial investigations found no acute medical cause, he was referred to psychiatric services. This voice had been present for several months. He stated that it represented his thoughts, describing it as his 'alter ego'. He did not describe any other psychotic phenomenon or perceptual disturbances, but did report progressively worsening memory. In view of the history and the CT Brain scan, which showed ischaemic microangiopathy, it was queried whether he had a vascular dementia or vascular parkinsonism. He was readmitted to hospital the following month having being found naked and confused in his front garden. He was transferred to a nursing home and commenced on Risperidone which initially had positive results, but which was later reduced and then replaced with Quetiapine because of an increase in parkinsonian symptoms. He experienced further hallucinations and became increasingly aggressive. He also became sexually disinhibited and had episodes of perseverance and catatonic behaviour. Having displayed minimal effectiveness, Quetiapine was subsequently replaced with Sodium Valproate after the patient had a witnessed partial complex seizure. The patient has now shown marked improvement on an increased dose of same, with no further hallucinations and significantly improved behaviour. Conclusion: This case highlights the difficulty in accurately diagnosing and treating patients presenting with hallucinations. Antipsychotics are often the first line treatment. However, even atypical agents are associated with extrapyramidal symptoms, which may make differentiating between dementia related psychosis and other potential causes even more challenging. Background Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is characterised by ventricular dilatation and systolic dysfunction. Dilatation and low flow state may predispose to thrombus formation, however, the incidence of biventricular thrombi is rare. We describe a patient transferred to a tertiary hospital with DCM complicated by biventricular thrombi and acute lower limb ischaemia due to embolism. A 43 year-old man was transferred from a regional hospital with symptoms of heart failure, complicated by an acutely ischemic lower limb. Thrombi were incidentally found to be cardiac in origin. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed biventricular DCM, a partially mobile thrombus at the LV apex, and a mural thombus at the right ventricle (RV) apex. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) demonstrated severe four-chamber dilatation, mid-wall fibrosis, and an ejection fraction (EF) of 15%. There was no evidence of previous infarction, inflammation or infiltration. Coronary angiography was normal. The patient is a current smoker, consumes 30-40 units of alcohol per week and has a family history of cardiac disease. He was commenced on therapeutic anticoagulation and the limb ischaemia resolved, and he was commenced on standard heart failure medications and enrolled for follow-up in our Heart Failure Unit. TTE within two weeks showed resolution of the intracardiac thrombi, however, he has experienced some pleuritic chest pain likely due to small pulmonary emboli. Conclusion This case report highlights an exceedingly rare presentation of heart failure with biventricular thrombi and systemic embolization. It outlines the clinical and radiological presentation of DCM with ventricular thrombi, and the potential complications and treatment challenges for this patient cohort. Paediatric epidural abscess: a case report Stakelum A 1,2 , Fahey L 1 , Jadaan M 1 1 Department of Orthopaedics, University Hospital Galway; 2 West North West Intern Training Network Paediatric spinal epidural abscess is a rare emergency requiring prompt diagnosis and both medical and surgical therapy. This is an infection of the central nervous system, with the most common causative organism being Staphylococcus aureus. A 14-year old male presented to the emergency department of a hospital in the West of Ireland with a ten-day history of progressive severe infrascapular pain with associated fever and night sweats. There was no preceding traumatic injury and neurological examination on admission was grossly normal. He had no significant past medical history and was not taking any regular medications. Initial blood tests revealed markedly raised inflammatory markers and MRI showed a large multiloculated complex bilateral paraspinous collection, extending into the epidural space and also extending bilaterally into the subpleural spaces with a large left-sided intrathoracic collection. Emergency spinal decompression and drainage of the abscess was performed and the patient was subsequently treated with a sixweek course of intravenous flucloxacillin. This case demonstrates the importance of early recognition of this rare surgical emergency and highlights how timely intervention and appropriate management can result in complete recovery. There are a number of associated risk factors including traumatic injury and epidural catheter placement, however our patient had none of these risk factors. Spinal epidural abscess is an extremely rare diagnosis in the paediatric population, with the average age of onset being fifty years. Our patient recovered well and was discharged home following his six week course of antimicrobial therapy. Feaheny F, Connell P Department of Ophthalmology, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital Dublin/Mid-Leinster Intern Training Network Primary intraocular lymphoma (PIOL) is a rare type of extranodal non-Hodgkin lymphoma, with less than 200 cases reported in the literature. It is a subtype of primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) and up to 65-90% of patients with PIOL will go on to develop central nervous system disease. [1] Conversely, only 15% of patients who present with primary central nervous system disease will develop intraocular lymphoma(1). The optimal treatment for this condition is not clear but usually involves systemic chemotherapy and local treatment, consisting of ocular radiotherapy and intravitreal chemotherapy. BS is a 68 year old lady, with a background of hypothyroidism and hypertension, who presented with a two month history of unilateral painless blurred vision. Findings on examination were consistent with intermediate uveitis and she was commenced on oral steroids. On return to clinic, her symptoms had not improved and vitreous cells were seen on slit-lamp examination. BS was admitted for investigation of intraocular lymphoma which included a vitreous biopsy, MRI brain and CSF and bone marrow examination. MRI brain identified multiple acute infarcts within the left frontal and parietal lobes. BS had experienced no neurological symptoms. A full stroke work-up was completed and the possibility of intravascular large B-cell lymphoma was also considered. Ultrasound of carotid arteries showed significant stenosis of the left internal carotid artery and a carotid endarterectomy was planned. Cytology from the vitreous biopsy was consistent with non-Hodgkin's B cell lymphoma. There was no CSF or bone marrow involvement and a CT neck, thorax, abdomen and pelvis showed no evidence of systemic lymphoma, thus confirming the diagnosis of primary intra-ocular lymphoma. BS will be discussed by the multidisciplinary team to determine the optimal management plan. 1 The clinical significance of DVT is the potential to cause fatal pulmonary embolism (PE) with reported incidences between 10-13%. 2 The CLOTS3 trial demonstrated intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC) applied to the legs of immobile patients with stroke significantly reduced the risk of DVT and hazard of death over the first 6 months. 3 METHODS: Sample: 10 inpatients on a daily basis for two weeks on Acute Stroke Unit between 9 th December 2016 -1 Jan 2017. A target sample size of 50 is expected. Data Collection: Audit team collate data on a daily basis using a paper data from. A list of standards was compiled according to the CLOTS3 trial demonstrating optimal management. -IPC' s started within 3 days of diagnosis -IPC's prescribed on the MMUH drug chart with a daily signature -IPC's remain in place continuously -IPC stocking must be turned on and fitted correctly with daily skin checks Data Analysis: Simple analysis using percentages calculated on excel spreadsheets was used to demonstrate compliance on the Acute Stroke Unit with the above list standards RESULTS: A mini data collection was performed in order to test the feasibility of the above proposal. Of 5 patients sampled on the 8 th December 76% of patients had IPC's in place as per above standards. There was an even distribution between male and female, median age was 75 years. Further results are pending. CONCLUSION: The evidence for use of IPC stockings as an effective method of reducing DVT risk and improving outcome after stroke is well established. This audit will establish current rates of compliance with IPC stocking use at MMUH and identify areas for improvement if required. All data will have been compiled and analysed by the 14 th of January The audit team apologizes for lack of data to date. Attitudes to their roles as researchers: a study of G.P trainees. With an increasing emphasis on the importance of research in clinical medicine G.Ps are expected to both participate in and undertake research projects. Once qualified and in practice they must at the very minimum carry out an annual audit for professional competence. Accordingly, G.P trainees must now undertake a research project. In this survey we examined how G.P trainees feel about this role within their practice and explore the factors that would facilitate their participation in research. Aims: Explore how G.P trainees feel about their role as researchers. Assess which factors would encourage their involvement with research. Methods: A 14-item questionnaire was emailed to all 14 ICGP training schemes in the Republic of Ireland. The survey was made available to trainees in all years of training. Results: 73 G.P trainees took part in the survey. 71% of trainees agreed that research was an important part of their role as a G.P while 20% of trainees disagreed with this view. 53% of those surveyed viewed research as a burden on their role as a G.P. We found that the most frequently agreed factors that would encourage their participation were: research that involved a minimal time contribution, directly affected their patient's care, and on a topic they were personally interested. They also said that some financial incentives to do research and better feedback about study outcomes would encourage participation. Conclusion: G.P trainees are the G.Ps of our future. These findings create an insight into how they see their role as researchers and should inform researchers who want to get G.Ps to take part in studies. They should consider G.Ps as part of the research team and give them feedback on the findings. Given the time demands on GPs researchers should be aware of the time research demands and consider some financial reimbursement for same. G.Ps should be given the option to identify, participate in and create research projects that are relevant to their everyday practice. Left-sided colonic lymphoma presenting as caecal perforation: a case report Colorectal lymphoma is a rare entity accounting for only 10-20% of gastrointestinal lymphomas and 0.1-0.5% of colorectal malignancies. Histologically, diffuse large B cell lymphoma and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma make up 90% of non-Hodgkin colorectal lymphomas. It typically presents as bulky tumours in males 1 . A 79-year old gentleman presented to Emergency Department with abdominal pain and distension for two weeks as well as dyspnoea, diarrhoea for four days and two episodes of bile-like vomit. His vitals were stable however his bloods showed a raised lactate, white cell count, CRP and neutrophilia. His past medical history was notable for ulcerative colitis and he had recently been complaining of increased diarrhoea but was reluctant to undergo an urgent colonoscopy. His initial CXR revealed a pneumoperitoneum. CT abdomen and pelvis showed a 13-cm splenic flexure soft tissue mass, invading the diaphragm and lateral abdominal wall, causing proximal dilatation of large and small bowel. There was accompanying pneumatosis in bowel wall and bowel ischaemia. He underwent a laparotomy at which point it was found he had a small perforation in his caecum with minimal contamination. A subtotal colectomy, a partial gastrectomy and a partial resection of his left hemidiaphragm were performed. Histology showed a 14 x 10 x 9.5cm diffuse B cell lymphoma extending into the colonic serosa surface with direct extension into the gastric mucosa and the diaphragmatic surface. Following a brief ICU stay and rehabilitation he was referred to medical oncology. Gastrointestinal lymphoma rarely presents with small bowel obstruction and is generally diagnosed at colonoscopy 1 . This case illustrates the need for a high index of suspicion in patients with chronic diseases; longstanding symptoms may resemble underlying malignancy and delay their presentation to hospital. This is compounded by the high morbidity associated with resection of such bulky tumours especially in the emergent setting. Advanced cancers that would previously have been declared inoperable and incurable are increasingly coming back into the hands of surgeons. Despite current screening programmes and access to free healthcare, there is still a significant amount of patients who present at an advanced disease stage. There are currently 3000 elderly male bachelors in Ireland, the majority living in rural communities. We present the case of a patient presenting with synchronous advanced cancers, which highlights the lack of awareness and neglect, specifically in a rural society with reduced socio-economic status. Case Description This report documents the case of a 73 year old male farmer living alone in rural Ireland. He presented to his GP with an eroding lesion on the nasal bridge which had been present for six years. It was the odour of the lesion that caused him to finally present to his GP. On examination a synchronous penile lesion was discovered. Biopsies of both lesions confirmed a basal cell carcinoma of the nasal bridge and a synchronous squamous cell carcinoma of the penile tip. The SCC of the penis required a complete penectomy and primary closure, with permanent suprapubic catheter placement. The surgical resection of the BCC of the nasal bridge involved a large en bloc resection of the nasal/cheek lesion with underlying nasal bone and mucosa and part of the maxilla. A three-stage nasal reconstruction with forehead flap was carried out. A full thickness skin graft was placed on the underside of the flap to act as mucosal lining for the reconstructed nose. This case highlights the severity of surgical resection following delayed presentation with locally advanced disease processes. Case Presentation: A 61 year-old woman was referred to the ENT clinic with a three-month history of cough, which was severe and present at all times, and significant weight loss. Clinical examination of the neck was normal, but biphasic stridor was present. Notable in her medical history was ER-positive breast cancer, diagnosed on routine screening. This had been managed with wide local excision and adjuvant radiation, followed by tamoxifen therapy for 5 years. Management & Outcome: Flexible laryngoscopy was not tolerated initially. Examination under anaesthesia was attempted, but abandoned due to a traumatic intubation. A pharyngeal tear resulted in tissue emphysema, which was managed conservatively and the patient was discharged. One month later, extensive topical anaesthesia allowed for repeat EUA and laryngoscopy, at which time bilateral vocal cord paralysis was diagnosed. A tracheostomy was sited for airway protection, and the patient was made NPO. MRI neck identified a 1x1cm thyroid nodule, and the Head & Neck Oncology MDT decision was for subtotal thyroidectomy. Specimen histology yielded the surprising finding of breast carcinoma, with wellformed ductal and glandular structures, and ER-and PR-positivity. The patient underwent adjuvant chemoradiotherapy and remained NPO with tracheostomy in situ. A RIG tube was sited for feeding. Two years later, the patient elected to have a laryngectomy to allow PO intake, which was successful. She is currently tolerating normal diet, gaining weight, and is dependent on tracheoesophageal speech. Her quality of life has dramatically improved. Discussion: Bone, lungs, liver and brain are the most common sites of breast cancer metastases, but thyroid nodularity in patients with history of breast cancer should be treated with reasonable clinical suspicion. 1) The duct of Luschka first described in 1863, is now referred to as an accessory bile duct. They are small ducts originating from the right hepatic lobe, which course along the gallbladder fossa, and usually drain in the extrahepatic bile ducts.(2) Accessory bile duct leaks complicate 0.4 -1.2% of cholecystectomies. (3, 4) Case report: A 40-year-old female underwent elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy after two previous admissions with acute cholecystitis. Intraoperatively to control minimal blood ooze from the gallbladder fossa a Matrix Hemostatic Agent was applied and a Robinsons drain was placed. It drained minimal serosanginous fluid. Following removal of drain on third postoperative day the patient experienced severe abdominal pain. An ultrasound abdomen followed by CT abdomen revealed a small amount of fluid around the gallbladder fossa, right colic gutter and pelvis. She was transferred to ICU on becoming hypotensive and febrile. After resuscitation and antibiotics she underwent a laparoscopy. No evidence of any iatrogenic injury was identified, 800mls of bilious fluid was aspirated and a drain was replaced. An urgent Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was arranged which showed a normal biliary tree with a slow contrast leak in keeping with accessory duct leak requiring a stent. The patient recovered well over two weeks and was discharged with outpatient follow up and repeat ERCP. ERCP on repeat showed no leak and the stent was removed. Discussion: Injury to accessory bile ducts can result in post cholecystectomy bile leak and abdominal sepsis. Accessory duct damage post cholecystectomy has increased in frequency in the era of laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Most injuries to accessory ducts occur when there is deviation from subserosal plane during dissection of the gallbladder from the gallbladder fossa. In this case the leak was diagnosed at ERCP. ERCP has the dual benefit of being diagnostic and therapeutic with the option of stent insertion. 1 Dept of Surgery, Mayo University Hospital; 2 WNW Intern Training Network Case Report A 58 year old female was emergently admitted with a one week history of epigastric pain, nausea and vomiting. She deteriorated quickly suffering three PEA cardiac arrests. After successful resuscitation, lab results showed a pH 6.86, lactate 21.8 and WCC 40. CT TAP showed a bibasal aspiration pneumonia and small bowel obstruction secondary to a gallstone in the distal ileum. A pre-op PPOSSUM score indicated a mortality of 94.7% and morbidity of 99.8%. An emergency laparotomy and enterotomy was performed with a golf ball sized gallstone removed. The enterotomy was closed transversely to prevent a stricture. No gallbladder surgery was attempted. This patient had a prolonged post-operative course requiring multiple ICU admissions but has since made a full recovery. Discussion Gallstone ileus is a very uncommon cause of intestinal obstruction, accounting for 0.3-5.3% 1 . They occur when a gallstone erodes through the gallbladder wall forming a bilio-enteric fistula and arrests, usually at the ileocaecal valve 2 . Diagnosis may be delayed due to its non-specific presentation including colicky abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting. On abdominal x-ray, the classical Rigler's Triad consisting of; small bowel obstruction, pneumobilia and gallstone may be seen. However, on plain radiograph gallstones are easily missed as most are radiolucent and all three elements only occur in 15%. Therefore expert opinion recommends the early use of CT where sensitivity rises to 80% 3 . Management is surgical with enterotomy and extraction alone being the preferred procedure in both low and high risk patients 4 . This reduces the mortality rate from 16.9% to 11.7% when compared with a combined fistula repair as shown in the case series of 1001 patients 5 . However, due to a lack of randomisation, these figures should be cautiously interpreted. Despite this, given the expected presence of inflammation our local guidelines advocate enterotomy alone without inspection of the bilio-enteric fistula. ARDS is an uncommon complication of pneumonectomy but one in which the associated mortality is high. Here we present a case of postpneumonectomy ARDS managed with mechanical ventilation and prone positioning in ICU. A 70 year old white male with a chronic cough and smoking history was investigated for lung cancer 12 years after a left upper lobectomy in 2004 for adenocarcinoma. With chest x-ray revealing a lesion in the remaining left lobe and PET-CT demonstrating FDG avidity, CT guided biopsy was performed and showed tissue consistent with adenocarcinoma. Mediastinoscopy confirmed no lymph node involvement and thus patient underwent completion pneumonectomy by open thoracotomy and with an unremarkable postoperative course was discharged home. However two weeks later patient presented to the ED with acute dyspnoea, a nonproductive cough, tachycardia, left sided chest pain and hypoxia (<60% SpO2) which rapidly deteriorated warranting HDU admission and finally same-day ICU admission for hypoxia refractory to non-invasive ventilation. Elevated white cell count revealed likely underlying sepsis as aetiology, transthoracic echo ruled out acute cardiogenic pulmonary oedema, while persistent and progressive diffuse opacity seen on chest x-ray was more definitively characterised as ARDS-like changes on CTPA on day 20 of admission. Empiric antimicrobials, conservative fluid management, and mechanical ventilation by PRVC failed to prevent a progressive drop in gas exchange and a deterioration in PaO2/FiO2 ratio to 13kPA before the decision to prone the patient on day 4 of ICU admission was made and deemed necessary for four days until supine position resumed once more and a tracheostomy was created to allow for continued ventilation. A protracted ICU admission followed with difficulty weaning FiO2 below 70% to maintain SpO2 above 88% before patient passed away after a 33 day ICU admission with hypoxic respiratory failure despite limits of respiratory support. Appendicitis is a common surgical emergency affecting up to 8% of the population. Appendicectomy has for many years been the traditional treatment of appendicitis. However, in recent years, non-operative treatment of appendicitis (NOTA) has been reported as an effective management option. Aims To assess the knowledge and attitudes of the general population regarding the diagnosis and treatment options for appendicitis. Methods We conducted a cross sectional study of public patients attending Mayo University Hospital over a one-month period. Patients were randomly sampled while awaiting general medical outpatient review and invited to complete a questionnaire. The survey contained an information sheet, consent form and questions which included both open, closed and multiple choice questions. Results 56 participants (36 female, 20 male) were included in the initial survey period. A high level of awareness of appendicitis as a surgical emergency existed amongst the participants (94.6%). 98% of participants recognised abdominal pain as a key symptom. However, only 30% were aware that appendicitis was associated with nausea. Just 39% of participants would be content to receive non-operative treatment of appendicitis. The main reason participants were reluctant to receive non-operative treatment was a fear of their appendix "bursting" if not removed. Conclusions Members of the public attending an Irish hospital display good awareness of appendicitis as an emergency surgical condition. A large proportion of survey participants are reluctant to receive conservative management due to the widespread concern than an appendix left in situ may perforate. In order for non-operative treatment to be adopted with success in Irish surgical departments, increased education of patients will be necessary. O'Mahony S, Elliot J, Murphy C, Narouz F, Carrol P, Ravi N, Reynolds JV A 49 year old female was admitted under Upper Gastrointestinal Surgery with a two day history of severe intractable vomiting and complete dysphagia. She had undergone laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding four weeks previously, in another country. The patient's initial postoperative recovery had been uncomplicated; however her BMI was 35 kg/m 2 , with no significant weight loss achieved since band placement, despite failure to progress from a liquid diet. Clinical examination was unremarkable, and a plain film of the abdomen showed the port in situ in the left upper quadrant. Initial blood results showed a mild acute kidney injury, but normal inflammatory markers and lactate. Due to concern regarding band slippage, balloon deflation was attempted under ultrasound guidance, without success. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed no evidence of band erosion, and band deflation was achieved with the patient under general anaesthetic. The patient was discharged after band deflation. Despite deflation, the patient's nausea and vomiting persisted. They were readmitted soon after as an emergency before she could fly to the original surgical service ending up requiring urgent laparoscopy. The band was found to be slipped, with impending gastric ischaemia, and was explanted. The patient's symptoms resolved and postoperative recovery was uncomplicated. Bariatric surgery is the most effective intervention for obesity, producing significant and durable weight loss, glycaemic improvements and reductions in cardiovascular risk and death for patients meeting criteria for intervention. [1] This case illustrates that due to lack of adequate public services in Ireland, patients are increasingly travelling abroad to undergo bariatric surgery. In such cases, inadequate postoperative follow-up may result in suboptimal weight loss outcomes and increased risk of postoperative complications, highlighting the urgent need for increased access to multidisciplinary specialist centres for the management of obesity in Ireland. We review the case of a fifty-two year old gentleman who presented to hospital with right-sided facial swelling, and trismus for 2 days. The swelling involved submasseteric, submandibular and right temporal spaces. The patient had had a toothache in the area 3 weeks previous. At this time the patient's dentist diagnosed an infection in the lower right first molar, prescribed a 5-day course of Amoxicillin and performed a simple extraction. On follow-up with an oral surgeon a submasseteric space infection was detected and the patient was advised to attend the hospital for care under maxillofacial surgeons. The patient was admitted to hospital that evening, initially managed by IV antibiotics and consented for Incision & Drainage for the following day. Computed tomography (CT) of the head & neck region was ordered for the following day. Of note, the patient was stable, with no shortness of breath or acute airway issues. Overnight swelling increased considerably and the submandibular swelling spread bilaterally. It was decided the patient was for urgent surgical incision & drainage due to potential airway compromise. During anaesthetic rapid sequence induction, laryngeal trauma resulted in oedema and a period of desaturation, and consequently an emergency tracheostomy was performed. Spaces were drained and corrugated drains placed. There was a short ICU stay. Post-operatively the patient's condition improved and the tracheostomy was removed 4 days post-op. However persistent leukocytosis and failure to completely improve clinically warranted repeat CT scan of head & neck region, which showed persistence on collections, spreading retropharyngeal, requiring further drainage. Definitive management was planned via exploration of right neck and drainage, dissection of level 2 nodes, and tracheostomy. This case provides a good example of how a seemingly mi Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) accounts for 2-3% of all adult malignancies and up to 30% of patients have metastatic spread at diagnosis. Detection in 50% of cases is incidental and attributed to increased use of abdominal imaging. Despite this, a substantial number of large, advanced tumours are encountered owing to the asymptomatic growth and silent progression of RCC. RCC with inferior vena cava (IVC) involvement has a relatively favorable prognosis when completely resected. We review the case of sixty-eight year female who presented with an acute abdomen and septic shock. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed an appendicular abscess and incidental detection of a 6.7 x 5.9 x 6.6cm mass in the upper pole of the right kidney with tumour thrombus extending into the right renal vein and IVC. On imaging with contrast this appeared to be confined to the subdiaphragmatic IVC. The patient was managed in the intensive care unit until sepsis had resolved. A semi-elective colonoscopy, to investigate for a synchronous bowel malignancy, was clear. Definitive management was planned as a joint procedure with the colorectal and urology services. Surgery was approached using a midline laparotomy incision and standard approach to right radical nephrectomy. The IVC was opened and the tumour thrombus excised en-bloc. The appendicular phlegmon was adherent to the ileum. The inflammatory mass was resected with a segment of ileum and primary end-to-end bowel anastomosis performed. Post-operative histology confirmed a clear cell RCC and appendicular abscess with no evidence of bowel malignancy. Post-operative ileus and sepsis were managed with nasogastric tube insertion and intravenous antibiotics, respectively. The patient was discharged on resolution of these issues. This case provides a good example of the often silent nature of advanced RCC and the merits of multidisciplinary management of simultaneous disease processes. O'Connor-Byrne N 1,2 , MacNally C 2 1 Beaumont Hospital, Dublin North East Intern Training Network, 2 Department of General Medicine, Beaumont Hospital Gallstone ileus is an unusual but recognized cause of mechanical small bowel obstruction (SBO). It is caused by impaction of a gallstone in the ileum after being passed through a bili-enteric fistula. The diagnosis may prove difficult as initial investigations such as plain film of the abdomen (PFA) may provide false negative results. 1 Treatment consists of removal of the offending stone after resuscitating the patient. A 50 year old woman presented to the emergency department with a week long history of coffee ground vomiting. On day of presentation she had had three large volume vomits. Other symptoms included epigastric tenderness and nausea exacerbated by food and anorexia. Her initial investigation showed raised C-reactive protein and white cell count, hyponatraemia and metabolic alkalosis. PFA showed an unremarkable gas pattern. This would ordinarily outrule SBO. However, persistent crampy abdominal pain, faeculent vomiting and abdominal distension suggested the obstruction could not be outruled by PFA alone, and CT thorax, abdomen and pelvis (CT-TAP) was done. The CT-TAP showed a gallstone ileus with 1.6cm laminated gallstone in the distal ileum and dilated loops of small bowel measuring up to 5cm. A chole-enteric fistula was also seen between gallbladder neck and the second part of the duodenum with associated pneumobilia. A 6.7cm intraloop collection was seen in the pelvis with pockets of free air, stranding of the mesentery and hyperaemia of the adjacent small bowel loops. Exploratory laparotomy and small bowel resection was performed. CT findings were confirmed intraoperatively. The affected segment of small bowel was resected, and a side to side anastomosis made. The patient was returned to ward post-surgery, and discharged after four days. Although plain film abdomen is a cheap and easy exam to perform its low sensitivity means that clinical acumen cannot be negated in a case of SBO. 1. Lappas, J.C., Reyes, B.L. and Maglinte, D.D., 2001. Abdominal radiography findings in small-bowel obstruction: relevance to triage for additional diagnostic imaging. American Journal of Roentgenology, 176(1), pp. 167-174. As surgical technology advances, we expect patient outcomes to improve. Robotic assisted surgery (RAS) is the latest development in minimally invasive surgery. The benefits with RAS include shorter length of stay, reduced blood loss and improved analgesic requirements. UHL has recently instituted the first RAS platform for colorectal conditions in Ireland, using the Da Vinci Xi Dual Console system. This case report describes Ireland's first robotic assisted APR. A 60 year-old female presented to our institution with PR bleeding and rectal prolapse, with investigations uncovering a low rectal tumour. She underwent a robotic assisted abdomino-perineal resection. Results: The Da Vinci Xi platform allows significantly improved visuals, including live 3D pictures. It allows highly accurate and selective dissection. In this instance, the left colon and rectum were mobilized robotically before exteriorizing the colon and performing the pelvic component as standard. RAS allows precise tissue dissection in the pelvis along anatomical planes. Blood loss was less than 50mls. The patient mobilized and passed flatus within 16 hours of surgery. Length of stay was 6 days in total. This compares favorably with a mean length of stay for open and laparoscopic colorectal procedures of 12 and 11 days in our institution. Conclusion: Minimally invasive surgery has been proven to be superior to open surgical techniques through the COST and COLOR trials, with faster return of bowel function and shorter hospital stay. Robotic procedures are the next step in surgical advancements, providing better visual fields, less blood loss, reduced need for analgesia and earlier mobilization, all leading to shorter hospital stays, as demonstrated by this case. In our experience, RAS offers tangible benefits for patient care. Transfusion-refractory thrombocytopaenia in the setting of intracranial haemorrhage and cirrhosis: a case report. Thrombocytopaenia has been identified as a significant predictor of progression of traumatic intracranial haemorrhage. The American College of Haematology guidelines recommend platelet transfusion in CNS bleeding with platelet count less than 100 x 10 9 /L. We report a case of thrombocytopaenia, traumatic intracranial haemorrhage(ICH) and left proximal humerus fracture with haematoma in a 46-year-old female. This is on a background of mixed alcoholic and autoimmune hepatitis. Given the acquired coagulopathy associated with cirrhosis and a platelet count of 40 x 10 9 /L on admission, preventing expansion of the IPH and haematoma was our primary concern. Imaging revealed an anteroinferiorly dislocated shoulder with a significant associated risk of avascular necrosis if not surgically corrected. We commenced platelet transfusion with a target platelet count of greater than 100 x 10 9 /L. Serial full blood count monitoring revealed worsening thrombocytopaenia despite transfusion. Post transfusion platelet increment was measured at 30 minutes post transfusion to evaluate response. Two consecutive post-transfusion platelet increments were measured to be less than 10 x 10 9 /L and the patient demonstrated evidence of a febrile non-haemolytic transfusion reaction. Immediate surgical correction of her left shoulder and humerus was evaluated to carry significant risk of mortality. We identified numerous potential non-immune causes of refractoriness to platelet transfusion including concurrent infection, hypersplenism secondary to cirrhosis. Non-HLA matched platelet transfusion was continued while awaiting Human Leukocyte Antigen(HLA) matching and extended platelet specific antibody screening. This revealed the presence of anti-HLA antibodies with evidence of significant alloimmunisation, limiting suitable donors to one on the registered list. Platelet count recovered to greater than 100 x 10 9 after transfusion with 10 units of unmatched platelets. HLA alloimmunisation presents a challenge in the management of a patient with thrombocytopaenia and significant haemorrhage. This case demonstrates the HLA alloantibody associated refractoriness to platelet transfusion managed with multiple transfusions of un-matched platelets. An interesting case of recurrent meningitis Smith C, Finan K Department of Medicine, Sligo University Hospital, NUI Galway Intern Training Network Background Mr LM is a 58 year old gentleman with a history of recurrent meningitis on a background of an ethmoidal bone fracture. Mr LM presented to the Emergency department with a headache of sudden onset which had gradually gotten worse over the previous six hours and a high grade temperature at 38.8. He was worked up for meningitis. Lumbar puncture confirmed pneumococcal meningitis. Mr LM had suffered a traumatic head injury and this was the 3 rd presentation of meningitis since this event. CT base of skull showed ethmoidal bone fracture. Incidentally it was noted that LM had recurrent rhinorrhoea not associated with other symptoms. A neurological opinion was sought and CT cisternography was advised. This confirmed that there was a CSF leak in the left posterior ethmoids. Conclusions Following an ENT consultation definitive management involving surgical exploration with the possibility of fascial grafting was decided upon. Discussion In this case we see one of the most common risk factors for recurrent meningitis. The ethmoidal bone fracture provided a direct route of entry into the CNS for organisms. Interestingly the two other most common causes are colonisation of the nasopharynx and infective endocarditis. Introduction: The incidence of childhood type 1 diabetes mellitus (TIDM) is increasing. Intensive insulin therapy with continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) therapy improves metabolic control and quality of life and reduces the risk of micro-vascular complications. Severe hypoglycaemia is a barrier to optimising control. The addition of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) technology provides a more composite understanding of glucose variability to allow more accurate insulin dose titration. Merging both devices has glycaemic control advantages but increases the cost and burden of care. Aim: We undertook a national audit of insulin pump use in regional paediatric diabetes centres in Republic of Ireland. Method: All regional centres were surveyed on pump initiations (January 2014-September 2015). Data on numbers of pumps initiated, age of patients, pump type, indication for pump choice, indication for CGM, HbA1c outcomes and adverse events were collated. Results: Eight centres providing care to 2104 children with T1DM submitted data for analysis. A total of 272 insulin infusion pumps were initiated in the study period, of which 32.6 % were for children aged < 6 years. Average HbA1c measurements decreased in each sub population during the follow up period. Mean HbA1c (in all age groups) 6 months' post initiation of CSII was 7.6% (60 mmol/mol) (range 6.4-8.4 % (46-68 mmol/mol). There were no serious adverse events during the study period. CGM initiation varied from 0-20% in this population. Conclusion: CSII therapy is safe and effective in children and adolescents with T1DM. The use of insulin pumps has increased but CGM technology use is currently limited. Technological advances continue to improve the therapeutic options available to children and adolescents with T1DM. Pump prescribers need to consider multiple factors in matching patients' needs with available technologies to maximise benefit. Introduction: Acute onset of psychosis in older patients should prompt a full workup for potential neurological cause of psychiatric symptoms 1 . Atypical presentation and non-specific imaging can make stroke difficult to distinguish from encephalitis. Case: A 74 year old man with no medical history presented with a 9 day history of anxiety and suicidal ideation. The patient reported intrusive thoughts of self harm and harming others. An organic cause was suspected due to acute onset of symptoms. CT-Brain suggested a right anterior temporal lobe infarct. The patient's psychosis worsened and was associated with a sensation of intracranial pressure. An MRI-brain was performed which showed high T2/FLAIR in the right lateral temporal area with limbic and mesiotemporal sparing, a picture more suggestive of encephalitis. Correlation with CSF and serology was advised. Empirical treatment with acyclovir and ceftriaxone was initiated. An LP was performed which showed raised protein, normal cell count and negative viral serology. Exhaustive investigation of infectious, autoimmune, inflammatory and paraneoplastic processes was negative. Symptomatic treatment was continued with haloperidol and symptoms resolved over 5 weeks. Disscussion: The acute onset of symptoms and the absence of the classic encephalitic triumvirate of confusion, fever and headache was suggestive of a cerebrovascular rather than neuroinflammatory process 2,3 . The radiological picture was more suggestive of encephalitis, but ultimately CSF findings did not correlate. Repeat interrogation of imaging along with the identification of vascular risk factors, atrial fibrillation and hyperlipidemia, cast further doubt on the diagnosis of encephalitis and made a temporal lobe infarct more likely. This case highlights that stroke without classical focal neurology and encephalitis without prodrome can be difficult to differentiate. Usefulness of EDD at Admission: Using EDD to estimate length of stay in surgical patients in Connolly Hospital, Blanchardstown is an important tool in bed management from the initial assessment through to discharge. Objective: The aim of this audit was to look at the difference between estimated and actual length of stay (LoS) of patients during general surgical take based on their initial EDD and the potential factors that affected these results. The audit was undertaken with a view to improve accuracy when calculating the EDD, which in turn can be used as an effective tool to aid efficient bed management. Method: Data was collected on 61 patients admitted under general surgical take over a period of 24 days. Inclusion criteria included all general surgical patients admitted through A&E on the surgical sign-out. Excluded from this audit were self-discharges and patients whose EDD was not calculated on the surgical sign-out. Relevant data was obtained from the surgical sign-out with additional information collected from the patients' charts post-discharge. Results: The average estimated LoS was 3 days compared to actual LoS which was 6.28 days. Other parameters identified included number of operations, number of consults, ASA grade, initial diagnosis and diagnosis on discharge. Further analysis of these parameters and their relationship with accurate EDD calculations is underway. Conclusion: Preliminary results show that although EDDs provide a valuable resource for hospitals, they are often still difficult to objectively calculate accurately. In the HSE 2014 document 'Integrated Care Guidance -A practical guide to discharge and transfer from hospital 1 , setting an Estimated Length of Stay (ELOS) is described as a key element in effective discharge planning. This audit aims to identify some common factors that can affect EDD accuracy, with the potential to expand to other areas of integrated care. 1 Health Service Executive, 2014 TVN and wound care audit: NCHD understanding in UHL involving wound care, wound dressing and the services of the tissue viability nurse. McKevitt K, Halpin J, Mulligan D, Moloney T Department of Surgery, University Hospital Limerick, Dooradoyle, Limerick, UHL Intern Training Network Introduction: Chronic wounds by definition are any break in skin integrity lasting longer than 4-6 weeks in duration, [1, 2] . Wounds are providing increasing challenges for physicians, affecting thousands, requiring longstanding therapies and dependence on nursing services. Patients are affected mentally, physically, have reduced work capacity and quality of life, incurring significant healthcare costs. Causes including vascular insufficiency, diabetes, pressure, trauma, infection and post-operative, occurring in people of any age. The total healthcare expenditure in UK in 2015 was 4%, figures suggesting £5 billion. In Ireland 66% of public health nurse work times are comprised of wound care. "Tissue viability is a growing speciality that primarily considers all aspects of skin and soft tissue wounds and ulceration", [3] . Startlingly a Canadian study reported that most family physicians feel illprepared to manage pressure ulcers, suggesting that they do not receive enough training in this disorder, [1] . Aims: The purpose of this Audit was (i) to determine the knowledge base of wound care among the Intern Training Network cohort in UHL, (ii) to ascertain whether NCHD's receive formal wound care education prior to commencement of Intern year, (iii) whether NCHD's feel they would benefit from formal teaching. Methods: A simple self administered questionnaire was delivered to the UHL Intern Training group 2016, with a response rate of 75% achieved. Results: Our survey demonstrated an overall lack of confidence and knowledge of wound care amongst interns. We failed to obtain a satisfactory number of SHO survey responses in order to provide a comparison. There is a huge response citing over reliance on tissue viability nurses and non-specialised nurses. Initial results seem to portray a lack of formal education in Irish Medical schools surrounding the area of wounds, ulcers and their care. Conclusions: Overall it appears Intern clinicians are often unsure about diagnosis and treatment, with a general desire for more wound care education. Very little if any training on chronic wounds is offered in Irish Medical Schools adding to the conclusion Interns are not confident on their knowledge base for treatment of wounds and ulcers. It is clear that there is a need for improved education about these conditions that have huge clinical and economic consequences. Consequently, there is a lack of clarity and consistency in the performing of these post-operative check x-rays. There exists many complications surrounding NOF surgery, with periprosthetic fracture being the most serious. It carries with it higher morbidity and mortality rates, especially in the elderly population. Published literature demonstrates the incidence of periprosthetic fracture as between 1.5% -6.8% for uncemented hip hemiarthroplasty and between 0% -1.8% for cemented.¹ The majority of hip hemiarthroplasties performed in UHL are uncemented. Methods: A retrospective study was performed on all NOF surgeries carried out in September 2016 in UHL. The type of surgery performed was recorded as well as the date of surgery, date of check x-ray booking and date of check x-ray performed. Results: The total number of fractured neck of femur surgeries performed was 28. Of these, 21 were hemiarthroplasty, 6 dynamic hip screw (DHS) and 1 long intrameduallary (IM) nail. The number of days between the surgery being performed and the check x-ray being filmed varied between 1 and 5 days. 43% were performed on day 1 post-op, 82% were performed within the first 3 days post-op. However 7% of check x-rays were not filmed until 5 days post-op. One hundred percent of fractured NOF patients did receive post-operative check x-rays prior to discharge. Conclusion: In conclusion, 100% of check x-rays are completed before discharge. However some take up to five days to be filmed post surgery, which may delay the detection of periprosthetic fractures. Of all x-rays performed, 21% of those carried out were on DHS, which are superfluous unless specifically requested. Therefore if 21% of x-ray requests were eliminated, there is opportunity for filming the hemiarthroplasty x-rays at an earlier interval. Introduction: We report a rare case of IgG4 related disease which presented under the guise of a pulmonary embolism and sarcoma. Case report: A 45 year old male, ex smoker who worked as a stonemason presented with a 6 month history of cough, haemoptysis and weight loss. A chest x-ray revealed a right lung nodule and pleural effusion and the patient was referred to a rapid access lung clinic. A CT thorax showed a right sided 3x3cm lobulated lesion in the right lower lobe with several satellite lesions. This was associated with pleural thickening and an incidental finding of a right main pulmonary artery embolism. The patient was anticoagulated with heparin and worked up for a possible malignancy. A PET CT scan found increased tracer uptake within the occluded right pulmonary artery, right hilum, right middle and lower lobe nodules. Amongst the differentials was a pulmonary artery sarcoma. Multiple procedures to obtain a tissue diagnosis were carried out without success. As a result, a right pneumonectomy was performed. Subsequent histopathology reports revealed a significant population of IgG4 plasmablasts in the mass which was suggestive of an IgG4 related disease tumefactive lesion and not a pulmonary embolism or pulmonary artery sarcoma as initially suspected. The patient was referred to Immunology and commenced on steroids. He is currently awaiting consideration for lung transplant. Discussion: IgG4 related disease is a syndrome of unknown aetiology, manifesting in various ways. Hallmarks are lymphoplastmacycic tissue infiltration of mainly IgG4-positive plasma cells and small lymphoctyes which may be accompanied by elevated serum IgG4 levels. Diagnosing this patient was challenging due to difficulty in obtaining a tissue diagnosis and the similarity on radiological imaging of the IgG4 disease to a pulmonary artery embolism and sarcoma. The condition has proven challenging to treat and transplantation is being considered. At least 4,500 Total hip replacements (THR) are performed each year in Ireland. The incidence of dislocation after THR ranges from 0.8% to 7% (1). There are numerous stabilizing techniques described after multiple THR dislocations, including trochanteric advancement, revision of components, conversion to bipolar or tripolar arthroplasty and the exchange of a modular head-neck component and the polyethylene liner 2 . The success of these techniques is questionable. Frequently, a revision THR is chosen. We present the results of a, previously described alternative approach, to multiple THR dislocations used in our institution, the posterior lip augmentation device (PLAD). Aim To investigate patient outcomes after PLAD insertion. Method Retrospective review of the PLAD devices inserted in an Irish university teaching hospital over a 5-year period. Results 27 PLAD devices were inserted over a 5-year period (n=25). The mean age was 75. The mean duration of time the patient spent in the operating theatre was 87 minutes. 11% (n=3) dislocated their hip afterwards and no patient went onto have THR revision surgery. In 2 of the PLAD dislocations, the hip was relocated successfully without further dislocation. In the third case of PLAD dislocation, a change of positioning of the PLAD was performed. The PLAD can be used successfully to treat multiple dislocations post THR. It has a high success rate, a low rate of dislocation and did not lead to revision arthroplasty in any case. It may be considered as an alternate option before deciding to revise a THR after multiple dislocations. Post-operative notes are an essential record of the events of an operation. It is important that information is communicated in a clear and concise manner for the safety of the patient. Post-operative notes serve as a medico-legal document. The Health Service Executive (HSE) have endorsed standards for post-operative operative notes. We set out to audit post operative notes in our institution. Aim To audit post-operative notes completed by orthopaedic surgeons in our institution. The standard used to benchmark our current practice against was the HSE's National Model of Care for Trauma and Orthopaedic Surgery document. Post-operative notes were selected at random from the University Hospital Waterford (UHW) trauma list and compared to the standard. 14 core elements of a post-operative note were recommended. Data was collected and evaluated. After the first cycle of data collection, NCHD's and consultants involved in writing post-operative notes were given a 30 minute education session on best practice. Data was then recollected approximately 2 weeks later. 1,2 Results Overall, there was good compliance with the Model of Care standards. The most common omission was "accurate description of any complications or difficulties encountered/solution" in 5/10 notes." The 'Surgeons signature was missing in 2 of the notes and "details of the incision" and "description of findings" was missing in 2/10 notes. Intervention: An education session with all NCHDs and Consultants resulted in greater than 95% compliance with all 14 standards. Complications, whether they had occurred or not, were documented and minor omissions were included. A pro-forma post-operative note was devised. This is being assessed at hospital management level for potential use in the future. 2. Improving the quality of general surgical operation notes in accordance with the Royal College of Surgeons guidelines: a prospective completed audit loop study. Singh, R. 3, 2012, Journal Eval Clin Practice, Vol. 18, pp. 578-580. An audit of record keeping in the medical notes Mahomed H, Carroll P, Cleary M University Hospital Waterford Introduction Clinical notes serve as a legal account of the treatment a patient has received. Accuracy and clarity is of the utmost importance to communicate between departments and provide an effective patient care plan. Poor note taking may result in poor communication, sub-optimal patient care and increased litigation. Aim To evaluate the quality of clinical notes written by doctors before and after educational intervention. Method Standard Used: Royal College of Physicians (RCP) -General Medical Record Keeping Standards. 1, 2, 3 Orthopaedic charts were chosen at random and applied to the RCP General medical Record Keeping Standards. 29 questions were addressed which involved 11 standards Data was evaluated. All non-consultant hospital doctors (NCHD) and consultants involved in documenting notes were then given a 30 minute education session on what a good clinical note should contain. Data was then re-collected approximately 2 weeks later. Results Summary of first cycle: Major omissions were identified in the medical notes such as patient details, timing and dating of the record, authors name, standardised structure and layout, and chronological order. Intervention: Education session with all NCHDs and Consultants resulted in greater than 95% compliance with all 11 standards. Intramedullary epidermoid cysts are rare, representing less than 1% of all intraspinal tumours in adults. Associations include spinal dysraphism and lumbar puncture, particularly with older, non-bevelled needles. Of approximately 50 cases reported in the literature, few have MRI studies. We present the following case with MRI features. A 60-year-old woman presented with an 18-month history of lower back ache and progressive limb weakness, on a background of an undiagnosed spinal lesion that was under clinical and radiological surveillance for 22 years. Symptoms comprised bilateral lower limb weakness, radicular pain and paraesthesia. No saddle anaesthesia or disturbance of bowel and bladder was reported. Pertinent positives in the examination included atrophy of the right calf muscles, reduced power on knee extension and flexion of grade 4/5, foot dorsiflexion of grade 3/5, and hypo-reflexia throughout. Sensation was reduced bilaterally in L1-L2. Medico-surgical history was significant only for T12-L1 laminectomies for incomplete resection of a spinal lesion in 1994. This had presented with predominantly right-sided weakness and radicular pain. The lesion was biopsied but not removed as it was adherent to the cord intra-operatively. Histopathology was non-diagnostic and the patient subsequently underwent radiological surveillance with serial thoracolumbar spine MRIs. MRI spine reported a well-defined intradural, intramedullary 5 cm mass at the level of T12-L1cystic in appearance, hypo-intense on T1 and hyper-intense on T2 weighted MRI with fatty droplets at craniocaudal poles. The patient underwent extension of previous T12-L1 laminectomies to L2. Durotomy was followed by near total removal of the cyst. Caseous material was seen within the cyst and histopathology confirmed a final diagnosis of an epidermoid cyst. A CSF leak at post-op day 8 was managed conservatively with a lumbar drain and the patient returned to baseline within 2 weeks. Aim: This audit set out to identify patients with AF within a general practice population, assess their individual risk for stroke using the CHA2DS-VASc score, review their current anti-coagulant treatment in the context of their risk of stroke, and review their currently prescribed medications to identify any other medications which may place them at an increased risk of haemorrhage, when prescribed alongside Warfarin or a NOAC. Method: The HealthOne database was searched using the terms "Atrial Fibrillation", "Afib", "AF", "Arrhythmia", "Ablation", and the search domain "repeat prescriptions" was searched for all drugs commonly prescribed in AF. The search included patients seen in the previous three years. The primary audit was carried out in January 2016, with the practice re-audited in November 2016. Results: In January, 60 patients with AF were identified, representing 0.85% of the practice population. There were 46(76.7%) on NOAC monotherapy, 4(6.7%) on Warfarin monotherapy, 5(8.3%) on a NOAC+ Aspirin, 4(6.7%) on Aspirin monotherapy, and 1(1.6%) patient had no thromboprophylaxis secondary to a history of bleeding. In November, there were 52(89.7%) on NOAC monotherapy, 2(3.4%) on Warfarin monotherapy, 1(1.75%) on a NOAC+Aspirin, 2(3.4%) on A s p i r i n m o n o t h e r a p y, a n d 1 ( 1 . 7 5 % ) r e m a i n e d w i t h o u t thromboprophylaxis. Two patients had passed away between audits. Conclusion: Audit of thromboprophylaxis in AF patients plays an important role in identifying individuals whom may benefit from alteration of their regular prescriptions. This will become increasingly important as the incidence of this arrhythmia increases, in an aging population with increasing numbers of co-morbidities. The practice audited showed very high rates of optimal thromboprophylaxis in their patients with AF. A clinical audit of Venous Thromboembolism Risk Assessment and Prophylaxis in the acute hospital setting, in the context of a national improvement collaborative 2 In the US and Europe, VTE-related events kill more people than AIDS, breast cancer, prostate cancer and road traffic accidents -combined. 3 In the UK, over 90% of patients are formally assessed for VTE risk and receive appropriate prophylaxis. 4 In 2016, the HSE launched a national improvement collaborative to improve VTE risk assessment and prevention. As part of this effort, we carried out an audit in the MMUH to assess the proportion of patients who were being VTE risk assessed and prescribed appropriate thromboprophylaxis. Aim: To measure VTE Risk Assessment Tool use and appropriate thromboprophylaxis in AMAU patients and a subset of general surgical patients at the MMUH. Objectives: Within 24 hours of admission, all AMAU patients and a single colorectal surgery team should be assessed using the appropriate MMUH VTE Risk Assessment Tool and receive appropriate VTE prophylaxis. Method: Inclusion criteria: AMAU patients and general surgery patients under the care of Mr Mulsow admitted to the MMUH in October/ November 2016. Exclusion criteria: Patients who were diagnosed and being treated for a current DVT or PE. For each patient we recorded whether an MMUH VTE risk assessment tool had been completed and whether thromboprophylaxis had been administered within 24 hours of admission. Where VTE risk assessment had not been clearly documented, we retrospectively noted individual VTE and bleeding risks and assessed whether thromboprophylaxis given was appropriate according to MMUH guidelines. Medical N=43 Surgical N=17 There has been a push nationally, in the form of the HSE Elective Surgery Programme, to optimise the theatre journey for elective surgery patients. In 2012, an anaesthetist led Pre-Operative Assessment Clinic (POAC) was established in UCHG. Patients scheduled for elective surgery are referred to this clinic (usually 1-3 weeks pre-op) where they are examined, assessed and consented for surgery by a multi-disciplinary team. Candidates are selected from the POAC to attend the Theatre Admissions Lounge -an expedited route to surgery. The Wireless Stimulation of the Endocardium (WiSE) system is a novel alternative to conventional cardiac resynchronisation therapy (CRT). A 42 year old gentleman presented to the heart failure clinic in PHB for routine follow-up. He was diagnosed with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) at 22 years of age (which has since become dilated with poor ventricular systolic function) and atrial fibrillation 12 years later. Repeat echocardiograms demonstrated moderate to severe mitral regurgitation. An implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) and pacemaker was inserted in 2008, and changed in 2014. At previous outpatient appointments, he complained of worsening symptoms of heart failure, despite optimal medical therapy, and had been referred for consideration of heart transplantation. In May 2016 at St. Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin, he was the first Irish patient to have a WiSE system fitted. At this follow up outpatient appointment, six months later, this gentleman noted a much improved quality of life. Measured exercise tolerance and dyspnoea on exertion had both improved. Discussion CRT has been shown to reduce morbidity and mortality in select patient populations 1 . WiSE systems are an alternative for patients who either fail to improve with conventional CRT or who suffer lead placement issues. This innovative approach involves the insertion of a tiny electrode into the left ventricular endocardium (replacing the traditional coronary sinus lead), which then generates the desired electrical current when subjected to ultrasonic waves from a transmitter, implanted in a left intercostal space. The "Select-LV" trial 2 , a non-randomised multi-centre study of 35 patients, demonstrated the feasibility of direct, wireless left ventricle pacing. Promising results were seen at one and six month intervals, with 84% of participants clinically improved at six months. Commercial implants of the WiSE system began in Europe in 2016. Introduction: Fall-related injuries have a major health impact both in Ireland and internationally. These injuries increase the economic burden on health services as well as the workload for Emergency Departments. Objectives: In this pilot study, we sought to evaluate the use of a standardised orthogeriatric assessment and utilise the resulting data to guide future research. Method: A total of 13 patients were audited. Inclusion Criteria: Age over 64, presenting with a femoral fracture secondary to a fall during an assigned three month period. Interventions audited: We used standardised orthogeriatric assessment which includes an assessment of 12 falls risk factors, 10 fracture risk factors, a bone health assessment, and a syncope assessment. Data collection: data was collected by detailed history and collateral history-taking using a standardised proforma. Results: The average age of the study population was 79 years. 4 (31%) participants were male and 9 (69%) were female. 7 (54%) of the participants reported only 1 fall in the past year. 3 (23%) reported more than 3 falls in the past year. On average, 4 risk factors were present in our participants with the following as most common: a) poor strength, balance or gait (62%), b) high falls risk medication (54%), c) urinary incontinence (46%), and d) diagnosis of cognitive impairment/dementia/delerium (46%). Conclusion: Our pilot study implies the need for a larger scale study, but independent of such results the risk factors associated with femoral fracture secondary to a fall are consistent with prior studies. We recommend a standardised falls assessment to be carried out on all patients presenting to hospital following a fall. Such a screening tool would efficiently identify the individual at risk of recurrent falls, and appropriate subsequent preventative measures could be taken. Background: The number of homeless people in Ireland continues to rise. Psychiatric illness is prevalent among those living on the street, however they are often either lost to follow-up or remain undiagnosed and untreated. Of those homeless in Ireland, a proportion are immigrants, in whom language and cultural barriers can be challenging. Case presentation: YH is a 38-year-old Chinese lady who presented to SVUH in August 2016. She was brought to hospital by the Gardaí following a psychotic episode and subsequently involuntarily admitted. She displayed symptoms of paranoia, ideas of reference, perceptual abnormality, delusions of control, telepathy, auditory and tactile hallucinations, and denied any previous psychiatric history at this time. With treatment as an inpatient, YH's clinical condition improved. However, she absconded and the treating team was unable to contact her as she had no relatives in Ireland and no Next-Of-Kin. She was declared a missing person to Gardaí before being re-admitted in a similar manner 4 weeks later. It transpired that YH had been homeless in Dublin for 1 year and was socially isolated. She told us that she had been treated at a psychiatric hospital in China and refused to allow the team to obtain a collateral history. This lady is an educated individual with a Masters Degree in Theology, yet was facing deportation to China on the basis of an expired visa as a consequence of her relapsing condition. YH was afforded a Stamp 4 Visa by the Irish Government on humanitarian grounds. Her symptoms are reducing and she has regained insight. Significant social challenges, namely social reintegration and re-engaging with her PhD studies will be key to her discharge plan. Conclusion: This case highlights the significant social challenges to psychiatric teams in treating patients who are homeless and socially isolated. It also underscores the importance of a collateral history in assessing psychiatric patients as well as the role for transcultural psychiatry in our health service. Breslin L, Tamagno G, Garrahy A Introduction: This is the case of a patient presenting with headache and hypertension, found to have metastatic paraganglionoma to the vertebrae. He had previously had resection of a phaeochromocytoma but had been lost to regular follow up and appropriate surveillance. Kelleher S 1 , Holian J 1 1 Department of Nephrology, St. Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin A twenty two year old male Kuwaiti native, studying in Ireland, presented to the emergency department having been found by friends on the floor of his home with lower limb weakness and confusion. His background was significant for a sleeve gastrectomy two months previously in Kuwait, a one week history of minimal oral intake, and BMI of 46. Initial examination revealed a tender abdomen and he was initially treated with broad spectrum antibiotics for presumed intraabdominal infection. Possible decreased power in the lower limbs was noted but difficult to assess as the patient was poorly cooperative with examination. Radiological investigations revealed no abnormality however, and his clinical condition deteriorated over the course of the day. He was not oriented to person, time or place and speech was nonsensical. Lumbar puncture showed elevated protein, normal white cells and glucose; and he was treated empirically for viral encephalitis with acyclovir. Over two days, his GCS progressively declined necessitating transfer to ICU for intubation and sedation. On examination, he had total ophthalamoplegia and decreased tone in all four limbs. A presumptive diagnosis of acute Wernicke's encephalopathy was reached which was supported by typical MRI finding findings of diffusion restriction in medial thalami, mammillary bodies and brainstem. High dose intravenous thiamine was commenced. Four weeks later, he has been extubated. His GCS is 13/15, he follows one stage commands, asks simple questions, has regained purposeful eye movements, has normal upper limb movement but flaccid paraplegia of the lower limbs. Thiamine deficiency is a rare but recognised complication of bariatric surgery arising from both reduced oral intake and malabsorption. Incidence and pathophysiology vary depending on the type of surgery. This case emphasises the importance of post-operative follow up in this cohort of patients and highlights that Wernicke's encephalopathy occurs in settings other than alcohol dependence. Beatty P 1 , Crosbie C 1 ,O'Connor E 1 , Lynch B 1 1 Rheumatology department, Galway University Hospital Introduction: Rheumatoid arthritis(RA) is a progressive,multi-systemic, inflammatory disease, primarily affecting the joints of the hands and feet bilaterally [1] . RA is characterised by persistent synovitis leading to erosive joint damage [1] . However, extra-articular symptoms correlate with disease severity and can add significantly to morbidity and mortality [2] . loss of response and 3 due to intolerance. 5 had loss of response to infliximab or adalimumab and 3 had experienced a reaction to same. 3 had failed methotrexate. Median time since starting ustekinumab was 1.2 years [4.0months-3.8yrs]. All received the standard induction regime of 90mg subcutaneously at Week 0 and 45mg on Weeks 1-3. 7 were placed on 90mg subcutaneously 8-weekly and 1 on 45mg 4-weekly. On this regime, 4(50%) were successfully maintained in clinical remission. 2 patients have continued mild symptoms on ustekinumab, though interval reduction has not been attempted in these patients. 2 patients have discontinued ustekinumab due to inadequate response. Conclusion: In our cohort of moderate/ severe CD patients, many of whom had previously failed thiopurines and anti-TNF therapy, 50% were maintained in clinical remission with Ustekinumab. Tolerability to this novel therapy appears promising though long-term follow-up is required to determine safety and side effects. The standardised Mini Mental State Examination (sMMSE) is a gold standard cognitive assessment, but takes 10-15 minutes to complete. The 6-CIT and TOS have been suggested as short, accurate cognitive screens, allowing routine screening of all older in-patients and hence earlier diagnosis and treatment of dementia/cognitive impairment. This study hypotheses that the 6-CIT and the TOS compare favourably to the sMMSE. The main aim of this study is to assess the accuracy of the 6-CIT and TOS compared to the sMMSE in screening for dementia in older inpatients. Methods Patient (N=216) were selected from the Cork-IDEAS study and their records were analysed. Demographics, sMMSE, 6-CIT and TOS results were manually extracted. A subset of 22 patients underwent timed cognitive testing using the 6-CIT and TOS. All statistical analysis was carried out using IBM SPSS version 20 and MedCalc version 15.8. There was significant correlation between sMMSE and both 6-CIT and TOS scores (r = -0.695, p<0.001 and r = -0.531, p<0.001 respectively), strongest for the 6-CIT. The mean time taken to complete the 6-CIT was 3.03 minutes. Using previously reported cut-offs for dementia (8/9, i.e. 8=normal; 9=dementia), the 6-CIT had sensitivity of 79.2 and specificity of 85.6 (AUC=0.82) compared to the accepted sMMSE score cut-off for dementia (≥24/30=normal). As a preliminary quick screen, a cut-off of 5/6 (sensitivity 92.2, specificity 64.7) would safely avoid the need for further testing in 44% of patients (i.e. 96/216 patients scored ≤5). Both the 6-CIT and TOS compared favourably to the sMMSE. The 6-CIT out-performed the TOS. Using "sensitive" cut-offs, the 6-CIT could prove a useful quick screening test for dementia, reducing the numbers of patients requiring a longer cognitive test in a busy hospital setting.  Patients with schizophrenia demonstrated higher aberrant salience levels than controls (P < 0.01). Patients also showed significantly higher schizotypy scores across the three subscales of the SPQ (all P < 0.001), as well as increased scores across all psychosis-related subscales in the CAPE (all P < 0.05). Non-parametric analysis revealed significant positive correlations between aberrant salience levels and SPQ (total and all subscales) scores, as well as elective CAPE domains (all P < 0.05) in both groups. Frequency of cannabis use was associated with increased aberrant salience levels across all groups (P < 0.001). More frequent cannabis use was associated with higher SPQ scores (P < 0.001) and increased scores in the CAPE subscales (P < 0.01). Patients with schizophrenia report impaired salience processing, and higher aberrant salience values are associated with increased schizotypy levels and cannabis exposure in both patients and controls. The majority of patients receiving trimodal therapy experienced mild GI/ GU toxicities at one year. 25% of patients that Biochemical failure occurred in had initial PSA of >10 and 75% had a Gleason score >7 and <10. 
