db7ecbb6e066fe45544ed22d060406b0258e16e1
Human Acute and Chronic Viruses: Host-Pathogen Interactions and Therapeutics
Matilde  Hoffman Degaulle I Chigbu Brenndan L Crumley Ravi  Sharma Sergey  Pustylnikov Thomas  Crilley Rashida  Ginwala Ronak  Loonawat Julie  Joseph Dominic  Sales Sydney  Wilson Pooja  Jain M  Hoffman · B L Crumley · T Crilley · R Loonawat · J Joseph· D  Sales · S Wilson P  Jain D I Chigbu R  Sharma S  Pustylnikov R  Ginwala 


Viruses are obligate intracellular pathogens that cause infection in susceptible host cells. Virus infections could be lytic, chronic, latent or immortalizing. Viruses causing latent infection are associated with high morbidity and mortality worldwide. The human body is protected from viral infection by physical and chemical barriers. However, when these barriers are breached, the body generates an antiviral immune response mediated by Natural killer (NK) cells, monocytes, Dendritic Cells (DCs), type I interferon (IFN), neutralizing antibodies, and T cells. DCs play an important role in generating a cell-mediated adaptive immune response to viruses, with conventional DCs playing a crucial role in the interactions between DCs and viruses. Crosstalk between NK cells and DCs facilitates DC maturation in antiviral innate immunity whereas crosstalk between DCs and T cells in antiviral adaptive immunity amplifies the function of mature DC. Viruses employ various strategies to evade the host immune system. They can block Pattern Recognition 2 Receptors (PRRs) -mediated production of type I IFNs, inhibit maturation and functionality of DCs, and interfere with cell-mediated immunity. Here we will focus on important human disease-causing viruses including latest COVID19 that caused worldwide pandemic. Because of the high mortality rate associated with viral diseases, there is an urgent need to re-evaluate current antiviral agents with more research focusing on developing alternative anti-viral therapies with an enhanced therapeutic index and safety profiles. Future directions in approaching the development of vaccines should focus on specific vaccines that can induce CD8 + T cell responses and produce IFN-gamma to promote a Th1-biased CD4 + T-cell response. Viruses are the smallest infectious agent that cause infectious disease with high morbidity and mortality on a global scale. Viruses are classified on the basis of the genomic type as either DNA or RNA viruses. There is further classification of the viral nucleic acid as either single-stranded or double-stranded. Viruses are able to cause infection in host cells with appropriate specific host cell receptors that facilitate viral attachment, entry, and invasion of the host cell. Viruses require host cells to replicate and survive. Destruction of the host cell by viral replication, along with immune response to the virus, results in clinical manifestations of viral infection. DNA viruses usually undergo replication in the nucleus of the host cell whereas majority of viruses with an RNA genome replicates in the cytoplasm of the host cell. Viral replication in the host cell results in disruption of normal cellular function, culminating in damage and death of the infected cell. When virus infection causes immediate cell death, this is termed lytic infection, wherein the infected cell is lysed as the virions emerge. However, many viruses are also known to cause persistent viral infection, which may take the form of a latent or persistent productive infection. In latent infection, viral nucleic acid persists inside the host cell without undergoing replication or killing the cell. Persistent productive infection, or immortalization, is associated with host cell senescence because of active viral replication. This occurs mostly with RNA viruses such as HTLV-1, during which the infected host cell becomes immortalized due to interference with normal cell cycle, this results in host cell transformation [1] . These forms of viral lifestyle are associated with the development of virus specific CD8 + T cells, which become stimulated during viral reactivation [2] . The human body is protected from viral infection by physical and chemical barriers. However, when these barriers are breached, different arms of the immune system come into action. The immune response involves the innate immune system mediated by Dendritic cells (DCs), Natural Killer (NK) cells, monocytes, and type I interferons (IFNs), and the adaptive immune response carried out by neutralizing antibodies and T cells. A complex interplay between different types of immune cellular and soluble factors of the innate and adaptive immune systems exists in preventing and controlling chronic virus infections. NK cells, complement proteins and cytokines are specific components of the antiviral innate immune responses, with DCs operating as immunosurveillance and immunostimulatory cells that process and present viral antigen to T cells [3] . DCs are divided into plas-macytoid and conventional DCs. Plasmacytoid DCs respond to viral DNA and RNA to produce type I IFN that inhibit viral replication in both infected and noninfected cells [4, 5] . Conventional DCs are one of the first immune cells to encounter viruses at their port of entry into the host [6] . The three subsets of conventional dendritic cells, important in viral infection, include tissue-derived migratory DC, lymphoid-resident DC, and monocyte-derived DC [4, 7] . Tissue-derived migratory DCs include Langerhans' cells and dermal/interstitial DCs that reside and survey the skin and mucoepithelial tissue. Lymphoid-resident DCs exist as immature DCs in the lymph nodes, spleen, and thymus. Monocyte derived or inflammatory DCs are those that are generated from monocytes under inflammatory conditions [4, 7] . Dendritic cells are located in strategic parts of the body to ensure optimal performance of immunosurveillance and immunostimulatory functions with the intent of triggering both innate and adaptive immune response to the presence of viruses that breach the anatomical and chemical defense barrier of the host [7] . Siglec-1 (CD169), DC-SIGN, mannose receptor, Langerin, immune dendritic cell receptor (DCIR), heparan sulfate proteoglycan, FC gamma receptors, and syndecan-3 are surface attachment receptors on DCs that facilitate uptake of viruses by DCs [6] . Virus interaction with DCs can cause degradation of the virus within the cell to allow for antigen-MHC complex formation for presentation to T cells. This trigger the T cell mediated antiviral immune response [6, 7] . Viral antigens are either generated during intracellular replication in virus infected cells or generated from recognition of viral components from other infected cells [7] . Some viruses can bind to and replicate within DCs, with DCs acting as permissive cells that facilitate viral spread to other cells or tissues in the host, resulting in trans-infection of lymphocytes in regional lymph nodes. This type of infection is particularly seen when viral antigens are not complexed to MHC molecules [6] as another way to alert the immune system and activate T cells ( Table 1) . Activation of PRRs on DCs by viral Pathogen Associated Molecular Patterns (PAMPs) is associated with maturation of DCs, processing and presenting of virusderived peptide complexed to MHC class I molecules, upregulation of MHC molecules and costimulatory signals, production of antiviral pro-inflammatory cytokines, and induction of the adaptive immune response. Viral nucleic acid, capsomer, peplomer on viral capsid or envelope, and RNA replication intermediates are viral PAMPs that interact with PRRs [6] . The efficacy of PRR activation determines the level of viral titers and duration of infection [7] [8] [9] . PRRs have dual function of detecting viral PAMPs and alerting the immune system about the breach of the passive innate immune defense mechanism [7] . Toll-like receptors (TLR) on DCs are PRRs that undergo morphological and biochemical changes when they interact with cognate ligands [3] . TLR involved in viral recognition can induce the production of type I interferons. Intracellularly located nucleic acid sensing TLRs (TLR3, TLR7, TLR8, TLR9) within the endosome facilitate recognition of viral nucleic acid or viral genome. Activation of TLR3 results in the induction of phosphorylation of IRF3, whereas activation of TLR7 and TLR9 is associated with IRF7 proteins of MuV suppress TNF-α production. V protein blocks the production of type I IFN and IL-6. Live MMR vaccine provides lifelong immunity. Research in post-exposure prophylaxis of mumps. phosphoryla-tion. Phosphorylation of IRF3 and IRF7 are associated with the transcription of type I IFN genes and subsequent translation of type I IFN proteins [9] . Interaction between viral dsRNA and TLR3 on myeloid DCs (mDC) are associated with IL-12p70 production that induce naïve CD4 + T cell to polarize into IFN-γproducing CD4 + T cells, thereby promoting Th1 polarization. The IFN-γ released by Th1 cells enhances DC functionality [3] . A stable DC-T cell interaction following viral infection is required for shaping and driving an efficient activation, proliferation and differentiation of T cells into viral specific T cells, as well as optimizing expansion of memory T cell pool [4] . DC-T cell crosstalk requires the formation of an immunological synapse to facilitate the process of reciprocal activation of T cell and DC, particularly the T cell dependent activation of DC. IL-12 produced by DCs during viral infection induces a Th1 response, wherein IFN−γ produced by Th1 cells activate and amplify the function of the mature DCs [10] . CD4 + T cells are essential for optimal priming of CD8 T cells to generate virus specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes and maintenance of memory CD8 + T cells. It also provides help to B cells to generate virus specific neutralizing antibodies, long-lived plasma cells, and memory B cells. Neutralizing antibodies bind to viral envelope or capsid antigens to prevent virus from attaching to and/or the entering host cell during reinfection and during release of virions from lyseda host cell, with the intent of blocking cell-to-cell spread of virus. Thus, antiviral humoral immunity can prevent reinfection, but it cannot eradicate an established viral infection. The early activation of tissue resident Th1-polarizing memory CD4 + T cell enhances antiviral innate immune response to induce innate inflammatory response upon reinfection with virus, while simultaneously promoting viral specific adaptive immunity through interaction with DCs. This form of DC activation correlates with reduced duration of viral infection due to reduced viral titers [8] . Immune system evasion by viruses adds an additional layer to the fight against viral infections. Viruses employ various strategies to evade recognition and elimination by the host's immune system. Viruses can escape host innate defense mechanisms by interfering with PRR-mediated production of antiviral pro-inflammatory cytokines and type I IFN [11] . Some viruses interfere with maturation and functionality of DCs [6] . Some viruses produce immunosuppressive molecules that can antagonize the function of pro-inflammatory cytokines as well as cell-mediated immunity. Impairment of lymphocyte function by preventing CD8 + T cell mediated killing (e.g. HSV), infecting and killing CD4 + T cells (e.g. HIV), and suppression of NK cells and B cells (e.g. measles) are other viral-induced immune evasion strategies [5] . Viral evasion and latency occur as mechanisms for facilitating colonization and survival of the virus within the host [7] . The review herein will discuss important viruses that cause acute and chronic viral infections associated with significant health burdens such as Cornoviruses, Hepatitis viruses, HIV, HPIV, HPV, measles, mumps, adenovirus, RSV, human coronavirus, Dengue virus, HSV and HTLV-1. Epidemiology and disease burden, virulence factors, and clinical presentation will be presented in detail. The interaction of the virus with the immune system and pathophysiology of disease caused by the above viruses will be the focus of each section, with emphasis on the interaction between these viruses and dendritic cells. Finally, current and ongoing research on antiviral therapies will be reviewed. Adenovirus is part of the adenoviridae family. Human Parainfluenza Virus (HPIV), Respiratory Syncitial Virus (RSV), Measles Virus (MV), Human Coronavirus (HCoV), and Mumps virus (MuV) are respiratory viruses. They all cause common infections in children: adenovirus causes respiratory illness ranging from the common cold to bronchitis [12] , RSV, HPIV, and HCoV are the most common cause of respiratory tract infections (RTIs) in infants and children. MeV is one of the causes of pediatric infectious rashes and respiratory symptoms, and MuV is a common cause of paroti-tis and orchitis [13, 14] . These viruses can also cause more severe disease in infants and immunocompromised individuals, such as those receiving chemotherapy, solid-organ and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation recipients, and AIDS patients. Adenovirus is a member of the Adenoviridae family that causes lytic, latent, and persistent infection of the mucosal tissues of the respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract, genitourinary tract, and the eyes of humans. It is a non-enveloped DNA virus that causes a broad range of diseases, such as epidemic keratoconjunctivitis, adenoviral-induced genitourinary tract infection, adenovirus-associated respiratory illness, and gastrointestinal tract infection [15, 16] . Chronic adenoviral infection is attributed to the presence of adenovirus DNA within the cell without continuous production of infectious virions and/or persistence of adenoviruses in lymphoid tissue [12, 17] . NK cells, macrophages, and type I interferon provide antiviral innate immunity against adenoviruses [18] . NK cells and CTLs are responsible for the cell-mediated cytotoxic destruction of adenovirus infected cells with CTL providing the majority of the cell-mediated cytotoxicity against adenovirus infected cells [19] [20] [21] [22] . Inhibition of interferon response, TNF-α-mediated viral cytolysis, apoptotic pathways, and expression of MHC class I molecules on the surface of virally infected cells are immune evasive mechanisms used by adenovirus [23] . There are no FDA-approved antiviral pharmaceutical agents for treating adenoviral infection [12, 16] . Because of the high mortality and morbidity rate of adenovirus infection in young children and immunocompromised individuals, there is an urgent need to focus current research on developing anti-adenoviral therapy with enhanced therapeutic index and safety profile [24, 25] . Human adenovrus (HAdV) is a ubiquitous virus that infects the mucosa of the respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract, genitourinary tract, and eye [15, 16] . Adenovirus causes lytic, latent and persistent infection in humans; however, some strains with oncogenic properties cause immortalization of animal cells [12] . The mode of transmission include direct contact, aerosolized virus, fecal-oral route and adenoviral contaminated swimming pool/water [18] . Sporadic outbreaks of adenoviral infections occur in crowded communities, wherein children play a prominent role in transmitting the virus to others [26] . Epidemiological studies in the USA have revealed that most respiratory tract infections in infants and young children were caused by adenovirus type 1-5. However, studies in military personnel revealed that outbreaks of adenovirus-associated respiratory infection were caused by adenovirus type 3, 4, 7, and 21 [16] . The most prevalent adenovirus in the civilian population is adenovirus type 3, while type 4 is more common among military recruits [27] . The age groups most at risk for fatal adenoviral infections are infants; however, other individuals with weakened immune systems can be at risk as well [18] . HAdV is an emerging opportunistic pathogen in immunocompromised individuals due to the enhanced potential for dissemination and increased risk for fatal outcomes [16] . Adenoviruses are non-enveloped lytic viruses with a DNA genome and icosahedral symmetric capsid [16, 28] . There are more than 100 types of adenoviruses, classified into seven groups (A through G) based on the hemagglutination properties, serology, phylogenomics, host range, genomic composition, DNA homology, receptor usage, tissue tropism, and adenovirus associated RNA [18, 25, 28-31, 34, 35] . Adenovirus genus Mastadenovirus and family adenoviridae infects humans [29] . HAdV is 70-90 nanometers in diameter with a 36-kb linear double-stranded DNA genome that encodes more than 40 different proteins [34, 35] . HAdV consist of an icosahedral capsid made up of 252 capsomeres comprised of 240 hexon proteins and 12 penton base proteins [35] . The major structural proteins of adenovirus include hexons, penton bases, and fiber proteins [29] . Penton base protein plays a role in hemagglutination and its RGD (arginine-glycine-aspartate) loop serves as a site for binding to integrin ανβ3 and ανβ5 to facilitate internalization of adenovirus into host cells [18, 29, 34, 36] . Fiber protein plays a major role in interaction between viruses and primary host cellular receptors [16] . Minor capsid proteins include protein VI, protein III, protein VIII, ad protein IX, whereas terminal protein (Tp), protein MU, protein VII, protein Iva2, and protein V are core proteins of HAdV [29] . Adenoviruses cause a broad range of diseases in humans and the port of entry of the virus determines the primary site of the infection [16] . The majority of adenoviral infections are subclinical, with some being mildly symptomatic and self-limiting in immunocompetent individuals; however, fatal infections do occur in infants and immuno-compromised individuals [18] . The affinity of the host cellular receptor to the virus' fiber knob, in addition to the interaction between the penton base protein and the integrin on the host cell surface, determine viral tropism [16] . Furthermore, fiber knob, penton base protein, and cellular receptors are important determinants of tissue tropism for adenoviruses, with binding affinity for host cellular receptors contributing to tissue tropism [12, 15, 28, 31] . Tissue tropism of adenovirus is also group dependent, with HAdV D species causing ocular disease whereas HAdV A and F species causing gastrointestinal tract infections [16] . HAdV type 1-5 and 7 cause pharyngoconjunctival fever, an ocular disease characterized by follicular conjunctivitis, low-grade fever, and pharyngitis. This ocular infection is usually associated with swimming in insufficiently chlorinated swimming pools and lakes [12, 16] . Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (EKC) is a highly contagious ocular infection that is characterized by follicular conjunctivitis, pseudomembrane and pre-auricular lymphadenopathy (Fig. 1 ). It is caused by adenoviral types 8, 37, 53, 54, and 64; however, it is usually self-limiting with corneal sub-epithelial opacities formed later in the course of the disease and lasting for many months [16, 18] . Most epidemic outbreaks of EKC are associated with spread from contaminated instruments and solutions in eye clinics [18, 35] . Respiratory tract disease is commonly caused by HAdV types 1 -7, 14, and 21 and it mostly affects infants and young children [12, 16] . HAdV-E4 and HAdV-E7 are associated with adenoviral-induced respiratory illness in military recruitment camps and dormitories [18, 37] . Gastrointestinal tract (GIT) disease is associated with persistent shedding of adenovirus in stool. Adenoviral-induced genitourinary tract disease is characterized by hematuria and dysuria that may persist for many days. Hemorrhagic cystitis syndrome is a selflimiting adenoviral infection that affects children and also includes hematuria and dysuria [18] . Additionally, adenovirus could be associated with meningitis, meningoencephalitis, myocarditis, arthritis, and pancreatitis [16] .  Many cells that are susceptible to adenoviral infection express primary cellular receptors such as coxsackie and adenovirus receptor (CAR), CD46, Sialic acid, desmoglein-2, Heparin sulfate proteoglycans (HSPG), CD80, CD86, and others [38, 39] . Activated macrophages and epithelial cells secrete CXCL8 that binds to CXCR1/2 receptors that triggers relocation of CAR and ανβ3 integrin from the basolateral surface to the apical surface to facilitate adenovirus attachment from the apical plasma membrane [30, 38] . Many epithelial cells express ανβ3 and ανβ5, and these integrins interact with penton base proteins to promote internalization of adenoviruses 29, 32, 36, 38] . Penton base-integrin interaction activates intracellular signaling molecules including phosphoinositide-3-OH kinase (PI3K) and p130CAS, which in turn, activate the Rho family of small GTPases, inducing polymerization of actin filaments, a process required for internalization of adenovirus into clathrin-coated vesicles [29, 34, 40, 41] . Following internalization of the adenoviral nucleocapsid into the endosome, the acidification of the endosome enables the process of uncoating of the virus, and subsequent transportation of the viral genome into the nucleus [34] . Viral DNA genome and protein VI are transported into the nucleus where adenoviral early region 1A (E1A) is transcribed. The EIA protein generated trans-activates expression of early gene E1B, E2, E3, and E4 involved in the early stage of the replication cycle [39, [42] [43] [44] [45] . E1A protein blocks type I inducible gene expression as well as blocks induction of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II genes by IFN-γ [46] . E1B protein encoded by E1B gene facilitates the completion of adenovirus replication by preventing apoptosis of the infected cell via inactivation of p53 [47] . The early geneproteins function to disrupt the immune system response and enhance viral replication, increasing polymerase transcription, blocking MHC class I function, lowering NK cell surface receptors, and shutting off host cell protein synthesis [39, 43, 46, 48] . Adenain (23K cysteine protease) encoded by L3 gene, is a proteolytic enzyme that is required for the cleavage and release of protein IIIa, pVI, protein VII, protein VIII, protein X (Mu), and terminal protein (TP) [34, 39] . It is involved in disassembly of the viral capsid, release of viral DNA, as well as maturation of adenovirus [43, 49, 50] . Viral protease cleaves pTP into TP in the final stages of DNA replication, which results in generation of progeny DNA that is packaged into virions [48] . The immune response to adenoviral infection involves the innate immune system mediated by NK cells, monocytes, and type 1 IFNs [18] . Additionally, epithelial cells, macrophages, plasmacytoid DCs and conventional DCs participate in the innate immune response to adenovirus [51] . Antimicrobial peptides such as defensins, defensin-like chemokines, and cathelicidin participate in antiviral innate immune response as well [23] . Components of the adenoviral capsid act as virusassociated molecular patterns (VAMP) that interact with pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) to initiate an innate immune response [52] . DC-SIGN is involved in the capture and uptake of adenovirus by DCs, and such interaction favors the development of a Th2-mediated immune response. This leads to establishment of a chronic infectious state due to impaired clearance of adenovirus [53] . HAdV-infected DCs can induce cellular immune response by stimulating CD8 + T cells [19] . Antibodies and T cells mediate the humoral and cellular adaptive immune response respectively. TNF-α and IFN-γ released by macrophages and NK cells, enhance the ability of DCs to induce the adaptive immune response [18] . Neutralizing antibody directed against fiber protein plays a role in resolution of lytic adenovirus infection with the potential to protect the individual from re-infection with the actual HAdV type that generated the neutralizing antibodies [12] . IgA-mediated mucosal immunity to adenovirus prevents productive adenoviral infection by preventing interaction between adenovirus and host cellular receptors. Furthermore, antibody-mediated cytolysis of infected cells involves complement-mediated cell lysis and antibody dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. CTLs and NK cells play a primary role in cell-mediated cytotoxicity via the release of perforins and granzymes that cause apoptosis of adenoviral-infected cells. IFN-γ and TNF-α released by Th1 cells and CTLs mediate non-cytolytic clearance of adenoviral infection without lysing infected cells. Killing of adenoviral-infected cells before the replicative cycle is complete, significantly reduces the production of infective progeny virions [20] [21] [22] . Cellular immunity limits growth of adenovirus, however, adenovirus is also able to evade the immune response resulting in persistence in the host. Adenovirus species such as HAdV-D evade immune-mediated cytolysis by down-regulating expression of ligands (CD112 and CD155) that activate NK cell receptor DNAM-1 (DNAX accessory molecule/CD226). Adenovirus also evades killing by NK cells by up-regulating the expression of HLA-E. Engagement of HLA-E is associated with inhibition of subset of NK cells expressing NKG2A. Furthermore, downregulation of HLA-A/B/C expression is a strategy used by the virus to modulate MHC class I expression in adenoviral-infected epithelial cells [54] . Adenovirus represents a significant health burden, especially in the immunocompromised population, due to increased rates of dissemination with multi-organ involvement, reactivation of latent infection, and unavailability of suitable anti-adenoviral therapy [18] . There are no FDA-approved antiviral agents for treating adenoviral infections [16] . Cidofovir and ribavirin have been used as antiviral therapy in immune-compromised individuals [12] . Cidofovir is an acyclic nucleoside phosphonate derivative of cytosine that incorporates into the adenoviral DNA, inhibits polymerase, and stopping transcription [35, 42, 45] . Cidofovir has been shown to have anti-HAdV activity against all types, particularly in recipients of bone marrow transplant and/or solid organ transplant. It is most efficacious when administered intravenously. It produces significant side effects such as nephrotoxicity, myelosuppression, and uveitis [25, 35] . Brincidofovir is a lipid-linked derivative of cidofovir that has enhanced oral bioavailability with an improved safety profile [35, 45] . Ribavirin is a broad-spectrum nucleoside analog of guanosine that has antiviral activity against HAdV group C species [45] . Maintenance of adequate or optimal levels of chlorinated swimming pools and improved personal hygiene can minimize transmission [55] . Immune-prophylaxis via live oral vaccine are beneficial for preventing adenovirus types 4 and 7-induced respiratory infections in military recruits [12] . Human adenovirus infection in immunocompromised individuals is associated with a high risk of developing disseminated and fatal disease; therefore, there is an urgent need to evaluate current antiviral therapies for efficacy in treating patients with adenoviral infections. Research should also focus on developing alternative antiadenoviral therapies with enhanced therapeutic index and safety profiles [24, 25] . RNAi-mediated viral gene silencing is a potential method of inhibiting replication of adenovirus [44] . The inhibitory effect of siRNA-mediated adenoviral gene silencing on DNA replication was also shown via blockade of the gene that encodes DNA polymerase [49] . The artificial microRNA directed against adenoviral E1A, DNA polymerase, and preterminal protein mRNA could inhibit replication of adenovirus in vitro [24] . Furthermore, shRNA delivered by non-viral or viral vector systems have been shown to undergo intracellular processing into mature functional active siRNA that possess activity against adenoviral E1A and DNA polymerase. siRNA and shRNA can induce RNAi-mediated suppression of CAR expression, which results in the inability of adenoviral species that use CAR as a primary cellular receptor to cause productive infection [35] . Thus, siRNA could be good candidates for RNAi-mediated inhibition of adenoviral multiplication. Cysteine protease adenain lacks human homologues and could therefore be a great target for therapy with an inhibitor of adenoviral cysteine enzyme such as ritonavir [25, 50] . Adenoviral infection can be inhibited using a soluble virus receptor trap, such as soluble CAR consisting of extracellular domain D1 and D2 of CAR fused to Fc portion of human IgG1 to generate soluble CAR-Fc. The D1 domain binds to the fiber knob of adenoviruses and the Fc portion of sCAR-Fc binds to macrophages to facilitate virus clearance [35] . Suppression of adenoviral replication was enhanced by co-administration of anti-adenoviral siRNA, virus receptor trap sCAR-Fc and Cidofovir [42] . Furthermore, donor-derived adenoviral specific T cells infused in children with post-Stem Cell Transplantation systemic adenoviral infection has been demonstrated to be an effective means of inducing adoptive transfer of HAdV-specific immunity, reducing viral replication and increasing protection from HAdV-related complications [56] . While intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) containing neutralizing antibodies against common adenoviral serotypes could be effective against primary adenoviral infection, it may not provide antiviral protection against reactivating viruses [28] . HPIV is an enveloped non-segmented negative sense ssRNA virus that causes lower and upper respiratory tract infection that can be more severe in infants, elderly, and immunocompromised individuals. HPIV causes causing significant health burden [13, [57] [58] [59] . Young children are susceptible to HPIV-associated acute respiratory illness due to immunological immaturity, underdeveloped immune system, and HPIV-specific maternal antibodies suppressing vaccine-induced antibody response [57] . Sialic acids are host cell receptors that facilitate HPIV infection through interaction with HPIV viral attachment proteins (hemagglutinin/neuraminidase) or glycoprotein (G protein) [13, 58, 59] . NK cells and type I interferons provide antiviral innate immunity; however, C and V viral proteins block induction of type I IFNs that are essential for activating NK cells and providing an antiviral microenvironment [57, 60] . C-protein expressed by HPIV type 1 and 3 suppresses the induction of IFN [57] . Similar immunosuppressive effects occur with V protein expressed by HPIV type 2 and 4 [57] . There are no FDA-approved antiviral prophylactic and therapeutic agents for HPIV; however, infected patients respond to supportive therapy with nebulizer steam therapy [57] . After RSV, HPIV is the second most common cause of acute respiratory infections in infants and children. It is prevalent during the fall months and it is the cause of approximately 23,000 hospitalizations per year [57] . There are four major strains of the virus causing infections ranging from croup and bronchiolitis to pneumonia. Disease burden is most significant with HPIV3 than with HPIV1 and HPIV2 [61] . No vaccine is yet available for this virus, but it would be beneficial to reduce the quantity of office or hospital visits caused by this infection [57, 62] . HPIV, like the other paramyxoviruses, is an enveloped non-segmented negative sense ssRNA virus. HPIV replicates in the cytoplasm and is transmitted by respiratory droplets or person-to-person contact. The genome of all paramyxoviruses encodes for six basic genes, with some variation amongst the members of this family. The basic mRNA is 3'-N-P-M-F-HN-L transcribed in sequence into separate RNAs [13, 58, 59] . The nucleocapsid is formed by the nucleocapsid protein (N). The large protein (L) and phosphoprotein (P) attach to the nucleocapsid and form the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase protein. The P protein can go through mRNA editing to produce C and V proteins that are important for virus interactions with the host immune system. The matrix protein (M) is essential for assembly and buddingoff of the virus during infection. The Fusion (F) protein and Hemagglutinin/ Neuroaminidase (H/HN) or G proteins are embedded in the viral membrane. H/ HN/G are the attachment proteins. They bind to sialic acids on the surface of the target cell and allow for internalization of the virus [13, 58, 59] . Binding of HN with sialic acid on cellular membrane proteins of host cells initiates the infectious process of HPIV, followed by F protein mediated fusion between the viral envelope and cell plasma membrane of the host cell. This fusion is followed by release of the viral genome bound by nucleocapsid proteins (nucleoprotein, phosphoprotein and RNAdependent RNA polymerase). The RNA-dependent RNA polymerase directs the Human Acute and Chronic Viruses: Host-Pathogen Interactions and Therapeutics generation of mRNA transcripts from viral genes and RNA genome replication. There is assembly of nucleocapsids that are packaged into virions with matrix proteins coating the inner surface of the viral envelope and surface F and HN projecting from the envelope [61] . The neuroaminidase portion of HN cleaves sialic acids on the target cell surface preventing re-infection of the same cell [58, 59] . HPIV 2 and 4 don't express C proteins, while HPIV1 and 3 don't express V proteins. V and C proteins are important for survival of the virus through suppression of IFN induction and cell signaling in HPIV infected cells [57] . All of the members of the Paramyxoviridae family cause cell-to-cell fusion, leading to the formation of multinucleated giant cells. This allows for viruses to easily transfer from cell to cell and evade the immune system [63] . HPIV has an incubation period of 2-6 days and lasts 1-2 days after symptoms begin. There are four major types of HPIV. Types 1-3 are the cause of severe lower respiratory tract infection in children and infants. Type 1 and 2 are the strains that can lead to croup. Type 3 is more likely to cause bronchiolitis or pneumonia in children. Less is known about type 4 HPIV but it seems to cause milder upper respiratory infections in children and adults [64] [65] [66] . HPIV is transmitted through contact or inhalation of respiratory droplets. HPIV travels through the paranasal sinuses, to the larynx and to the bronchi, which can then also lead to obstruction of the eustachian tube and cause otitis media [57] . Laryngotracheobronchitis, or more commonly known as croup, is the more severe manifestation of HPIV that is caused by inflammation, leading to sub-glottal swelling and blockage of the airways. The typical patient presents with hoarseness, cough, tachypnea, tachycardia, and suprasternal retractions [13, 57, 66] . Infants, the elderly, and immunocompromised patients are at an increased risk due to immature or decreased function in the immune system [57] . When HPIV circulates through the host respiratory system, it activates viral receptors such as melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5), RIG-I, and PKR. The activation of these receptors leads to transcription of IRF3 and NF-κB, as well as activation of IFNs that create an antiviral microenvironment. The major players that interfere with this system are HPIV proteins C and V. Both HPIV1 C protein and HPIV 2 V protein block IFN production and inhibit apoptosis through interference with MDA5 and laboratory of genetics and physiology 2 (LGP2) [57, 60] . The HPIV3 C protein decreases the innate immune response by slowing down viral replication. It also binds to STAT1 and prevents IFN signaling. HPIV 4 hasn't been shown to affect IFN signaling, and this could be a reason for its milder manifestations [57] . Additionally, HPIV C protein suppresses activation of NF-κB and IRF3 that play a role in inducing antiviral and inflammatory response to HPIV infection [57] . Secretory IgA secreted from the respiratory tract epithelium can be protective, but it is short lived. A couple or more of subsequent HPIV infections are required to enhance longevity of the mucosal IgA response [61] . Although IgA provides better correlate of immune protection, both serum and mucosal neutralizing antibodies that target HN and F glycoprotein provide long-term protection against HPIV [57] . CD8 + T and CD4 + T cells provide cellular immunity that can clear the virus [57] . Cellular immunity developed during primary HPIV infection can confer short-term protection against re-infection but this T cell-mediated viral clearance following reinfection wanes over a few months [61] . Histopathology of RSV respiratory complication, such as bronchiolitis and pneumonia are characterized by obstruction of small airways by inflammatory debris and edema as well as hyperplastic lymphoid follicles compressing the bronchioles [57] . HPIV 1-3 infect the apical superficial layer of epithelial cells of the respiratory tract, which not only contain the infection but also prevents antigen presentation, which could be one of the reasons for recurrent infections [57, 67] . HPIV can be inactivated by dryness and acid. RT-PCR of respiratory secretions is the best way to detect and quantify viral load [13] . Treatment of croup is supportive, which include steam nebulizer treatments, administration of racemic epinephrine, and monitoring for airway patency. Rarely, a patient may need to be intubated if inflammation is so severe as to compromise the airways. There are no specific antiviral medications used. No live or attenuated vaccines have been effective [57] . There are ongoing clinical trials sponsored by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID) and MedImmune to develop a vaccine against HPIV infection. The majority of the HPIV3 vaccine variants have been shown to be safe and immunogenic, however, only HPIV3cp45 is in phase II clinical trials. Phase I clinical trial of Bovine PIV3 (BPIV3) and HPIV3 vaccine revealed modest seroconversion rate for HPIV3. Recombinant Bovine/HPIV3, a bivalent vaccine containing RSV F protein and HPIV antigen, was well-tolerated in young children with a seroconversion of 100% in children under the age of 2 years [61] . Evaluation of live attenuated HPIV vaccine (rHPIV-1/84/del 170/942A) in adults and children revealed that the vaccine was effective in adults but ineffective in seronegative children because it was insufficiently immunogenic. Therefore, further research is necessary to develop a live-attenuated HPIV vaccine that is highly immunogenic and not overattenuated [68] . Because HPIV3 is the cause of the most serious form of respiratory tract infection in young children, HPIV3 vaccine would be ideal for infants who are at increased risk of HPIV infection [61] . Measles (MV) and mumps (MuV) are enveloped negative sense ssRNA viruses transmitted through aerosolized viral particles inhalation or contact with infected respiratory secretions [69] [70] [71] [72] . Because infection caused by measles and mumps virus is associated with high mortality and morbidity, it is of significant health burden particularly in regions with low MMR vaccination rates [73] . Immunoprophylaxis with MMR vaccines have significantly decreased the global incidence [74] . DCs and alveolar macrophages initiate the immune response to measles and mumps similar to other viruses that target the respiratory mucoepithelial cells. DC-SIGN on DCs mediate spread of infection, whereas CD46 expressed on all nucleated cells mediate viral interaction with epithelial cells [69, 75] . Clinical manifestations of measles-associated infection include respiratory tract infection, giant cell pneumonitis, encephalitis, conjunctivitis, and subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE). Mumps is associated with parotitis, orchitis, meningitis, encephalitis, transient sensorineural hearing loss, pancreatitis, pericarditis, and myocarditis [76] . Blockade of type I interferon production is associated with MV-induced suppression of antiviral innate immunity [69] . Protein C and V mediate immune evasion via blocking T cell and antibody effector function [63] . V protein blocks effector function of plasmacytoid DC generation [77, 78] . FDA-approved MMR vaccine provides long-lasting immunity against measles and mumps [79]. Measles and Mumps infections are most commonly seen in children and immunocompromised individuals; they are highly infectious and can cause serious long-term complications. With the advent of the Measles-Mumps-Rubella (MMR) vaccine as part of standard childhood vaccinations, the morbidity and mortality from these diseases have decreased worldwide. Measles, also called rubeola, is a worldwide, highly infectious viral disease that causes rash, respiratory symptoms, and long-term neurological disease. Despite vaccination programs, measles virus still caused 164,000 deaths in 2008 [74] , and according to one of the latest WHO reports, between 2013 and 2014 there were 280,795 cases and 40 cases per million population [80] . Measles is still endemic in many developing countries with poor health and sanitation systems, and where strict vaccine regiments aren't well established [81, 82] . The mortality associated with measles can be attributed to the immune suppression caused by MV, predisposing patients to fatal secondary respiratory or gastrointestinal infections [73] . During the period between 2000 and 2014, there was a decline in measles incidence by 73% worldwide, and estimated deaths due to measles decreased by 79%, from 546,800 to 114,900 [80] . The U.S. declared measles elimination in 2000, even though there have been outbreaks since then, mostly due to decreased herd immunity following refusal of vaccinations by parents [83] . According to epidemiologic data from the WHO, there are 23 genotypes of MeV: A, B1, B2, B3, C1, C2, D1, D2, D3, D4, D5, D6, D7, D8, D9, D10, E, F, G1, G2, G3, H1, and H2. In areas where measles is still endemic, such as Africa, there are only one or two different genotypes being transmitted (for example, West Africa only has infections with the B3 genotype). In countries where measles has been eliminated, there are many different genotypes seen during outbreaks due to exposure of the virus from outside of the country itself, such as in North America and Western Europe [84] . Mumps can cause infections ranging from mild parotitis to more severe systemic infections such as meningitis and encephalitis. With institution of MuV vaccination programs, infections have declined to <0.01 cases/100000 population in 2001 [76] . There have been some recent outbreaks of MuV, even among vaccinated populations, such as the one in 2009-2010 in NY/NJ. Recent outbreaks have identified genotype G as the culprit [85] . Currently, the most common genotypes worldwide are G, H, C, F, K, and D [86] . MuV usually causes self-limited infection with fatalities only related to the 1% of infections that lead to encephalitis [76] . MV and MuV are spherical, enveloped, negative sense, ssRNA viruses with only one serotype. They are human pathogens transmitted through aerosols or contact with infected respiratory secretions. In the temperate zones, outbreaks of both diseases usually occur in winter and early spring, when individuals are more likely to congregate in close quarters (e.g. inside schools in the winter) [69] [70] [71] [72] . Like other paramyxoviruses, their genome encodes NP, P, L, H, F, M, C, V proteins that allow it to attach and enter its target cells, replicate its genome, translate it, re-assemble, and infect other cells. The H and F proteins are key in the pathogenesis of measles for entry into target cells and spread to other host cells. The H glycoprotein is immunogenic, causing an immune response reaction, and conferring life-long immunity [70] . MuV, like HPIV, expresses the HN protein that allows it to interact with target host cells. MV also causes a transient suppression of the immune system, affecting T cell signaling and B cell production of antibodies, and predisposing affected individuals to superinfections with other pathogens. Proteins V and C have been implicated in this immunosuppression. MV can cause a persistent infection. It can remain dormant in cells such as those of the CNS, increasing the risk for postmeasles infection sequelae like encephalitis [63] . MuV spreads through viremia and can affect multiple organ systems. Unlike other viruses in the paramyxoviridae family, MuV causes a lytic infection of epithelial cells of the URT. Cellmediated immunity is necessary for controlling infection. Protein V is crucial in immune system evasion [76, 85] . Measles is a systemic infection. MV typically has an incubation period of 10-14 days. The first signs of the disease are fever and respiratory distress, or the 3 Cs: cough, coryza, and conjunctivitis. One of the cardinal features of MV infection is the appearance of Koplik spots in the buccal mucosa, which are blue-grey spots on the inside of the mouth; they usually appear 1-2 days before the onset of the other common feature of measles, the maculopapular rash. This rash extends from the head and neck, including the face, and moves downward over the whole body, eventually coalescing; it usually appears 14 days post infection, and can last up to a week [69, 70, 74, 87] . The presence of the rash signifies a good immune response to the virus replicating in the skin. Someone infected with measles is infectious even before the onset of the rash, making it difficult to contain the spread of the virus. Patients also remain infectious a few days after the advent of the rash. A patient is most infectious when the respiratory symptoms are most severe due to its mode of transmission through respiratory secretions [63] (Fig. 2) . Giant cell pneumonitis can be a more severe presentation of measles if patients have a dysfunctional cell-mediated immune response, are immunosuppressed, or malnourished. Another possible but rare outcome is encephalitis, which usually Measles virus infects respiratory tract epithelium by attaching to CD46 and nectin 4 expressed on epithelial cells. This is followed by local replication in the epithelium and subsequent spread via lymphatics to secondary lymphoid tissue and non-lymphoid tissue. Measles virus also interacts with SLAM receptors on lymphocytes in the respiratory tract to facilitate entry and subsequent replication in the lymphocytes. The virus spreads via infected lymphocytes and viremia to other parts of the host presents 2 weeks after the initial infection and can include headache, seizures, and fever. This is usually due to an autoimmune response against myelinated neurons. Subacute sclerosing panecephalitis (SSPE) is an even more rare sequela caused by a persistent infection with a measles virus variant. This presents with seizures but also with progressive behavioral, motor and cognitive dysfunction, causing death 5-15 years post-viral infection. These serious complications have diminished since the introduction of the MMR vaccine [69, 74, 81] . MuV also causes systemic infection but one third of infections are usually asymptomatic. It is rarely seen in countries that promote the live attenuated vaccine but without vaccine, 90% people will be infected with MuV by 15 years of age [13, 76] . Symptomatic MuV initially presents with a mild fever, headache, and malaise. Once infection in the respiratory tract has been established, MuV can infect the parotid gland by travelling through the Stensen duct or by viremia. Parotitis is usually bilateral and accompanied by high fever. It appears 2-3 weeks after exposure to the virus and lasts a few days. MuV causes a self-limiting illness but if viremia occurs, it can lead to orchitis, meningitis, or encephalitis, as well as possible spread of infection to the ovaries and thyroid [76] . Orchitis is the most common manifestation outside of the respiratory tract: it is usually unilateral and affects 10-20% of post-pubertal men who have been infected with Mumps. Mumps orchitis can be one of the causes of hypofertility, but rarely causes sterility. MuV is neurotropic, with 10% of infections leading to meningitis and <1% encephalitis. It has been postulated that MuV spreads to the brain parenchyma either through viremia or CSF from the choroid plexus. Cases of pancreatitis, pericarditis, and myocarditis due to MuV infection have also been reported. Unilateral sensorineural hearing loss has also been observed in about 4% of MuV infections, but this is transient, and children usually recover well [76] . The main players in the course of measles virus infection are dendritic cells (DCs), alveolar macrophages, T cells, B cells, and mature DCs. The main receptors involved in the spread of infection are DC-SIGN; CD150/signaling-lymphocyte-activation molecule (SLAM); normally expressed on activated T and B cells, macrophages, and mature DCs; CD46, a complement regulatory molecule that is expressed on all nucleated cells, and nectin-4/ poliovirus receptor-related 4 (PVRLA4), which is part of the E-Cadherin family and is expressed within the adherens junctions of epithelial cells [69, 73] . Wild-type measles virus infects cells mainly using SLAM, but vaccine strains also bind to CD46 [70] . MV uses the H and F glycoproteins to enter alveolar macrophages and DCs. MV-H binds to DC-SIGN, which causes these cells to increase expression of CD150/SLAM through activation of acid sphingomyelinase [69, 75] . MV-H binds to SLAM, causing a conformational change in F, which allows membrane fusion to occur. Infected DCs and alveolar macrophages travel to draining lymph nodes where they encounter and infect activated T and B cells, allowing the virus to replicate, and spread. Infected T and B cells exit the lymph node and travel to secondary lymphoid sites and then disseminate to other tissues, causing some of the clinical symptoms already discussed [69] . In the respiratory tract, virions coating T cells, B cells, and DCs enter the basolateral surface of the epithelium via the nectin-4/PVRLA4 receptor at junctions, disrupting the barrier and allowing for widespread infection to occur [69, 73, 88, 89] . Interactions of host proteins such as the heat-shock protein 72 (HSP72), casein kinase II, and Peroxiredoxin1 (Prdx1) with MV proteins have been shown to cause an increase in viral replication [69] . HSP72 interacts with N protein, causing increased levels of MV RNA expression [90] ; Prdx1 interacts with the N and P proteins, altering the MV-N-RdRp complex, and consequently enhancing mRNA synthesis and regulation [91] . MV is also associated with lymphopenia; lymphocyte numbers go back to normal about a week after infection resolves, but the immune suppression extends for several weeks more [92] . MV interaction with host immune cells causes a decrease in production of IFN-α and IFN-β, which are normally necessary to mount a good innate immune response against viruses, and this could be one of the causes for the immunosuppression [69] . When the virus enters the host cell, its RNA is sensed by RNA helicases like RIG-I, MDA5, and LGP2. MV P protein binds to MDA5 and opposes the synthesis of IFNs, especially IFN-α. When LGP2 interacts with the V protein, RIG-I is inhibited. In addition, MV P protein also decreases the signals through toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) [69] . These interactions down-regulate the host's sensors for viral particles, diminishing the immune response. Usually, virus RNA activates transcription factors such as interferon regulatory factors 3 and 7 (IRF3 and IRF7), and nuclear factor of the kappa light chain enhancer of B cells (NF-κB), which causes the secretion of IFN-β and other inflammatory cytokines. In plasmacytoid DCs, V protein interacts with IRF3 and IRF7 and inhibits their action. P, V, and C proteins also individually bind NF-κB subunits to inhibit signaling through the JAK/STAT pathway [74, 93] . Additional mechanisms contributing to the immunosuppression include the persistence of an immature profile of DCs and a switch from a Th1 to Th2 immune response. Immature DCs have decreased expression of co-stimulatory molecules for T-cell activation and a reduced level of CCR7 expression, preventing them from homing to secondary lymphoid sites and stimulating T cells [77, 78] . The Th2 immune response decreases IFN-γ secretion as well as the immunological synapse proteins such as plexins and neuropilins that aid in T cell activation, while increasing secretion of IL-10, downregulating the immune response as a whole [77, 94, 95] . MuV usually causes mild parotitis, but there are strains that cause infections of the meninges or brain parenchyma. MuV, like other members of its family, has specific proteins that aid in establishing or spreading the infection. The smallhydrophobic (SH) proteins have been shown to suppress TNF-α production [76] . Also, V protein interrupts the IFN signalling pathway causing the degradation of STAT1, and blocking the production of IL-6 by degradation of STAT3 [85] . No specific set of proteins have been found that transforms an MuV strain to a neurovirulent strain; viral loads in the CSF have been correlated with severity of infection [96] . Knowing the immune status of patients is critical in managing a measles infection. It is beneficial for patients with immune-deficiencies to receive immunoglobulins after measles exposure [87] . Immunocompromised patients should not be administered an attenuated live-virus measles vaccine; exceptions exist for HIV patients who have a high enough CD4+ T cell count [87] . There are no efficacious treatments for Measles, but IFN-α, ribavirin and other antiviral therapies have been used. Administration of vitamin A has been proven to reduce morbidity and mortality in those affected by MV. Usually a physician will give daily doses for two consecutive days based on age and nutritional status. If a patient is already vitamin A deficient, a longer course of therapy will be necessary [97] . Because of passive immunity acquired from maternal antibodies, infants are protected from measles virus for a few months after birth. Because MV has only one serotype, and the immunogenic H glycoprotein remains constant, the vaccine created years ago is still effective and protection is maintained [81, 87] . The measles vaccine is a live-attenuated viral vaccine; there were three strains that were developed -the Edmonston vaccine licensed in 1963, the Schwarz vaccine in 1965, and the final Moraten strain in 1968. Each time, the vaccine has been progressively more attenuated, causing less side effects [70] . MuV can be recovered from saliva, urine, pharynx, secretions from the Stensen duct, and CSF. Serologic tests or ELISA can be done to look for a 4-fold increase in antibody titer when suspecting an acute infection. A live attenuated vaccine, together with Measles and Rubella, was introduced in 1967, and is part of the recommended childhood immunizations [13, 76] . Studies have been conducted that compare the injected versus the aerosolized MV vaccine, but the latter has been found to be inferior to the original. Many developing countries where measles is still endemic would benefit from a vaccine that is easier to administer, easier to store, and less expensive, therefore more studies are needed to explore other vaccine options [79] . Another ongoing area of research is the use of measles virus for oncolytic therapy. The receptor tropism of MV makes it a great candidate to target many cancer cells due to over expression of CD46 in cancer cells (this receptor is used by the Edmonston-B vaccine measles strain), and especially lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinomas, as well as ovarian and breast cancers due to their high expression of Nectin-4. The syncytia formation induced by MV is an asset in the spread of MV engineered to target tumor cells to allow for infection of many cancer cells efficiently. In addition, MV strictly replicates in the cytoplasm and does not interact with host genome eliminating potential safety issues with recombination and transformation [98] . "Virotherapy" [99] has been proven to be safe in humans; however, trials are still ongoing to prove its true efficacy. Improving specificity to tumor cells while evading preformed immune mechanisms against the virus is a challenge [99] . For example, in the case of measles virus, the H and F proteins can be slightly modified into glycoproteins of a virus of the same genus to avoid neutralizing antibodies present from previous vaccination or infection. To improve efficacy, but maintain safety, miRNAs can be used to augment viral replication in tumor-specific cells already expressing miRNAs, increasing the oncolytic effect of the virus [99] . Lastly, using viruses to carry chemo-, radio-, and immune-therapy genes could improve overall efficacy of these therapies. There are ongoing Phase I clinical trials using NIS-expressing measles virus (human sodium-iodide symporter) for ovarian cancer, myeloma, mesothelioma, and head and neck cancers. This kind of engineered therapy not only uses radioactive isotope targeting for cancer cells, but also allows for in-vivo tracking of viral replication in tumor cells using single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and positron emission tomography (PET) . RSV is an enveloped negative sense ssRNA that contains 10 genes that encode 9 nonstructural proteins found in infected cells and virus. It also encodes 2 structural proteins that are also found in infected cells [100] . RSV forms syncytia in infected mucoepithelial tissue of the respiratory tract. Because RSV causes fatal respiratory tract infections in infants, patients with cardiopulmonary abnormalities, elderly individuals, and immunocompromised individuals, it is of significant public health concern [13, 65] . Innate immunity is mediated by type I interferon and NK cells while CTL provide cell-mediated immunity against the virus. NS1 and NS2 are important viral proteins that block type I interferon via blockade of interferon regulatory factor 3. RSV impairs both plasmacytoid DC effector function of producing type I interferon microenvironment and myeloid-derived DC presentation function. RSV also blocks signaling via TLR and RIG-1 with consequential reduction of proinflammatory antiviral cytokines. Furthermore, it suppresses cell-mediated cytotoxicity via blockade of CD8 + T cell and Th1 cell effector function [14] . Ribavirin is a guanosine analogue that is therapeutically beneficial for high risk patients, particularly preterm infants and patients with cardiopulmonary disease. Premature infants also benefit from the use of antibody prophylaxis [13, 65] . Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) is the major cause of upper and lower respiratory tract infection in young children and elderly individuals [101] . It is associated with pulmonary complications such as bronchiolitis, pneumonia-related illness, and exacerbations of underlying pulmonary diseases [101, 102] . RSV is highly contagious and prevalent in the winter months. In 2005, RSV caused 34 million cases of Lower RTIs (LRTI) in children less than 5 years of age [14, 65] . RSV causes RTIs, with no serious long-term sequelae or intensive treatments. However, it still causes a considerable portion of children hospitalizations and health burden. Complications from RSV are only seen in developing countries [65] . Infants with poorly developed airway system or those born pre-term are at higher risk of RSV infection; also, a low maternal antibody titer has been correlated to higher RSV infection risk. Exposure to second-hand smoke, pollution, and daycare exposure are additional environmental factors that increase the risk of infection with RSV. There is no vaccine available and recurrence is high throughout life, especially in the elderly [65] . Some studies suggest a correlation between bronchiolitis in infants and asthma later in life, but usually RSV does not cause long-term consequences [103] . RSV poses a significant health burden because it is linked to the development and exacerbation of airway hyper-responsiveness in infected children [102] . Additionally, RSV is of significant health burden because reinfection with RSV is common due to inability of the infection to confer long-term protective immunity [101] . G proteins expressed by RSV bind to target cells but don't possess hemagglutinin action [58, 59] . RSV also expresses unique proteins that allow it to interact with the immune system: these are the non-structural proteins (NS1 and NS2) [104] . The fusion (F) and matrix (M) proteins are highly conserved between RSV serotypes; however, surface glycoprotein (G) is not fully conserved between RSV serotypes [101] . SH proteins have been studied in RSV and mumps in relation to their interactions with the immune system as well. RSV is the most common cause of acute respiratory tract infections in infants and young children. Everyone below the age of 2 will be infected at least once, and it often recurs, especially in the elderly. It may be fatal in premature infants, persons with underlying lung disease, and immunocompromised people [13, 65] . RSV is transmitted through contact or respiratory droplets; it invades the respiratory epithelium directly, causing immunologically mediated cell injury. This can lead to necrosis of the bronchi and bronchioles, and eventually to plugs of mucus, fibrin, and necrotic material in the smaller airways. Infants are innately at an increased risk from RSV infection due to the small size of their airways. This can lead to respiratory impairment [65, 104] . The typical patient usually presents with a low-grade fever, tachypnea, tachycardia, and expiratory wheezes over the lungs. Bronchiolitis is usually self-limited, but it can be dangerous in infants. Humoral immune response restricts reinfection of RSV via the action of neutralizing antibodies against major surface glycoproteins. The immunopathology of RSV associated with pulmonary inflammation is attributed to Th2-derived cytokines that induce eosinophilia in the lungs of RSV infected individuals [100] . RSV can inhibit the production of IL-12 and IFN-γ by DCs with consequential suppression of Th1 polarization and creation of an immunosuppressive microenvironment that favors viral persistence [6] . NS1 and NS2 proteins both decrease the maturation of DCs, and therefore their ability to further stimulate the immune system. NS1 suppresses proliferation and activation of CD103+ CD8 + T cells and Th17 cells, which are important in anti-viral cytotoxicity and memory, while also promoting activation of the Th2 pathway, with increased production of IL-4 and other interleukins that are not helpful in fighting viral infections [105] . Other studies have shown that RSV infection impairs the ability of pDCs to produce IFN-α, IL-6, TNF-α, CCL3, CCL4, and CCL5 in response to TLR9 interaction. RSV also impair mDC presentation to CD4 + T cells and production of other cytokines [14] . RSV expresses proteins that allow it to evade the immune system and establish infection. G protein contributes to immune evasion and subsequent continued viral replication and/or viral persistence in the host by modifying the magnitude of chemokine and cytokine generated in response to RSV infection. Additionally, it modifies immune cells expressing CX3CR1 receptors and induction of Substance P, which contributes to dysregulation of the immune response to RSV [102] . G protein cannot elicit a CTL response because it lacks a MHC class I restricted epitope, and as such, immune response to G protein is associated with Th2 polarization and eosinophilia [100] . NS1 and NS2 proteins block IFN regulatory factor 3 activation, inhibiting type I IFN induced signaling, leading to a block of IFN-α and IFN-β production from the target cells. NS1 and NS2 have also been found to activate phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway, inhibiting apoptosis of the infected cells. In addition, RSV inhibits TLR signaling and RIG-I signaling, leading to decreased production of other immune modulators such as NF-κB and other cytokines [65, 105] . Antigenic variation could play a minor role in immune evasion. Inhibition of T cell activation by fusion protein is a major contribution to immune evasion by RSV. Additionally, the secretion of soluble G protein that shifts response from Th1-mediated immunity to a Th2-mediated immunopathologic response is another immune evasion strategy used by RSV [100] . Treatment of healthy infants/children is usually supportive, consisting of administration of oxygen, intravenous fluids, and possibly steam nebulizer treatments. Ribavirin has been used for the treatment of high-risk patients such as pre-term infants, or those with poor respiratory tract development; it is administered through a nebulizer [65, 106] . Palivizumab is a humanized immunoglobulin G monoclonal antibody that targets the fusion protein of RSV. Prior to FDA-approval of palivizumab, RespiGram (RSV-immune globulin) was used as passive immunoprophylaxis in high risk children under the age of 2 year (100). Palivizumab and Respiratory Syncytial Virus Immune Globulin Intravenous (RSV-IGIV) are FDA approved passive immunoprophylactic agents for RSV infection in infants and young children with chronic cardiopulmonary disease [107] . If hospitalized, isolation of the infected child is crucial to containing the infection. Infection-control methods include hand washing as well as wearing protective gowns, gloves, and mask [13, 65] . When a vaccine was introduced in the 1960s, it actually caused more severe infections when patient was re-exposed to the virus, and was therefore not approved as a preventative measure [65] . One of the challenges for RSV vaccine development is to create a vaccine that maximizes immune protection and minimizes Th2 mediated immunopathology. Another major hurdle for RSV vaccine development for the pediatric population is the infants immature immune system and presence of maternal antibodies that could suppress vaccine-induced immunity [100] . The original FI-RSV vaccine was associated with vaccine-enhanced RSV disease (ERD) and it was believed that it induced the deposition of immune complexes and complement components in small airways of the affected infants. It was also associated with the development of Th2-mediated immunopathology with eosinophilia in the lungs of these infants who received the vaccination [108] . Subunit RSV-A vaccines containing purified Fusion, matrix, and G proteins have been demonstrated to be safe and immunogenic in the over 65-age group [101] . It has been reported that RSV vaccines using DNA plasmids that express fusion proteins or glycoproteins had low immunogenicity with limited immune protection [100] . Because of the lack of vaccine-ERD in individuals with memory immune response to natural infection with RSV and potential adverse effects of developing vaccine-ERD, only RSV vaccines that induce optimal antibody response and Th1 cell-mediated immune response should be developed particularly for antigenicnaïve infants. However, vaccine-induced ERD is not of great concern for patients with pre-existing RSV immunity [108] . RSV disease in infants is of high public health concern, and as such, there are benefits of providing child-bearing women RSV vaccination with the intent of generating RSV-specific maternal antibodies that provide immune protection and reduce maternal-infant transmission of RSV and acquiring RSV infection in the first months of life. High levels of RSV-specific maternal antibody titer correlates with reduced incidence of RSV in infants. There is ongoing research to develop vaccines for women in the third trimester of pregnancy such as RSV F nanoparticle vaccine which is currently in the final phase of the clinical trial [109] . It is of note that RSV infection does not confer long-term protective immunity, therefore, there is ongoing research to determine effect of RNAi on host immune response to RSV reinfection with the same or different strain [102] . Future directions in approaching the development of RSV vaccines should focus on vaccines that can induce CD8 + T-cell responses in antigen-naïve infants to clear RSV and produce IFN-γ to promote a Th1-biased cell-mediated immune response [108] . Thus, a deep understanding of the immune evasion strategy used by RSV and RSV-associated immunopathology are required in developing a safe and effective RSV vaccine [100] . Coronavirus (CoV) was first identified in the 1960's and there are seven human CoV (HCoV) of medical importance. In the winter of 2020, the WHO declared the disease caused by SARS-CoV2 a public health emergency of international concern. On March 11, 2020, The WHO declared the disease caused by SARS-CoV2 a pandemic. The transmission of CoV involves animal-to-human as well as human-tohuman transmission [110] . Coronavirus is a positive-sense, single-stranded RNA virus with club-shaped spikes emanating from the viral envelope [110] . Coronaviruses are subdivided into four genera based on phylogenetic clustering. There genera are alphacoronavirus (alphaCoV), betacoronavirus (betaCoV), deltacoronavirus (deltaCoV), and gammacoronavirus (gammaCoV) [111, 112] . Host cellular receptors such as aminopeptidase N (APN), angiotensin converting enzyme 2 receptor (ACE2), dipeptidyl-peptidase 4 (DPP4), and 9-O-acetylated sialic acid via their interaction with spike protein of CoV play a role in pathogenesis and tissue tropism [111] . Many alphaCoV bind to aminopeptidase N (APN) on host cell receptors in order to gain entry into permissive human cells. SARS-CoV and HCoV-NL63 bind to ACE2 receptors to enter into host cells. MERS-CoV utilize dipeptidyl-peptidase 4 (DPP4) for host cell receptor binding [113] . The earlier human CoV caused up to 30% of mild self-limiting respiratory tract infection on an annual basis [113] . HCoV-229E, HCoV-NL63, HCoV HKU1, and HCoV-OC43 cause mild respiratory tract infection, which can progress to lower respiratory tract infection in elderly and immunocompromised individuals. Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) is usually associated with SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infection [114] . It is important to note that a mild self-limiting CoV infection will run its course. RT-PCT is a diagnostic test of choice for identifying human CoV [113, 115] . NK cells and type I interferon (IFN) provide antiviral innate immunity whereas antibodies such as IgG provide humoral immunity. However, humoral immune response mediated by IgM, IgA, and IgG is short lived. CD4 + T cells and CD8 + T cells provide cellular immunity [116] . Nonstructural and accessory proteins of HCoV interfere with antiviral innate immunity [111] . There are no FDA-approved antivirals for human CoV. The main treatment is generally supportive [114] . Because of the high mortality of SARS-CoV2 in highrisk individuals based on advancing age and pre-existing conditions, there is an urgent need to develop antiviral therapeutics and vaccines. Coronaviruses were not considered highly pathogenic until the outbreak of two strains, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, which had zoonotic origins. SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV were responsible for the outbreaks in 2002 and 2012 respectively. The newly emerged SARS-CoV-2 triggered the 2019 pandemic causing CoVID-19 [117] . HCoV are responsible for up to 30% of common cold, which are self-limiting and harmless infections [111, 118] . The transmission of CoV involves animalto-human as well as human-to-human transmission. The main mode of human-to-human transmission is through aerosolized droplets containing viral particles from coughing and sneezing as well as contact with surfaces contaminated with human CoV. The reproduction number (RO -R naught) of human CoV is more than 2.0, in which each infected individual can transmit the infection to more than 2 individuals [110, 119, 120] . The SARS epidemic of 2002-2003, which infected 8098 people across 29 countries and left 774 people dead, was caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus, SARS-COV [121] . The Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) is a virus that causes severe respiratory disease and has proven to be highly lethal with a fatality rate of nearly 40% [122] . MERS-CoV was first isolated and discovered in April 2012 from a 60-year-old man who was initially admitted to a Jordanian hospital for acute pneumonia, but subsequently died 11 days later from respiratory and renal failure [123] . Followed by MERS diagnoses in three hospital patients in the United Kingdom, cluster outbreaks of MERS-CoV in hospitals across Saudi Arabia were retrospectively diagnosed and raised a global concern as the number of MERS cases began to spread to countries outside of Saudi Arabia. As of January 2020, a global total of 2519 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS and 866 MERSassociated fatalities across 27 countries have been reported [124, 125] . MERS-CoV transmission can occur between dromedary camels, camels-to-humans, and human-to-human, although human-to-human transmission is thought to be rare as it requires close contact and exposure to significant amounts of viral shedding [126] . This observation is substantiated by the majority of MERS-CoV infections occurring within hospitals where transmission between patients accounted for 62-79% of infection routes and transmission between family members accounted for 13-21% of infections [125] . Coronavirus belongs to the subfamily Orthocoronavirinae, family Coronaviridae, order Nidovirales. Coronavirus are categorized into four genera based on phylogenetic clustering. The genera include alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, deltacoronavirus, and gammacoronavirus. Human coronaviruses are either alphaCoV or betaCoV [111, 112] . Coronavirus has a helically symmetrical nucleocapsid and an envelope with club-shaped spike glycoprotein emanating from the viral envelope [111, [127] [128] [129] . It contains a non-segmented positive-sense, single-stranded RNA genome of 30 kb with a 5′ cap and 3′ poly (A) tail. The first two-thirds of the genome, constituting the replicase gene consisting of open reading frame 1a and ORF1b, is responsible for coding nonstructural proteins (NSP) [113] . Nonstructural proteins of HCoV interfere with antiviral innate immunity [111] as well as play a role in RNA synthesis and processing [130] . It is important to note that CoV undergoes recombination using both homologous and nonhomologous recombination [131] . The final third of the genome encodes structural and accessory proteins [113] . Spike (S), Envelope (E), Membrane (M), and Nucleocapsid (N) protein are structural proteins, which play a role in virion assembly and infection [114] . The Spike protein of HCoV is involved in receptor binding via the action of receptor binding domain (RBD) in S1 subunit of Spike protein binding to host receptor and viral fusion process via the S2 subunit of Spike protein [132] . Membrane and Envelope protein play a role in the formation of the viral envelope. E protein promotes release of the virus [113, 133] . Nucleocapsid protein is involved in viral pathogenesis and it inhibits production of type I interferon (IFN) [134, 135] . The accessory proteins play a role in viral pathogenesis [113] . There is more genome sequence alignment of homology in the NSP coding region than in the structural protein coding region, which translates into the NSP region being more conserved compared to the structural protein. This may explain the adaptability of the virus to a new host, this adaptability could be attributed to the diverse nature of the structure protein region [114] . MERS-CoV is a zoonotic virus, and serological studies determined the source of the virus was dromedary camels. This animal is the most likely reservoir for MERS-CoV [126] . Phylogenetic studies of 182 full-length genomes from humans and dromedary camels revealed greater than 99% sequence identity between these two species, suggesting low rates of genetic mutation and the potential for MERS-CoV to infect many mammalian species [122] . HCoV can survive on surfaces for days and remain viable in aerosols for hours [136] . HCoV lose their infectivity when exposed to ultraviolet radiation and high temperature, whereas lipid solvents inactivate the virus [110] . AlphaCoV and betaCoV usually infect mammals whereas gammaCoV and delta-CoV have been known to infect birds and fish. HCoV-229E and HCoV-NL63 are alphaCoV whereas SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and HCoV-HKU1 are betaCoV [114] . The clinical manifestations of Human CoV include mild upper respiratory tract infection, fever, nonproductive dry cough, conjunctivitis, and croup in 80% of individuals and severe forms of respiratory illness with dyspnea in less than 20% of infected individuals. Severe forms of HCoV infection is characterized by blood oxygen saturation of ≤93% and/or lung infiltrates. The critical form of the disease is characterized by respiratory failure, septic shock, and/or multiple organ dysfunction [137] . HCoV-OC43, HCoV-NL63, HCoV-229E, and HCoV-HKU1 are Human CoV that cause mild, self-limiting upper respiratory tract infection in immunocompetent individuals as well as lower respiratory tract infection in infants, elderly individuals, and immunocompromised individuals. SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV2, and MERS-CoV are betaCoV that cause severe forms of respiratory tract infection and extra-respiratory manifestations with varying rates of mortality [110, 114] . Individuals infected with SARS-CoV initially present with fever, a non-productive cough, sore throat, and myalgia, with dyspnea becoming a prominent feature within 7-14 days of the illness. The second phase of the illness results in dyspnea and hypoxia with continued fever often accompanied by diarrhea. In some cases, they develop acute respiratory distress syndrome often requiring mechanical respiration by the third week. Death from SARS-CoV may occur anywhere from 4-108 days post infection depending on patient age, immune status, and underlying conditions [138] . It is important to note that patients infected with MERS-CoV can be asymptomatic or experience acute illness such as coughing, diarrhea, and vomiting with most hospitalized patients commonly present with pneumonia, acute respiratory disease syndrome (ARDS), and multiorgan failure [126] . Individuals that are more susceptible to the development of severe forms of the infection associated with SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV2, and MERS-CoV have comorbidities that include obesity, diabetes, and lung disease with risk factors associated with male sex and older age. Due to these complications, 50-89% of MERS patients require intensive care wherein 75% of these patients present with at least one comorbidity. Additionally, patients with comorbidities account for 86% of MERS-associated fatalities [122] where the overall fatality rate is approximately 36% [125] . Reinfection occurs in the presence of antibodies to the virus [139] . The host cellular receptors for HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-HKU1 is 9-O-Acetylated sialic acid. ACE2 receptor is the host cellular receptor for HCoV-NL63 and SARS-CoV. Human aminopeptidase N (CD13) is a host receptor for HCoV-229E, whereas DPP4 is the host cell receptor for MERS-CoV [111] . Host cell furin-like protease cleave the spike protein into two subunits noted as S1 and S2 subunits [113, [127] [128] [129] . Either cathepsin or TMPRRS2 mediate the acid-dependent proteolytic cleavage of S protein that facilitate entry of the virus into the host cytosol. Cleavage of the S protein yields a receptor binding domain (RBD) and fusion domain of the S protein [113, 140] . The interaction between the S1 subunit of the spike glycoprotein with the host cell receptor promotes attachment of the virus, which in turn, triggers a conformational change in the Spike protein. This is followed by a second cleavage at S2 protein that exposes the fusion peptide [113, 140] . The fusion peptide inserts into the host cell membrane, which facilitates the mixing of membrane lipids of the virus envelope and host cell membrane to mediate fusion between viral membrane and host cell membrane [111, 113] . This conformational change also triggers the formation of a fusion pore that promotes entry of the virus into the host cell [141] . The fusion allows for the virus to utilize receptor-mediated endocytosis to gain access into the cytoplasm of the host cell via an endosomal pathway [111] . Fusion between viral membrane and cell membrane as well as endosomal pathway of entry is made possible by the acidic pH of the cellular microenvironment and pH-dependent endosomal cysteine protease cathepsin [111, 142] . The non-endosomal pathway of entry into the host cell is used by some CoVs. Transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) and TTPRSS11D are host cell proteases that activate and cleave Spike protein into S1 and S2 subunits to facilitate the non-endosomal pathway of viral entry at the host cell membrane during HCoV-229E and SARS-CoV infection [111, 142] . Additionally, proteases such as trypsin and thermolysin facilitates the adsorption of SARS-CoV onto the cell surface to mediate the nonendosomal direct entry from the site of viral attachment. It was demonstrated that protease-mediated entry of SARS-CoV from the cell surface was more efficient than the endosomal pathway of virus entry [143] . Interferon inducible transmembrane protein (IFTM) is a host restriction factor that blocks entry of enveloped viruses by inhibiting the fusion between the viral envelope and the plasma membrane of the host cell. These host cell restriction factors are induced by type I and II interferon [111, 141] . IFITM3 accumulation at the site of fusion of viral membrane and host membrane prevents the formation of a fusion pore, thereby trapping the virus in the hemifusion stage [141, 144] . The fusion is followed by the release of viral genome into the host cytoplasm [113] . Following entry into the host cell, the uncoating process in the cytoplasm involves removing the viral capsid to release the viral genomic RNA into the cytoplasm [111, 145] . The positive-sense viral genomic RNA is used directly as a messenger RNA template for translation of polyprotein 1a/1b (pp1a and pp1b) [111] . CoV have six open-reading frames (ORF), of which, the first two-thirds of the CoV genome consists of two overlapping open reading frames ORF1a and ORF1b that undergo translation to yield polyprotein1a and polyprotein1b [111] . ORF1b undergoes ribosomal frameshift to yield polyprotein1b [130] . The subsequent cleavage of these polypeptides by viral encoded protease yield 16 non-structural proteins that assemble to form the replication-transcription complex (RTC) [146] . The RTC then localizes to modified intracellular membranes derived from the rough endoplasmic reticulum [147] . The RTC drives replication of viral genomic RNA and synthesis of subgenomic mRNA. RTC consists of RNA-dependent RNA polymerase and other nonstructural proteins, which are involved in the synthesis of viral RNA [146] . Papain-like protease, serine type protease, and main protease are proteases that cleave the replicase polyproteins. Many non-structural proteins make up the replicase-transcriptase complex (RTC). NSP1 promotes the degradation of cellular mRNA [148] . It also inhibits IFN signaling [114] . NSP3 is a large multi-domain transmembrane protein that promotes cytokine expression and blocks host innate immune response [113, 114, 149] . NSP5 encodes main protease (Mpro), which plays a role in cleaving viral polyprotein [113, 150] . NSP7, NSP8, and NSP12 assemble to form the NSP7/NSP8/NSP12 tripartite complex known as the RNAdependent RNA polymerase [151] . NSP9 is an RNA binding protein [152] , whereas NSP12 is the catalytic subunit of RNA-dependent RNA polymerase [113, 153, 154] . NSP13 is a multifunctional protein that possess RNA helicase and 5′ triphosphatase activity [113, 151, 155] . NSP14 is a bifunctional protein that has proofreading and 5'-RNA capping activity [156] . The association between NSP7/NSP8/ NSP12 polymerase complex and NSP14 is required during replication of the viral genomic RNA. Exoribonuclease subunit of NSP14 mediates proofreading activity, which is required during replication to maintain the genomic RNA integrity from damage or mutation [157] . N7-guanine methyltransferase is required for viral RNA capping and methylation [156, 158] . NSP15 evades the innate sensor of dsRNA [114] . NSP10/16 complex plays a role in the viral RNA methylation [159] . The final third of the viral genomic RNA at the 3′ consists of ORFs that encode structural and accessory proteins. Furthermore, RTC is required for transcribing the full length of positive-strand genomic RNA into a full length negative-strand RNA template, which are required for generating new genomic RNA and negative-strand subgenomic RNAs. It is important to note that discontinuous transcription yields negative strand subgenomic RNA. These subgenomic RNAs are transcribed into subgenomic mRNAs, which are translated into structural and accessory proteins [111, 114, 145, 146, 160, 161] . Additionally, negative sense subgenomic serves as a template for synthesizing positive sense subgenomic RNA [162] . The four main structural proteins, which include Spike, Envelope, Membrane, and Nucleocapsid proteins, protein along with accessory proteins are translated from subgenomic RNA [111, 163, 164] . S protein is a viral attachment protein that facilitates attachment of the virus to a host cell receptor [114] . M protein has three transmembrane domains. It gives the virus its shape and binds to the nucleocapsid. M protein plays a role in the assembly of the virion [113, 165] and promoting curvature of the viral membrane [114] . The E protein is required for viral pathogenesis and plays a role in the assembly and release of the virus [113, 114, 133] . Nucleocapsid protein is a multifunctional protein that enhances the efficiency of viral transcription and assembly. Nucleocapsid protein also plays a role in viral envelope formation and budding process. It interacts with other structural proteins and host membrane derived from the site of budding to facilitate assembly of the virus [166] . Nucleocapsid protein binds to non-structural protein 3 (NSP3) and M protein. It is present in the viral nucleocapsid [113] . The assembly process of the virion involves the encapsulation of the viral genomic RNA in nucleocapsid protein and the subsequent interaction of Nucleocapsid protein with Spike, Envelope, and Membrane proteins. This assembly process occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi-intermediate compartment [147] . Following virion assembly, it is transported in cell surface vesicles and leaves the infected host cell via budding of the virus through the membrane. Interaction between M protein and E protein induces the budding and egress of the virion in vesicles. The vesicles containing the virion are released from the cell surface by exocytosis [111, 113] (Fig. 3) . Host-HCoV interaction involves strategies to mount an effective defense against the virus and modalities utilized by the virus to evade the host immune response. The innate immune system uses pattern recognition receptors to detect pathogenassociated molecular patterns expressed by the HCoV. Toll-like receptors and retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLR) are pattern recognition receptors that engage HCoV PAMPs. Viral PAMPs such as dsRNA are recognized by TLR3 whereas ssRNA is recognized by both TLR7 and TLR8. Interaction between viral PAMPS and TLR induce the recruitment of MyD88 and TRIF, which in turn, stimulate the MAPK and NFκB pathway to facilitate the production of IFN and pro-inflammatory cytokines [111, 167] . RIG-I and melanoma differentiation associated factor 5 (MDA5) are members of RLR, which interact with viral RNA to induce conformational changes, resulting in the recruitment and the activation of mitochondrial antiviral signaling adaptor (MAVS). The activated MAVS phosphorylates interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1) and IRF3 to induce the expression of type I interferons as well as phosphorylate NFκB to generate pro-inflammatory The SARS-CoV virus enters host cells through the endosomal pathway mediated by the angiotensin concentering enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor. The S proteins bind to the receptor and following membrane fusion into the host cell, the viral RNA is released into the cytoplasm. The positive sense (+) RNA is then translated to produce pp1a and p1ab polyproteins that are then proteolytically cleaved to yield an RNA replicase-transcriptase complex. This complex then drives the production of (−) RNA to be used as a template for (+) genome and for the generation of subgenomic mRNA encoding all the structural proteins necessary for the virus to assemble through discontinuous transcription. Viral nucleocapsids and N protein are assembled in the cytoplasm, followed by assembly, and budding into the lumen of the ER-Golgi intermediate compartment. The virion is then released by exocytosis cytokines [111, 168] . IFN-α/β induce the maturation of conventional dendritic cells and NK cells as well as induce an antiviral microenvironment at the site of HCoV infection [111, 169] . Nonstructural protein (NSP) 1 of both MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV facilitate the cleavage of host messenger RNA [111, 170, 171] . NSP3 is a large viral multifunctional protein that suppresses the antiviral activity of IFN. This has been demonstrated in HCoV-229E and SARS-CoV, via inhibition of antiviral interferon activity mediated by ADP-ribose 1′ monophosphatase activity [172] . These are viral escape mechanisms that allow the virus to downregulate the expression of antiviral innate immune factors [171] . Unlike HCoV-HKU1, the Membrane protein of SARS-CoV mediates the suppression of antiviral innate immune response via type I IFN antagonism [173] . Membrane protein suppression of type I IFN is not conserved among all strains of HCoV [111] . Additionally, the nucleocapsid protein of SARS-CoV plays a role in suppressing innate immunity by blocking IRF3 function (IFR3 activates the expression of interferon genes) [134] and block the expression of IFN-β [174] . CD4 + T cells and CD8 + T cells provide cellular immunity that plays a role in inhibiting viral replication and eliminating virus infected cells [116] . CD8 + T cells play a pivotal role in viral clearance and cytotoxicity [132] . IFN-γ released by both Th1 cells and NK cells inhibit viral replication, whereas granzyme B released by both CD8 + T cells and NK cells destroy HCoV-infected epithelial cells [116] . The Spike glycoprotein is a major antigen for both humoral and cellular immune response against HCoV [175] , since it induces the generation of SARS-CoV specific neutralizing antibodies within 2 weeks of the onset of infection. The high titer of antiviral neutralizing antibodies is retained for up to 6 months [132, 176] . Virus shedding from the respiratory tract peaks around day 10, and the presence of neutralizing antibodies is associated with a decline in viral load [138] . The SARS-CoV specific antibody response does not last for a long time, and as such, the humoral immune response mediated by IgM, IgA, and IgG is short lived. CD4 + T cells and CD8 + T cells recognize immunogenic epitopes present in Spike and Nucleocapsid protein of SARS-CoV. In the acute phase of SARS-CoV infection, there is a reduced number of virus-specific T cells, likely due to impaired function of dendritic cells with its associated reduced priming of T cells [116] . Resolution of the acute phase of cell-mediated immune response is followed by generation and maintenance of a pool of virus-specific memory T cells. Virusspecific memory CD4 + T cells and CD8 + T cells are present in SARS-CoV patients who recover from acute infections [116] . Yang et al. [177] demonstrated the presence of long-lived effector/central memory T cells in individuals who recovered from SARS-CoV infection. The study found that most memory CD4 + T cells consist of SARS-CoV Spike protein specific central memory CD4 + T cells that secrete IFNγ. The study also showed that a majority of memory CD8 + T cells were SARS-CoV Spike protein specific effector memory CD8 + T cells. This shows that CD4 + T cells and CD8 + T cells mediate cellular immunity against the Spike protein of SARS-CoV [177] . Cellular immunity mediated by T cells lasts for a long time [116] . HCoV infects and induces the apoptosis of epithelial cells, macrophages, monocytes, lymphocytes, and dendritic cells [111, 178, 179] . APN is a type II transmembrane peptidase expressed on the cell surface of epithelial cells of intestines and respiratory tract. HCoV-229e infects APN positive expressing cells such as epithelial cells, granulocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and cerebral pericytes at the blood-brain barrier [180, 181] . HCoV-229E can infect and destroy monocytederived dendritic cells; however, the migration of infected dendritic cells into the draining lymph nodes could play a role in the spread of the virus [111, 182] . As such, the destruction of infected dendritic cells could serve as a host immune strategy to prevent viral spread [182] . TNF-α and IL-1 induce the maturation of dendritic cells, a key regulator of the immune response against viral infection [183] . Mesel-Lemoine et al. demonstrated that HCoV-229E infects and destroys monocytederived dendritic cells but had no cytopathic effect on monocytes [182] . Thus, monocyte-derived dendritic cells support the efficient replication of HCoV-229E, but the exposure of these cells to IFN-β prior to infection with HCoV-229E prevented permissiveness of these cells to HCoV-229E. These researchers demonstrated that monocyte-derived dendritic cells and CD34-positive stem cell-derived dendritic cells are susceptible to infection and destruction by HC0V-229E. Thus, HC0V-229E infected conventional dendritic cells are susceptible to caspase-3activation induced apoptosis [182] . HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-HKU1 infect 9-O-Acetylated sialic acid expressing epithelial cells of the trachea and intestines as well as mucoepithelial tissue of the lungs [184] . SARS-CoV infects ACE2 positive expressing cells such as alveoli epithelial cells, bronchial epithelial cells, bronchial serous gland epithelial cells, monocytes/macrophages, gastric parietal epithelial cells, small intestine epithelial cells, myocardial cells, distal convoluted renal tubules, adrenal cortical cells, pancreatic islet cells, sweat gland epithelial cells, and acidophilic cells of the pituitary [178] . The acute injury to the lungs observed in individuals with SARS-CoV infection is attributed to infiltration of macrophages and desquamated epithelial cells along with destruction of epithelial cells and pneumocytes of the lung in the setting of upregulation of expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in patients with SARS-CoV infection [111, 178] . Ziegler et al. [185] demonstrated that epithelial cells of the lung are permissive to infection and replication of SARS-CoV; however, SARS-CoV infected monocyte-derived dendritic cells failed to upregulate the expression of MHC class II molecules and/or CD86. Thus, the suboptimal or non-efficient infection and subsequent replication of monocytederived dendritic cells and macrophages was observed. This could explain the suboptimal antiviral immune response to SARS-CoV. Additionally, the little/no expression of IFN-β, a major antiviral innate cytokine, by SARS-CoV infected macrophages may explain the poor immune response to SARS-CoV [185, 186] . ACE2 receptor is not expressed on dendritic cells; however, Spiegal et al. [183] demonstrated low level replication of SARS-CoV in both immature and mature dendritic cells. The uptake of SARS-CoV by dendritic cells is mediated by CD209 (DC-SIGN) [187] and CD209L (L-SIGN) [188] . These C-type lectin receptors likely serve as alternative receptors for entry of SARS-CoV into dendritic cells [183] . SARS-CoV caused an epidemic in 2002-2003, and it had an inefficient transmissibility. This could explain the reason for the control of the infection with quarantine. SARS-CoV infects epithelial cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells, and this results in production of pro-inflammatory cytokines by these infected cells. It is important to note that these pro-inflammatory cytokines contribute to the immunopathological mechanism of the disease. Additionally, suboptimal virus-specific T cell response has been shown to contribute to immunopathological changes in individuals with SARS-CoV infection [113, 189] . There is an increase in expression of cytokines such as IL-1β, TNF-α, TGF-β1, IL-6, and MCP-1 in patients with SARS-CoV infection [178] . TNF-α and TGF-β1 can induce the apoptosis of epithelial cells, pneumocytes, and lymphocytes. TGF-β1 induces Fas-mediated apoptosis of infected epithelial cells (alveoli epithelial cells), lymphocytes, and platelets with lymphopenia and thrombocytopenia resulting from destruction of lymphocytes and platelets respectively [111, 190, 191] . It is important to note that TGF-β1 induces Fas-mediated apoptosis of infected epithelial cells of the lung via caspase-3-activation [191] . TNF-α induces fibrosis of pulmonary tissue since it activates pulmonary fibroblasts to undergo proliferation to produce and dump excessive amounts of collagen and extracellular matrix in the affected lungs [111] . There is no FDA-approved antiviral vaccine for human CoV. Treatment of human CoV is mainly supportive [113] . Recently, the FDA authorized the compassionate use of remdesivir for treating individuals with severe forms of SARS-CoV2 infection. This drug has been shown to inhibit RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) [153, 192, 193] . Additionally, in patients with severe respiratory illness, the use of oxygen therapy is of great benefit. Individuals with septic shock respond to hemodynamic support, whereas mechanical ventilation is the treatment of choice for patients with respiratory failure recalcitrant to oxygen therapy. Protective mechanical ventilation with rapid sequence intubation is indicated for individuals with severe forms of SARS-CoV induced respiratory failure. High flow nasal oxygen is beneficial for individuals with mild-to-moderate SARS-CoV induced respiratory distress [110] . In the absence of antiviral therapy or vaccine, preventive strategies to contain the infection via quarantine and practice of good hygiene should be encouraged [110, 113] . The following recommendations have been issued by the WHO: avoid close contact with individuals with acute respiratory infections; wash your hands following contact with infected people or a contaminated environment infected individuals with symptoms of acute respiratory infection should cover cough and/or sneeze with disposable tissue and wash their hands; maintain strict hygiene measures for prevention and control of infection in hospital department; maintain social distancing to cut down the spread of the infection; high risk individuals should avoid public gatherings; and healthcare workers caring for infected individuals should wear personal protective equipment (PPE) to prevent viral transmission [110, 114] . Our understanding of coronaviruses and its pathogenesis are constantly evolving. Trying new strategies for treatment based on this evolving knowledge will provide opportunities to target viral replication or immunopathology. Though treatments are being developed, prevention of viral transmission is key to reducing the burden of the virus. There is ongoing research aimed at developing antivirals that target specific enzymes of human CoV such as viral protease, polymerase, and entry protein [114] . Furthermore, plasma and antibodies obtained from convalescent patients have been shown to be therapeutically beneficial [194] . Because IL-6 is a proinflammatory cytokine implicated in the pathology of cytokine release syndrome (CRS), the therapeutic benefit of humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody directed against IL-6 receptor (tocilizumab) has been investigated [110, 195] . Furthermore, human monoclonal antibodies that bind to SARS-CoV 2 RBD have been shown to block interaction between human ACE2 receptor and SARS-CoV RBD. As such, it should be explored as a possible prophylactic and therapeutic agent against SARS-CoV [196] . It has been suggested that IFNβ1 is a safe and effective antiviral therapeutic agent for treating the early stages of COVID-19 [197] . Additionally, combinations of IFNβ1b and liponavir/ritonavir have been suggested for therapeutic use in individuals with MERS-CoV [198] . Adoptive transfer of SARS-CoV-specific Th1 cells and CTL cells could clear the virus and increase survival rates. This therapeutic option could be beneficial for patients with life-threatening SARS-CoV infections [116, 199] , particularly in elderly individuals with reduced levels of virus-specific T cell mediated immunity [116] . Vaccine options against HCoV include recombinant attenuated virus, live virus vector, or individual viral protein expressed from DNA plasmids [113, 115] . Spike protein-based vaccines include full-length Spike protein-based vaccines that induce effective neutralizing antibodies and T cell immunity in animal models [175, 200] . Yiu Wing Kan et al. demonstrated that recombinant trimeric Spike protein induced protective immunity and production of neutralizing antibody [201] . SARS-CoV Spike protein plays a role in viral attachment and entry, thus it is an important target for the development of vaccines or antiviral therapeutics [132] . Furthermore, SARS-CoV neutralizing antibodies could be utilized for prevention and therapeutic applications. CoV is mainly a mucosal infection, and as such, it is difficult to develop an effective vaccine against the virus because natural infection of mucosal tissue does not prevent reinfection. Another challenge to developing a vaccine is the tendency of these viruses to undergo recombination to yield new viral strains. In the absence of approved effective therapeutic or vaccine, rapid diagnostic testing and quarantine remains the most effective control measure [113] . Governments and communities taking early action to prevent emerging viruses from turning into pandemics, increasing measures limiting transmission in hospitals as well as having the necessary equipment to combat the virus and protecting vulnerable populations are all key reducing the human and economic burden a virus" with "populations are all key in reducing the human and economic burden a virus generates. There is progress in developing vaccines and therapeutics, but further research and rigorous testing is necessary to fight novel viruses. Encephalitis virus (SLE), and Zika Virus (ZIKV) are arboviruses that belong to the flaviviridae family [202] . ZIKV associated infection was declared a public health emergency by the WHO [203] . Ticks and mosquitos are vectors for these viruses and the infections are cause significant morbidity and mortality across the world due to some of the devastating manifestations of these viral infections such as hemorrhagic fever and encephalitis. If not caught early, these diseases progress very rapidly and can have long-term sequelae or even death, such as congenital birth defects if a woman is infected with ZIKV during pregnancy. Immunoprophylaxis exists for Yellow Fever Virus but the other members of the flaviviridae family require control of environmental factors that promote their transmission [202] . Here we discuss DENV, as a prototype to explain some of the immunology and pathophysiology behind the diseases caused by flaviviruses. One of the important players are Nonstructural proteins (NS) encoded by the different flavivirus genomes; they interact with different members of the immune system to down regulate it or evade it, leading to spread of infection [203] . Dengue virus is an enveloped positive sense single-stranded RNA virus that rely on Aedes aegyptus and Aedes albopictus mosquitoes as vectors for facilitating arboviral infection characterized by dengue hemorrhage fever and dengue shock syndrome in susceptible individuals in endemic areas [202] . Because of the predominance of Aedes mosquitoes south of the US border, the CDC declared DENV infection a serious US public health concern [2] . Monocytes and dendritic cells are primary targets of DENV wherein interaction between DC-SIGN and DENV attachment protein results in clathrin-mediated endocytosis of the virion [204] . DENV-associated immune evasion strategies include inhibition of IFN-γ production. [205] . There is no FDA-approved antiviral agents for DENV. However, vector control is the main preventive strategy utilized in reducing DENV transmission [206] . Treatment is mostly supportive including restoring normal vascular permeability and maintaining hemodynamic stability. Repurposing or adaptation of current antimicrobial therapies for DENV such as minocycline, a commonly used antibacterial, has been found to have antiviral capability against DENV infection [207] . Current research into immunoprophylaxis focuses on developing vaccines that are immunoprotective against all serotypes of DENV [208, 209] . ZIKV is an enveloped virus with a linear positive sense, single-stranded RNA genome and icosahedral viral capsid. It acquired global health significance when it caused significant outbreaks in Yap Island, French Polynesia, and South America [210] . DC-SIGN expressed on macrophages, Langerhans' cells, and dendritic cells is a primary target for ZIKV. TIM (T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain) and TAM (Tyro3, AXL, and Mer) family of receptors are also attachment molecules for ZIKV [211] . AXL and Tyro3 facilitate ZIKV infection of astrocytes, epidermal keratinocytes, skin fibroblasts, endothelial cells, trophoblast cells, fibroblasts, amniotic epithelial cells, trophoblast progenitor cells, macrophage, and microglia cells [212, 213] . The clinical manifestation of ZIKV infection include transient low-grade fever, pruritic maculopapular rash, arthralgia, nonpurulent conjunctivitis, myalgia, lymphadenopathy, hematospermia, and subcutaneous bleeding [210, 214, 215] . Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) and microcephaly are neurological complications associated with outbreaks of ZIKV infection [210] . There are currently no FDAapproved therapeutic agents for treating ZIKV infection [214, 215] . The preventive measures include minimizing risk of both vector and non-vector transmission [214] . Current research into ZIKV vaccines is focused on developing nonreplicative vaccine strategies using prM/E as vaccine antigen [216] . Dengue virus (DENV) is an arthropod-transmitted spherical virus endemic in over 100 countries that originated in monkeys and was only found in Africa and Southeast Asia until the middle of the twentieth century [217, 218] . DENV's vectors are the Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquitoes, and both species acquire the virus by biting infected humans and transmiting it to uninfected humans [219] . The virus has four serotypes, with DENV-2 causing the most severe manifestations of the disease: dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) and shock syndrome (DSS) [202] . Roughly 2.5 billion people live in areas considered at-risk for DENV, with the WHO estimating an incidence of 50-100 million infections and a death rate of 20,000 per year [218] . A. aegypti is the primary vector in Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Samoa, and Guam, where DENV is endemic, so the virus could be transmitted when an infected individual travel to the continental U.S. [218] . The WHO tracks outbreaks of the disease based on reported surveillance data with an DENV outbreak in Uruguay on March 10, 2016 [220] . The disease causes high burden because hospitalization is necessary even if only mild symptoms are present since these could be warning signs for the development of DHF or DSS [221] . There is currently no DENV vaccine available for clinical use, though several are in clinical trials, with Sanofi Pasteur's tetravalent vaccine viewed as the most promising [202] . DENV is a single-stranded positive-sense RNA spherical virus classified as a flavivirus (family Flaviviridae, genus Flavivirus). It is also classified under the family of arboviruses due to the nature of its vectors. ZIKV is part of the same family, and interactions between the two are possible [222] . Dengue is transmitted between hosts through blood via the bite of an infected female A. aegypus or A. albopictus. They are very active during the day, and A. aegyptus is often found in domesticated environments due to household storage of water [223] . Each of the four DENV serotypes can be distinguished from one another based on cell surface proteins [220] . The three structural proteins encoded by DENV's genome are the Capsid (C) protein, envelope (E) protein, and PrM/M or (pre) membrane protein [204] . There are also seven nonstructural NS proteins that are encoded by the genome and have various functions in DENV's life cycle and pathogenesis [224] . Of the four serotypes, DENV-2 and DENV-3 have NS5 proteins that allow them to enter the nucleus, while DENV-1 and DENV-4 copies of NS5 do not have this function due to a defect in the Nuclear Localization Signal (NLS) [224] . The primary targets for DENV are immune cells i.e. monocytes and dendritic cells, though new research suggests that endothelial cells are targeted as well [204, 220] . When dengue virions reach a target cell, they bind via attachment factors e.g. heparan sulfate, DC-SIGN (a C-type lectin), and a mannose receptor. Once a virion attaches to its potential host, it is endocytosed through clathrin-coated endocytic vesicles. These join with the host cell in the late endosome, where DENV's E protein facilitates fusion of the viral and host membranes [204] . Once the viral genome begins transcription and translation, new virions mature in the trans-Golgi, via the action of furin protease before being exocytosed [204] (Fig. 4) . Infection with one DENV serotype doesn't confer immunity to another serotype -the patient has protective immunity only against the serotype with which they are infected. Actually, if a patient was exposed to any of the other three serotypes,  Human Acute and Chronic Viruses: Host-Pathogen Interactions and Therapeutics their symptoms could be worse than after the original infection, i.e. they could develop DSS or DHF [222] . A truly effective DENV vaccine would have to provide immunity against all four serotypes. The clinical course of DENV has been described as having three phases: the febrile, critical, and recovery phases [225] . The febrile phase is clinically characterized by fever and mild hemorrhagic symptoms; on laboratory evaluation, you would see values of RBC destruction and blood loss such as thrombocytopenia, elevated liver enzymes, and hemoconcentration. This phase lasts approximately 1 week [225] . Sometimes patients may experience a mild rash or joint and muscle aches, though these are not amongst the more severe symptoms. Most DENV infections resolve spontaneously, but a minority of them progress to the critical phase. Patients will present with systemic vascular leakage due to endothelial hyper-permeability and other associated symptoms. In response to the loss of fluids, the pulse pressure decreases, though if it decreases too much the patient's peripheral vessels may collapse, leading to DSS [225] . While a patient is in the critical phase, the healthcare team must be vigilant for signs of deterioration: vomiting, serosal effusion, hemorrhagic manifestations (e.g. mucosal bleeding), and impaired clotting activity (e.g. increased PT and PTT) are all indicators that a blood transfusion is necessary to save the patient's life [225] . While the critical phase is the most dangerous, it is also the shortest, usually lasting around 48-72 h. As the patient moves into the recovery phase, their vascular permeability returns to normal, though occasionally they may develop a rash. After this, the only symptom the patient experiences is fatigue [225] . The major players in DENV pathogenesis are DCs. Other important immune cells involved in DENV infection are macrophages/monocytes, T cells, and different varieties of APCs [226] . Once the host has been infected by DENV, the virus inhibits the body's antiviral response through inhibition of IFN-γ production via inhibition of the STAT2 pathway, with DENV-2 being the most effective at this mechanism of immune evasion [226] . Even though no receptor has yet been found that is specific for DENV recognition, a few candidates have been studied. DC-SIGN receptors are involved in DENV pathogenesis by its interaction with DENV glycoproteins and facilitating infection of monocyte-derived DCs (moDCs); an already infected moDC cannot be infected again [226] . Another important receptor in the pathogenesis of dengue is the Fc-receptor, more specifically the Fcγ subtype. These receptors bind DENV-IgG immune complexes, and send activating or inhibiting signals to monocytes (and moDCs) via immunoreceptor Tyrosine-based activation (ITAMs) and immunoreceptor Tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs (ITIMs) [226] . If an activating signal is sent, this makes the moDC more likely to undergo antibody-dependent enhancement, or ADE. This is notable with FcγRIIa receptors, which actually internalize DENV -though the moDC must have already matured for this increase to occur [226] . ADE is part of the reason that secondary DENV infection usually leads to more severe symptoms than primary infection [226] . In antibody-dependent enhancement of disease as seen in dengue virus infection, prior infection with one serotype of dengue virus may lead to the development of suboptimal neutralizing antibodies that do not fully neutralize other dengue virus serotypes. As such, ADE can enhance viral infection of myeloid cells via Fcγ receptor-mediated process, which leads to more severe viral disease [227] ). DENV immune complexes that enter conventional DCs via FCγRIIA receptors rather than the DC-SIGN can lead to the generation of proinflammatory cytokines that feature heavily in DV immunopathology [6] . T cells play the largest role in the cellular immune response to DENV. In primary DENV, CD8 + T cells exhibit a low level of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IFN-γ and TNF-α, and a high level of CD107a, indicating the CD8 + T cell has already released perforin substance toward a target cell [205] . In patients with DSS and DHF, CD8 + T cells' function switches, producing mainly pro-inflammatory cytokines, and enhancing the immune response [205] . Memory T cells are thought to play a role in the endothelial hyperpermeability associated with severe DENV [205] ; they are also important because they have higher affinity for the primary infection's serotype than the serotype(s) of a secondary infection [205] . Currently, there is no infection-specific treatment for DENV, nor is there a DENVspecific vaccine. Prevention is mainly focused on vector control, diminishing A. aegypti or A. albopictus mosquito bites that actually transmit DENV to humans. Poor living conditions, lack of preventative measures, such as emptying containers of standing water, low/no use of mosquito repellent, and lack of knowledge of DENV were found to be risk factors for Dengue contraction [206] . Taken in combination with the fact that efficacious Dengue vaccines are still in development, this suggests that the best way to fight DENV is to prevent people from contracting it in the first place, educating communities, implementing ways to control mosquito infestations, and prevent bites [228] . Prevention can also be effected through the use of sterile insect technique or SIT, where sterile male mosquitos are released into the environment and compete with wild-type males, causing the mosquito population to gradually decrease [229] . This form of vector control is a good starting point and will be supplemented as research efforts discover new ways to control spread of DENV vectors, and develop an effective vaccine against the virus. As for treatment, clinical guidelines generally focus on keeping the patient hemodynamically stable and maintaining adequate perfusion. This can be done through blood transfusion, as well as by attempting to restore normal vascular permeability and coagulation. Current treatments only provide symptomatic relief and control of DENV infection, but do not eliminate it completely. DENV is very effective at suppressing host antiviral responses, and finding optimal ways to target this, will be the focus of future research to find treatments. The main focus of DENV research is on finding effective vaccines and therapeutic agents for the virus, especially finding a tetravalent vaccine that provides immunity against all four DENV serotypes. On the basis that severe cases of DENV (DSS or DHF) present with endothelial dysfunction leading to edema and hemorrhage, much of the treatment-targeted research has focused on returning the endothelium to normal function. A double-blinded clinical trial investigated the use of statins, shown to protect the endothelium from inflammation, as a possible treatment for severe DENV; unfortunately, in the context of the clinical trial, statins do not provide a clear clinical benefit [230, 231] . It was suggested that statins might need to be introduced earlier than 72 h after diagnosis, but further research would be needed to investigate this [231] . Development of an effective vaccine is an important avenue of DENV-related research. Currently, the most promising vaccine has been a live attenuated Yellow fever (YF)-dengue chimeric vaccine (CYD-TDV) in development by Sanofi-Pasteur that incorporates genes for DENV preM and E proteins into the cDNA of a YF 17D vaccine (used to prevent yellow fever) [209] . Studies based on this trial have found that it protects against DENV 1/3/4 infection at a statistically significant level, but not against DENV-2 (which could be considered one of the more dangerous serotypes) [208, 209] . While this vaccine has progressed to phase III trials, it does not contain any of the NS proteins, which hold most of the epitopes recognized by T cells [208] . Regarding treatment and preventative research, there have been studies and case reports suggesting that a substance in papaya leaves could be an effective treatment for DENV and protective agent against A. aegypti mosquitos. However, it has been reported that these findings pointed out that identification of the active agent in papaya leaves, as well as a way to standardize dosage, are critically necessary before any true clinical trials can begin [232] . There has also been focus on adapting current therapies for use as anti-DENV agents. For example, minocycline, a commonly used antibacterial agent, has demonstrated antiviral effect against DENV infection [207] . Extensive in vitro examination of the effect of minocycline on DENV found that, in a dose-dependent manner, it reduces DENV RNA activity as well as different steps of its pathogenesis. It has been shown to down regulates ERK phosphorylation, across all four serotypes [233] . This finding is significant because ERK phosphorylation normally decreases the antiviral IFN response, and as such, inhibiting ERK phosphorylation would keep DENV from hampering the immune response. On a genetic level, minocycline was found to increase the expression of OAS1 and OAS3 genes, which also play a role in the IFN antiviral response. Zika virus (ZIKV) is an arthropod-borne virus that belong to the Flaviviridae family and is closely related to mosquito-borne flaviviruses of global medical importance such as DENV and West Nile virus. It was first isolated in nonhuman primates in Uganda in 1947. ZIKV acquired global health significance when it caused significant outbreaks in Yap Island, French Polynesia, and South America [210] . Serosurvey have shown residents of Nigeria, Vietnam, Uganda, Gabon, India, Pakistan, Malaysia, Philippines, Egypt, and Indonesia have varying levels of seroprevalence and antibodies against ZIKV [234, 235] . Prior to 2007, there were few cases of confirmed human infection caused by ZIKV [234] . Outbreaks of ZIKV infection in 2007, 2013, 2014, and 2015 affected thousands of residents in the Yap State (an island in the Federated State of Micronesia), French Polynesia, and South America [234, 235] . The first recorded ZIKV outbreak outside Africa and Asia occurred in Yap Island, in which infected individuals had clinical manifestations such as transient low grade fever, pruritic maculopapular rash, arthralgia, and nonpurulent conjunctivitis [210] . In 2013-2014, a major outbreak of ZIKV in French Polynesia was associated with neurological complications such as Guillain-Barre syndrome. Visitors from USA, France, Norway, and Italy who were exposed to the ZIKV whilst in the Pacific Island developed symptoms associated with ZIKV infection [210] . The ZIKV outbreak in South America in 2015 was associated with high incidence of newborn infants presenting with microcephaly. The outbreak of ZIKV with associated neurological complications prompted the WHO to declare ZIKV a disease of global health emergency. The ZIKV isolate that was responsible for the Zika infection outbreak in South America was confirmed to have a high degree of homology to ZIKV that caused the ZIKV outbreak in French Polynesia based on sequence analysis [210] . Cases of ZIKV in nonendemic areas such as Europe and North America are attributed to travel-related cases with more than 95% of ZIKV infections in the USA due to travel related ZIKV infections [214] . The two major transmission cycles of ZIKV are sylvatic cycle and urban cycle [210] . ZIKV is a mosquito borne disease that existed in Africa in a sylvatic transmission cycle involving Aedes mosquito and nonhuman primates [234] . Sylvatic cycle involves ZIKV transmission between nonhuman primates and forest dwelling mosquitoes, in which humans became the accidental host [210, 234] . The spread of ZIKV in a human-Aedes mosquito-human transmission cycle constitutes the suburban-urban transmission cycle [234] . Urban cycle involves transmission to humans in the urban setting via bite of arboreal mosquito infected following blood meal from an infected nonhuman primate. Major mode of transmission of ZIKV is via mosquito bite. Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus are vectors of ZIKV with Aedes aegypti considered the primary vector responsible for the ZIKV outbreaks [210] . In the USA, Aedes aegypti is endemic in the US Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, whereas Aedes albopictus is seen in the eastern part of the USA. Both species of Aedes mosquitoes are daytime feeders on human blood and are readily found in tropical and subtropical regions of the world [234] . Non-vector modes of transmission, in which ZIKV is transmitted from human-to-human, include an infected mother transmitting ZIKV to the fetus during pregnancy, mother to infant transmission, sexual transmission with replicative viral particles and viral RNA present in sperm, and transmission via breastfeeding particularly in the setting of high titers of Zika viral particles in breastmilk [210, 234, 235] . Although non-vector modes of transmission exist, vector-borne transmission is considered the major route of transmission [210] . The WHO declared ZIKV a public health emergency of global concern due to the temporal and geographical association between ZIKV infection and neurological complications such as Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) and microcephaly [215] . The increased prevalence of ZIKV and its association with larger sporadic outbreak of the disease is an additional reason for the WHO declaring it a disease of public health emergency of international concern [210] . Additionally, the presence of Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus in the state of Florida constitutes an increased risk for ZIKV to become endemic in the southern states of the USA. Furthermore, the high vectoral capacity of Aedes aegypti heightens the concern that it can increase the spread of ZIKV in the southern states of USA in the future due to its potential to infect many individuals during blood meal [210] . Phylogenetic analysis of ZIKV identified the presence of African lineage and Asian lineage with ZIKV outbreak in French Polynesia and South America attributed to the Asian lineage ZIKV strain [215, 236, 237] . The genetic diversity of ZIKV is attributable to the subtle differences in the envelope glycoprotein sequence of the African and Asian lineage, a difference that may affect virulence of ZIKV (121) . ZIKV is an enveloped virus with a linear positive sense, single-stranded RNA genome and icosahedral viral capsid. It has three N-terminal structural proteins (viral capsid, viral membrane protein, envelope glycoprotein) and seven C-terminal nonstructural proteins (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, and NS5) [210] . The icosahedral capsid is surrounded by enveloped (E) glycoprotein and membrane/ precursor membrane (prM) protein [215] . Structural proteins are responsible for development of infectivity of the virion [210] . RNA replication is mediated by NS3 and NS5 and processing of polyprotein is mediated by the interaction between NS3 and NS2B [215] . NS3 consist of an N-terminal serine protease domain and C-terminal RNA helicase domain [210, 238, 239] . NS5 consists of an N-terminal methyltransferase domain and C-terminal RNA-dependent RNA polymerase domain [210, 239, 240] . NS5 also inhibits interferon response [212, 215] . NS4A also aids in polyprotein processing and immune evasion [212] . Viral cellular tropism is determined by the ability of ZIKV to bind to host cell surface receptors [213] . Dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3 grabbing nonintegrin (DC-SIGN) or CD209 expressed on macrophages and dendritic cells is a primary target for ZIKV. TIM (T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain) and TAM (Tyro3, AXL, and Mer) family of receptors are also attachment molecules for ZIKV [211, 241] . Tyro3, AXL, and TIM-1 are ZIKV cell surface receptors expressed on human placenta cells, endothelial cells, trophoblast cells, fibroblasts, amniotic epithelial cells, trophoblast progenitor cells, and macrophages [212, 241] . Additionally, AXL and Tyro3 facilitates ZIKV infection of astrocytes, epidermal keratinocytes, skin fibroblasts, and microglia cells [213] . ZIKV envelope glycoprotein bind to host cell surface receptors on permissive cells to initiate attachment and subsequent internalization into an endosome through clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Once inside the endosome, acidic pH induced changes to viral envelope glycoprotein enables fusion between viral membrane and endosomal membrane, and subsequent release of a viral RNA genome into the host cell cytoplasm [210, 214, 236] . Once inside the cytoplasm, viral disassembly occurs to release the RNA genome for replication, which occurs in association with replicative complexes [203, 210, 214, 236] . Because the RNA genome is a positive sense nucleic acid, the positive strand RNA acts as a mRNA that is directly translated on human ribosomes into a large polyprotein that undergoes co-translation and post-translation by cellular and viral proteases into structural and nonstructural proteins [203, 214, 242, 243] . The negative strand RNA is used for generating additional mRNA and replicating the genome [214] . Budding of viral genome RNA-C protein complex into the endoplasmic reticulum initiates assembly of immature virion. Enveloping of the virion with viral precursor membrane protein (prM) and envelope protein occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum. The immature virion undergoes post-translational modification in the trans Golgi network with production of membrane (M) protein from prM. The mature virion is released from the infected cell via exocytosis [210] . The clinical aspect of ZIKV infection encompasses acute febrile illness, neurological complications and Zika associated fetal outcomes [234] . The clinical manifestation of ZIKV infection usually develops after an incubation period of 4-10 days with up to 25% of infected individuals presenting with transient low-grade fever, pruritic maculopapular rash, arthralgia, nonpurulent conjunctivitis, retro-orbital pain, headache, myalgia, vomiting, lymphadenopathy, fatigue, lower back pain, swelling of the extremities, hematospermia (blood in the ejaculate), hearing difficulties and subcutaneous bleeding [210, 214, 215] . Viremic phase may be associated with increase in erythrocyte sedimentation rate, raised C-reactive protein levels, and thrombocytopenia in some patients [214] . ZIKV can replicate in immune privilege sites and cause persistent infection of the central nervous system (CNS) [244] . Neurological correlates of ZIKV infection include Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS), encephalitis, microcephaly, acute myelitis, and meningoencephalitis [234] . GBS and microcephaly are the major neurological complications associated with outbreaks of ZIKV infection [210] . GBS, an autoimmune characterized by immunemediated attack of peripheral nervous system, has been documented with other arboviral infections; however, the association of GBS with ZIKV was observed during the ZIKV infection outbreak in French Polynesia due to the presence of neutralizing anti-ZIKV antibodies in majority of patients with GBS [210] . Temporal and geographical associations of increase in incidence of microcephaly and ZIKV infection in 2015, identification of ZIKV nucleic acid in brain of deceased infants with microcephaly, and demonstration of inhibition of growth of human neural progenitor cells are evidences to support the role of ZIKV infection in microcephaly [210, 215, 234, 245] . The greatest risk of developing microcephaly is when a pregnant woman has an acute Zika viral infection in the first trimester [234] and microcephaly is worse when infection is acquired in early stages of pregnancy [214] . ZIKV infection of microglia cells is associated with an inflammatory response with high levels of IL-1β. TNF-α, and IL-6, which in turn, plays a role in the neuropathogenesis of ZIKV infection characterized by impaired proliferation and differentiation of neural precursor cells (NPC) [246] . Up to 50% of infants with presumed or confirmed congenital ZIKV-associated microcephaly present with iris coloboma, lens subluxation, cataract, glaucoma, intraocular calcifications, microphthalmia, esotropia, focal retinal pigment epithelial mottling, retinochoriodal atrophy, and hypoplastic optic nerve head [234, 247, 248] . Diagnostic tests for ZIKV include Trioplex reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and IgM class capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (MAC-ELISA) [215] . RT-PCR can detect viral nucleic acid in urine, saliva, semen, CSF, amniotic fluid, and plasma [214] . Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay or immunofluorescence assay are useful for identifying IgM or IgG antibodies in serum [214] . Inhibition ELISA method (IEM) is used in detecting and determining total ZIKV-specific antibody titer in serum. Zika NS1 blockade-of-binding (BOB) ELISA measures IgG antibody titers and it is useful for diagnostic and seroprevalence studies [249] . Neural stem cells, oligodendrocyte precursor cells, cranial neural crest cells, neurons, astrocytes, trophoblasts, microglia, macrophages, dendritic cells, endothelial cells, skin keratinocytes, and dermal fibroblasts are ZIKV permissive cells that support ZIKV replication and propagation of ZIKV to other cells and tissues [211] . ZIKV has been shown to be capable of infecting and inducing the apoptosis of human neural progenitor cells, which are crucial for driving the development of the fetal brain cortex [210] . Epidermal keratinocytes and skin fibroblasts are highly permissive cells that support ZIKV replication, and subsequent ZIKV-induced apoptosis of infected cells and viral dissemination [213] . Aedes mosquitoes become infected with ZIKV following blood meal from an infected individual [214] . The infected Aedes mosquito transmits ZIKV to uninfected humans during blood meal, which infects fibroblasts, keratinocytes, Langerhans cells, and macrophages. It is noteworthy that Tyro3, AXL and TIM-1 are cell surface receptors for ZIKV on fibroblasts and keratinocytes whereas DC-SIGN is an entry receptor for ZIKV on Langerhans' cells [214, 250] . Pattern recognition receptors for ZIKV include TLR3, RIG-1, and MDA5 found on fibroblasts and keratinocytes, which when engaged by ZIKV PAMP results in the activated keratinocyte and fibroblast generating type I IFN that induces an antiviral microenvironment and activates NK cells [214] . Generating an antiviral microenvironment including IFN production is required for suppressing ZIKV replication and this constitutes the major anti-ZIKV innate immune response [215] . ZIKV infected Langerhans' cells traffic to the regional lymph node to activate naïve T cells to become ZIKV-specific T cells. ZIKV spreads from infected cells that support viral replication to other tissues and organs via bloodstream and lymphatics [214] . In ZIKV infection, NS5 induces the degradation of STAT2 in a proteasome-dependent manner, which results in suppression of type I interferon production [251] . Furthermore, ZIKV evades host immune response via the blockade of type I interferon production mediated by NS1 and NS4B [252] . Thus, NS1, NS4A and NS5 proteins mediate the inhibition of the antiviral immune response by blocking the production of type I interferon [251] . In non-human primate models, detectable levels of viral RNA are observed 6-7 days post-infection with a decline in plasma viral RNA levels coinciding with the presence of rising titer of ZIKV neutralizing antibodies [215, 253] . Neutralizing antibodies primarily directed at determinants in domain 3 or the fusogenic loop of domain 2 in E protein play a major role in providing humoral protection against ZIKV infection [227] . Neutralizing antibodies are protective against ZIKV; however, the concern is antibodies against flavivirus such as DENV are highly crossreactive [215] . Cross-reactive neutralizing antibodies against ZIKV and DENV bind to conserved epitopes on both viruses [216, 254] . The cross-reactivity between ZIKV and DENV is based on the similarity of their envelope glycoprotein sequences, which can trigger the development of antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) of clinical disease. ADE is mediated through sub-neutralizing or non-neutralizing antibodies that enhance viral entry and infectivity by FcγR-mediated process when Fc regions of these antibodies engage FcγR expressed on myeloid cells [215, 241, 255, 256] . There is a theoretical concern that neutralizing antibodies induced during primary DENV infection may cross-react with subsequent infection by ZIKV leading to increased viral load in circulation, and associated damage to blood vessel endothelial lining and promotion of inflammation within the microenvironment [216] . This could be associated with a significant risk for individuals with ZIKV infection presenting with severe clinical manifestations [244] . Serological cross-reactivity is of great concern in diagnosing ZIKV infection. This serological cross-reactivity between ZIKV and other flaviviruses constitutes a considerable hindrance to seroprevalence studies and diagnosis of ZIKV in geographical areas with co-circulating members of the flavivirus genus [215, 227] . It is of note that prior exposure to DENV may interfere with serological diagnosis of ZIKV producing a false positive result for ZIKV infection [214, 234] . In cases wherein ZIKV yields a positive MAC-ELISA result for DENV, plaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT) is beneficial in differentiating between antibodies against ZIKV and DENV [234] . Cell-mediated immunity against ZIKV involves ZIKV-specific CD8 + T cells and CD4 + T cells (121) . Th1 cells produce IFN-γ, TNF-α and IL-2. Th1 cells mediate type 1 immune response against ZIKV. They also play an important role in helping to induce proliferation and differentiation of CD8 + T cells as well as driving IgG production. CD8 + T cells are essential for immune protection and clearance of ZIKV from the CNS [244] . T cell response to NS1 and envelope glycoprotein has been demonstrated in ZIKV infected human [216, 257] . There are currently no FDA approved therapeutic agents for treating ZIKV infection [214, 215] . Pharmacotherapy is nonspecific and geared towards alleviating symptoms associated with ZIKV infection [214] . Ribavirin has demonstrated broad spectrum antiviral activity against several RNA viruses but it has not shown antiviral activity against ZIKV [258] . The main goal of prevention is to minimize risk of both vector and non-vector transmission. Such preventive measures aimed at avoiding vector transmission include draining mosquito breeding grounds, use of insecticide and Picaridin-containing insect repellent. Travelers to endemic areas should use insect repellent while outdoors, wear long sleeve shirt and pants, and use or wear permethrin-treated clothes [214] . During a ZIKV outbreak, discontinuation of all blood donations in endemic areas is recommended and it is necessary to seek travel history for blood donors from non-endemic areas [214] . Male partners returning from ZIKV endemic regions should practice safe sex to prevent sexual transmission of ZIKV [214] . Pregnant women or women trying to conceive should avoid travel to ZIKV endemic areas as well as avoid unprotected sexual contact with partners who are at risk for ZIKV infection [234] . To minimize the risk of sexual transmission of ZIKV, men and women with history of ZIKV exposure should avoid unprotected sex for at least six months and eight weeks respectively [259] . Furthermore, pregnant women or women trying to be pregnant should adopt strict personal protective methods to limit or avoid contact with mosquitoes if resident in ZIKV endemic areas [214] . Han and colleagues [258] demonstrated that an FDA-approved antimalarial drugs such as Amodiaquine dihydrochloride dihydrate (AQ), chloroquine phosphate (CQ), and mycophenolic acid (MPA) were capable of inhibiting ZIKV RNA replication in Vero cell cultures infected with ZIKV. They demonstrated that amodiaquine, an antimalarial drug could be therapeutically repurposed for ZIKV infection due to its antiviral capabilities against ZIKV. Although AQ is a desirable agent due to its safety profile in pregnant women, clinical trials are required to evaluate its efficacy and safe dose range in treating ZIKV infection [258] . Mesci and colleagues [260] demonstrated that Sofosbuvir (SOF), an FDA-approved RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) inhibitor for treating chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV), had anti-ZIKV activity in both in vitro and in vivo models of ZIKV. SOF is considered a FDA pregnancy category B antiviral agent. It is of note that HCV is a member of the Hepacivirus genus of the Flaviviridae family. Because both HVC NS5B and ZIKV NS5 sites for SOF were structurally similar and conserved, SOF could inhibit the function of NS5 via targeting the C-terminal RNA-dependent RNA polymerase domain on NS5. ZIKV has a considerable health impact on pregnant women with the heightened risk of delivering infants with microcephaly, and as such, further studies are necessary to evaluate the therapeutic benefit of SOF in preventing congenital ZIKV microcephaly [260] . Antibody-based therapies against ZIKV in the form of monoclonal antibodies that target the envelope glycoprotein to block viral attachment to host cellular surface receptors and prevent fusion of viral membrane proteins with host cellular membrane are potential viable target-based therapeutics. However, antibody-dependent enhancement of infection with associated increase in viral entry and infectivity may occur due to the development of suboptimal neutralizing antibodies that bind to the Fcγ receptors on myeloid cells such as monocytes, dendritic cells, and macrophages. This is a major safety concern and challenge to developing antibody-targeted therapy [261] . Because T cells play a major role in anti-ZIKV adaptive immune response, ZIKV vaccine platforms should trigger both humoral and cellmediated immune response against ZIKV [262] . Current research into ZIKV vaccines are focused on developing nonreplicative vaccine strategies due to their enhanced safety profile in pregnant women and women of childbearing age [216, 244] . Current ZIKV platforms using prM/E as a vaccine antigen are designed to provide correlates of immune protection based on generating neutralizing antibodies against nonstructural proteins [216] . Incorporating immunodominant epitopes of T cells into the nonreplicative vaccine strategy could boost T cell response to nonstructural proteins. Additionally, utilizing pre-immune cross-reactive T cells to other flaviviruses could yield a strategy of formulating a combination vaccine that contains closely related flaviviruses that could increase efficacy of the prospective vaccine [241, 244] . There are in excess of 40 vaccines against ZIKV under evaluation for their safety, immunogenicity and tolerability in phase 1 clinical trials ( [215, 241, 262] . ZIKV vaccine platforms under development include DNA-Based Vaccines, Vector-Based Vaccines, mRNA-Based Vaccines, Live Attenuated Virus Vaccines, Purified Inactivated Virus Vaccines, and In Silico Approaches to Vaccine Design [262] . The limited diversity among ZIKV strains is likely to be associated with reduced severity of disease in secondary ZIKV infection, and as such, neutralizing antibodies against one strain is probably going to be protective against another ZIKV strain [244] . Challenges for handling the global threat of ZIKV infection include identifying appropriate correlates of immune protection that are necessary for developing a ZIKV vaccine with high efficacy of protecting against congenital ZIKV syndrome as well as devising a means of overcoming the cross-reactive immune response among flaviviruses [215, 216] . Because pregnant women, the primary target for developing anti-ZIKV pharmacotherapy are generally excluded from clinical trials, investigational drugs should constitute very minimal risk to pregnant women and fetus [215] . Research directed towards developing point-of-care diagnostics as well as vaccine and antivirals safe for use in pregnant women and/or nursing mother should be of the utmost priority [214] . The liver is the metabolism hub of the body, which is responsible for majorly all anabolic and catabolic activities for survival. Any kind of stress or damage to the liver will significantly lower the functional efficacy of the affected organism. A couple of ways in which liver could be affected is, by inflammation and hepatocarcinogenesis [263] . Along the lines of co-evolution, viruses have adopted ways to take advantage of the liver, benefit themselves while simultaneously transforming the host organ. There are various hepatic viruses which work on similar lines such as, Woodchuck hepatitis virus, Duck hepatitis B virus, Hepatitis A-E, Ground Squirrel hepatitis virus etc. [264] . Out of these viruses, Hepatitis B (HBV) and Hepatitis C (HCV) stand out to be the most dangerous and potent species to infect humans and primates. In early 1960s, Baruch Blumberg discovered the 'Australian Antigen' which was technically the surface antigen from Hepatitis B virus, which eventually lead to an entire field of unchartered viral research [265] . Hepatitis B virus is tropic to the liver and hence cause inflammation of the liver, which can lead to liver failure, liver cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatitis B viruses do not differentiate between continental boundaries and thus can be found in almost all places of human habitation. For Hepatitis B Virus, western Pacific and African region make up a larger bias for prevalence by contributing 6.2% and 6.1% of the total infections respectively [266] . Number of infected people with HBV is relatively higher than most of the viruses and that is one of the reasons why these two viruses are considered to be clinically very important. According to the WHO, the number of chronically infected patients with HBV is 257 million and for that of HCV is 71 million worldwide [266, 267] . The terminology of acute and chronic infection is a major criterion to classify the type and severity of the infection. Acute infection means the body is able to clear the virus within 6 months of incidence, whereas in chronic infection, the immune system is unable to nullify the threat and the virus is persistent [268] . Some of these infections are co-infection with different viruses such as HIV, which furthers the complication [269, 270] . The number of deaths attributed to chronic infection with HBV is astonishing which is corroborated by reports of 887,000 deaths due to HBV related cirrhosis and/or hepatocellular carcinoma in 2015 alone [271] . As the numbers suggest, these viruses are already an overloading economic burden for the healthcare system and hence actual expenditure statistics are monumental. For HBV, the economic burden for lifetime carriers crosses the $9 Billion with $360 million spent on chronic infections per year [272] . All these reasons make up a powerful stimulus to study and eradicate these viruses. HBV is a spherical enveloped virus within Hepadnaviridae family [273] . Measuring 42nm in diameter, it is one of the smallest DNA virus known, with a compact genome size of 3.2Kb. Due to its compactness, the genome of HBV has an overlapping genome which is partially double-stranded, relaxed circular in nature [274] . It consists of 4 open reading frames which translate to 4 major proteins namely: Polymerase, Core, Surface antigen, and HBx [275] . Interesting fact about Polymerase is that it also acts as a reverse transcriptase, which is unusual, as HBV is a DNA virus. Polymerase is also the largest transcript generated by HBV [276, 277] . Another protein known as the Surface antigen which is also known as (HBsAg) was previously thought as Australian antigen during the discovery of HBV by Baruch Blumberg, it is now used as identification marker of HBV infection in the patient sera [278] . Core is a structural protein which makes up the viral capsid. It also acts as a unique marker for assays like Western blot and Native gel analysis. Lastly, HBx is the smallest regulator protein translated by HBV and has been shown to be involved in replication of the virus both ex vivo and in vivo [275, [279] [280] [281] [282] . HBV is a non-cytopathic virus, which does not kill the hepatocyte, as opposed to some lytic viruses which are cytopathic in nature [283] . There are a number of reasons for viral persistence-first being the innate immune evasion like a stealth virus, where HBV does not expose its genetic material to the host cytoplasm [284] . This mechanism used by HBV is very successful in long term persistence in the host cell. Another reason could also be the expression of HBeAg, a protein produced by core ORF and its vertical transfer from mother to offspring. As new borns are the major victim population suffering from chronic version of HBV, HBeAg is recently hailed as one of the most promising reasons for chronic infection and viral persistence [285] . Children born to HBV infected mother have the highest chance of getting chronic HBV infection due to the high rate of vertical transmission [286] . Other means of getting HBV infection is through the exchange of bodily fluids such as blood. Blood banks have a mandatory rule for testing for HBV before donating the blood to somebody in need. HBV infections are divided into two main sections: Acute infection and Chronic Infection. Acute infections are considered to be the less damaging as compared to Chronic infections because adults are able to clear the infection with the help of their immune system whereas in chronic infections, the virus always persist in the body, evading the immune response [287] . Chronic HBV can be divided into 4 categories: Immune tolerance phase, Immune clearance phase, Inactive HBsAg carrier stage, and HBeAg-negative [288] . HBsAg is a clear mark for HBV infection and its sustenance for more than 6 months after initial infection is a sign of chronic infection. During the immune tolerance phase, there is little to no liver inflammation for decades, normal aminotransferases levels (ALT), but it is associated with high titers of HBV DNA [289] . Another phase of chronic inflammation criterion is immune clearance phase. Progression of fibrosis and liver inflammation is observed in this phase with high HBV DNA and HBeAg expression. Increased ALT levels seen in this phase are often associated with CTLs (Cytotoxic T-lymphocytes) mediated response. Seroconversion to anti-HBe is a significant response to control the viral detection in serum. Inactive HBsAg carrier phase is majorly characterized by loss of HBeAg expression and seroconversion to anti-HBs. ALT levels are found to be normal and low levels of the liver disease appear with this phase. Finally, there is a reactivation phase which is called HBeAg negative phase, which is marked by increased inflammation and HBeAg negative. A significant increase in the HBV DNA levels is detected along with high tissue necrosis [290] . Long-term chronic HBV infection also leads to HCC, but the exact mechanism of its progression is not known. HBV is known as Stealth virus because of its ability to be invisible to the innate immune response while its invasion of the hepatocyte [291] . Recently, it was implicated that human sodium taurocholate co-transporting peptide [hNTCP] was the HBV receptor through which it infects the human hepatocyte [292] . Clathrinmediated endocytosis is a potential candidate to explain the entry of HBV [293] . From initial entry to nuclear localization, HBV does not expose its genetic material to the intracellular immune response, as the nucleocapsid is still intact. Nucleocapsid disintegrates at the nucleus pore, releasing relaxed circular HBV DNA with the polymerase [294] . Once inside the nucleus, it forms cccDNA with help from host factors such as histones [295] . Transcription of this cccDNA results in the formation of pgRNA, which when translated produces core and polymerase for packaging. This pgRNA is also used by Reverse transcriptase to make HBV DNA for completion of the HBV replication cycle. The action of Reverse transcriptase takes place inside the nucleocapsid. Some of the HBV DNA is recycled back into the nucleus and a majority of it is packaged out via the ER pathway. Even though there is so little to no exposure of HBV genetic material in the cytosol, there is some activation of innate immune response. Some studies show that 5' region of the pgRNA sensed by RIG-1 or MDA5 leads to the production of IFN0-λ [296] . Over the course of evolution, HBV has acquired some tactics to interfere with the host's immune responses. Some of these innate immune evasion tactics include the blocking of TLR3 and RIG-1 induced Interferon response factors, inhibition of STING pathway, and blocking nuclear translocation of STAT1 [297] . All these hindrances are towards innate responses which are important during the initial stages of infection. Talking about other responses, there are few cells which are capable of fighting off HBV infection. NK cells, T cells, and antibodies are the major players to counteract HBV infection with the latter two forming the adaptive immune arm. NK cells are cytolytic or cytotoxic in nature and they also produce IFN-γ to promote inflammation. HBV infection reduces the production of IFN-γ [297] . Antibodies are produced towards HBsAg-surface antigens providing protective immunity. Both CD4 + T cells and CD8 + T cells are very important in clearing of HBV, but particularly CD8 + T-cells are the ones known for their cytolytic activity against HBV infected cells. Absence of CD8 + T cells is known to prolong HBV infection. Interaction and upregulation of the PD-1/PD-ligand leads to CD8 + T cell exhaustion, which might be the reason why during chronic infection, CD8 + T response is dysfunctional (Reviewed in Ref [297] ). Treatments for HBV aims to clear the viral titers and/or neutralizing the surface antigens. Once the chronic phase of HBV kicks in, complete clearance of HBV is almost impossible because of its presence inside the nuclei of the host cell, but it could be contained to a minimum level [298] . Treatments are considered necessary during liver tissue damages phases, which occur during chronic infection. There are 7 treatment options available for chronic HBV infection: 2 interferon-based therapies and 5 Nucleoside analogs (NUC). Immuno-based therapies offer a boost up to the host's immune system and the nucleoside analogs interrupt viral replication. The two interferon-based therapies include conventional interferon therapy and PEGylated interferon-alpha therapy. These therapies enhance the power of the immune system to clear HBeAg and HBsAg as these will be encountered by the immune cells, which are activated through interferon signaling pathways [299] . Side effects of these therapies are greater than that of NUCs. There are 5 Analogs namely lamivudine, adefovir, entecavir, tenofovir, and telbivudine. Analogs act at the replication level to block the formation of the new virions and hence are a very efficient way to control the viral load. Combination therapies have a risk of developing resistance to one of the drugs used. Adefovir is often used in place of lamivudine where there is resistance to the latter [299] . There are preventive measures in place for HBV. The vaccination program has been very successful in preventing HBV transmission, which leads to a gradual decrease in HBV load on the population [300] . The HBV vaccine is based on the HBsAg, which will generate anti-HBs in the recipient and hence provides protective immunity to an individual. Since 1992 WHO have recommended all countries to incorporate the HBV vaccine program into their routine immunization format [301] . There is also Post-exposure prophylaxis present for HBV, which uses HBV immunoglobulin (HBIG). This could be used after the individual is exposed to the contaminated blood/ bodily fluids and it can also be used to prevent HBV vertical transfer from mother to child [302] . Apart from these preventions strategies, routine blood tests, screening of blood products, or use of condoms could greatly reduce the risk of HBV exposure [303] . Although advances in Hepatitis research have taken place, definitive answers are yet to follow. Developing and improving therapies like PEG-Interferon and nucleoide or nucleoside analogs are still the central focus of HBV research. Using these technologies, it is currently impossible to remove complete cccDNA from a patient's liver cells [304] . So the markers which are used for antiviral treatments are HBsAg, ALT levels, negative serum HBV DNA, and negative HBeAg respectively. There is also a need to use alternatives or different NUCs as using NUCs lead to the development of resistance and NUC related syndromes. Adefovir related Fanconi syndrome is associated with renal failure and hence while designing NUCs, these side effects should be taken into consideration [305] . Some of the future treatment options include generation of Tenofovir alafenamide, treatment of HBV ccc DNA and targeting NTCP. Tenofovir alafenamide demonstrated better antiviral activity and reduced the exposure of Tenofovir that leads to lower renal failures [305, 306] . Clearly, ccc DNA, was reported by APOBEC 3A and 3B related agents which will need further validation [304] . APOBEC has been known to target the viral genome as it mutates the bases during synthesis of new viral genetic material. NTCP, the recently found receptor for HBV entry, is also the latest target for HBV treatment. Some early reports suggest that cyclosporine A inhibits the interaction between NTCP and HBV surface proteins, and this could be an important breakthrough in controlling HBV infection in the future [307] . Also from the CD8 + T point of view, there has been an emphasis on anti PD-1 therapies which would block the exhaustion of the CTL activity and help in clearance of the virus. There are around 30 different drugs which are in the clinical trials which differ from NUC and Interferons [308] . Recent success of the Hepatitis C viral containment, and there is excitement in the HBV field for new directions. All the drugs which are in the clinical phase drug pipeline are either Direct acting that target virus or Indirect acting that target human host. For Direct acting siRNA, entry inhibitors, capsid inhibitors, and HBsAg inhibitors are the main drugs being developed [308] . And from Indirect acting drugs point of view, increasing the host's immunity is the answer to contain the viral infection (Reviewed in Ref [308] ). Like the Hepatitis B virus, the Hepatitis C virus is tropic to the liver and hence causes inflammation of the liver, which can lead to liver failure, liver cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. The Hepatitis C virus does not differentiate between continental boundaries and thus can be found in almost all places of human habitation. For Hepatitis C, Eastern Mediterranean and the European region take the major share of 2.3% and 1.5% respectively [267] . According to the WHO, the number of chronically infected patients with HCV is 71 million worldwide [266, 267] . The number of deaths due to liver inflammation attributed to chronic infection with HCV is about 399,000 people each year [271] . As the numbers suggest, these viruses are already an overloading economic burden for the healthcare system and hence actual expenditure statistics are monumental. Unlike HBV, the numbers are not far less for HCV, around $300 million is spent on liver transplant every year and the lifetime infected patient healthcare cost reaching about $9 billion [272] . Discovered in 1989 at Chiron, HCV when compared to HBV, is a larger virus consisting of 9.6kb of single-stranded RNA genome under a lipid bilayer envelope. It also forms larger 45nm-65nm virion particles than HBV [309] . It is a member of Flaviviridae family, which hosts members like Dengue virus and Zika virus [310] . IRES-containing uncapped 5' UTR region translates a positive-stranded RNA into one large polyprotein which eventually gives rise to 10 different proteins [311] . The proteins are divided into 2 main categories: Structural and Non-structural proteins and one separate entity: viroporin p7. Structural proteins are core, envelope (E1 & E2), and Non-structural proteins (NS2, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5A, & NS5B) [309, 312] . NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5A, and NS5B forms the replicase machinery, and NS2 and p7 are essential for viral assembly and release [311] . HCV virulence is well known and it is aptly called the 'hard to kill virus' [313] . Virulence of HCV may be attributed to the types of genotypes it has and the different role every genotype plays in accordance with the pathogenesis. For example, the Type 1 genotype is more aggressive and more directly linked to HCC and cirrhosis. Type 3 is associated with steatosis and fibrosis [314] . Also, the genetic makeup of the host is a major factor in virulence of HCV. The HAVCR1 gene shows variable susceptibility towards different genotypes of HCV. In HIV co-infected patients, IL28B CC was shown to be associated with chronic hepatitis C infection in patients infected with HCV genotype 3 than HCV genotype 1 or 4 [315] . Recently one more factor leading to HCV's virulence has come to light, involving stimulation of Drp1 by HCV, which leads to uneven fragmentation of Mitochondria [313] . Similar to the Hepatitis B virus' clinical manifestations, the Hepatitis C virus shows two types of disease progression: Acute and Chronic Infections. Majority of HCV acute patients remain asymptomatic. Around 20-30% of acutely infected patients develop clinical symptoms [316] . These symptoms may include weakness, anorexia, and jaundice. Levels of ALT rise 10 times the normal limit which is necrotically damaging to the liver tissue [317] . In self-containing acute infections, the levels of ALT and the HCV RNA both go down with time. Detection of HCV acute infection is dependent upon anti-HCV produced by the body within 1-3 months after onset [318] . Late or undetectable levels of anti-HCV antibodies could lead to major liver damage. Majority of HCV infected individuals develop HCV chronic infection with HCV RNA. Presence of HCV RNA in the blood for more than 6 months after the onset of HCV infection is called chronic HCV infection. It depends on factors such as demography, ethnicity, and gender of the affected individual. Factors like age, HIV infection, alcohol consumption, prior exposure to jaundice etc. are linked to developing HCV infection (Reviewed in Ref [318] ). Levels of ALT also plays a role in the rate of disease progression. If ALT is at normal levels, then the disease progression is slower than what is associated with the upregulated levels of ALT. Hepatocellular Carcinoma is also associated with chronic HCV infection under various conditions. HCV coinfection with HBV leads to a higher chance of developing HCC [319] . Co-infection with HIV and host genetic factors are associated with HCV associated HCC development. The HCV being the lipid centric virus has two envelope glycoproteins E1 and E2. These two proteins are involved in the entry mechanism of the HCV. These two glycoproteins interact with CD81 and various other surface proteins such as claudin [263, 280, 290] , occludin, and epidermal growth factor receptor to enter the host cell [320] . Clathrin-mediated endocytosis is how the virus enters the target cell and releases the nucleocapsid into the cytoplasm. Due to the release of the nucleocapsid in the cytoplasm, the genomic material of the HCV is exposed to the host's immune machinery, which counteracts the HCV in several ways. Positive-strand RNA bearing Internal Ribosome Binding Site (IRES) is used for translation of HCV proteins. The HCV translates a large polyprotein, which is broken down into individual proteins later during ER related processing. Breaking down of polyprotein requires help from two cellular peptidases: Signalase and Signal peptide peptidase and two viral peptidases: NS2 and NS3/4A [321] . NS5B and helicase domain of NS3 are regulators of HCV replication. They assist with unwinding and stabilizing the HCV RNA in the replication complex [322, 323] . NS4B plays a role in the formation of compartments for HCV replication by producing 'membranous web' structures [309] . Certain host factors also assist in HCV replication such as; microRNA-122 which binds to IRES to increase the efficiency of translation whereas Cyclophilin A interacts with NS5A and NS5B to increase HCV replication [309] . HCV also uses Fatty acid pathways and VLDL production for assembly and release [324] . Compared to HBV, HCV initiates a better innate response due to the exposure of its genetic material in the cytoplasm. Major players in HCV induced immune responses are IFNs I and III, ISGs, NK cells, T cells, and antibody type response. During HCV infection the levels of IFNs and ISGs are upregulated in the cell. Generally, they have an inflammatory response towards the threat, but in the case of HCV, components like ubiquitin-specific peptidase 18 (USP18) and ISG15 negatively regulate the downstream signaling pathways of interferon signaling and help to prolong the persistence of HCV in the cell [325] . USP18, downregulates the production of IFNα through interaction with IFNAR signaling [326] . ISG15 is abundant in the cell during HCV infection and it also stabilizes USP18 which relates to poor IFNα processing [327] . Moving on from internal response towards a more cellular response, NK cells are paramount in HCV infection. During prolonged HCV infection there is a decrease in production of IFN-γ and increase in cytolytic enzymes. This also results in host tissue damages due to cytotoxic effects of the NK cells. Upregulation of KIR receptors, which are found on NK cells and are markers for lysis of target cells, is seen during HCV infection indicating the importance of NK cells [328] . Due to the hypervariable regions in E1 and E2 glycoproteins and high mutation rates, T cell and B cell responses are short and not efficient enough. E1 and E2 glycoproteins are the major targets of neutralizing antibodies. However, these antibodies are short-lived, and are not persistent during chronic stages of the infection. Due to direct cell to cell transmission of HCV, it often escapes the antibodies and is difficult to neutralize [312, 329] . Neutralizing antibodies are thought to have a lesser role in controlling HCV infection, as they are detected in chronic stages rather than after acute infections [330] . As far as T cells go in accordance with HCV, CD8 + T cells are the frontrunners in combating the viral threat. They are active during the acute phase and relatively slow during the chronic phase of HCV infection [331, 332] . A vigorous IFN-γ response is seen by CD8 + T cells, which helps in providing an antiviral response at the site. Mutation in HCV also leads to its escape from T cells detection, but the response is still important during an earlier stage of infection. CD4 + T cells are diminished cell-mediated immune response during chronic infection due to reduced IL-2 production [312, 331] . The CD8 + T cellmediated immune response is enhanced via the assistance of CD4 + T cells during the acute stage of infection. Since spontaneous clearance of HCV is seen in acute infection, there is no treatment authorized for acute infections. Patients with raised levels of liver enzymes are able to clear the infection more rapidly than those with lower levels. If the infection is not cleared, IFN monotherapy is used for rescue therapy. Sustained Virological response (SVR) is over 90% in these conditions [333] . This means that patients are aviremic for over 24 weeks after the treatment. Use of DAA (Direct Acting Antivirals) in acute infection is not the ideal treatment option, but it has 100% SVR (Sustained Virological Response) detected 12 weeks after the end of therapy [309] . DAAs are effective drugs for chronic hepatitis treatment DAA starget three essential proteins in the HCV replication cycle: NS5B polymerase, NS3/4A protease, and NS5A protein [309] . All patients with detectable levels of viral RNA in their serum should be treated with DAA therapy. Combinations of more than one DAA work significantly better than taking an individual DAA. The nature of the regimen also depends on the genotype and the geographical area. Examples of approved DAAs in North America and Europe are elbasvir/grazoprevir and sofosbuvir/velpatasvir. The combination of IFN and DAA are some of the preferred methods of treatment. Vaccines are currently not available for Hepatitis C virus. Post-exposure prophylaxis preventive measures are difficult to undertake for the Hepatitis C virus, and as such, the focus is on how to prevent the spread of Hepatitis C virus in the first place. Screening for blood before transfusion, needle awareness strategies and Sex education are the primary preventive measures which need to be addressed. Identifying the people infected with HCV and treating them is the best option to prevent it further from spreading [309] . Introduction of DAAs (Direct Acting Antivirals) has revolutionized the way we think about treating HCV infection, it is now known as a 'curable' disease. Even though DAAs are the best option for treatment of HCV infection, resistance and potential side effects are the reasons for which there is a continuity into HCV research. There are various new strategies for HCV treatment options that are being evaluated. Researchers are using similar viruses to solve for HCV related complications. Using bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV), which is similar to HCV in many aspects, researchers have studied different targets for HCV replication cycle, genetic makeup, and general biology [334] . Another interesting area for HCV research is the generation of antivirals from marine invertebrates. Isolation of extracts from the Bacillus genus showed antiviral potential during the viral adsorption phase [335] . Also extracts from plants are being used for potential antivirals as their side effects are minimal for human usage. Majority of the plant extracts tested so for antivirals, target RNA levels. For example; Polyphenols from Chinese mangroves exhibited inhibition of HCV's RNA replication [336] . Caffeine has been shown to improve the liver functionality of chronically infected patients with HCV, it targets the replication phase of HCV with non-toxic concentrations [337] . So all these new and exciting areas which are being explored for HCV treatment shape up the current and future endeavors for this particular field. Due to the effectiveness of the current regimen for HCV treatment, not many drugs are undergoing clinical trials, but there a few of them which are aimed at overcoming all the potential pitfalls of the current treatment options. In 2016, Harvoni and Viekira Pak were the highest prescribed HCV medications with a 95% success rate for eliminating HCV (Reviewed in Ref [308] ). Drugs like Samatasvir, Odalasvir, MK-3682 etc, are top of the line for their respective clinical trials (Reviewed in Ref [308] ). These drugs are still targeting the viral components such as polymerase and proteases, but their success rates during clinical phases has strengthened their overall reliability. Retroviruses are enveloped positive sense ssRNA viruses that belong to the retroviridae family. HIV and HTLV-1 are retroviruses that will be the focus of the discussion on retroviruses because they pose a significant health burden [338] . The two viruses not only have similar structures and mechanisms of infection, but they are also more likely to be transmitted when someone engages in risky behaviors, such as unprotected sex and sharing of contaminated needles, as well as breastfeeding by infected mothers. HIV primarily infects macrophages, CD4 + T cells, and neurons [338] . The difficulty with completely eradicating HIV from the host is due to HIV's ability to integrate its genome into T cells, macrophages, and DCs, making it a global health problem [339, 340] . HTLV-1 infects CD4 T cells. The probability or contracting HTLV-1 through blood transfusion of organ transplantation renders HTLV-1 a significant health burden. As such, it is imperative to have adequate blood and/or organ screening processes in place to prevent the transmission of HTLV-1 [341] . For the last several years, our group has studied host-pathogen interactions between HTLV-1 and the immune system with a focus on viral transactivator protein Tax and dendritic cells [342] [343] [344] [345] [346] [347] [348] [349] [350] [351] . These studies have identified key aspects of viral pathogenesis with respect to both ATLL and HAM/TSP paving ways for novel immunotherapeutic strategies currently underway in our research team. HIV is a member of the retroviridae family that is responsible for a global epidemic with an annual mortality of more than one million [352] . HIV glycoprotein interacts with CD4 (on CD4 + T cells, monocytes, macrophages, and DCs) and CCR5 (on T cells, macrophages, and DCs) to mediate attachment and internalization of the virus into permissive host cells [338] . Furthermore, HIV can infect granulocytes (neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils) as well as macrophages, microglial, and astrocytes in the central nervous system especially the brain [353, 354] . In the absence of an effective vaccine, clinical management is focused on prevention, education, and anti-retroviral therapy. Research on HIV therapy is focused on developing immunotherapy and immunomodulators. Challenges to developing an effective HIV vaccine constitutes a global health burden because of HIV's ability to integrate and cause a latent infection, as well as its ability to evade neutralizing antibody-mediated humoral immunity and cell-mediated cytotoxicity. An enormous barrier to the control of HIV spread is the lack of effective HIV vaccines and unaffordability of breakthrough on anti-HIV therapy in resource limited countries. In the absence of early diagnosis and treatment, HIV can lead to secondary or opportunistic infections and malignancy [355] [356] [357] . HIV is a global epidemic, killing over 1 million people annually and causing 3.4 million new infections in the last 5 years [352] . Untreated HIV infection causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), and the increased susceptibility to opportunistic infections usually leads to AIDS-related death. The only effective way to manage HIV infection focuses on preventative measures to decrease transmission and lifelong antiretroviral therapy (ART) for those infected with HIV [358, 359] . HIV infection is associated with high-risk groups including injection drug users (IDUs), men who have sex with men (MSM), and people practicing high-risk sexual behavior [360] . UNAIDS, the main international organization dedicated to the control of HIV/AIDS epidemic, set goals that include having fewer than 50,000 newly infected people and fewer than 500,000 AIDS-related deaths by 2020, and elimination of AIDS epidemic by 2030 [361] . HIV treatment coverage is increasing steadily from slightly over 20% in 2010 to almost 50% in 2015, also mirrored by decreasing numbers of AIDS-related deaths: about 1.5 million in 2010 and 1.1 million in 2015. The number of new HIV infections in most regions, besides Eastern Europe and Central Asia, has stabilized. HIV mutates during active infection, making the adaptive immune response ineffective and complicating vaccine development. In addition, the virus acquires drug resistance during therapy and it varies in different regions, making it difficult to find sustainable, worldwide treatments. There are two types of HIV genomes: HIV-1 (causing over 90% infections), which includes groups M, N, O and P, and HIV-2, which includes groups A and B [362] . HIV belongs to the retroviridae family, genus Lentivirus. The virus is enveloped, with positive sense single stranded RNA genome in a spherical capsid 119−207 nm in diameter [363, 364] . HIV bears several Env spikes on its surface that allow for cell infection [363] . HIV genome encodes 16 proteins. They include structural proteins: Matrix, Capsid, Nucleocapsid, and p6; enzymes: Protease (PR), Reverse Transcriptase (RT), and Integrase (IN); regulatory proteins: Tat and Rev; accessory proteins: Vif, Vpr, Nef, and Vpu/Vpx (in HIV-1/HIV-2); and envelope glycoproteins gp120 and gp41 [365] . Three heterodimers gp120/gp41 form a trimer: the envelope glycoprotein Env that mediate cell entry. Its immunogenicity is low due to massive glycan shield preventing access of antibodies to over 97% of Env surface [338] . Initial HIV infection induces strong activation of innate and adaptive immune response, but mutations of the virus gradually lead to immune system evasion and elimination of CD4 + T cells [360] . Complete elimination of HIV in infected individuals using ART is not possible due to latent residency of the viral particles and/ or integrated HIV genomes in memory T cells and possibly some populations of macrophages and dendritic cells [339, 340] . HIV is transmitted through blood, sexual secretions, and vertically from mother to baby. When transmitted through infected blood, ie. needles, macrophages, dendritic cells, and CD4 + T cells take up the virions and spread the infection. When the virus in semen, cervicovagina, and rectal mucus comes in contact with the mucosa of non-infected individuals, it can infect the periluminal T cells, DCs, and monocytes/macrophages of the mucosal epithelium [366] . During vertical transmission, the fetus may swallow infected maternal fluids or become infected via breastfeeding [367] . HIV has an incubation period of 1-2 weeks, which marks the primary acute infection, and manifests itself with flu-like symptoms for 2-4 weeks that can go unrecognized as HIV infection. The next stage, the chronic/latent infection, significantly varies from 1 to 20 years [368] . The last stage of infection is AIDS, marked by the development of opportunistic infections [369] . The potential for infected individuals to transmit HIV is dependent on the viral load [366] ; asymptomatic individuals and those who do not have anti-HIV antibodies in their plasma could still be infected and have the potential to infect others [370] . Babies born from HIVinfected mothers have the highest chance of being infected if the mothers were not on ART [360] . The few individuals who are resistant to HIV/AIDS are called longterm non-progressors, defined as an absence in CD4 cell count, and HIV elite controllers, meaning no viremia [371] . Decreasing CD4 + T cell count is an important diagnostic marker. AIDS-associated opportunistic infections include oral candidiasis, tuberculosis, herpes zoster, and fungal pneumonia in both the ART-naïve people and people who receive ART. ART reduces the risk of 15 most prevalent opportunistic infections by 57-91%, with the greatest reduction shown for oral candidiasis, toxoplasmosis, and Pneumocystis pneumonia [372] . In developed countries, HIV-infected people on ART have only slightly reduced life expectancy compared to the general population [373, 374] . However, HIV-infected individuals on ART still have increased risk of cardiovascular, digestive, excretory, musculoskeletal, and central nervous system diseases. One of the consequences of HIV infection is HIV-associated dementia (HAD) that develops in 20-30% of HIV-infected people not on ART, and also HIVassociated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) affecting 18-50% of patients with chronic HIV on ART [375] . HIV targets CD4 + T lymphocytes, macrophages, and DCs [376] . T cell infection is initiated when the cell surface receptor CD4 and co-receptors CCR4 or CXCR5 interact with viral glycoprotein gp120. After this initial interaction, the Env complex undergoes a conformational change and viral fusion peptide, a part of gp41, interacts with the cellular membrane; eventually the viral and cellular membranes fuse and the capsid contents are transported inside the T cell [377] . Gut CD4 + T cells with high expression of CCR5 [378] and T-follicular helper cells [379] are T cell populations highly vulnerable to infection. Other types of T cells serve as longterm viral reservoirs, such as subsets of memory T cells [379, 380] . Following host cell entrance, HIV proteins interact with numerous host cell proteins [381] and re-program the cell functions [382] . HIV virion core changes conformation to reverse transcription complex (RTC) [364] . RTC allows for transcription and recombination to occur using the two HIV RNA molecules as templates to build the chimeric double-stranded DNA [383] . RTC then binds nuclear membrane proteins, undergoes uncoating, and allows the pre-integration complex (PIC) to reach the nucleus via the nuclear pore complex (NPC) [384] . The viral genome is then integrated into the host genome into the active chromatin segments [364, 384] . Host cell proteins aid in transcription of the HIV genes, splicing, translation, and virion budding [364] . Activity of HIV replication in the + T cells is dependent on the activation status: resting T cells prevent HIV replication at different levels, while activated T cells allow multiple rounds of HIV replication [385] . Macrophages are the second most important cell type in HIV infection. Macrophages bind and take up virions, and while they rarely allow for HIV replication, they do influence the immune responses [386] , promoting inflammation, disrupting the blood-brain barrier [387] , and serving as both long-term reservoirs of infection (245) and means for trans-infection of T cells [388] . CD4 [389] , CCR5 [390] and CXCR4 [391] , mannose receptor (MR) [388] , purinergic receptors [392] , syndecan, cysteine-rich scavenger receptor, gp340, elastase, glycolipid GalCer, heparan sulfate, disulfide isomerase protein [386] , and DC-SIGN [393] mediate binding and capture of HIV in macrophages. Another route of macrophage infection is capturing HIV-infected T cells [394] . DCs are another key cell type in HIV infection. Myeloid DCs are infected non-productively, and they can provide trans-mucosal transmission of HIV and mediate trans-infection of T cells [395] . HIV infects mucosal DC via CCR5 and CXCR4 on DC, and this promotes spread and transmission of HIV to trans-infect CD4 + T cell in the draining lymph nodes [3] . Immature forms of myeloid DCs express high levels of CCR5 but express high levels of CXCR4 in their mature state. The immature form promotes HIV transmission because they are susceptible to HIV infection [396] . However, conventional DC with low expression of CXCR4 and CCR5 do not support efficient replication of HIV [3] . HIV endocytosis by DCs result in partial degradation of the virus with some virus retaining the infectious capability. This could explain why these APCs promote infection of CD4 + T cell, as these captured nondegraded HIV molecules can be transferred to CD4 + T cell in a process called trans-infection through infectious synapses [396] . Macrophages and DCs mediate trans-infection through receptors including Siglec-1 (CD169), DC-SIGN, MR, Langerin, immune dendritic cell receptor (DCIR), heparan sulfate proteoglycan, syndecan-3, and galactosylceramide [397] . The infectious synapse allows transfer of HIV from conventional DC to CD4 + T cells via a gp120 and CD4 dependent interaction. HIV interaction with DC-SIGN on DCs may skew T cells response toward generating Th2 cells that favor development of inflammation and fibrosis during viral infection [6] . In spite of known primary role of Siglec-1 in myeloid-to-T cell trans-infection, its absence does not influence HIV acquisition and disease outcomes in Siglec-1 null individuals, demonstrating that other transmission mechanisms are sufficient (T cell-to-T cell) for development of HIV infection [398] . HIV evades intracellular recognition and secures replication, assembly and viral release by multiple mechanisms. For example, HIV genetic material is surrounded by proteins that are inaccessible for the host cell receptors before it is translocated inside the nucleus [399] . HIV protein Nef promotes T cell activation, HIV replication and evasion of the infected cells from cytolytic immune response [385] . Viral proteins Nef and Vpu induce decline in CD4 and BST2 expression on the cell surface that reduce efficiency of antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity [400] . Vpu protein also inhibits Theterin function, which normally prevents the release of virions, activates antiviral signaling and cytokine release [401] . HIV capsid interacts with CPSF6 (Cleavage and Polyadenylation Specificity Factor subunit 6) and cyclophilins of monocyte-derived macrophages to block type 1 interferon production and allow viral replication in these cells [402] . HIV-infected T cells die by caspase-1-mediated pyroptosis, an inflammatory form of programmed cell death with release of cytoplasmic contents and cytokines. This mechanism of T cell elimination is supposed to be a cause of chronic inflammation in HIV [403] . HIV infection also causes dysregulation of B cells and antibody production [404, 405] , and impairs regulatory and suppressive functions of HIV-infected T regulatory cells [406] . HIV evades recognition and inhibits the ability of pDCs to generate IFN-α by the use of gp120 to suppress the induction of CpG-induced activation of pDCs [3] . HIV may reduce IL-12 and IFN-γ production by DCs and NK cells respectively, consequently resulting in reduced Th1 polarization [11] . HIV non-progressors and controllers possess diverse mechanisms of immune defense. CD4 + T cells and macrophages from HIV controllers are less susceptible to infection [407] . DCs of HIV controllers are less susceptible to HIV infection but more potent in viral uptake compared to the DCs of healthy individuals [408] ; DCs of elite controllers are also able to recognize HIV and stimulate antigen-specific reactions in the T cells [409] . CD8 + T cells from HIV controllers contain highly functional HIV-specific pool [410] effective at elimination of infected CD4 T cells [411] . Moreover, CD8 regulatory T cells of elite controllers that express KIR3DL1 gene can repress HIV replication in Bw4-80Ile-expressing CD4 + T cells by preventing helper T-cell activation [412] . Another immune response in elite controllers is the production of poly-functional antibodies with increased effector activities and production of IgG1/3, but not of IgG2/4 subclass [413] . HIV treatment should be started immediately after diagnosis, and effectiveness of ART should be continuously monitored. There is a wide diversity of ART algorithms based on age, maternal status, disease stage, and viral drug resistance status. Most patients will be on a combination of three different anti-retroviral drugs to increase effectiveness and reduce resistance. People living with HIV not on ART are recommended to follow preventative measures to decrease transmission and to seek immediate care for opportunistic infections [355] . In the absence of an effective vaccine, HIV prevention is based on education, testing, and treatment. Harm reduction programs targeting high-risk groups have proven efficacious: providing IDUs with clean syringes to prevent blood-to-blood transmission, promotion of condom use among sex workers, HIV counseling, and testing and treatment in all high-risk groups [356, 357] . Vaccine development encompasses a number of different approaches: vaccines based on a wide range of immunogenic types from peptides to nanoparticles [414] , DNA vaccines [415] , dendritic cell vaccines [416] , and therapeutic vaccines [417] . An important obstacle to the development of an HIV vaccine is the need to create an HIV-specific T cell pool to support HIV-specific antibody production, with this pool still being the most vulnerable to infection and promotion of HIV replication [418] . The HIV vaccine RV144 has shown 31.2% efficacy and provided only temporary defense [419] . For a long time, the development of HIV vaccines was mainly focused on the generation of broadly neutralizing antibodies (bNAbs) and cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) [420] . Induction of neutralizing antibodies is considered important since they usually correlate with the protective effect of vaccines and provide sterilizing immunity [414] . Induction of pathogen-specific CTLs is considered important based on research on efficacy correlates of SIV vaccines [420] , and after analysis of the mechanisms of RV144 efficacy that included cytotoxic effects of non-neutralizing antibodies [420, 421] . Another novel aim in the development of HIV vaccines is generation of CD8 regulatory T cell response to prevent CD4 + T cell activation and viral replication [412] . Development of anti-HIV drugs is always ongoing. Besides the great number of small molecules being tested in preclinical and clinical trials [353] , there are therapeutic approaches on bNAbs being studied for passive immunotherapy, including those that demonstrate efficacy in human subjects [422] [423] [424] , and immunotherapy based on checkpoint blockers [417] . More complex HIV therapies are also proposed, such as adoptive therapy with chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells for development of antigen-specific cell-mediated responses [425, 426] , use of singlechain CARs based on bNAbs as neutralizing antibodies [427] , gene therapy using CRISPR/Cas9-mediated removal of HIV DNA from latently infected CD4 + T cells [428] , or genetic inactivation of HIV co-receptors production in CD4 T cells to prevent infection [429, 430] . Another future direction is the development of therapies aimed at modulating the host response to HIV [431] : cell and gene therapy have reached the stages of clinical trials [430, 432, 433] . Despite some recent breakthroughs, many of the new developments are highly complex and the costs of some of these treatments are not affordable in resource-limited countries. HTLV-1 is endemic in Japan, Brazil, Iran and parts of Sub-Saharan Africa [434] . It is a unique retrovirus that is transmitted through an immunological synapse wherein infected T cells form synapse with an uninfected cell to facilitate transfer of genetic material. Other forms of viral transmission include infection of dendritic cell, coinfection with HIV, and through virological synapse [435] . Education focused on safe sex practices and needle exchange programs are few preventative strategies to limit the spread of HTLV-1. Treatment is geared towards using chemotherapy to counteract symptoms of leukemia and lymphoma. A combination therapy of AZT and interferon-alpha is effective in some patients with ATL. There is no FDAapproved therapy for HTLV-1 infections [436] . HTLV was discovered in the 1980s by a team of researchers led by Robert Gallo. It is the cause of varying burden of disease in many countries [437] . HTLV-1 is the most clinically harmful subtype and it is endemic in Japan, Brazil, Iran, and parts of Sub-Saharan Africa with an estimated prevalence of 20 million cases as of 2017 [434] . While there are four recognized subtypes of HTLV, HTLV-3 and HTLV-4 have only been recently discovered, and have a very low global prevalence [438] . Between HTLV-1 & HTLV-2, HTLV-1 has received more research attention, and carries a larger burden of disease [438] . While this may seem perplexing given that HTLV-2 is more prevalent than HTLV-1 in some areas (like the US), HTLV-1 is the subtype that can progress to more deleterious conditions [439] . Some areas in Japan and South America have about 5% prevalence of HTLV-1, while European and North American countries barely have any reported cases, and of those, most are associated with travel to and from endemic areas [440] . HTLV-1's main routes of transmission are through secretions during unprotected sex, through infected blood, such as the sharing of contaminated needles, through the donation and transfusion of contaminated blood, and vertically between mother and baby [434] . As such, HTLV infection has significant social implications. This is especially important for HTLV-1, as it is the subtype that can progress to clinical disease. Higher male-specific virulence in areas like Japan could be due to an increased prevalence of breastfeeding and a persistence of women as viral reservoir for transmission [441] . This phenomenon has the potential to influence a perceived risk of contracting the virus, partially due to its similarities with HIV. HLTV is a member of the family Retroviridae, the subfamily Orthoretrovirinae, and the genus Deltaretrovirus, placing it in the same genus as the bovine leukemia virus and simian T-lymphocytic virus (STLV), the latter of which is considered to have evolved into HTLV after interspecies transmission [442] . The HTLV-1 genome carries several structural genes (i.e. gag, pol, & env), but it also contains an accessory pX region at its 3' end [443] . This portion of the genome contains genes such as Tax and HBZ (HTLV Zipper Factor), which encode proteins that are key to HTLV's interaction with the immune system. The trans-activating Tax protein is responsible for initiating an immune CTL response against HTLV-1-infected cells, while HBZ triggers immunological senescence, inducing chronic infection that leads to pathology of clinical disease [241, 443] . Both Tax and HBZ have been a major focus of HTLV research because fully characterizing their function and interaction with the Human Acute and Chronic Viruses: Host-Pathogen Interactions and Therapeutics immune system may lead to effective treatment or prevention of HTLV and related diseases. HTLV-1 is primarily transmitted through an immunological synapse, directing structural Gag and Env proteins to create a bridge with the uninfected cell, after which the infected T-cell sends its genetic material across the bridge. There are other ways the virus could be transmitted, such as by membrane extensions or by infection via DCs and, alongside HIV, through the typical virological synapse as well [241, 435] . Vertical transmission is the most common mechanism of the spread of infection in endemic areas [435, 444] . While this type of transfer can occur through breastfeeding and through the placenta, in the case of HTLV-1, a clear majority occurs through breastfeeding, with risk of transmission increasing the longer a mother breastfeeds [444] . Once breast milk is ingested, infected cells can penetrate intestinal mucosa or oral epithelium, and infect various cells in the child's immune system; penetration of mucosal epithelium is crucial for this type of transmission [435] . If the virus is spread through contaminated blood products, it doesn't need to cross mucosal barriers because it is already in the host's blood and can immediately initiate virological synapses with uninfected cells. This increased ease of infection drives home the importance of preventing blood-borne transmission of HTLV [435, 445] . Genetic factors play a role in HTLV's clinical course as well, though their role is more prominent in determining risk of progression to symptomatic disease. Certain HLA alleles can be risk factors or protective factors for ATL and HAM/TSP. Data suggests that HLA-A*02 and HLA-Cw*08 can be protective against HAM/TSP, while HLA-DRB1*0101 and HLA-B*5401 increase the risk of progressing to HAM/ TSP [446] . However, HLA-Cw*08 (along with HLA-DR1) can actually increase risk of HAM/TSP in other areas (Southern Japan) suggesting that environment al factors can influence the effect of the HLA haplotype on HTLV-related risks [446] . HTLV-1 is the only subtype that has been found to be associated with disease, though this may mean that an association between the three other subtypes and clinical disease hasn't been discovered yet [438] . Roughly 5% of patients do develop either ATL or HAM/TSP, both of which can have severe clinical consequences, including severe immunosuppression, the development of autoimmune diseases, and death [442] . ATL, characterized by atypically shaped lymphocytes or flower cells, which express CD3 but not CD20 [447] , have four recognized clinical subtypes: acute, chronic, smoldering, and lymphoma [448, 449] . ATL is diagnosed through serological and cytological testing, the latter being sputum analysis for malignant T cells [447, 449] . ATL is a multi-organ system disease. The skin is one of the most commonly affected organs, with patients presenting with erythema and plaques. Immunosuppression tends to occur more often in the less aggressive (chronic and smoldering) subtypes [448] . HLTV-1 alters CD4 + T cell behavior leading to increased inflammation and disinhibition of the immune system, increasing susceptibility for opportunistic infections [442, 448] . Immune system dysregulation can alter risk and clinical course of autoimmune diseases. For example, patients with Sjögren's syndrome have higher levels of anti-HTLV-1 antibodies, and if coinfected with HTLV-1, they have a higher amount of infiltrates and worse outcomes than if they had Sjögren's syndrome alone, implying that HTLV-1 has the potential to imbalance the entire immune system [442] . While ATL presents with diffuse effects, HAM/TSP is system-focused, mainly affecting the nervous system. Through the production of TNF-α, IFN-γ, and other cytokines, HAM/TSP exerts a neurotoxic effect that leads to spinal cord inflammation, especially in the thoracic region [450] . This inflammation leads to demyelination and axon dysfunction, which damage nerves innervating the thoracic spinal cord resulting in, among other symptoms, bladder dysfunction and possible paralysis [450] . HAM/TSP is diagnosed through the evaluation of the patient's serum and CSF showing antibodies against HTLV-1 [451, 452] . A neuroradiological study conducted in early 2017 produced data suggesting that HTLV-1 and HAM/TSP are associated with alterations in brain glucose metabolism, which can be detected via neuroimaging [451] . The glucose transporter GLUT-1, found in the blood-brain barrier among other places, is utilized by HTLV virions to infect cells, thereby competing with glucose for the transporter. One of the key immune cells implicated in HTLV is the T cell. When infected, T cells initially express the Tax protein, which suppresses their proliferation and enables their recognition by CD8 + T cells [453, 454] . It has been shown that infected cells can spread Tax through exosomes, a potential route for dissemination of the infection [454] . Tax is therefore necessary for an HTLV-1 infection to be successfully eradicated. It is thought that the immune systems of asymptomatic HTLV-1 carriers are more responsive to Tax, and that changing this responsiveness can induce progression to ATL or HAM/TSP [453, 455] . Studies show that patients who have progressed from latent HTLV to ATL or HAM/TSP initially had high expression of Tax and corresponding stimulation of the HTLV-specific immune response, but eventually something happens in their immune system circuitry, preventing every infected cell from being destroyed. This leads to viral persistence without future immunologic triggering, and proliferation of infected cells that can lead to ATL and HAM/TSP [341] . There are two prevailing schools of thought for this mechanism. On one side, it is hypothesized that T cell exhaustion plays a role in this transformation. Normally, the immune system shuts off once the invading pathogen is eradicated, however, exhaustion forces the response to shut off prematurely, allowing infected cells to persist in the host [456, 457] . PD-1 binds PD-L1 and induces exhaustion by suppressing proliferation of the infected cell and preventing it from interacting with other immune cells. Some studies have looked for ways to reverse exhaustion or prevent it altogether, possibly through blockade of PD-1, in order to keep the immune response active [453] . On the other side, HBZ protein is considered to be a main player in the progression from HLTV-1 infection to ATL or HAM/TSP. HBZ is expressed more in ATL patients than in carriers, contrary to Tax [341, 443, 458, 459] . HBZ acts to stimulate infected T cells and induce their proliferation, allowing them to outlast the immune response, eventually leading to ATL. It is also possible that the 'true' mechanism of ATL and/or HAM/TSP pathogenesis involves both exhaustion and the action of HBZ. DCs also play an important role in HLTV pathogenesis. They are among the most potent APCs in the human body, and are crucial for the propagation of the anti-HTLV immune response [455] . DCs can become infected with HTLV-1, but they express different receptors necessary for their immunological function [455] . DC-mediated transmission of HTLV-1 from infected DC to T cells involve heparin sulfate proteoglycan and neuropilin-1, and consequential transformation of HTLV-1infected T cells [6] . Patients whose HTLV-1 progresses to ATL and HAM/TSP were found to have significantly decreased amounts of pDCs compared to both carriers and uninfected controls [455] . Infected T cells may be unable to attack HTLV, and infected DCs may be unable to start the attack. DCs are also crucial for the immunogenic action of Tax. In a 2014 study examining the effect of DC presence and absence on Tax showed that Tax requires DCs to initiate the immune response against HTLV, and if the immune response does not start it is more likely that patients will progress to clinical disease [460] . Because HTLV infection is usually asymptomatic, treatment is only started if it progresses to ATL or HAM/TSP. ATL is mainly treated with chemotherapy to counteract the symptoms of leukemia and lymphoma, though patients have varying responses to this treatment [461] . Due to the generally dismal results of chemotherapy, some clinicians advocate to wait for less severe subtypes of ATL to become more aggressive, as smoldering forms are likely to remain asymptomatic. Chronic ATL produces milder symptoms than do lymphoma-type or acute ATL [436, 448] . A 2012 study found that a combination of antiviral and interferon therapy may prove more effective than chemotherapy, especially because the latter therapy can lead to ATL relapse and further complications [436] . Unlike ATL, there is no currently recognized treatment for HAM/TSP. Because HAM/TSP leads to neurological impairment of varying degrees including paralysis, discovering a viable treatment is important for all HTLV-1-infected patients, even those who remain asymptomatic. Presently, preventing transmission is the only way to decrease HTLV infection. Prevention follows the same guidelines as those of any blood-borne pathogen, as well as education on safe sex practices and needle-sharing, providing access to barrier contraception, and increasing awareness of the consequences of HLTV-1 infection [462] . Acquiring the virus from blood transfusion or solid organ transplant is possible, and as such, screening for HTLV in donated blood and other organs should be a priority [463] . Vertical transmission is one of the more significant routes of HTLV transmission. In some endemic countries (e.g. Japan) public health officials urge people with poor access to testing to avoid breastfeeding their infants. If the healthcare infrastructure is sufficiently developed, a mother's cessation of breastfeeding would not significantly affect her children's health; however, this is not the case in areas where people have less access to healthcare resources [444] . In such areas, researchers have acknowledged that complete avoidance of breastfeeding can harm more than help their children's health, and encourage breastfeeding only during the first few months of the infant's life [444] . There is currently no vaccine approved by the FDA or any other regulatory body for HTLV, ATL or HAM/TSP. A large amount of HTLV-related research is targeted towards vaccine development. Some studies have used Tax to model an HTLV vaccine, though a search of the literature suggests this has not yet led to its use as a clinical vaccine [453, 454, 460] . The brunt of HTLV-related research is focused more on ATL and HAM/TSP than the virus itself, owing to these two diseases comprising most of HTLV's disease burden. There is some research oriented towards HTLV, but it is mainly focused to further determine what differentiates asymptomatic carriers from patients who progress to ATL and HAM/TSP. Some research has served to redirect the focus of molecular HTLV investigations from the Tax protein to HBZ. The Tax protein is important for the initial development of HTLV infection and can be used as a marker that infection has progressed to ATL or HAM/TSP [453] . As an oncogenic protein, Tax is certainly critical for the immune response to HTLV infection. However, because both ATL and HAM/TSP rely on a dampened or even silenced immune response to HTLV for their development, researchers have shifted their focus to HBZ due to its role in allowing infected cells to persist through an immune response. Some research has suggested this occurs via HBZ decreasing the activity of T-cell inhibitory receptors such as PD-1 and TIGIT that normally blunt the immune response, either by decreasing their expression or decreasing their function [459, 464] . This blunted inhibition leads to stimulation of infected T cell proliferation, with excessive proliferation and suppression of other cell types being part of the clinical definition of ATL; HBZ stimulates proliferation by initiating a cascade that results in the phosphorylation of molecules like CD3ζ and ZAP-70 that induce T cell proliferation [459] . Furthermore, Tax has been found to not be expressed by a majority of T cells in ATL cases, suggesting its oncogenicity and immunogenicity are turned off once an infected carrier progresses to ATL [453] . A smaller amount of current research is devoted to HAM/TSP. A cross-sectional analysis of Brazilian HAM/TSP patients stratified by age generated data suggesting that younger HAM/TSP patients are more likely to be clinically depressed [465] , pointing to the importance of the psychological effects of the viral infection in addition to its physiological effects. Finally, while HAM/TSP treatment is not universally effective in all patient populations, a 2015 case report highlighted the use of cyclosporine to treat early myelopathy cases [466] . Future studies will be needed to show whether this treatment can be expanded to other stages of the disease, and to research ways to build on it and develop even more effective treatments. Another area of research could focus on novel testing protocols for HTLV and its associated diseases. In the case of HIV, for example, oratory-based testing is being supplanted in favor of rapid testing that can be done right in the clinic, or even in the patient's home [467] . These tests must meet the WHO requirements to be approved for clinical use. If researchers develop a similar kind of test for HTLV then patients who live in endemic areas with limited access to clinicians would be more likely to get tested and get the treatment they need. Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) affect individuals of all ages, race, backgrounds, and cultures. They can have some serious long-term sequelae, such as infertility, pregnancy complications, cancer, and super-infections, causing significant health burden on our society. HIV as an STIs has been discussed above, but two other major viruses that can be transmitted through sexual intercourse and contact are Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV) and Human Papilloma Virus (HPV). They both interact with Langerhans' cells and DCs of the skin, and cause infection of mucosal surfaces. Both HSV and HPV often go undetected and untreated because the infected individual may be asymptomatic with no visible outbreaks. HSV remains latent in the neurons, while HPV can be cleared by the body but may also cause cancer. HSV is an enveloped dsDNA virus that causes a wide spectrum of diseases ranging from orofacial herpes and keratitis, to genital ulcerations, meningitis, and encephalitis. HSV genital infection is considered a STI of global health significance because HSV-associated genital mucoepithelial inflammation increases the risk of HIV transmission [468] . HSV glycoprotein D (gD) is essential for fusion to host cell receptors whereas VP16, a tegument protein promotes immune evasion and viral gene transcription [469] . VHS destabilizes host proteins. It also promotes immune evasion by suppressing type I interferon and reducing production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. VHS impairs expression of MHC I and MHC II, which helps the virus to evade antiviral cell-mediated immunity [470] . There are FDA-approved nucleoside analogues for treating herpes simplex infection; however, there is no viable therapeutic or preventive HSV vaccine. Another health burden of HSV is the development of resistance to currently FDA-approved nucleoside analogues and/or inability to adhere to recommended therapeutic protocol putting immunocompromised individuals at a great risk of developing devastating complications [471] . There is current research into developing an effective preventive and therapeutic HSV Vaccine. Herpes virus (Greek word meaning to creep or to crawl) and its diseases can be traced back to ancient Greece. Although the nature of the lesions was already established for many centuries, it wasn't until the late nineteenth century that scientists established the 'virus' mode of transmission: person to person contact. Half a billion people all over the world are affected by genital herpes infection [352] . HSV-1 primary route of transmission is through contact with oral mucosa, which leads to orolabial herpes and cold sores. HSV-2 is mostly sexually transmitted by skin to skin contact and causes genital herpes [352] . HSV-1 and HSV-2 cause a wide spectrum of diseases ranging from recurrent, painful oral and genital ulcers, to meningitis, encephalitis, neonatal infection, and keratitis [472] . These two subtypes share more than 80% amino acid sequence similarity in proteins and can cause oral or genital infections [473] . Initially, HSV-1 was primarily thought to be associated with oral infections, while HSV-2 was linked to genital infection, but HSV-1 has now been shown to cause the first episode of genital herpes and neonatal herpes in the developed world [474, 475] . In 2012, the global burden of HSV-1 was 3.7 billion people with age less than 50 years, which makes about 66% of total world population in this age group, with maximum prevalence in Africa, South East Asia, and western pacific countries [352] . Additionally, about 140 million in the 15-49 years age group are infected with genital HSV-1 infection. Globally 417 million people in 15-49 year age group are HSV-2 sero-positive, with incidence rate of 19 million per year [476] . HSV-2 infection increases the chances of HIV acquisition by 3 times [477] through genital mucosal inflammation associated with HSV-2 [478, 479] . Furthermore, genital ulcerative disease also increases the risk of HIV transmission [468] . An estimated 25-50% of HIV infections are attributable to HSV-2 in high prevalence regions [480, 481] . HSV-2 infection has an estimated $540 million total lifetime cost, which ranks 3rd after HIV and HPV among major sexually transmitted infections in the US [482] . The expenses on hospitalization in neonatal herpes [483] and contribution of HSV-1 and HSV-2 infections in HIV acquisition add further to this burden. HSV-1 and HSV-2 are members of the neurotrophic alpha-herpesviridae subfamily, which is a hierarchical progeny of herpesviridae family of viruses. Besides HSV, Varicella Zoster Virus, Cytomegalovirus, and Epstein-Barr Virus are few well known members of this family. Approximately, human herpesviruses measure about 200 nm in diameter and contain a linear, 150kb dsDNA genetic material. The genetic material is enclosed by a protein capsid, which is covered by a tegument and a glycoprotein rich envelope. In HSV, genes α (immediate early), β (early), and γ (late) regulate viral genome translation, transcription of viral transcription factors, and dynamics of viral particles via infected cells [484] . The glycoprotein D (gD) on the viral envelope is central to the process of adhesion of the virus to the host cell surface. Fusion is facilitated by gB, gH and gL glycoproteins [485] . After the viruses fuse with the host cell membrane, tegument proteins and the nucleocapsid are able to enter the host cell cytosol. Tegument proteins (such as VP16) hijack the host cell replication and translation machinery, to facilitate immune evasion and viral gene transcription [469] . Virion host shutoff protein (Vhs), a major viral endonuclease, is a member of the tegument protein family and degrades host mRNA in infected cells while protecting the viral mRNA at the same time [486] . The same protein blocks type I interferon system, dendritic cell functions, and inflammatory immune response in the affected individuals [487, 488] . This allows effective establishment of an infection in the infected individual. Despite considerable DNA sequence similarity between HSV-1 and HSV-2, the difference in envelope proteins endows them with distinct antigenicity [484] . HSV is acquired mainly through direct exposure of mucous membranes or abraded skin to the lesions or mucosal secretions of actively infected individuals. A major virulence factor of HSV is protein γ134.5, which has been found to play a significant role in inhibition of dendritic cell maturation [489] . This protein inhibits p65/RelA phosphorylation, NFkB activation, and nuclear translocation, which results in inhibition of dendritic cell maturation in HSV infection [489] . Collectively all these HSV proteins and factors help the virus to successfully establish an infection, especially in immunocompromised individuals. Immunocompetent children and adolescents are the most susceptible to acquiring primary HSV infection. The clinical features of primary HSV infection include painful and ulcerative vesicles in the skin and mucous membranes of the affected regions. These visible manifestations may follow a prodromal phase, which includes loss of appetite, malaise, muscle pain, and fever. The primary orolabial infection occurs on non-keratinized mucosal surfaces such as the labial and buccal mucosa, sparing the keratinized surfaces (gingival, hard palate or tongue dorsum) [490] . HSV is a neurotrophic virus, which infects epithelial cells at skin or mucosal surfaces, and travels via retrograde transport to the nerve ganglion, where it finally establishes persistent latent infection. When the virus moves from neurons to mucosa, asymptomatic shedding of viral particles follows. Although immunocompetent individuals rarely manifest severe complications from HSV-1 or HSV-2 infection, it can cause significant morbidity and mortality if the disease progresses to Bell palsy, meningitis, or encephalitis [470] . Immunocompromised individuals are the main victims of more complicated manifestations of HSV disease in terms of duration, reactivation, recurrence, and dissemination of disease. TLR2 and TLR9 are the main players of the innate immune response to HSV by recognizing viral glycoprotein and DNA, respectively [491] . This interaction leads to the production of type I IFNs, which control initial infection via apoptosis of infected cells, recruitment of immune cells, and inhibition of viral protein expression. Few recent studies have shown increased susceptibility to herpes encephalitis in genetically TLR3 deficient individuals [492, 493] . This TRL3 deficiency in CNS cells results in poor type I interferon response, which may explain the increased susceptibility of the CNS to HSV infection [494] . The loss of pDCs and NK cells, which are heavyweights in immune response to HSV, also results in increased susceptibility and worse disease development [491, 495] . In addition to production of IFN-α leading to recruitment of NK cells and T cells, pDC play a role in stimulation of neighboring CD8 + T cells even in absence of infection; thereby contributing to adaptive immunity [496] . Infected Langerhans' cells transmit HSV-1 and HSV-2 to human skin DCs expressing CD141 and DC-SIGN, which present antigens to various T-cell subsets [497] . Still, nothing concrete is known about the involvement and roles of (a) various DC subsets in CD4 + T and CD8 + T cell priming; (b) regional versus migratory DCs in T cell priming; and (c) DC subset critically important in context of HSV antigen. The virus employs a variety of strategies to evade the host immune response in order to establish successful primary infection. The damage to various components of the immune system such as complement proteins, NK cells, major histocompatibility complex I or II molecules, or antibodies are few of the most commonly employed strategies [498] . The virion's attachment to host cells involves the interaction of HSV-1 glycoproteins B and C with heparan-sulfate proteoglycans in the host [499] . Interestingly, the ability of glycoprotein B to bind immunoglobulin like type 2 receptor alpha endows HSV-1 with infectivity towards cells lacking heparin sulfate glycans [500] . In HSV infection of skin or mucosa, dermal/interstitial DCs play a key role in presenting the viral antigen for priming CD8 + T cells in regional lymph node [7] . Monocyte-derived DCs can be infected by HSV because they express HSV receptors nectin-1, nectin-2, and HVEM. Additionally, C-type lectin DC-SIGN on immature DCs can enhance infection of DCs by HSV. Immature DC infected with HSV do not progress to maturity and lose their antigen presenting capability because HSV downregulates expression of MHC I and costimulatory molecules like CD40, CD80, and CD86. HSV infected DCs do not respond to stimulus that induce or promote maturation such as TNF-α. Because HSV infected DCs have decreased capability to generate IL-12, Th1 immune response may not be generated, which likely favors viral spread [396] . HSV-1 and HSV-2 induce apoptosis of DCs, and apoptotic HSV-infected DCs along with HSV antigen are engulfed by uninfected bystander cells for subsequent cross-presentation to CD8 + T cells in the lymphoid tissue. This counteracts the immune evasive strategy of HSV-induced downregulation of costimulatory signal and apoptosis of DC [11, 501] . Infected cell protein 47 (ICP47) is a protein in HSV that mediates the downregulation of MHC class I [7] . Although HSV downregulates MHC class I expression on epidermal keratinocytes, IFN-γ secreted by CD4 + T cells upregulate suppressed MHC class I expression on HSV infected cells enabling recognition by CD8 + T cells [396] . Treatment options are based on careful and thorough evaluation of clinical symptoms, immunocompetency status, site of infection, and primary or recurrent state of infection. Nucleoside analogues form the most potent category of drugs of choice against HSV. They range from the first drug against HSV-1, acyclovir, or its prodrug valacyclovir to penciclovir or its pro-drug famciclovir [471] . The pro-drug formulations increase bioavailability of drug molecules in the body. Another treatment choice using acyclovir in combination with hydrocortisone has shown prevention of full-blown HSV outbreak, as it resulted in pre-outbreak symptoms only [502] . The major preventive measures for HSV include public education regarding the infectious nature and autoinoculation potential of the disease as well as promotion of barrier strategies for genital herpes infections such as condoms [484] . There is an urgent need for vaccine development because the current treatments mostly function to decreases the time to healing of lesions. In fact, treatment has minimal effect on the outbreak if viral replication has already started; this period can be as low as 8 hours after an encounter [503] . Immunocompromised individuals are even more burdened by this, because development of resistance to nucleoside analogues in these patients can lead to increased severity of disease ranging from the presence of life threatening atypical lesions and greater dissemination of virus [471] . Major effort is needed to find both preventive and therapeutic vaccine candidates for HSV-2. Owing to homology in the two types, vaccines against HSV-2 may work against HSV-1. A number of reports have shown promise towards vaccine development in animal models using strategies ranging from replication of defective mutants and live attenuated strains, to neutralization antibodies and subunit vaccines [72, [504] [505] [506] . Unfortunately, none of these strategies have worked out at the translational stage. The most widely utilized candidates for HSV-2 vaccine are glycoprotein subunit vaccines. Surface glycoprotein D is responsible for most antibody neutralizing activity, making it a good target. The largest clinical trial of HSV subunit vaccine, Herpevac, didn't show efficacy against HSV-2, although it prevented genital HSV-1 disease with an efficacy of 58% [507] . GEN-003, a subunit vaccine of gD2 and ICP4, along with a matrix to stimulate T cell immunity, has been shown to decrease viral shedding by 55% in a phase IIb clinical trial [508] . These encouraging outcomes may lead to a successful vaccine development in future. HPV is a member of the Papillomaviridae family, a distinct nonenveloped virus family with dsDNA genomes. It is a causative agent of sexually transmitted disease in a majority of sexually active individuals via contact with lesions [509] . Low risk HPV types are associated with genital warts while high risk HPV types correlate with genital cancer [510] . Because of the carcinogenic nature of some subtypes of HPV, the virus is considered a significant health burden. HPV 16 and HPV 18 are the two most prevalent carcinogenic subtypes of HPV that are responsible for 71% of cervical cancers [510, 511] . HPV-associated immune evasion strategy includes downregulating antiviral innate immunity mediated by type I interferon, decreasing production of pro-inflammatory cytokines by keratinocytes, and increasing the expression of immunosuppressive cytokines with consequential downregulation of MHC class I expression [512] . There is no FDA-approved cure for HPV infection; however, current treatment options include tissue destruction by thermal or chemical methods. Immunoprophylaxis of HPV include quadrivalent HPV vaccine, trivalent HPV vaccine, etc [513] . HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection worldwide [514] . The majority of sexually active individuals will likely acquire it at some point during their lives. Cervical HPV has an 11.7% prevalence worldwide, with some variation depending on geographical region; higher rates are observed at younger ages, with a general downward trend as age increases [509] . HPV carries a high health burden since some subtypes of HPV have been shown to be carcinogenic [515] . HPV has been shown to be a leading cause of cervical, head and neck squamous cell cancers (HNSCC) and other ano-genital cancers [511] . Persistent infection with HPV is a risk factor across all types of genital cancers. HPV 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59 , and 68 have been classified as high-risk, linked to high-grade dysplasia and particular cancer subtypes; HPV 6, 11, 40, 42, 43, 44, 53, 54, 61, 72, 73 , and 81 are classified as low risk associated with warts and mild dysplasia [510] . These low-risk HPV types are eventually cleared by the immune system. However, in immunocompromised patients, these infections can lead to papillomatosis and cancer [516] . HPV 16 represents the most prevalent carcinogenic type, followed by HPV 18 [510] . Together, these two subtypes represent 73% of malignancy of the anus, 38% of penile cancers, 58% of vagina cancers, 36% of the vulva cancers, and 71% of cervical cancers [510, 511] . Estimates of HNSCC attributable to HPV is 25.6% of cases [511] . Worldwide this accounted for 530,000 cases of cervical cancer and 21,400 of oropharyngeal cancer in 2008 directly attributed to an HPV infection [511] . Estimated financial burden in the U.S. is $8 billion: $6.5 billion attributable to cervical cancer screenings and follow ups, $1 billion for actual cancer treatment, and $288 million for treatment of genital warts and recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (RRP) [517] . Papillomaviridae is a distinct virus family of non-enveloped doubled-stranded DNA viruses [517] . The human subtypes of this virus family are limited to five genera: alpha, beta, gamma, mu, and nu [517] . The alpha subtype affects the mucosal epithelium while the beta genus infects the skin [518] . HPV is about 55 nm in diameter and contains an 8kb BP doubled stranded DNA circular genome which encodes 8 genes: E1, E2, E4, E5, E6, E7, E8, L1, and L2 [518, 519] . The icosahedral capsid of HPV consists of L1 major and L2 minor capsid proteins. L1 major capsid protein consists of 360 molecules organized into 762 pentamers whereas L2 minor capsid consists of between 12 and 72 molecules [520] . It is hypothesized that initial HPV binding involves interaction between viral protein L1 and heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) on either the epithelial cell surface or basement membrane [518, 520] . This binding induces a conformational change mediated by cyclophilin B (CyPB), an endoplasmic protein that when secreted, is associated with HPSGs. Because binding of HPV16 to HSPGs/CyPB does not mediate endocytosis, a second, yet to be identified receptor must be involved for infectious internalization [520] . Several candidates have been identified, including α 6 integrin and growth factor receptor (GFR) [520] . Once internalized, the viral capsids disassemble in the late endosome or lysosomes in a pH dependent manner. L2, which complexes with viral DNA, interacts with cellular machinery proteins such as sorting nexin 17, essential for lysosomal escape. L2 then targets the viral DNA to the perinuclear region of the cell through a pathway that utilizes Dynein-mediated transport and endocytic retromer components, leading the L2-DNA complex to the trans-Golgi network. Viral entry into the nucleus requires mitosis, which causes the barrier between nucleoplasm and cytosol to be removed and the trans-Golgi network to become dispersed [521] . Once in the nucleus, viral DNA replicates together with basal cell chromosomes. The early promoter is located in the upstream regulatory region adjacent to the E6 open reading frame (ORF) and is active early in infection. It directs expression of the E1 and E2 that leads to establishment of viral genomes as stable episomes with about 50-100 copies per cell, and tightly regulates E6 and E7 expression. E1 viral protein has DNA helicase and ATPase activities that catalyze the unwinding of DNA and recruits cellular replication machinery to viral origins. E2 is a DNA-binding protein that helps to load E1 onto the origins and ropes chromosomes and viral DNA during segregation. As HPV-infected cells divide and differentiate, the late HPV promoter found in the middle of the E7 ORF is activated causing expression of late gene products such as E4, E5, L1, and L2, as well as increased levels of E1 and E2 leading to genome amplification, virion assembly, and virion release. Viral proteins E6 and E7 are necessary for the differentiation-dependent life cycle of HPV and cell immortalization via their interactions with p53 and pRB respectively. How the overall differentiation-dependent life cycle of HPV is regulated is still not fully understood, and as such, it is under investigation, however, some studies show ATM DNA damage responses (DDRs) play an important role [522] . The clinical presentation of HPV depends on several factors such as the HPV type, the area of skin affected, and the immune status of the individual. The majority of HPV infections are asymptomatic and clear within 1 year [523] . If infection persists, it usually manifests as warts. Anogenital warts are most commonly caused by HPV 6 and 11. The warts are most often benign though can cause pain, discomfort, and itching; they are highly infectious, with 65% of infected patients passing it onto their sexual partners [524] . Common warts are typically caused by HPV types 1, 4, and 7, and are found more commonly in children and in immunosuppressed patients. These manifest as small, dome-shaped papules with a verrucous and kerotic surface. Plantar warts, associated mostly with HPV types 1 and 4, are found primarily on the soles of the feet and more commonly seen in children. Condyloma acuminatum presents as exophytic papillomatous lesions infecting the anogenital region and are often caused by HPV 6 and 11. Giant condyloma acuminatum of buschke and löwenstein is a large exophytic tumor that has a cauliflower-like appearance and is caused by HPV 6, 11, and 16. It can also present as undifferentiated intraepithelial neoplasia (grade I, II, or III) which can be distinguished into warty or basaloid subtypes. Epidermodysplasia verruciformis presents due to a rare, autosomal recessively inherited susceptibility to β-HPV subtypes. Respiratory papillomatosis, which is caused primarily by HPV 6 and 11, is a rare and life-threatening condition that can develop from failure to clear the virus. Finally, infection can manifest as intraepithelial neoplasia that can progress to malignancy. Most malignant cases are linked to HPV 16 and 18 [525] . There is evidence that HPV infects epithelial cells and keratinocytes. The virus replication cycle takes a minimum of 3 weeks from infection to viral release, which equals the period of time for a differentiated keratinocyte to undergo complete differentiation and ultimately desquamate. Activation of TLRs on keratinocytes leads to signaling pathways mediated by Mal/Myd88 or TRIM/TRIF that initiate both the innate and adaptive immune responses. Genital tract keratinocytes have TLRs located either on its cell surface, 1-6, or in the endosome, 3 and 9. Activation of TLR3 by doubled stranded DNA such as HPV results in up regulation of TLR7, which then triggers release of type I interferons, α and β, leading to a predominantly Th1 cell-mediated immune response. Activation of NLR, another PRR on keratinocytes, leads to pro-inflammatory signaling pathways and pro-caspase 1, which ultimately cleaves pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18. Keratinocytes can also be induced to make other important cytokines including IL1, IL6, IL10, and TNF-α. The secretion of these pro-inflammatory cytokines are essential for the activation of resident immune cells like Langerhans cells and macrophages, and for recruitment of effector T cells, which ultimately starts the adaptive immunity [526] . NK cell-mediated immunity is important in controlling HPV, as loss of NK cell antiviral function is associated with loss of control of human HPV infection [527] . HPV employs various techniques to down regulate the immune response. The viral protein E7 inhibits IFN-α signaling pathway by binding to P48/IRF-9, preventing its translocation to the nucleus and formation of the ISGF-3 transcription complex. Additionally, E7 binds to IRF-1, inhibiting its activation of the IFN-β promoter for recruitment of histone deacetylases, thus preventing transcription. Experimentally, this has been shown with a reduction in TAP1, IFN-β, and MCP-1 genes, which are all IRF-1 target genes. Viral protein E6 binds to TYK2, which prevents it from binding to the cytoplasmic domain of the IFN receptor, preventing downstream phosphorylation of TYK2, STAT1, and STAT2 impairing the JAK-STAT pathway blocking IFN-α-mediated signaling [526] . Additionally, soon after infection, HPV up regulates the cellular deubiquitinase ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase L1 ( UCHL1), which impairs PRR-induced NFκB activation by upstream interference with TRAF3, TRAF6 and NEMO [512] . Research showed that UCHL1 removes activation K63-linked ubiquitin molecules from TRAF3, suppressing the type 1 IFN pathway, and when bound to TRAF6, UCHL1 mediates enhanced degradation of NEMO, which suppresses the NF-κB pathway [528] . Additionally, in an in vitro model, it was shown that HPV up regulated the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR), which induced overexpression of interferon-related developmental regulator 1 ( IFRD1). Ultimately, this impairs the acetylation of NFκB/RelA K310 in the keratinocytes, leading to a decreased pro-inflammatory cytokine production and immune cell attraction in response to stimuli of either the innate or adaptive immune pathways [512] . HPV viral proteins E2, E6, and E7 have been shown to increase IL-10 and other cytokines such as TGF-β production through trans-activation of different cell types, causing a decrease in MHC1 expression and limiting the effects of the immune response. Other research shows that high-grade cervical lesions correlate with a high viral load that produces an IL-10 immunosuppressive environment, with increased Treg cells [529] . Despite these defense mechanisms, 80-90% of genital infections resolve, typically with a cell-mediated immune response directed at E2 and E6 [526] . Persistent infection is often associated with disease development; it is the strongest risk factor for high grade cervical cancer as it is associated with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) of grade 2 and 3, viewed as essential for the progression to cancer [523] . The switch from premalignant to malignant infection occurs by incorporating the viral genome into the cell's chromosomal DNA at fragile sites commonly targeted for deletion; E6 and E7 have been consistently shown to be expressed in cervical carcinomas. E6 and E7, acting as oncogenes, interfere with the normal functions of pRB and p53 at cell-cycle checkpoints, evading normal apoptosis pathways; they also act as potent mitotic mutators, increasing the likelihood of acquiring additional mutations necessary for cancer development [530] . Both of these factors are necessary in tumor progression in the human population. Currently, two commercially available L1 VLP vaccines are Cervarix, a bivalent vaccine targeting HPV16/18, and Gardasil, a quadrivalent vaccine against HPV6/11/16/18. These vaccines are delivered intra-muscularly at three separate times [531] . Since 2006, 133 countries have licensed the vaccine and over 40 have introduced some kind of vaccine program with high efficacy. In Germany, incidence of anogenital warts was reduced by 47% for girls age 16 and 35% for girls age 18 by 2008 [532] . A CDC study showed a 56% decrease in vaccine-related HPV strains for U.S. girls ages 14-19 [533] . Countries with vaccination programs have also shown a decrease in anogenital HPV-related diseases in women and in men due to both the vaccination and herd immunity [534] . Additional research showed that vaccines stimulate effects of IL-15, DCs, and natural killer cells, leading to production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and generation of cytotoxic activity against HPV-positive tumor cells, which includes increases in antigen specific T-cell responses [535] . In October 2016, after FDA approval, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) began recommending a two-dose vaccination schedule beginning at age 9 through 14 for both boys and girls. If vaccination is started after 15 years of age up until 26, the three-dose schedule should be followed [536] . Current vaccine research is looking at L2-based vaccines since L2 peptides are conserved across HPV subtypes, and could lead to the further studies for a 9-valent vaccine [537, 538] . Despite vaccine efficacy as a prophylactic measure, treatment still remains quite limited and focused on amelioration of symptoms. There is no cure for HPV infection; in most cases, patients with HPV infection are asymptomatic and those that do present with symptoms will see those spontaneously resolve over time. Promotion of barrier protection during sexual intercourse and education on safe-sex practices are still crucial in preventing HPV infection. With the advent of the PAP smear, cytological findings can be used to determine if any high-risk HPV subtype is present and if the HPV has already begun to cause dysplasia, allowing for early detection of cancer. Current treatment options for patients with benign lesions include tissue destruction by thermal, chemical, or electrical methods, and more invasive surgical approaches for larger and more extensive lesions [513] . Current research into therapeutic vaccines aim to generate cytotoxic T cell responses against the HPV early viral gene products E1, E2, E5, E6, and E7, since L1 and L2 are not seen in basal epithelial cells that have persistent infection. A few early trials focused on a vaccine for both prophylactic and therapeutic use via fusion of L2 and E7 or L2 and E6/E7; this showed some promise in early clinical trials, but therapeutic efficacy has not yet been proven. Early attempts to incorporate early viral proteins into L1 VLPs showed some promise by inducing a cellular response, but the response failed to reduce intraepithelial neoplasia [539] . Currently, after chemotherapy and radiation treatments fail, the 5-year overall survival rate of cervical cancer is at 3.2-13%. Radio-immunotherapy targeted at E6 and E7 proteins have been shown as a promising treatment candidates in head, neck, and cervical cancers [540] . Viruses are obligate intracellular pathogens that come in different shapes, sizes and characteristics that give them unique abilities to invade and infect a host. The human body has physical and chemical barriers that attempt to block a virus from entering, but when these barriers are breached, the virus triggers our immune system to fight back. The innate immune response is led by NK cells, DCs, cytokines, and Interferons. The presence of PRRs on DCs serves an important immunosurveillance function, detecting potentially foreign particles and alerting the immune system of a breach in the immune defense mechanism. Together with viral PAMPs, this allows for initiation of the antiviral adaptive immune response [7] . During a viral infection response, DCs form immunological synapses with NK cells and T cells. DCs release cytokines that activate innate immune cells such as NK cells during the early phase of viral infection, followed by antigen presentation to T cells in order to drive adaptive immunity [11] . NK cells are activated by IL-12 and IFN-α produced by myeloid DCs and pDCs respectively [11] . The Dendritic Cell-Natural Killer cell crosstalk involves the activation of NK cells by cytokines (IL-12, IL-15, IL-18, and type I interferons) secreted by DCs at the site of viral infection [7] . DC-NK cell cross talk yields reciprocal activation, wherein IL-12/IFN-α activate NK cells and IFN-γ and TNF-α produced by NK cells facilitate the maturation of DCs [11] . Type I interferons generated during the innate immune response to a virus creates an antiviral microenvironment that inhibits viral infection via inhibition of viral replication in both infected and noninfected cells [5] . Cell mediated antiviral immunity is mediated predominantly by effector CD8 + T cells. CTL-mediated antiviral function includes killing of infected cell via the perforin/granzyme pathway, leading to secretion of antiviral pro-inflammatory cytokine IFN-γ, and other mechanisms [5] . The interaction between virus and DC leads to different outcomes with viruses triggering T cell mediated antiviral immune response via various mechanisms of antigen presentation [6, 7] . This interaction promotes activation and amplification of T cell immune response to viral infection, such as virally infected tissue-derived migratory DCs presenting endogenously derived viral antigen complexed to MHC class I and II molecule to CD8 + T cells and CD4 + T cells respectively [4, 7] . Furthermore, endogenous viral antigens detected in lymph nodes could be derived from free virus draining from the peripheral tissue via afferent lymphatics. On the other hand, tissue-derived migratory DCs may take up antigens from virally infected epithelial cells that have undergone apoptosis, and cross-present these exogenously derived viral antigens complexed to MHC I to CD8 + T cells in the regional lymph node [4] . When tissue-derived migratory DCs carrying processed viral antigen undergo apoptosis, the apoptotic tissue-derived migratory DC with components of the viral antigen could be taken up by an uninfected bystander DCs for onward trafficking to the regional lymph node for further presentation to naïve T cells [7] . However, under certain conditions, lymphoid-resident DCs may either take up exogenously generated viral antigen from infected tissue-derived migratory DCs or engulf fragments of apoptotic infected tissue-derived migratory DCs loaded with exogenously generated viral peptide and cross present these viral peptides via MHC class I molecules to CD8 + T cells [4, 7] . Thus, dendritic cells play a central role in priming naïve T cells to generate virus-specific T cells via expression of costimulatory molecules, presentation of endogenously and exogenously-derived viral antigens complexed to MHC class I molecules to CD8 + T cells, presentation of MHC class II restricted viral peptides to CD4 + T cells, and polarizing naïve CD4 + T cells to generate Th1 cells [4, 6] . It was mentioned earlier that surface attachment receptors such as DC-SIGN, mannose receptor, Langerin, and immune dendritic cell receptor (DCIR) facilitates the uptake of viruses. Binding of virus (e.g. HSV, DV, Ebola virus, HCV) to DC-SIGN on DC results in the development of an infectious synapse that facilitate the transfer of virus from DCs to lymphocytes and secretion of DC-derived antiviral pro-inflammatory cytokines [6] . Langerhans cells do not express DC-SIGN but express langerin that mediates internalization and degradation of HIV in Langerhans cells. DEC-205 (CD205) is a pan-DC specific surface marker that is significantly upregulated on mature DC and function to target antigens to MHC I and II molecules with intent of priming naïve T cells. DCIR is a C-type lectin surface receptor that is involved in virus uptake by DC [6] . Stability of the DC-T cell interaction following viral infection shapes and drives activation and differentiation of T cells into viral specific T cells as well as optimizes the expansion of memory T cell pool [4] . CD4 + T cells provide primary and secondary antiviral protective immunity through various mechanisms. Effector CD4 + T cells are important in antiviral adaptive and innate immunity because they promote the generation of cytotoxic CD8 + T cell response and maintain the memory CD8 + T cell pool as well as enhances innate antiviral function [8] . Memory CD4 + T and CD8 + T cells (tissue-resident memory T cells) residing at the site of infection provide first line defense against viral re-infection by facilitating rapid recruitment and activation of innate immune cells capable of controlling initial viral titers, while simultaneously interacting with DCs to promote the generation of viral specific adaptive immunity. As such, DCs could be activated through both PRR-mediated activation and recognition of viral antigen by memory CD4 + T cells such as tissueresident Th1-polarizing memory CD4 + T cells [8] . Activation of DCs by virus specific tissue resident memory CD4 T cells is associated with heightened intense early inflammatory response and optimal upregulation of MHCII, CD40, and CD86 [8] . When DC laden with viral antigens complexed to MHC class I molecules interact with CD8 + T cells in the lymph nodes, DCs and CD4 + T cells mediate amplification of memory CD8 + T cell recall. As such, DCs are capable of presenting endogenous and exogenous viral antigen peptide to T cells due to the presence of MHC and costimulatory molecules required to supply the necessary signals to ensure T cell activation, proliferation, and differentiation into effector T cells [4] . When viruses invade and colonize a host, they employ immune evasive mechanisms that enhance their survival within the host. Viruses can evade innate immunity by interfering with PRR-mediated activation of dendritic cells and production of antiviral pro-inflammatory cytokines [11] . Some viruses inhibit the function of antiviral pro-inflammatory cytokines as well as antagonize cell-mediated immunity. Viruses may evade CTL-mediated killing by interfering with antigen processing, transportation, and presenting, which culminates in the non-presentation of viral peptide complexed to MHC I molecule on the surface of infected cells [5] . Although infected cells with absent or altered MHC I molecules are susceptible to killing by NK cells, HIV and HSV are capable of evading NK cell mediated killing [527] . Some viruses such as HSV and HIV may cause latent and cell-to-cell infection as a strategy of evading humoral immune recognition [5] . In latency, there is little/no viral replication and effector CD8 + T cells are maintained to inhibit viral reactivation [2] . In viruses with persistent replicative lifestyles, the constant stimulation of viral antigens correlate with impaired development of memory CD8 + T cells, exhaustion of virus-specific CD8 + T cell due to chronic CD8 + T cell stimulation with reduced antiviral pro-inflammatory cytokine production, and CD8 + T cell-mediated tissue damage [2] . The failure of the CTL-mediated cytotoxic immune response allows for the persistence of the virus in the host [5] . It is of note that DC and virus interaction determines T helper (Th) polarization and viral pathogenesis; however, some viruses favor viral persistence by polarizing CD4 + T helper response toward Th2-mediated immune response and generation of cytokines that suppress Th1-mediated immune response [6] . Moreover, transient IL-10 production during virus infection under conditions of high levels of viral antigen and costimulatory signals can promote or contribute to viral persistence by preventing excessive activation of DCs and T cells, which might limit efficacy of the antiviral immune response as well as prevent inflammation and immunopathology [3, 8] . The majority of the viruses discussed in this review do not have an FDA-approved therapeutic agent and/or vaccine. Because of the high mortality and morbidity rate associated with viral diseases, there is an urgent need to re-evaluate current antiviral agents, both therapeutic and prophylactic. Further, there are no FDA-approved antiviral agents for treating adenoviral infections, cidofovir and ribavirin have, however, demonstrated anti-HAdV activity in high risk individuals [12, 16, 45] . Immune-prophylaxis via live oral vaccine have been demonstrated to be beneficial for preventing adenovirus types 4 and 7-induced respiratory infections in military recruits [12] . Although there are no efficacious antiviral agents for treating measles infection, IFN-α and ribavirin have demonstrated anti-measles activity [97] . MMR is a well-established effective live-attenuated vaccine recommended in children for the prevention of measles, mumps, and rubella infection [13, 76] . There is ongoing research into exploring ways to enhance the efficacy as well as facilitate storage and administration of current vaccines. Also, there are no FDA-approved vaccines or antiviral agents for HPIV infection [57] . Ribavirin is used as an antiviral therapeutic agent in treating patients with an RSV infection, Palivizumab and RSV-IGIV are FDA-approved passive immunoprophylactic agents for high risk groups [65, 106] . Because there are no vaccines for the pediatric respiratory pathogens RSV and HPIV [32] that cause serious respiratory tract infection in this population, a combined RSV/HPIV3 vaccine would be most appropriate for young children. It has been reported that NIAID/MedImmune programs are currently evaluating pediatric HPIV vaccines with the intent of having one of the investigational vaccine progress to phase III clinical trials [61] . Currently, prevention of Dengue fever is focused on minimizing the exposure to vectors that facilitate transmission of Dengue virus. This may take the form of controlling mosquito infestation with the intent of preventing mosquito bites [206] . Research in Dengue virus is geared towards developing an effective vaccine that would generate appropriate correlates of immunity against all serotypes of Dengue virus [230, 231] . Studies of live-attenuated Yellow fever-Dengue chimeric vaccine has demonstrated efficacy against serotype 1, 3 and 4 of Dengue virus but not against the DENV-2-serotype [208, 209] . Because pregnant women are generally excluded from clinical trials, current research into ZIKV vaccine is focused on developing nonreplicative vaccine strategies due to their enhanced safety profile in pregnant women [216, 244] . Owing to the absence of an effective therapeutic and/or preventive HIV vaccine, management of HIV is focused on education and FDA-approved ART [356, 357] . HIV vaccine that generates broad neutralizing antibodies to prevent cell-free viruses from infecting other permissive cells in the host, and CTL to induce apoptosis of HIV infected cells would be the preferred vaccine [420] . HIV therapeutic approach may involve the use of passive immunotherapy that utilizes broad neutralizing antibodies to prevent HIV from infecting host cells [422] [423] [424] . It has been reported that combination of antiviral and IFN therapy may have anti-HTLV-1 activity [436] . HTLV-1 is a disease of significant health burden because it causes neurological impairment and bone marrow malignancies. There are no vaccines for HTLV-1, and therefore, therapy is focused on education and preventive measures to limit or restrict transmission [453, 454, 460] . Acyclovir, valacyclovir, and panciclovir are FDA-approved nucleoside analogues that provide antiviral activity against HSV. A significant burden of HSV is the potential of resistance to anti-HSV therapy, particularly in immunosuppressed individuals, and as such, efforts should be stepped up in developing an effective preventive HSV vaccine [471] . There is ongoing research geared toward developing an effective preventive and therapeutic HSV-2 vaccine. However, the focus is on education and modification of social behavior in high-risk groups that could limit HPV transmission, as well as routine screening protocols. Although there is an effective quadrivalent HPV vaccine that targets HPV 6/11/16/18, but ongoing research is focused to develop L2-based HPV vaccines [537, 538] . RNAi-mediated viral gene silencing has been shown to inhibit viral replication of adenovirus, RSV, HIV, and HSV; however, viruses such as HIV can mutate the target sequence. A mismatch of the specific target for RNAi can induce drug resistance [44, 33] . The advantage of using siRNAs is that they can target conserved regions of viral genome and sites of viral replication. In addition, efficacy of RNAi is independent of immune status of the recipient, and as such, its effective in individuals with an immunosuppressed or underdeveloped immune system [102] . Many viruses cause persistent viral infections, which may take the form of a latent, chronic infection or transformation of host cells. Conventional dendritic cells play a crucial role in interactions between DC and viruses. Crosstalk between DCs and immune cells that mediate cell-mediated cytotoxicity is crucial for generating IFN−γ that enhance maturation and functionality of DCs. Most viruses do not have FDA-approved antiviral therapeutic and prophylactic agents. Hence, future directions should target on developing vaccines that can induce CD8 + T cell responses and produce IFN-γ to promote and secure a Th1-biased cell-mediated immune response. Because of the high mortality and morbidity rate associated with chronic viral diseases, there is an urgent need to re-assess the therapeutic index of current available antiviral agents with research focusing on developing novel anti-viral agents with enhanced efficacy and safety profile. 
