e44ccc59c4b47efc05e1c45782a7017f94e58f8a
Abstracts Abstract# 1090 Poster Board #-Session: P20-III ROLE OF COMPLEMENT IN ALLOGRAFT REJECTION AND INDUCTIVE ANTIBODY THERAPY
 Keri Csencsits Sherri Chan Wood Guanyi  Lu Gregory L Stahl D  Keith Bishop   

University of Michigan School of Medicine University of Michigan School of Medicine University of Michigan School of Medicine University of Michigan School of Medicine 
Chronic graft dysfunction is now the leading clinical problem following renal transplantation. The principal histopathological lesion seen in this disease is tubular loss with concurrent interstitial fibrosis, similar to lesions typical of fibrosis in primary nephropathies. Recent studies suggested that transition of tubular epithelial cells into activated fibroblasts (EMT) was an important contributor to the progression of renal fibrosis and that reversal of EMT could prevent the decline of renal function. Here we attempted to elucidate the contribution of EMT in a rat model of chronic allograft dysfunction. We transplanted kidneys from Fisher 344 rats (allografts) or LEW rats (isografts) orthotopically into LEW rats. Transplanted rats received a short course CsA treatment and fibrosis was recorded by H&E staining, Masson Trichrome Staining as well as by immunohistochemistry after 30 and 120 days. Expression of fibroblast specific protein1 (FSP1) in tubular epithelial cells was considered evidence for EMT. After 30 days allograft and isograft kidneys both displayed slightly increased numbers of interstitial fibroblasts, whereas EMT did not occur at this stage. After 120 days, tubular epithelial cells expressing FSP1 (indicating EMT) were sporadically present (0.4 cells per high power field). In allografts, severe fibrosis and tubular atrophy were associated with substantial numbers of tubular epithelial cells undergoing EMT (5.2 cells per high power field) and abundant presence of interstitial fibroblasts. These findings suggest that EMT contributes to the progression of chronic renal allograft dysfunction. Our results also indicate that EMT is mediated by both alloantigendependent and alloantigen-independent factors. Future studies will determine, if EMT will be a useful therapeutic target to prevent progression of chronic renal allograft dysfunction. Proteinuria is a sensitive and specific marker of chronic allograft nephropathy. The pathophysiology of proteinuria is arguably multigenic in that it has been associated with over a dozen cytokines/growth factors, several transcription factors, and altered T cell subsets. To this end, the Program for Genomic Applications (PGA) has bred a partial panel of consomic rats to provide chromosome-specific animal models that have been phenotyped, genotyped, and in some cases undergone expression array analysis. We have analyzed the PGA renal protocol data to determine chromosomes of interest in the pathogenesis of proteinuria. METHODS: Consomic strains for which the degree of proteinuria was significantly lower in consomic (SS-xBN, where x= inserted chromosome) strains vs. parental background (SS) strains were considered to represent chromosomes of interest. For the chromosomes of interest for which gene expression arrays studies were performed on renal tissue, gene expression data were subjected to regression normalization, filtered (3-fold difference) for genes differentially expressed between SS and SS-xBN strains, and clustered by known function (EASE software). In addition, each rat chromosome of interest was mapped to human chromosomes (MAPVIEW), and a PubMed search was performed to detect publications demonstrating an association between mapped genes and proteinuria. All data were analyzed in the R programming environment. Significance was defined as non-parametric p value < 0.05. RESULTS: Significantly elevated proteinuria excretion levels were detected in male rats, and in SS-18BN rats stratified by gender. The rat Y chromosome was not identified as a chromosome of interest by our filter criteria. Therefore rat chromosomes 18 and X were further analyzed. SS-18BN vs. SS gene expression array analyses revealed that the main functional clusters included immune-related genes (RT-1 antigen binding gene, phospholipase A2, and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor 2) and G-protein coupled receptor genes. PubMed searches of human genes mapped from rat chromosomes X and 18 included CD154, FGF 1, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP1 collagenase inhibitor), and a glucocorticoid receptor subunit gene that have been previously associated with proteinuria. CONCLUSIONS: Consomic studies can identify novel biomarkers and provide global profiles of molecular processes involved in proteinuria that is in turn a marker of chronic allograft nephropathy. Transendothelial migration of graft infiltrating leucocytes seems to play a pivotal role not only in the destruction of the graft but also in the activation of endothelial and smooth muscle cells, leading to the migration and proliferation of VSMC from media to intima. These events cause chronic rejection. Purpose of the study was to evaluate graft infiltrating leucocytes (CD4, CD8, CD11a, CD18) after cardiac transplantation in rats under immunosuppressive therapy Methods: 340 animals were transplanted and divided by random into four groups of therapy: CSA 3mg/kg/d (n=74), MMF 40 mg/kg/ d (n=96), FK506 0.03 mg/kg/d (n=96) and a control group receiving no immunosuppressive therapy (n=74). 3-4 animals of each group were sacrified in intervals of 1-4 days up to day 60. FACS analysis of leucocytes (CD4, CD8, CD11a, CD18) from peripheral blood was performed in the same intervals like sacrification. Immunohistochemistry on frozen specimens was performed using a mAb against CD4,CD8,CD11a, CD18. Positive stained cells were analysed at the endothelium and in the perivascular space of intra-and epicardial arteries. Statistical analysis was performed using the areas under the curves over the time of 60 days by an extended ttest. Results: While in peripheral blood the amounts of stained leucocytes where not statistically different among the study groups, the amounts of graft infiltrating leucocytes (CD4,CD8,CD11a and CD18) were reduced under MMF therapy by 80% compared to the control groups already from day 1 after grafting. CSA and FK506 needed 12 to 20 days to achieved this reductive effect. The reduction of leucocytes under the therapy of MMF was statistically significant compared with control , CSA and FK 506 treated animals. Conclusion: This significant reduction of graft infiltrating leucocytes reflects the superior of MMF over CSA and FK506 of CSA, FK506 and MMF. Chronic rejection was statistically reduced under MMF therapy. The reduction of transendothelial migrating leucocytes probably is responsible for the reduction of chronic rejection under MMF. Chronic rejection (CR) remains as the major obstacle in successful organ transplantation. Heme oxygenase system has been shown to provide protection against several inflammatory reactions including CR. Carbon monoxide (CO), a by-product of heme catalysis, also exerts similar cytoprotective effects against a variety of stimuli. This study evaluated the efficacy of CO in preventing CR in rat heart transplantation (HHT) model. Methods: Fully allogeneic HHT was performed in LEW to BN rat combination under short course FK506 (0.5 mg/kg, d0-6). Recipients were either kept in air or exposed to CO (20 ppm) for 28 days continuously after HHT. Cytokine mRNA levels, flowcytometry, mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR), graft histopathology, and graft survival were analyzed. Results (Table) : In recipients treated with CO, blood carboxyhemoglobin (COHb) levels were maintained at 10 % during CO exposure, compared to 1.4 % in air. CO treatment was remarkably effective in prolonging heart graft survival to a median of >100 days from 45 days in air control group. Severe histopathological changes associated with CR seen in control allografts were significantly reduced in CO-treated allografts. Th1 type cytokine IFNγ) upregulation in the spleen of air group at d28 was significantly downregulated with CO, associated with a considerable reduction of splenic CD25 (IL-2R) expression. CO-treated recipients developed donor-specific hypo-responsiveness in MLR by 28d, while maintaining vigorous third-party alloreactivity. Antidonor IgG antibodies in recipient serum at d50 were significantly increased in air-compared to CO-treated recipients. In addition, early short CO exposure (d0-13) was more effective in prolonging graft survival than later exposure (d13-28), suggesting that CO exposure during early acute phase is important for graft survival. Conclusion: Low dose CO inhalation to allograft recipients was effective in prolonging heart allograft survival and preventing the development of CR via the downregulation of Th1 type cytokine responses. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an endothelial mitogen with increased expression in inflammation and vasculopathy. The aim of this study was to clarify the relationship between VEGF expression and macrophage infiltration in renal allografts and to assess the role of VEGF on interstitial fibrosis (IF). The expression of VEGF and the proportion of macrophage in the interstitium were examined immunohistochemically in 92 cases including 4 cases with non-rejected kidneys, 40 cases with acute rejection (AR), 29 cases with chronic allograft nephropathy (CAN), 10 cases with borderline changes (BD) and 9 cases with CsA toxicity. The follow-up biopsies of all cases with AR were evaluated for the progression of IF. In the non-rejected group, intraglomerular VEGF expression was observed in endothelial, parietal and visceral cells. Tubular VEGF expression was positive only in few tubules of 2 cases. There was a significant positive correlation between the interstitial macrophage infiltration and tubular VEGF expression (p<0.01). In serial sections interstitial VEGF colocalized with the expression of CD-68 positive macrophages. There were significant differences between the cases with AR, CAN and CsA toxicity for the expression of tubular and interstitial VEGF (p<0.001). Tubular VEGF expression was marked in 17/29 cases (58.6%) of CAN, 9/50 cases (18%) of AR and 3/9 cases (33.3%) of CsA toxicity. A significant difference was found between AR grades with regard to tubular and interstitial VEGF expression (p<0.01). Patients with AR whose initial biopsies showed marked tubular and interstitial VEGF expression developed IF earlier than those whose initial biopsies showed low grade tubular and interstitial VEGF expression (p<0.05). In addition a significant VEGF expression was observed in the mesangial cells of cases with CAN. The results suggest that macrophage infiltration and hypoxia due to chronic allograft vasculopathy may play an important role in the induction of VEGF that leads to early interstitial fibrosis 1 Robert L. Fairchild. 1 1 Urology, The Glickman Urological Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH; 2 Biomedical Engineering, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH; 3 Urology, Tokyo Women's Medical Univ., Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; 4 Immunology, Washington Univ., St. Louis, MO. INTRODUCTION: The factors directing T cell infiltration into allografts to mediate rejection remain poorly defined. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are enzymes that digest extracellular matrix proteins. Activated T cells express MMP2 and MMP9. The goal of this study was to investigate the role of these MMPs in the rejection of allografts. METHODS: C57BL/6 (H-2b) mice and MMP-9 deficient mice on a 129 background received heterotopic heart or skin allografts from completely MHC mismatched donors. Immunohistochemistry was performed to identify cells infiltrating the grafts. Recipients were depleted of CD4+ or CD8+ T cells by treatment with specific mAb before transplantation. RNA expression of MMP2 and MMP9 was tested by ribonuclease protection analyses. Gel zymography was performed to detect the presence of proenzyme and active forms of MMP2 and MMP9 in graft tissue homogenates. In-situ zymography was also performed to detect and to investigate the localization of active form of MMP2 and MMP9 in graft tissue RESULTS: Heart allografts were rejected in wild type recipients on day 7-8 and in MMP9-deficient recipients from day 11-22 post-transplant. When compared to allografts retrieved from wild-type recipients, rejecting allografts from MMP-9 deficient mice had decreased infiltration with T cells and macrophages. In wild-type recipients, rejecting allografts had high levels of MMP9 and low levels of MMP2. MMP9 activity was absent in recipients depleted of CD4+ T cells. Using antibody-mediated depletion of allograft recipients, expression of MMP9 was only observed during CD4+ T cell mediated rejection. In-situ zymography in the wild type graft indicated co-localization of active MMPs and CD4+ T cells. However, there were no co-localization between MMPs and CD8+ T cells. In the graft of MMP9 deficient recipient, there was no colocalization between CD4+ T cells and MMPs. These results suggest CD4+ T cell produce active MMP9 during acute rejection. CONCLUSIONS: MMP-9 activity is required for optimal rejection of allografts and is dependent on CD4+ T cells. The results suggest that T cell graft infiltration may be attenuated by interfering with these enzymes. Chronic renal allograft dysfunction (CRAD) is the major cause of allograft loss following the first post-transplant year and is in part due to the nephrotoxic effects of calcineurin inhibitor (CNI) immunosuppression. We employed the salt-depleted model to examine the potential antifibrotic effects of the novel agent pirfenidone on CNI-induced CRAD. Methods Male Sprague-Dawley rats (350-500g) were salt-depleted for seven days prior to the introduction cyclosporine (CyA) (15mg/kg/day) or tacrolimus (FK) (6mg/kg/day), with or without addition of varying doses of pirfenidone. Serum creatinine and urinary protein/creatinine ratios were measured for 28 days. After sacrifice, collagen deposition was calculated, and mRNA expression TGF-beta, collagen III, MMP-2, MMP-9 and TIMP-1 was assessed by reverse transcriptase PCR. Results CyA (94 vs 61 µmol/l, P=0.002) and FK (76 vs 61 µmol/l, P=0.01) increased serum creatinine compared to the positive controls, but the effect was more marked for CyA (P=0.009). Pirfenidone significantly attenuated serum creatinine for both drug treatments at 28 days (non-dose-dependent). CyA reduced MMP-2 mRNA expression, an effect abrogated by pirfenidone (P=0.009). The reverse was found for the profibrotic TIMP-1 (P= 0.015). Collagen III (P=0.026) and TIMP1 (P=0.04) mRNA expression was reduced below FK-alone levels and control levels when pirfenidone was added to FK. Collagen III deposition was not significantly different between any groups. The underlying mechanism of the action of the novel antifibrotic agent pirfenidone is attenuation of profibrotic gene expression. It also reduces serum creatinine in saltdepleted rats treated with cyclosporine and tacrolimus in this model of CNI-induced nephrotoxicity. Telomeres, the non-coding region at the end of chromosomes, are required for the stability of chromosome ends and non genome erosive cell-replication. Telomeres are shortened by each cell division and environmental stress factors and hence have been implicated in processes such as aging and cancer development. The immunosuppressive drug Cyclosporine A (CsA) has revolutionized transplant medicine in the last decades. However, CsA induced nephrotoxicity still represents a major therapeutic challenge. Chronic CsA nephropathy is characterized by a decrease in glomerular filtration rate (GFR), tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis and progressive renal dysfunction. In vitro cell culture techniques allow the direct determination of toxicity at a cellular and molecular level, thus allowing each of the effects of CsA to be investigated independently. In this study we have investigated the effect of the widely used immunosuppressive reagent Cyclosporine A on telomere length in a renal proximal tubular cell line . HK-2 cells were cultured in growth medium containing 0, 1 and 10 µg/ml CsA. These concentrations have previously been shown to be non-toxic to confluent HK-2 monolayers. HK-2 cells were therefore seeded in low concentration and CsA was applied one day after seeding to the proliferating cells up to day 6. Genomic DNA was isolated on the sixth day with magnetic beads extraction and analyzed by quantitative PCR for relative telomere length. CsA caused a dose dependent decrease in total DNA content over the three concentrations and 10µg/ml CsA resulted in a significant telomere shortening as compared to control cells (unpaired T-Test) . From these results it can be postulated that CsA causes a shortening of telomere length in proliferating proximal tubular epithelial cells and thus could be a factor in the limited life span of transplanted kidneys, where patients are treated for prolonged periods with CsA. Telomere length may act as a parameter in the process of organ function deterioration and therefore a reduced kidney transplant survival. At present it is unclear if the shortening of telomere length is a CsA specific event or whether other chronic nephrotoxins can also induce this phenomenon. Abstracts partial inhibition of both phases of CMV-mediated PI3-K signaling and NF-κB and Sp1 activities. These results are in contrast to that reported for A77 1726: inhibition of assembly of complete virions despite the presence of abundant viral proteins. FK778 has a unique anti-CMV mechanism of action compared to other currently used drugs giving it promise as an ideal adjuvant agent in transplant patients. Recurrent hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a serious problem post-transplant. Side effects of interferon-ribavirin combination therapy limit the sustained viral response achievable in a given HCV patient population. Coupled ribavirin/hemoglobin offers the potential of a therapy with improved safety and efficacy by targeting the delivery of ribavirin to key tissues (hepatocytes and macrophages) which possess receptors for binding and internalization of hemoglobin-haptoglobin complexes infected by viral infections such as HCV. To evaluate the effect of a ribavirin-hemoglobin conjugate (RBV-Hb, HRC 203) in a mouse model of viral hepatitis induced by the coronavirus, MHV-3. Ribavirin was covalently coupled to highly purified hemoglobin HbAo at a mean molar drug ratio of 8:1 (ribavirin:hemoglobin). The RBV-Hb was evaluated for retention of haptoglobin binding and cellular uptake in vitro, as well as the ability to recover bioactive ribavirin following enzymatic cleavage from RBV-Hb. The RBV-Hb was complexed to haptoglobin prior to administration to MHV-3 infected Balb/c mice, and carried 1/3 of the drug dose that was used for the Ribavirin group. The RBV-Hb-treated group was compared to control infected untreated and Ribavirin-treated groups for survival, clinical behavior, viral titer, biochemistry and liver histopathology. RBV-Hb was specifically internalized by cultured human and mouse hepatic cells but not by control non-hepatic cells. Ribavirin enzymatically cleaved from RBV-Hb retained in vitro bioactivity similar to unmodified ribavirin. Untreated and MHV-3 infected mice all developed clinical and biochemical signs of acute viral hepatitis and died by day 4 post infection (ALT max 7000 IU/L). Livers recovered from untreated and infected mice showed greater than 90% necrosis. In contrast, survival was enhanced in both Ribavirin and RBV-Hb treated and MHV-3 infected mice with a marked reduction in biochemical (ALT max 1000 IU/L) and histologic evidence of hepatic necrosis (<10%). Clinically, RBV-Hb treated mice behaved normally at all time points, in contrast to Ribavirin treated mice which developed lethargy and abnormal fur texture compatible with drug toxicity or ongoing viral infection. A beneficial effect of RBV-Hb was shown on the course of MHV-3 infection as demonstrated by prolonged survival, improved clinical behavior, and a reduction in biochemical and histologic disease. We hypothesized that tubular epithelial cells (TECs) contribute to fibrogenesis via epithelial-mesenchymal transdifferentiation (TEMT) in kidney transplants developing tubular atrophy/interstitial fibrosis (TA/IF). Biopsies from 10 kidneys with TA/IF, as defined by Banff CT CI CV scores and impaired function, were studied by immunohistochemistry and compared to their implantation biopsies, and to 6 protocol biopsies from transplants with stable function. Epithelial markers (E-cadherin, cytokeratin) were reduced and E-cadherin expression was redistributed from the basolateral membrane to the cytoplasm and apical membrane. New expression of mesenchymal markers [vimentin, S100A4 (human homologue of fibroblast specific protein-1)] and collagen synthesis marker (heat shock protein-47, HSP-47) was significantly demonstrated in cytoplasm of TECs, both in deteriorating and atrophic tubules. Double immunostaining showed coexpression of cytokeratin and vimentin, S100A4, and HSP-47 in some TECs, suggesting an intermediate stage of TEMT. Moreover, TEMT features correlated with serum creatinine, the degree of TA/IF, history of T cell-mediated rejection (TCMR), calcineurin inhibitor effect (hyalinosis), and proteinuria. Conclusion: TECs apparently contribute to fibrogenesis in kidney transplants, via TEMT. TEMT changes correlates with graft function and extent of fibrosis. The association of TEMT with TCMR as well as post-transplant stresses (i.e. CNI effect, proteinuria) suggests that damage to TECs either by immunologic or non-immunologic processes leads to loss of epithelial features and induction of fibroblast features. Implantation CI&CT Creatinine History CNI Proteinuria nephropathy biopsies score of effect rejection E-cadherin 37.7 ± 5.0 %* 0.8 ± 1. 2 Introduction: Gene-based therapy for the treatment of insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) requires the development of a surrogate beta-cell that can synthesize and release insulin in response to glucose challenge in the physiological range. We have previously shown that hepatocytes genetically altered with a viral vector to produce transgenic insulin improved glucose tolerance tests and corrected fasting hyperglycemia in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic animals. Some viral vectors transduce hepatocytes efficiently and express transgenes at high levels; however, nonviral vectors have the advantage of being less toxic, less immunogenic and further lack the risks inherent to viral vectors. Recent studies provided evidence that intravascular delivery of plasmid DNA results in an effective gene transfer to hepatocytes. Material and Methods: To test whether the systemic delivery of plasmid DNA is sufficient to correct diabetic hyperglycemia, STZ-treated diabetic mice were injected via the tail vein by proinsulin plasmid DNA including the liver-specific albumin promoter coupled with 3 glucose inducible regulatory elements (GIRE)s from the S-14 gene and the modified proinsulin with (3SATEM) or without (3SAM2) an additional translational enhancer sequence derived from vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Results: Compared to diabetic control mice, both 3SATEM-and 3SAM2-treated diabetic groups showed a normalization of fasting blood glucose levels, a significant reduction of postprandial hyperglycemia and reduced weight-loss. Treatment with 3SATEM in contrast to 3SAM2 significantly increased insulin serum concentration under both postprandial (3SATEM: 8.0±4.8µU/ml, and 3SAM2: 2.8±1.0µU/ml) and fasting (3SATEM: 2.4±0.3µU/ml, and 3SAM2: 0.3±0.4µU/ml) conditions (both P<0.05), thus accelerating kinetics to restore postprandial euglycemia. Schlussfolgerung: Our data demonstrate that high levels of insulin expression can be achieved in hepatocytes by plasmid DNA injection via the tail vein avoiding the inherent risks of gene delivery by viral vectors. Additionally, the enhanced translational efficacy of our preproinsulin construct (3SATEM) substantially improves the output of hepatic insulin secretion and accelerated kinetics to restore postprandial euglycemia in vivo. Introduction: NOD mouse has proven to be an excellent model to study the pathogenesis and therapy of autoimmune diabetes including islet transplantation, however, these mice tend to be markedly resistant to tolerance induction. Rapamycin forms an important component of the Edmonton protocol for clinical islet transplantation and has been shown to have unique properties in facilitating tolerance induction in other organ/tissue transplant models. The CD154-CD40 and ICOS-B7h costimulatory pathways play an important role in alloimmunity, and combined CD154 and ICOS blockade is synergistic in promoting long-term allograft survival in cardiac transplant recipients. We tested the efficacy of high dose Rapamycin in combination with T cell costimulatory blockade of CD154 and ICOSL in fully allogeneic islet grafts in NOD recipients. Methods: Approximately 800 islets from BALB/c donor mice were transplanted in spontaneously diabetic (blood glucose >500mg/dL on at least 2 consecutive days) NOD mice. Rapamycin was administered in a dose of 3mg/kg on each day from day 0-7 followed by alternate day injections until day 28. Blocking anti-CD154 (MR1) and anti-ICOSL (HK5.3) mAbs were injected in doses of 0.5mg on day 0 or day 4 respectively, followed by 0.25mg on alternate days for 3 additional doses. Blood glucose was monitored post-transplantation, initially daily for 2 weeks and on alternate days thereafter. A blood glucose reading of >200mg dL on two consecutive readings was considered as rejection of islet allograft. High dose Rapamycin significantly prolonged islet allograft survival in NOD mice (MST 32, n=5, P=0.0382) . CD154 or ICOSL blockade alone did not prolong islet allograft survival significantly, however marked prolongation of islet allograft survival was seen on combining high dose Rapamycin with anti-CD154 mAb (MST 93.5, n=4, P=0.0069) or high dose Rapamycin with both anti-CD154 and anti-ICOSL mAbs (MST 104, n=4, P=0.0069). Conclusion: Combination therapy with high dose Rapamycin and CD154 plus ICOSL costimulatory blockade has synergistic effect in facilitating prolonged islet allograft survival in NOD mice. These results provide the rationale to test this protocol in nonhuman primates and ultimately in human islet transplant recipients. Pancreatic islet transplantation (PIT) has been demonstrated to reverse type I diabetes. However, significant loss of islet mass occurs in the peritransplant period that require the infusion of high numbers of islets to achieve insulin-independence. To asses potential therapeutic approaches to enhance the efficiency of PIT, an accurate in vivo measure of islet mass is needed. Based on recent technological advances, it is possible to obtain quantitative, noninvasive, in vivo imaging of cells expressing Lucifearse. We hypothesized that this method can also be used to asses intraportal islet mass after transplantation. Methods: Islets were isolated from male Lewis rats. Hand-picked islets were infected with a targeted adenoviral vector encoding firefly Luciferase or LacZ (RGD and polylysine motifs incorporated in the fiber knob, AdRGDpk7Luc), which allowed high transfection efficiency (96% islet cells) using a minimal viral dose (0.1 VP/cell). 24 hours after infection, different islet doses were infused into the portal vein in streptozotocin-induced diabetic syngeneic recipients. Bioluminiscence imaging was correlated with islet dose, glucose levels, and functional islet mass (glucose disposal rates obtained from serial metabolic testing). Results: No significant changes in islet viability, islet mass or in vitro glucose stimulated insulin release were demonstrated after islet infection with AdRGDpK7Luc. After transplantation of 2000 IEQ/rat, 100% of the recipients presented euglycemia (nonfasting glucose <200 mg/ dL) within 7 days compared with animals given 1500 IEQ (glucose 220-279 mg/dL) or 1000 IEQ (glucose=>300 mg/dL). A direct correlation between islet dose, luciferase readings, and glucose disposal rates was demonstrated (day 7: 2000 IEQ= mean 1.97 E+06 photons/sec; Kg-2.96±0.6 versus 1000 IEQ=mean 5.2+05 photons/sec; Kg 1.4±0.5) . No luciferase readings were demonstrated outside the liver or in animals given islets infected with AdRGDpk7LacZ. No significant interference in iselt engraftment or functionality was demonstrated in animals given islets infected with AdRGDpK7Luc (Kg=2.96±0.6 compared with mock infected islets=3.1±0.8). Conclusions: It is possible to quantitatively assess intraportal transplanted islet mass in vivo using noninvasive bioluminescence imaging. Two or more donors are required for a successful human islet allotransplantation under the current Edmonton protocol. However, human islet autotransplant recipients after pancreatectomy need fewer islets per recipient than the islet allotransplant recipients. In this study, we determined whether the islet mass required to reverse diabetes could be significantly reduced in diabetic NOD mice after establishing a substantial level of donor lymphocyte chimerism (>40%), as compared with the islet mass required for successful allogeneic islet transplantation in immunosuppressed diabetic NOD mice. Fludarabine phosphate (400 mg/kg) and cyclophosphamide (200mg/kg) were given at day -1. Donor BALB/c bone marrow cells were transplanted into diabetic NOD mice at day 0. Anti-CD154 mAb were given from day 0 to day 14. Different numbers of islets were transplanted in diabetic NOD mice with >40% donor chimerism 3 weeks post-BMT. We also transplanted different numbers of islets into diabetic NOD mice under immunosuppression comparable to the Edmonton protocol. Diabetic NOD mice were treated with ALS (0.3 ml) on day -1 and 0, and rapamycin (1 mg/kg/day) and low-dose tacrolimus (0.5 mg/kg/day) beginning on day -2. At 3 weeks posttransplant, diabetes was not reversed in any NOD mice that received 100 islets and immunosuppression (N=3). When 200 islets were given, only 16 % of the mice achieved normoglycemia (N=12). When the number of transplanted islets was further increased to 300 and 400, the percentage of mice that achieved normoglycemia was increased to 50% (N=12) and 75% (N=8). However, in diabetic NOD mice with > 40% donor lymphocyte chimerism, 83% of mice reversed diabetes 3 weeks after receiving 100 donor islets (N=6). When the number of transplanted islets was increased to 200 (N=9), 300 (N=8), and 400 (N=8), all recipient mice achieved normoglycemia and significantly increased body weight in these three groups. Our results demonstrate that a high number of islets is required to reverse diabetes in spontaneously diabetic NOD mice with immunosuppression. However, a low islet number is sufficient to restore normoglycemia in diabetic NOD mice with a substantial level of donor chimerism. These data suggest that a small number of islets are sufficient to reverse diabetes in those diabetic NOD mice whose alloimmune response and autoimmune response were abrogated by pretransplant induction of a substantial level of donor chimerism. Currently, the inability of producing successful islet transplantation from one donor to one recipient is a major obstacle facing clinical islet transplantation (tx). In the present study, we hypothesize that IFN-γ might be induced immediately after islet tx in the liver, which is the site of clinical islet tx, and responsible for primary non-function of islets resulting in the requirement of multiple donors to cure a single recipient. To prove this, IFN-γ-deficient (KO) mice as well as anti-IFN-γ antibody were used for the experiments. When 200 islets, equivalent to those isolated from a single mouse pancreas, or 400 syngeneic islets were grafted into the liver of STZ-induced diabetic wild-type mice (C57BL/6), 0/10 or 10/10 recipients, respectively, became normoglycemic (<200 mg/ dl) after tx. Morphologically, de-granulated or well-granulated β cells of islets were seen in the liver of mice receiving 200 or 400 islets, respectively, at 60 days after tx. In marked contrast to wild-type mice, IFN-γ KO diabetic mice (n=5) became normoglycemic by 14 days after tx when 200 islets were grafted into the liver. IFN-γ KO diabetic mice receiving 200 islets in conjunction with exogenous IFN-γ (human recombinant, 50000 U, ip, day 0-6) remained hyperglycemic at 60 days. Four out of 5 or 0/5 diabetic wildtype mice receiving 200 islets and treated with anti-IFN-γ antibody (ip, 100 µg/ injection, day 0, 2, 4) or control antibody, respectively, became normoglycemic. IPGTT at 60 days after tx revealed that the plasma glucose levels of mice receiving 200 islets and treated with anti-IFN-γ antibody were 70.0±8.0, 324.3±6.5 and 188.0±10.6 mg/dl at 0, 30 and 120 minutes after the glucose injection (1g/kg), respectively, and those of mice receiving 400 islets without treatment were 66.5±4.1, 413.8±18.5 and 259.8±18.7 mg/dl, respectively. When diabetic wild-type C57BL/6 mice (n=5) receiving 200 BALB/c islet allografts and treated with anti-IFN-γ antibody in conjunction with anti-CD4 antibody (ip, 200 µg, day 0) to prevent rejection remained normoglycemic at 90 days after tx. These findings clearly show that IFN-γ is responsible for primary nonfunction of islet isografts and allografts in the liver of mice and suggest that the treatment targeted at IFN-γ may facilitate to produce the success of clinical islet transplantation from one donor to one recipient. Poster Board #-Session: P70-III PROTEIN Islet transplants fail due to immune and non-immune insults. Metabolic stress attributable to an inadequate islet cell mass may be an important non-immune contributor to islet graft dysfunction. Characteristic protein biomarkers may be useful for identifying stressed islet grafts. To isolate the effects of metabolic stress on islet graft protein expression, syngeneic islet transplants were used to limit graft infiltration by alloreactive lymphocytes. Methods: To induce metabolic stress, a marginal number of C57Bl/6 (B6) islets were transplanted into streptozotocin-induced diabetic B6 mice. Specifically, 250 islets (i.e. marginal mass) consistently reduced blood glucose levels but did not restore euglycemia (i.e. ≤10mM) as was achieved with 450 islets (i.e. optimal mass). Islet protein expression was assessed by Western gel or two dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DE) coupled with mass spectrometry. Non-transplanted islet protein expression was compared with day 7 islet transplant protein expression. 'Stressed' (250 islet) transplants were compared with 'non-stressed' (450 islet) transplants for relative protein expression. For Western blots, relative band chemiluminescence was used to assess differential protein expression. For 2DE, Melanie 3.0 Image Analysis Software and Amersham Difference in Gel Electrophoresis were used to detect changes in islet protein constituents. Results: Differential protein expression was readily demonstrated by both Western and 2DE. Sixteen proteins were upregulated and 29 proteins were downregulated with metabolic stress. Protein biomarkers of islet stress can be grouped into two functional categories based on their conserved amino acid sequence domains: (1) proteins containing stress-responsive heat shock element domains (e.g. heme oxygenase-1, GRP78, HSP70) that confer chaperone activity essential in protein quality control such as folding and translocation to appropriate cellular compartments; and (2) proteins containing thioredoxin-type domains that are responsive to redox homeostasis (e.g. protein disulfide isomerase-related protein, GRP58). 2DE analysis revealed posttranslational modifications of islet actin, GRP78, and tumor rejection antigen gp96 under conditions of metabolic stress. Conclusions: In vivo protein biomarkers of transplanted islets under metabolic stress have been identified and demonstrate that complex differential protein expression during metabolic stress can be meaningfully interpreted. Biomarkers to predict and monitor islet function may prove a useful clinical adjunct. In allogeneic bone marrow transplantation, permanent engraftment across disparate MHC barriers can be achieved experimentally by reducing host anti-donor immune responses with rigorous host conditioning regimens. Clinically, this approach is limited due to regimen related toxicities, graft failure and the high incidence of graft versus host disease. The use of a bioengineered stem cell graft might aid in reducing the requirements of conditioning while retaining the ability to achieve long-term engraftment. Since mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are known to suppress T cell responses, we hypothesized that co-administration of these cells with an allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell graft would aid in overcoming the allogeneic barrier and permit a reduction in the intensity of the host conditioning regimen. To test this hypothesis, 8 groups of B6 (H2b, n=6 per group) mice were conditioned with 800, 600, 400 or 200 cGy of sublethal radiation and given MHC disparate Balb/c (H2d) hematopoietic grafts alone or grafts supplemented with Balb/c MSC. To test for durable engraftment, peripheral blood of recipients was analyzed for the presence of donor cells at 120 days via flow cytometric detection of H2d + cells. MSC-treated recipients had significantly higher levels of donor engraftment when compared to non-MSC treated recipients at conditioning doses of 600, (6.9 ± 3.6 vs. Background: Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease resulting in the destruction of the insulin-producing beta cells of pancreatic islets. Islet transplantation offers the potential to reestablish regulated insulin secretion in patients with type 1 diabetes. Encouraging clinical results have been hampered by the fact that large numbers of transplanted islets are functionally impaired due to apoptosis. Genetic engineering of islets with cytoprotective genes may augment islet survival following transplantation. We have shown that islets can be efficiently transduced using a feline immunodeficiency viral (FIV) vector. However, the delivery of more than one cytoprotective gene, which would be highly advantageous for the protection of islets, has never been demonstrated with this vector. The goal of this research was to determine whether a bicistronic FIV could deliver two genes to human pancreatic islets. Methods: Human pancreatic islets were isolated and transduced using a bicistronic FIV vector expressing an anti-apoptotic gene (cFLIP) driven by a cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter, and a marker gene (YFP) on a viral internal ribosome entry site (IRES). This system allows for translation of two cDNAs from a single transcript. Control islets were transduced with an FIV vector expressing only YFP. Apoptosis was induced by adding 0.05mM doxorubicin to the islet culture media for 24 hours. Islets were disassociated and examined for Annexin PE and 7AAD to determine cell death. YFP fluorescence was used to determine transduction in these cells. Results: All transduced islets were positive for YFP fluorescence. cFLIP-transduced islets induced with doxorubicin showed apoptosis levels of 15.5±0.7 whereas induced islets transduced only with YFP showed significantly higher apoptosis levels (33.5±3.5). These results show that both genes were expressed and that cFLIP-transduced islets were significantly protected from doxorubicin-induced apoptosis. Discussion: In this study we show the successful transduction of human islets with a bicistronic FIV. This is the first report of the concomitant expression of two genes by an FIV vector in pancreatic islets. The capacity of an FIV vector to express two genes has important implications in terms of strategies aimed at cytoprotection of these cells in the transplant setting. FIV vectors may be useful in transducing islets with more than one cytoprotective, anti-lytic and/or immuno-modulating molecule. 1 1 Medicine, Weill Medical Coll. of Cornell Univ., New York, NY; 2 Pathology, The Children's Hosp. of Philadelphia, PA. We designed and constructed a replication deficient adenovirus (Ad) vector encoding the active form of human TGF-β 1 and tested the hypothesis that systemic TGF-β 1 gene therapy restores self-tolerance and facilitates islet regeneration. Diabetic female NOD mice received intravenous injection of 5x10 10 particle units of Ad.AH.TGF-β 1 and 500-600 syngeneic islets one week later. Hyperglycemia was promptly corrected by the islet grafts but reoccurred by day 17 in all untreated NOD mice. In striking contrast, long-term functioning of syngeneic grafts was found in 7 of 12 NOD mice treated with Ad.AH.TGF-β 1. Analysis of islet grafts retrieved from Ad.AH.TGF-β 1 treated NOD mice showed well-preserved islets with a peri-islet infiltrate primarily of CD4+ T cells and expression of CD25 and Foxp3. Staining for IFN-γ was negative whereas TGF-β 1 and IL-10, and PD-L1 and PD-L2 all showed heightened expression. Systemic TGF-β 1 gene therapy was also associated with functional restoration of endogenous islets (islet regeneration) in the native pancreas. Not only the Ad.AH.TGF-β 1 treated NOD mice remained normoglycemic after removal of the syngeneic islet grafts, examination of the native pancreas revealed scattered but intact islets, among pancreatic exocrine tissues (panel A). There were few intra-islet cellular infiltrates. However, similar to what was found in the syngeneic islet grafts, there were well-demarcated lymphocytic infiltrates on the periphery of the islets without invasion of the islets themselves (peri-insulitis). Moreover, the intact islets stained strongly for insulin (panel B) , providing definitive evidence of functional restoration of endogenous beta cells. Our studies demonstrating that systemic TGF-beta1 gene therapy restores self-tolerance and facilitates islet regeneration suggest a new treatment for type 1 diabetes. The mechanisms involved in early loss of functional islet mass remain uncertain, although immunologic factors are probably not the primary cause. Evidence indicates that early islet death is largely due to apoptosis, in part related to dissociation of islets from the extracellular matrix (anoikis). Most studies of islet apoptosis are in murine and human models and provide little information about the apoptosis mechanisms in isolated nonhuman primate (NHP) islets. We examined molecular mechanisms of NHP islet apoptosis. Normal pancreata were harvested after cold perfusion in UW and digested with Liberase using a standardized semi-automatic procedure. Islets were isolated by density centrifugation using a Cobe processor. Beginning at 5 minutes after islet isolation and at serial time points thereafter, we examined caspase activation, cellular expression and distribution/translocation of Bax, Bmf, and GSK3b, with and without specific inhibitors. Caspase activation was determined by FLICA. Western blots and immunhistochemistry was used to examine protein expression. Apoptosis was measured using annexin V staining. Activation of effector caspases 3, 6, and 7 and also caspase 9 was observed within 5 minutes after islet isolation. In contrast, caspase 8 was activated 2 hrs later, and caspases 1, 2, 4, and 10 were not activated in the first 24 hrs. Inhibitory peptides, specific for caspase 3,6, 8, or 9, added alone or in combination, yielded a maximum 35% protection, suggesting involvement of a caspase-independent pathway. Bax activation, by nuclear and mitochondrial translocation, was observed within 5 minutes after islet isolation, whereas there was negligible Bax translocation in situ in non-isolated pancreatic islets. Bax activation correlated with Bmf relocation from the myosin V motor complex, an event common to anoikis-type apoptosis in other cell types. The active form of GSK3β, an integral component of the intergrin signaling pathway and an upstream activator of Bax, became increasingly prominent in the nucleus. Addition of the GSK3β inhibitor, LiCl 2, blocked Bmf and Bax nuclear translocation, decreased the active form of GSK3β, and blocked apoptosis. In summary, we postulate that the break down of integrin survival signals leads to sequential activation of GSK3β, Bmf and Bax, triggering the caspase cascade to rapidly initiate apoptosis in isolated islets. We designed and constructed a replication deficient adenovirus (Ad) vector encoding the active form of human TGF-β 1 (Ad.AH.TGF-β 1 ) and tested the hypothesis that systemic TGF-β 1 gene therapy prevents the development of type 1 diabetes. Ad.AH.TGF-β 1 was constructed on an Ad 5 backbone and was deleted of E1 and E3 genes. TGF-β 1 was rendered active by mutating the codons encoding cysteines 224 and 226 into serine codons. In order to test the efficacy of systemic TGF-β 1 gene therapy under stringent conditions, we administered Ad.AH.TGF-β 1 to 7-week old female NOD mice with overt autoimmunity and examined whether the onset of diabetes (hyperglycemia) is delayed. Our data demonstrating the striking impact of systemic TGF-β 1 gene therapy on the development of overt diabetes is shown below. Immunohistologic analysis of pancreatic samples harvested at 13 weeks from the untreated diabetic NOD mice showed insulitis and destruction of most islets. Infiltrates consisted predominantly of CD4+ T cells that expressed CD25 and showed staining for IFN-g but not for TGF-β 1 or IL-10. By comparison, analysis at 19 weeks of the pancreas of a female NOD mouse that had received Ad.AH.TGF-β 1 , showed well-preserved islets and small peri-islet mononuclear cell aggregates. As with the control diabetic mice, peri-islet cells in Ad.AH.TGF-β 1 -treated mice consisted largely of CD4+ T cells that showed expression of CD25, but in contrast to the control group, lacked IFN-γ and showed staining for Foxp3 and TGF-β 1 . Our observations demonstrating that TGF-β 1 gene therapy induces the emergence of T-regulatory cells capable of constraining overt autoimmunity and retarding the development of type 1 diabetes advances systemic TGF-β 1 gene therapy as a potential treatment for type 1 diabetes. Background: Strategies to engineer a bone marrow cell transplant (BMT) to optimize efficiency but avoid graft versus host disease (GVHD) will significantly expand the use of BMT to chronic disease states including tolerance induction. We, and others, have described a subpopulation of BM cells (CD8 + TCR -) that facilitates long-term engraftment of purified HSC in allogeneic recipients without causing GVHD. Facilitating cells (FC) also, significantly enhance the engraftment of limiting numbers of HSC in syngeneic recipients. We therefore hypothesized that FC may act directly on HSC to improve engraftment. Methods: In the current study, we evaluated the activity of FC on HSC biology in vitro using: 1) colony formation in semi-solid media (CFC) to enumerate progenitors and 2) cobblestone area forming cell (CAFC) assay to quantify early hematopoietic progenitors, reflecting long-term repopulating cells (LTRC) . We also assessed the effect of FC on HSC death/apoptosis using AnnexinV and 7-AAD uptake by flow cytometry. Sorted HSC (Sca-1 + c-Kit + lin -) were used fresh, or after 18 or 40 hours incubation in the presence or absence of sorted FC or control T cells (all from C57BL/6 mice). Results: We found that the FC increased the ability of fresh HSC to generate colonies for both assays CFC, and CAFC suggesting a direct effect of FC on HSC quiescence/ differentiation. FC alone do not produce colonies. Additionally, unlike FC, T cells did not augment the number of CFC produced by the HSC. We determined that co-incubation with FC for 18 or 40 hours significantly decreased the percentage of apoptotic HSC (from 31.2 % for HSC alone to 22.1 % for HSC + FC at 18 hours and 16.2 % to 8.8 % at 40 hours; (P<0.01). Moreover, FC increase the ability of HSC to generate CFC at these same time points. Conclusion: These data demonstrate a direct effect of FC on HSC maintenance in longterm culture, balance between quiescence/differentiation, and survival. These functions correlate with in vivo facilitating activity as control T cells did not facilitate HSC engraftment or result in the same in vitro effects. These assays provide effective tools for studies of human facilitating cells. Through their effects on HSC, FC are a powerful tool in therapeutic applications of stem cell transplantation from curing of disease to regeneration of damaged tissue. A substantial level of donor lymphocyte chimerism is required to protect donor-specific islet grafts in the mouse model with autoimmune diabetes. Donor islet grafts can be rejected in diabetic NOD mice with a low level of donor chimerism. In this study, we investigated whether islet graft rejection in chimeric NOD mice is mediated by autoimmune or alloimmune response. Allogeneic BALB/c splenocytes were injected into diabetic NOD mice at day -3, followed by cyclophosphamide at day -1. BALB/c bone marrow and islets were transplanted simultaneously at day 0. Anti-CD154 mAb and rapamycin were given from day 0 to day 14. Mixed chimerism was measured by flow cytometric analysis. Autoimmune response was determined by adoptive transferring splenocytes from chimeric NOD mice that have rejected donor-specific islet grafts into NOD.scid mice. Alloimmune response was tested by MLR and ELISPOT for INF-γ-producing cells in vitro. Mixed chimerism was achieved in all recipient mice. At 8 weeks post-BMT, the level of donor-derived CD3 + T cells was 11.4±7.9%. After donor specific islet grafts were rejected, 5x10 6 splenocytes from these chimeric NOD mice with at least over 1% donor CD3 + T cells were adoptively transferred into each NOD.scid mouse. Twelve of 15 NOD.scid mice developed diabetes 12 weeks after adoptive transfer. All 8 NOD.scid mice that received splenocytes from control diabetic NOD mice also developed diabetes. Proliferation of splenocytes from these chimeric NOD mice against donor BALB/c stimulators was markedly reduced, as compared with proliferation of splenocytes from naïve NOD mice (P<0.01). However, the response of chimeric mice to third-party C3H/ He stimulators was not significantly different from the response of naïve NOD mice. The number of IFN-γ-secreting splenocytes significantly increased in the splenocytes of control NOD mice under the stimulation with BALB/c splenocytes. In contrast, the level of IFN-γ-secreting splenocytes in the chimeric NOD mice did not increase and it was the same as the background level under the stimulation of BALB/c splenocytes (P<0.01). The number of IFN-γ-secreting splenocytes in both the chimeric NOD mice and control NOD mice significantly increased when third-party (C3H/He) splenocytes were used as the stimulators, as compared with the naïve splenocytes as the stimulators. These data demonstrate that islet antigen-specific autoreactive T cells exist in chimeric NOD mice and they are responsible for islet graft loss. Poster Board #-Session: P80-III Wen-Ghih Tsang, 1 Carolyn C. Huntenburg, 1 Tianli Zheng, 1 Andrew Schaeffer, 1 Yan Ping Wang, 1 Kermit Lim. 1 1 AmCyte Inc., Santa Monica, CA. To advance islet transplantation the shortage of organs and the toxicity of chronic immune suppression need to be addressed. While we approach the islet shortage by islet regeneration, islet encapsulation has been applied to eliminate chronic immune suppression. Encapsulation also provides islet stability which allows safety and functional determination prior to their transplantation. It allows accumulation of islets for clinical use. This increases the percentage of organs that benefit patients. An approved clinical trial utilizing encapsulated islets without chronic immune supression has been initiated. Method: Cultured encapsulated islets were analyzed for up to 12 months. Sterility and mycoplasma were tested for safety. Viability (AO/PI), purity (DTZ staining), SGS (SI) and perifusion were tested for function. To evaluate in vivo function and immune protection, encapsulated islets, cultured for 3 months, were transplanted into STZ induced diabetic C57/bl mice (n=9) at 18K IEQ/kg. The BG level and other indications were compared with that of the cohort (n=8) which received empty capsules. Results: Safety and function of cultured encapsulated islets could be maintained for up to 12 months. Encapsulated islets were able to normalize BG levels of diabetic mice for 3 months without immune suppression. Grafts recovered from hosts (n=4) at 8 weeks post transplantation contained insulin, glucagon and somatostatin positive cells. Retrieved grafts were responsive to glucose challenge by perifusion test. Some cellular overcoat on capsules were observed. Necropsy exams were normal. OGTT at week 3 (n=3), 5 (n=2), and 8 (n=4) were normal. At day 107, the BG levels of all remaining mice (n=5) rose above 244 mg/dL (442±151 mg/dL) indicating cessation of graft function. This suggested that prior BG normalization was not caused by recovery of host endocrine function. Conclusion: Encapsulated islets offer in vitro stability allowing for graft testing prior to transplantation. Immunoprotection afforded by the capsules under the xenograft setting for 3 months was remarkable. The protective nature of the capsule affords a potential benefit of eliminating chronic immune suppression in human islet transplantation. Background: As short-term renal transplant survival continues to improve, with known risk factors having a diminishing effect, attention has been increasingly focused on alternative measures of outcome such as renal function. This study explores the relationship between renal function in the first year post-transplant and long-term kidney transplant survival in the UK. Methods: Cadaveric heartbeating donor kidney only transplants in adult patients in the UK between 1983 and 1987 were analysed. Transplants failing in the first year were excluded. For 75% of the remaining cohort, both 3 and 12-month serum creatinine measures were recorded on the national transplant database. Transplant survival analysis (death with function counted as a failure) considered the influence of 3 and 12 month serum creatinine; the change between 3 and 12 month serum creatinine (∆ creatinine) and other potential risk factors recorded. Data were available for 2766 transplants with 97% 10-year follow-up including 17% regrafts, which were analysed separately. Results: Analysis of first transplants showed a highly statistically significant association between ten-year transplant survival and 12-month creatinine, ∆ creatinine and an interaction of the two (p<0.0001). Unadjusted 10-year transplant survival estimates ranged from 62% (95% confidence interval (CI) 58-65%) for transplants with 12-month serum creatinine <120 µmol/l to 13% (95% CI 9-18%) for those with 12month creatinine >= 265 µmol/l. There was a negative association between outcome and ∆ creatinine, which was greatest for those with poor function at 12-months. Other factors adjusted for were recipient age (p<0.0001), blood group (p<0.001) and HLA match (p<0.1). Univariately, donor age and donor-recipient gender match were significant, but these effects disappeared with the introduction of measures of posttransplant renal function. Analysis of regrafts and of graft (death-censored) survival both showed comparable results. The relevance of findings to more recent data was validated by analysis of 3-year outcome of a recent cohort. Conclusion: For transplants functioning after the first post-operative year, 12-month serum creatinine and ∆ creatinine were highly predictive of 10-year transplant survival. There was a 49% survival difference at 10-years post-transplant between the group with the poorest renal function at one year and the group with the best function. The importance of delayed graft function (DGF) kidney transplants (tx) remains controversial. We examined the long-term impact of DGF in recipients with stable function at six months post-tx in the attempt to separate true DGF from those events that are more attributable to technical failures. We examined 67,725 first solitary deceased donor kidney tx in the SRTR database from 1990-2000. We generated models for overall graft survival and death censored graft survival comparing patients with and without indications for DGF. Subsequently, we examined the impact of DGF in situations in which recipients had stable renal function at 6 months post-tx, with relatively young donor organs, and with no indications of acute rejection during the first week post tx. Our results indicated that even in rather ideal conditions, for recipients with stable renal function and low-risk donations, incidence of DGF was associated with late graft loss. Death censored graft survival at ten years was 71.2% in the DGF group and 77.9% in tx without DGF (p-value <.0001). This result was confirmed in multivariate analysis correcting for potential confounding variables. On the other hand with shorter follow up, censoring the same cohort at five years, we found no effect of DGF (Relative risk = 1.031 (0.896, 1.185), p-value = 0.6729). Contrariwise if all DGF situations were considered, including early failure, there was a very early detectable difference in graft survival. In summary, DGF including early failures, most likely secondary to technical problems and rejection, constitutes obviously a strong risk for early graft loss. More importantly even in situations in which technical failures are unlikely, looking at patients who had reasonable renal function at 6 months post tx, DGF was a significant risk factor for graft loss in the long term. 5-year follow up might not be sufficient to elucidate this late effect. HLA molecules have a central role in allorecognition and alloimmune response in organ transplantation (Tx). Although donor/recipient (D/R) HLA M is considered important, it is not uniformly predictive of successful outcome. More specifically, alloresponse depends on recognition of the mismatched EPIs that constitute the donor's class I and II HLA molecules. Thus, we hypothesized that Epi M would correlate better with short-term graft outcome than HLA M. We reviewed the records of 76 patients (Pts) who underwent kidney Tx from 1/02 to 5/03 with follow-up 15±6 mo (all ≥ 6 mo). Data on Pt characteristics, acute rejection (AR), and graft loss (GL) were obtained. HLA typing was performed pre-Tx using molecular methods. D/R Epi M for HLA-A, B, DR, DRw, and DQ was performed using the Duquesnoy HLA MatchMaker program. Linear and logistic regression models were used for statistical analysis. Pt age was 47.7±11.6; 93% were African American (AA); and 59% male. Duration of ESRD was 5.5±3.7 yrs; 71% of grafts were from deceased donors; and 20% were re-Tx. 23 Pts had peak PRA > 10%. 62% received basiliximab and 38% received Thymoglobulin for induction. 34% of Pts had DGF. Maintenance immunosuppression included mycophenolate mofetil, prednisone, and either tacrolimus (FK) (68%) or sirolimus (SRL) (32%). The number of HLA mismatches (MM) was 3.6±1.7. The number of Epi MM for class I, class II, and both combined was 14.8±7.8, 11.2±9.3, and 26.0±13.6, respectively. 19.7% of Pts experienced at least 1 episode of biopsy-proven AR, and GL from death or graft failure occurred in 9.2%. The total number of Epi MM correlated well with the number of HLA MM (r=0.61). We did not find any statistically significant association between the number of Epi MM nor HLA MM and the development of AR or GL. Choice of maintenance agent (FK vs SRL) correlated with AR in some models. Although our results did not reveal a significant association between the number of Epi MM and short-term graft outcome in our high-risk AA kidney Tx population, we cannot refute its potential role as a predictor for long-term graft survival. It has been noted that Epi MM are predictive of the antibody specificities detected after GL and impact on matching with future donors. A larger study with longer follow-up is warranted to explore the influence of humorally-recognized Epi MM on extended graft survival. Background: Improvement in short and long-term graft survival has necessitated the need for early markers of late graft outcome. Post-transplant Serum Creatinine (SCr) at 6 month and 1 year as well as delta SCr has been correlated with long-term graft failure. The current study evaluates the correlation between the change in GFR (calculated using MDRD equation) between 6 and 12 months post transplant (∆GFR 6-12 ) and long-term survival. Methods: A total of 23,522 adult cadaveric renal recipients patients recorded in the USRDS database for 1996-1999 were included for this s tudy. These recipients were categorized according to ∆GFR 6-12 : Non-decliners (0), 5, 5.1-10 and > 10ml/min/1.73m 2 respectively. Multivariate regression analysis and Cox proportional hazard modeling were performed after correcting for donor and recipient demographics such as age, gender, and race, recipient cause of ESRD; transplant and post-transplant variables such as HLA match, PRA, CIT, DGF, induction antibody use, type of Calcineurin inhibitor, transplant year and baseline GFR at 6 months. RESULTS: The projected median graft survival time (half-life) was calculated for various ∆GFR 6-12 are shown in table below.   table 1 ∆GFR6-12 0 (N = 13,819) 1 -5 (N = 2,316) 5.1 -10 (N = 3,018) > 10(N = 4,369 ) half-life(95% CI) 18.8 (16.7, 20.9) 15.3 (13, 17.5) 11.7 (10. 2, 13 .3) 7.1 (6.3,7.9) yrs. A decline of > 5ml/min/1.73m2 was associated with nearly 40% lower graft survival (p< 0.0001). A similar pattern of lower long-term graft survival was noted when patients were censored for death with a functioning graft. The hazard ratio for long-term graft failure using Cox proportional hazard model revealed for each 10 ml decline ∆GFR6-12 after correcting for various donor and transplant variables was 1.61 (1.38, 1.67) , p < 0.0001 Conclusions: ∆GFR 6-12 correlates with long-term graft failure and a rapid decline in ∆GFR 6-12 would help in separating high-risk patients for further intervention. The role of parameters of prior transplant (Tx) in the allograft and recipient survival is not well established. Using Cox proportional hazard model we analyzed USRDS records from all patients receiving kidney or kidney-pancreas Tx between 1/1/90 through 12/ 31/99 with the follow-up period through 12/31/00 (n=92,844, 60% males, 70% white, 23% black ) and a subsample of all patients with a history of more than one Tx (n=11,714, 59% males, 78% white, mean=32.7 months between previous graft failure and current Tx). Separate Cox models were fit for time from Tx to graft failure and time from Tx to recipient death. Cox models were adjusted for donor and recipient characteristics (e.g. demographic data, comorbidities) and Tx procedure characteristics. In the dataset of all patients Cox models demonstrated that history of prior Tx increased the risk of graft failure (HR 1.24, p<0.001), but was not significant for recipient death. Total number of Txs increased the risk of graft failure (HR 1.35, p<0 .001), but was not significant for recipient death. In the subsample of patients with history of more than one Tx, the total number of Txs increased both the risk of graft failure (HR 1.25, p<0 .001) and recipient death (HR 1.09, p=0.026). The time period between the last graft failure and the most recent Tx had no significant association with the graft outcome, but slightly worsened the recipient outcome (HR 1.04, p<0.001). Having Tx as a renal replacement therapy modality immediately prior to the last Tx without dialysis in between posed a greater risk of graft failure (relative to hemodialyis, HR 1.99, p<0.001), but had protective effect on recipient survival (HR 0.74, p=0.005) . Previous donor type did not significantly affect the graft or the patient outcome. In conclusion, the history of prior Tx and the number of Txs increased the risk of graft failure, but not the recipient death (except in the subsample of patients with >1 Txs, where total number of Txs increased the risk of mortality); the time period between the last graft failure and the most recent Tx was not associated with the graft outcome, but worsened the recipient outcome. While preemptive first Tx seems to increase graft and recipient survival, consecutive Tx without dialysis in between appears to increase the risk of allograft failure. Poster Board #-Session: P88-III Background: The aging population has resulted in an increasing number of elderly kidney transplant (KT) recipients. Elucidating the outcome of KT in the elderly will be essential to optimize recipient selection and management as well as choice of donor organ. Aim: To determine outcome of KT in elderly patients. Methods: Retrospective review of 269 cadaver (CAD) and live donor (LD) kidney transplants performed at our institution 7/1/99 -10/15/01. Results: Recipients were divided into 2 groups: patients ≥60 years old (yo) and patients < 60 yo. Mean age of patients ≥ 60 yo and < 60 yo was 65 ± 4 years and 42 ± 11 years, respectively, p<0.0001. Groups were well matched for recipient age, gender, ethnicity, HLA mismatch, PRA, maintenance immunosuppression regimen, use of antibody induction, LD or CAD, and donor age. Patients ≥ 60 yo had more diabetic nephropathy (40% ≥ 60 yo vs. 19% < 60 yo, p=0.007). 1-and 4-year cumulative rejection (AR) incidence was 28%, 35% in ≥ 60 yo and 43%, 53% in < 60 yo, respectively, p=0.02. Actuarial patient and death-censored graft survival appear below. Grade of rejection episodes tended to be less severe in patients ≥ 60 yo. The most common cause of graft failure in patients ≥ 60 yo was death with functioning graft (DWFG, 85%), whereas the most common cause of graft failure in patients < 60 yo was chronic allograft nephropathy (39%). Distribution of the causes of recipient death was similar between age groups. Conclusions: Elderly KT recipients have less rejection and similar long-term graft survival compared to younger patients, possibly reflecting inherently lower immune reactivity in these patients. DWFG accounts for the vast majority of graft losses in this group of patients. Development of comprehensive algorithms for recipient risk stratification, appropriate selection of type and source of donor organ, and immunosuppression strategies in the elderly patient is necessary, particularly given the limited availability of cadaver kidneys. There is a general presumption that highly sensitised renal transplant recipients are at increased risk of transplant failure. In our centre we practice efficient pre-transplant antibody screening and allocate deceased donor kidneys to minimise HLA mismatches. As a result, we hypothesise that transplant survival should not differ between highly sensitised and non-sensitised recipients. This cohort study aimed to investigate patient and graft survival, acute rejection and renal function in highly sensitised recipients of deceased donor kidneys. Methods: Between 1998 and 2002, 15 .7% of 535 adult recipients were sensitised pretransplant. Four recipients were transplanted twice and 18 had a pre-transplant HLA specific antibody reaction frequency of >85% in CDC, FC and ELISA screening assays thus fulfilling the UK Transplant definition of highly sensitised (HSP) recipients. All transplants were done in the absence of donor reactive, clinically relevant antibodies (negative crossmatches). Patient records and histology reports were retrospectively reviewed. The follow-up period ranged from 14-60 months. Kidneys were allocated acoording to UK Transplant criteria, which aims to minimimse HLA mismatches. 64% of patients were initiated on triple therapy [csa/tac+aza/mmf+pred], 23% on double therapy [csa/tac+pred/mmf] and 12% received monotherapy with csa or tac. Results: Data was complete on 94% of 84 patients. Partial data was available on 4 of the remaining 5 patients. The 1 year graft survival was 83.6% (expected 87-92%). The mean serum creatinine at 1 year was 163 µmol/l (see table 1 ). Over the five year study period 21.5% of grafts were lost (see table 2 ). 37 patients had rejection episodes. 34 patients had 1 rejection episode and 3 patients had 2 rejection episodes. Of these we found 16 vascular, 10 cellular, 8 combined vascular and cellular and 3 clinical (biopsy not undertaken or biopsy inadequate for diagnosis) rejections. Delayed function, defined as the need for dialysis within the first post transplant week, occurred in 30 (37.9%) transplants (expected 34%). Conclusion: We find that efficient, clinically relevant antibody screening and allocation to minimise HLA mismatching lead to graft loss and rejection rates which are similar to those observed in non-sensitised recipients. Previous analysis of OPTN data has shown that cadaveric renal transplant function at six months post-transplant has improved over decade of the 1990's (figure 2). Using OPTN data, 40,155 cadaveric renal transplants between 1991 and 2000 with graft survival of at least six months were idenfied that had complete data for HLA mismatch, donor and recipient age, sex and race, delayed graft function, clinical rejection in the first six months, and creatinine data at six months. Figure 1 shows the trends in donors and recipient characteristics as well as trends in maintenence immunosuppression, HLA mismatch, acute rejection and delay graft function over the ten year span. Linear regression analysis of six month post-transplant MDRD GFR was preformed using variables shown in figure 1 to determine the impact of each variable on graft function. The reduction in the clinical acute rejection rate accounted for only 19.8% of the improvement in mean GFR over the decade. MMF use accounted for 24.4% and FK506 use accounted for15.1% of the improvement while 37.2% of improvement was due to unidentified factors. The improvement in GFR associated with MMF and FK506 was seen after accounting for clinical rejection suggesting other benefits such as a reduction in subclinical rejection or nephrotoxicity accounts for their beneficial effect on graft function. Kidney function is a significant correlate of long term graft survival. In this study we sought to determine the variables that relate to the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) post-transplant. GFR was measured by iothalamate clearance and was not corrected for body surface area in an attempt to minimize the contribution of changes in BMI, early post-transplant, on GFR. GFR was measured at 3 weeks, 1 and 2 years post-transplant in 407 patients transplanted between 1/98 and 9/01 and including 337 living (LD) and 70 deceased (DD) donors. Patients with delayed graft function were excluded from the analysis. At 3 weeks post-transplant, GFR was significantly higher in LD than in DD recipients (Table) ; and also in younger donors (p=.001); and younger recipients (p=.04, all multivariate). The difference between LD and DD in GFR 3wks increased with increasing donor age: donor <30 years: GFR LD 69±21 and GFR DD 61±13, p=.06; donor >45 years: GFR LD 59±20 and GFR DD 48±18, p=.01. At 1 year post-transplant, GFR was still significantly related to donor age (r=.354, p<.0001) but the difference between GFR LD and GFR DD was no longer significant (Table) . This was due to an average increase in GFR DD (p<.001) during year 1 with no significant change in GFR LD . During this period grafts from younger donors loss less GFR than those from older donors (p=.001). Other variables tested such as acute rejection and BK nephropathy did not correlate with the loss of GFR. At year 2, GFR was still significantly related to donor age (r=.416, p<.0001) and GFR was not significantly different in LD and DD (Table) . Among patients without rejection or BK nephropathy (N=323) 20% loss GFR (>20%) during year 1 and these patients had reduced graft survival (Log rank, p=.003). During year 2, 18% of patients lost GFR (>20%) and had reduced graft survival (p=.0001). Conclusions: 1) donor age relates to GFR throughout the first two years post-transplant; 2) compared to younger donors, older donors lose more GFR during year 1 post-transplant; 3) relatively small declines in GFR, measured precisely, relate with poor graft survival; 4) losses in GFR during years 1 and/or 2 are most often unrelated to clinically recognized events such as acute rejection. We have previously shown that the slope of the estimated creatinine clearance (GFR) in deceased donor kidney transplants (DDT) improved in recent years (JASN 14:2387 (JASN 14: ,2003 . In the present study we compared function in 191 live donor transplants (LDT) to 429 DDT transplanted between 1990 and 2000. Results: 6mGFR (ml/min) was 72.3 ± 1.4 in LDT vs 64.6 ± 1.1 in DDT (p<.001). Slope (ml/min/m) was -0.02 ± .04 in LDT vs -0.12 ± .04 in DDT (p=0.08). Rejection rates were similar in LDT vs DDT: proven or suspected 30% vs 33%; severe rejection 9% vs 13%. In multivariate analysis, higher 6mGFR in LDT correlated with younger donor age and male recipients. In DDT, higher 6mGFR correlated with younger donor and recipient age, male recipients or donors, no rejection, and no previous grafts. The slope of GFR for LDT improved (less negative) only with more recent transplant year (p=0.002). The slope of GFR for DDT was better in male recipients, lower blood pressure, absence of rejection and more recent transplant year. Multivariate analysis of the entire population (n=620) showed that better 6mGFR correlated with LDT vs DDT, no rejection, younger donor and recipient age, male donor or recipient, higher donor GFR, no previous grafts, and immediate function. A less negative slope was determined by male recipient, absence of severe rejection, older recipient age, later transplant year, and lower blood pressure, but was not better in LDT. Conclusions: 1. A major advantage of LDT is higher GFR post-transplant, perhaps due to lack of brain death. The similar rates of rejection/suspect rejection in LDT and DDT suggest that the advantage of LDT is primarily nonimmunologic; 2. The slope (stability) of GFR is similar for LDT and DDT, and has improved for both in recent years; 3. Rejection strongly determines 6m GFR and increases the slope of GFR in DDT and in the combined population Recurrence of IgA nephropathy (IgA) and Schönlein-Henoch purpura nephritis (H-SP) is frequent after renal transplantation (RT). Purpose: To identify the possible risk factors for developing recurrence of IgA and S-HP after RT. Patients and methods: Between January 1980 and April 2003, 518 RT were performed at our center. 31 RT in 29 patients who had IgA as original disease and 6 RT in 4 patients who had H-SP. 32 grafts (86.5%) were of cadaveric origin and 5(13.5%) were living-related donors. 8(21,6%) patients showed recurrence of their original renal disease. We analysed the following variables: mean time from diagnosis of disease to onset of dialysis program, mean time on dialysis, cigarette smoking, recipient age at RT, gender, donor age, and type (cadaveric or living-related), HLA (A1, B35, DR4) in donor and recipient, number of match, cold ischemia time, creatinine clearance, proteinuria, dislipemia, hypertension and the number of antihypertensive drugs after RT, CMV infection, HCV status, acute rejection episodes, withdrawal of steroids and the mean time from RT to withdrawal, graft function and the mean time from RT to loss of graft function. Statistical analyses: Univariate analysis: "U" Mann-Whitney for quantitative parameters and χ2 test for qualitative parameters. Results: Analyzed variables with significative risk for recurrence: Introduction and Objective: Controversy exists regarding the efficacy of renal transplantation into recipients with ileal conduits. We retrospectively reviewed our experience with renal transplantation into ileal conduits over a 17-year period. Methods: Between Janueary 1986 and December 2002, we performed a total of 2055 renal transplants. Thirteen grafts were implanted into 13 recipients who had an ileal conduit diversion. There were 7 male and 6 female patients, mean age 35.8 years (range 4-63 years). The indications for ileal loop diversion were: neuropathic bladder associated with spina bifida (n=%); total tractectomy for tuberculosis (n=3); atrophic bladder (n=2); prune belly syndrome (n=1); bladder extrophy (n=1); radical cystectomy for transitional cell carcinoma (n=1). All ureters were implanted into the ileal loop using a Bricker technique over an 8F infant feeding tube. Twelve patients were on haemodialysis at the time of surgery and 1 patient received pre-emptive graft. All patients were immunosupressed with triple induction therapy with the exception of the paediatric patients (n=3) who received quadruple induction immunosupression with ATG. Results: Three patients have died at 5, 5 and 39 months post transplant. The cause of death was fungal sepsis, miliary TB and myocardial infarction, respectively. One patient died with a functioning graft. Of the 10 surviving patients all have a functioning graft with a mean follow up of 7 years (range 17-198 months). The mean serum creatinine of the 10 functioning grafts is 111.8mmol/l (+/-25.9mmol/l). Conclusion: Given improvements in immunosupression, surgical technique, infection treatment and selection criteria we believe that renal transplantation in the patient with an ileal conduit yields excellent graft and patient survival. Background: Serum creatinine and formulas based on it continue to be the most used measures of kidney function. The limitations of serum creatinine and the formulas are well recognized but the alternative; measuring glomerular filtration rate( GFR) is both time consuming and expensive. Creatinine based formulas have been validated in many populations. Their use in transplant recipients is common and clinical decisions are often made based on the estimate of GFR yielded from these formulas. Purpose: To assess the performance of the Cockcroft-Gault, the MDRD number 7 and the 24 hour creatinine clearance methods in renal transplant recipients with excellent kidney function in the early post transplant period. Methods: 33 renal transplant recipients underwent iothalamate GFR measurements at our General Clinical Research Center one month after their transplant. Four timed urine and plasma collections were done. GFR was the average of at least 3 periods. Results: 64% were males, 30% received cadaveric grafts, 42% were diabetics and the mean blood pressure was 131±72. The mean GFR was 55±14ml/min, the estimated GFR from CG was 64±16, 59±13 from the MDRD formula and 59±22 from the 24 hour CrCl. The bias and accuracy of these methods is shown in Background and Aims: Patients with ESRD due to AL amyloidosis have poor clinical outcomes from chronic dialysis and from autologous stem cell transplantation (SCT) while kidney transplantation (KTx) alone is likely to result in recurrent disease. To overcome this dilemma, we have pursued a strategy of living donor KTx followed by SCT for patients with advanced renal AL amyloidosis. Methods: Clinical and laboratory outcomes were examined for 7 patients who were accepted for sequential transplantation by the kidney and bone marrow transplant programs at a single center between Dec 1999 and Feb 2003. Results: All 7 patients received living donor KTx with good initial graft function. Immunosuppression consisted of tacrolimus (n = 4), cyclosporine (n = 2), or sirolimus (n = 1) combined with mycophenolate mofetil and prednisone. Five of the 7 were on dialysis prior to transplantation. No patient had acute rejection of the renal graft. Four have subsequently had successful SCT (see table) : Of the other 3 patients, one, for whom SCT was not recommended due to worsening liver amyloid, died following SCT at another institution. A second died of demyelinating disease which occurred 4 weeks following the KTx. A third has thus far elected not to undergo SCT and has minimal recurrent disease with stable renal graft function 3 years post-KTx. Conclusions: (a) Living donor kidney transplantation followed by autologous SCT is a feasible approach for AL amyloidosis with advanced renal impairment. (b) Stem cell harvest prior to renal transplantation is recommended. (c) Stem cell engraftment was not severely impaired in renal transplant recipients on tripledrug immunosuppression. Clinical  Poster Board #-Session: P103-III URINARY TRANSFORMING GROWTH FACTOR-BETA1 (TGFβ β β β β 1 ) EXCRETION IS NORMAL IN RENAL TRANSPLANT RECIPIENTS WITH STABLE ALLOGRAFT FUNCTION. Geeta G. Gyamlani, 1 Catherine E. Gray, 2 Mark D. Stegall, 3 Joseph P. Grande, 2 Timothy S. Larson. 1 1 Nephrology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; 2 Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; 3 Transplant Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN. Background: Up-regulation of TGF-β 1 is pivotal in extracellular matrix deposition. Although urine TGF-β 1 excretion has been proposed as a surrogate marker of fibrosis, no detailed studies of urine TGF-β 1 excretion in patients with well functioning renal allografts have been performed. We tested the hypothesis that both tissue deposition and urinary excretion of TGF-β 1 are normal in renal transplant recipients with stable allograft function. Methods: Fifty-six adult kidney transplant recipients followed at our institution and 49 healthy controls were studied. Random urine samples were analyzed for TGF-β 1 , creatinine, albumin and protein from controls and from recipients at the time of their 4month post transplant visit. Renal function was assessed by measurement of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) in all transplant recipients. TGF-β 1 was determined using an ELISA assay. All transplant recipients had a protocol biopsy obtained 4 months after renal transplantation, which was used for semiquantitative assessment of chronic histopathologic alterations and for assessment of renal deposition of TGF-β 1 by immunohistochemistry. Results: The mean GFR was 51.7 ± 13.8 ml/min in the transplant recipients. At 4 months post-transplant, none of the recipients had chronic changes on biopsy (chronic tubular or interstitial scores of >1, as assessed by Banff '97). Although there was a trend for higher total urinary TGF-β 1 /creatinine ratios in the recipients vs healthy controls, this difference was not significant (26.64 ± 39.55 vs 18.26 ± 17.19 pg/mg, p= 0.117). The low TGF-β 1 excretion in the recipients was associated with relatively low intrarenal TGF-β 1 deposition. Urinary TGF-β 1 correlated with proteinuria (r=0.31, P<0.05). However, there was no correlation between TGF-β 1 levels and the degree of fibrosis, sub-clinical rejection, or GFR Conclusion: In kidney transplant recipients with stable allograft function, urine excretion of TGF-β 1 is not significantly greater than that observed in healthy control subjects who did not receive a renal allograft. We propose that the similar urine TGFβ 1 levels in transplant recipients and healthy controls reflects the lack of fibrosis in recipients with stable, well functioning allografts 4 months after transplantation. These studies provide important baseline information for interpretation of urine TGF-β 1 excretion in transplant recipients who develop significant fibrosis following transplantation. Alfonso Cueto-Manzano, 1 Luis E. Morales-Buenrostro, 2 Liliana Gonzalez, 1 Norma Gonzalez-Tableros, 2 Isela Valera, 1 Ricardo Correa-Rotter, 2 Josefina Alberu. 2 1 Clin. Epidemiol.Research Unit, Hospital de Especialidades, CMNO, Guadalajara, Jal., Mexico; 2 Nephrology and Transplantation, Inst. Nal. de Ciencias Medicas y Nutricion S.Z., Mexico City, Mexico. Inflammation is a phenomenon frequently present in ESRD patients (pts) even before dialysis, and it has been associated with cardiovascular mortality. Data regarding the behavior of inflammation markers after kidney transplantation (KT) are limited. The aim of this study is to report serum concentrations of C-reactive protein (CRP), TNFα, and IL-6 in ESRD pts before and after receiving a KT. Serum samples from 37 ESRD pts (24 male, age 34±13 yrs) were collected the day before KT (baseline value) and 13 (8-15) months afterward (last value). Serum samples from 31 kidney donors (as controls) were obtained the day before nephrectomy. All serum samples were frozen at -20°C until tested. Serum CRP concentrations were measured using Nephelometry (Dade Behring); TNFα and IL-6 were measured by ELISA (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). Clinical and biochemical relevant information before and after KT was obtained from the clinical records of the patients. Results: Values of inflammation markers are shown on the Table. No significant correlation was observed between inflammation markers and: pre KT dialytic method, time on dialysis, gender, immunosuppressive therapy, anti-IL2R use, acute rejection or chronic allograft nephropathy. Before KT, CRP correlated with age (r 0.45, p=0.006), and serum albumin (r -0.36, p=0.04) . At the end of the study, CRP correlated with serum albumin (r -0.54, p=0.003), and with IL-6 (r 0.33, p=0.05), while TNFα correlated with body weight (r 0.35, p=0.04), and with IL-6 (r 0.55, p=0.001), and IL-6 correlated with serum creatinine (r 0.34, p=0.04). Conclusions: CRP decreased significantly after KT, whereas an increase in TNFα and IL-6 was observed. These results deserve further investigation to determine the impact on graft and patient survival, as TNFα and IL-6 have been associated with vascular damage progression. Patients (n=37) Patients ( African-American (AA) recipients of cadaveric renal transplants (CRT) have shortened allograft survival and higher rates of acute rejection than non-African-Americans (nonAA). Matching of donors and recipients to amino acid triplets from exposed portions of the protein sequences of HLA molecules exposed to alloantibodies has been associated with allograft survival overall, but has not been examined by race. We conducted a prospective cohort study of 550 donor-recipient CRT pairs to evaluate the extent of HLA mismatching among AA vs. nonAA using amino-acid triplet analysis and compared this to traditional HLA analysis using LR DNA typing employing SSOP or SSP methods. Amino acid triplet analysis was performed utilizing the computer program HLA Matchmaker (Duquesnoy, Human Immunology 63, [339] [340] [341] [342] [343] [344] [345] [346] [347] [348] [349] [350] [351] [352] 2002) . Results: Traditional HLA analysis revealed that, AA (n=163) had higher % of mismatching than nonAA (n=396) at HLA-A (10 vs. 25, 23 vs. 33, 67 vs. 42 for 0, 1 and 2 mismatches respectively, p<0.0001) and HLA-B (12 vs. 27, 41 vs. 43, 48 vs. 30 for 0,1 and 2 mismatches respectively, p<0.0001). By amino acid triplet analysis, AA had higher mean number of triplet mismatching than nonAA on HLA-A and B (14.4 ± 6.8 vs. 11.6 ± 8.0 mismatches, p=0.0001). Among AA, the most frequent triplet mismatches occurred at amino acid a66rKv (polymorphic amino acid lysine at position 66 with arginine in position 65 and valine in position 67 on HLA-A), a107W, and a74H with 55 mismatches at each of these positions (34% of AA). Among nonAA, the most frequent mismatch occurred at amino acid a70aQs with 88 mismatches at this position (22% of nonAA). These mismatches are on the HLA-A loci. In addition most of these polymorphic amino acid residues are located at the exposed portions of HLA molecule and participate in peptide binding. Conclusion: Like traditional HLA analysis, amino acid triplet analysis of HLA-A and B loci reveals a greater degree of mismatching among AA than nonAA recipients. The role of this higher level of amino acid mismatching in the observed worse allograft outcomes among AA needs further exploration. Introduction: Systemic sclerosis (SS) is an unusual cause of ESRD with historically poor outcomes on hemodialysis. Our experience suggested that renal transplantation in SS was marked by an improvement in nonrenal disease activity and comparable mortality benefit compared to SS patients on dialysis. We thus decided to take a systematic approach to understanding disease activity and outcomes in SS after renal transplant. Cardiac mortality following kidney transplantation has been a major cause of graft and patient loss in most centers. In our center, cardiac death accounts for about 22% of patient mortality. Prior to kidney transplantation numerous strategies have been evaluated to stratify cardiac risks and prognosis. However, following transplantation there is no consensus as to what is the optimal way to screen and stratify patients at risk of cardiac morbidity and mortality risks. The aim of our study was to determine the usefulness of a normal dipyridamole-stress technetium-tetrofosmin SPECT study in predicting low risk of cardiac morbidity and mortality following kidney transplantation. Due to the high cardiac mortality at our center all kidney transplant patients on followup underwent routine dipyridamole technetium tetrofosmin SPECT study since October 2000. A total of 156 patients had undergone imaging till April 2003 with analysis done at end October 2003 giving at least 6 month follow-up data on all patients. Of these156 patients, 136 (87%) had a normal dipyridamole-stress technetiumtetrofosmin SPECT study with respect to myocardial ischemia. Follow-up was complete in 100 % of patients with mean follow-up of 2.03 ± 0.86 years from the stress study. The mean time from transplantation to the time of dipyridamole stress-testing was 6.88 ± 3.95 years. None of the patients had a history of coronary artery disease prior to kidney transplantation. Mean age 48 years (range 24 -68 years). 80 (59%) males and 56 (41%) females. Cause of ESRF: chronic glomerular disease 66 (48%), hypertension 31 (22%), diabetic nephropathy 8(6%) and others 31 (22%). On follow-up 110 (81%) had hypertension, 92 (68%) had an LDL-cholesterol level of more than 2.6mmol/L, 24 (18%) had diabetes mellitus (8 pre transplant & 16 post transplant). All patients were on calcineurin inhibitors (either cyclosporin (77%) or tacrolimus (23%)) and 114 (84%) were on long-term steroid therapy. Two patients (1.47%) with a normal study had myocardial infarctions during the followup period. No patients experienced cardiac-death. The annualized cardiac event rate was 0.7% for patients with a normal study. Our study has demonstrated that a normal dipyridamole-stress technetium-tetrofosmin SPECT study predicts a low risk of cardiac events following kidney transplantation. We would recommend it as the non-invasive screening method of choice to evaluate cardiac mortality and morbidity risks following kidney transplantation. Background: Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a major determinant of survival after renal transplantation (RT). Practices vary as to which patient needs CAD screening and which screening modality to use. Non-invasive testing for CAD in this population may lack adequate sensitivity and specificity. Methods: We devised a CAD risk-weighted algorithm that stratified RT candidates into high-risk (DM or history of CAD), intermediate risk (≥ 2 CAD risk factors other than DM), or low risk (≤ 40 years and ≤ one risk factor) for CAD. High-risk patients were evaluated by coronary angiography (CA), and intermediate risk patients by stress (exercise or Dobutamine) Echo. Low risk group did not require CAD screening. Results: From July 2001 to October 2003, 50 RT candidates were evaluated with the screening algorithm. Mean age was 56 ± 12 years and 72% were male. Etiology of renal failure was DM in 61%, hypertension in 10%, chronic glomerulonephritis in 12%, and miscellaneous in 16%. According to the algorithm, 36 patients were classified as high risk requiring CA and 14 patients were intermediate risk of whom 4 required CA on basis of abnormal stress test. Overall CA was mandated in 40/50 patients (80%) and performed in 34 patients. CA revealed no CAD in 5 (15%), non-obstructive CAD [≤ 50% diameter stenosis] in 4 (12%), one vessel CAD in 10 (30%), 2 vessels CAD in 7 (20%), and 3 vessels CAD in 8 (23%). Revascularization was performed in 14 patients (5 had CAB surgery and 9 had percutaneous stenting). Based on poor coronary anatomy, 3 patients were removed from transplant list. From this cohort, 10 patients underwent renal transplant surgery. No peritransplant cardiac events were encountered. Of the 30 diabetic patients (7 type 1, 24 type 2), 27 underwent CA, 20 (74%) had evidence of obstructive CAD of whom 14 (70%) were asymptomatic. Revascularization was indicated in 14 (51%) and performed in 10 (37%) patients. Among all patients with documented obstructive CAD, 79% were free of cardiac symptoms. Conclusion: The prevalence of CAD in renal transplant candidates is high and usually silent in most patients. As the accuracy of non-invasive testing of CAD in this particular population is suboptimal, a risk-weighted screening algorithm is a valuable and efficient tool to evaluate CAD in RT candidates. IL6 was correlated with VWF (0.23 P=0.001), fibrinogen (0.31 P<0.001) and inversely with albumin (0.27 P<0.001). At entry, VWF was independently predicted by age, blood group (O vs Non-O) and IL6 (R² 0.25 F=17.8, P=0.001). Independent predictors of incident CVD in a multiple logistic regression model were prevalent CVD, VWF, age at transplant and a positive FHCVD while IL6, smoking history, total-cholesterol and albumin were not associated with CVD (P=0.001). Patients with venous thrombosis at any time also had a statistically significant increased VWF (176 vs 142% P =0.007). Conclusion: These data suggest that despite immunosuppression, evidence of endothelial dysfunction (VWF) associated with persistent inflammation (IL6), and a family history of CVD are powerful determinants of prevalent and incident all cause CVD in RTR. Poster Board #-Session: P115-III The prevalence of hypertension in renal transplant recipients (RTR) is 70-85% , a value that actually exceeds that of chronic kidney disease patients with comparable level of renal function. The effectivness and feasibilty of home blood pressure monitoring (HBPM) as a practical tool for directing antihypertensive managment in hemodialysis patients was confirmed by Svetkey et al (ASN-2002) . No studies to date have investigated the use of HBPM in RTR. In the present pilot study a cohort of 10 stable RTR followed for a period of 3 month. Each patient underwent a 24-hour ambulatory BP monitoring (ABPM) at baseline and at the end of the three month study period. Patients were trained to use the OMRON IC monitor and instructed to measure their BP twice daily, after breakfast and before bedtime and these readings were downloaded once per month. Antihypertensive drugs were adjusted to achieve a goal home BP of 130/80 mm Hg. Serum creatinine (S.Cr) as well as number of antihypertensive medications were documnted at baseline and after the three month study period. Introduction: Anti-Recombinant-Human-Erythropoietin-Associated pure red cell aplasia (anti-r-HuEPO associated PRCA) has been reported in CRF patients who are using r-HuEPO and develop an unexplained sudden decrease in their hemoglobin level. Currently, there are no recommendations for the management of anti-r-HuEPO. This unfortunate situation of resistance to r-HuEPO provides a model to access the impact of delivery of the native molecule by renal transplantation on antibody production. Methods: Sera from four ESRD patients who had hemodialysis with anti-r-HuEPOassociated PRCA as documented by anemia resistance to r-HuEPO, reticulocytopenia, exclusion of gastrointestinal blood loss by endoscopy, and bone marrow biopsy were assayed for antibody by ELIZA and for inhibition of erythroid precusors prior to and after renal transplantation under a standard immunosuppression; anti CD25, cyclosporin, azathioprin, and prednisolone. Results: The mean pre-transplant hemoglobin was 5.5 g/dl (range 5.1-6.2 g/dl) and the mean maximum r-HuEPO dose was 267.25 unit/kg/week subcutaneously (range 206-338 unit/kg/week) The mean duration of anti-r-HuEPO associated PRCA before renal transplantation was 8.25 months (range 3-11 months). The patients needed average PRC transfusion of 3 units per month (range 2.5-3.4 unit/month) to alleviate anemic symptom. Their pre-transplantation sera documented a 1: 40 mean titer (range 1:16-1:96) in ELIZA and inhibited erythroid precursor generation by mean ratio of 1:40 titer (range 1:16-1:96) Following renal transplantation, r-HuEPO antibody activity in these in vitro assays disappeared at a mean time of 4 weeks (range 3-5 weeks) and they no longer required any transfusion. At 4 and 8 weeks post-transplantation, the mean hemoglobin was 7.6 g/dl and 9.9 g/dl respectively. Furthermore, a pre-transplant dialysis patient with anti-r-HuEPO associated PRCA and treated with cyclosporin and MMF failed at 6 weeks to show a reduction in anti-r-HuEPO titer, suggesting that it was the renal transplant and not the immunosuppression that lead to the remission. Conclusion: Anti-r-HuEPO associated PRCA was recovery after renal transplantation and these findinds suggest that a natural molecule erythropoietin can terminate the humoral antibody response to its recombinant form. Poster Board #-Session: P121-III   ANEMIA  MANAGEMENT  PRIOR  TO  KIDNEY  TRANSPLANTATION AND THE RISK OF POST-TRANSPLANT  BLOOD TRANSFUSION . John S. Gill, 1,2 Craig Solid, 3 Brian J. G. Pereira, 2 Allan J. Collins. 3 1 Nephrology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 2 Nephrology, Boston, MA; 3 Nephrology Analytical Services, Minneapolis, MN. Aggressive management of chronic kidney disease complications prior to transplantation (tx) may improve post tx outcomes. We determined the incidence and risk factors for blood transfusion in the first 30 days after kidney tx among adult, cadaveric, first, kidney only transplant recipients between 1995-2000 who were Medicare eligible for at least 12 months prior to tx. Pre tx hemoglobin (HB) levels, erythropoietin (EPO) use within 6 mos pre-tx and post tx blood transfusion were determined in each transplant year. The association of pre-tx HB level with post tx blood transfusion was determined in a multivariate logistic regression model that included patients who received pre-tx EPO (n=15,453). The model included variables associated with post-tx blood transfusion in univariate analyses: gender, race, DGF, and comorbid conditions.The table shows that between 1995 -2000, the percentage of patients who received EPO within 6 mos pre-tx increased from 81% to 89%. Among patients who received EPO pre-transplant, the percentage of patients with HB within K-DOQI target level of 11-12g.dL increased from 27% to 50%. During this period there was a significant decrease in post tx blood transfusion from 13% to 9%, p <.0001. Blood transfusions were rarely associated with major bleeding episodes (< 1%). In the multivariate analysis, patients with pre-tx HB less than the K-DOQI target of 11-12 g/ dl, had increased odds of blood transfusion after tx: Patients with HB 10-11 g/dl had OR = 1.2, 95% confidence interval (CI)1.06-1.36, p = .004 and patients with HB <10 g/dl had OR = 1.5, 95% CI 1.3-1.8, p <.0001. Patients with HB > 12 did not have a significantly reduced risk of blood transfusion. We conclude that the K-DOQI target of 11-12 g/dl is associated with a decreased risk of blood transfusion after kidney tx. However in 2000, 20% of patients still fell below this target. More aggressive treatment of anemia in transplant candidates may decrease the need for post tx blood transfusion and improve post transplant outcomes. Year 1995 Year 1996 Year 1997 Year 1998 Year 1999 Background: Posttransplant diabetes mellitus (PTDM) is a serious complication of renal transplant (RT) with negative effects on patient and graft survival. Several risk factors for PTDM have been described, but does not exist any early marker that can predict it. Recently it has been demonstrated that adiponectin (APN) levels -an adipocyte-derived peptide with antiinflammatory and insulin-sensitising propertiesare protective for future development of type 2 diabetes in healthy individuals. Objective: To study pretransplant insulin resistance and to analyze pretransplant serum leptin and APN levels as independent risk factors for the development of PTDM. Patients and methods: 31 RT patients with PTDM (mean age: 48±8 years, 80% males, BMI: 25±3 kg/m², 80% tacrolimus and 100% prednisone) and control group of 37 RT patients without PTDM matched by age, gender, BMI, immunosuppressor treatment and posttransplant time. Familiar history of DM was collected. Homeostasis model assessment for insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) index was measured. Serum leptin and APN concentration were determined by radioimmuno assay. Results: PTDM patients showed higher pretrasplant HOMA index (PTDM: 5.1±3.4; non-PTDM: 3.6±2.9, p=0.042) and lower pretrasplant serum APN concentration (PTDM: 9.3±3.1 mg/ml; non-PTDM: 11.8±4.2 mg/ml, p=0.011). Pretrasplant serum leptin levels were similar in both groups (PTDM: 25.5±20.4 ; non-PTDM: 20.1±20.5, p=0.23). An inverse correlation between APN and BMI was observed (r=-0.29, p=0.027), APN and HOMA index (r=-0.45, p<0.001) and APN and PTDM (r=-0.31, p=0.011). There was direct correlation between leptin and BMI (r=0.27, p=0.04). Regression analisis showed that patients with lower APN pretransplant levels are those with greater risk for developing PTDM independently of age, gender, familiar history of DM and inmunosupressor treatment (Odds Ratio=0.832 (0.71-0.96), p=0.01). Conclusions: Serum APN pretransplant level is an independent protective factor for PTDM development in renal patients. This trial investigated the effects of calcineurin dose reduction plus the introduction of a non-nephrotoxic immunosuppressive agent in renal allografts recipients with established chronic allograft nephropathy (CAN). The additional immunosuppressive agents studied were azathioprine (AZA) and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), which is both non-nephrotoxic and has anti-proliferative effects that may be of benefit in renal allografts with fibrosis. Patients and methods Patients with biopsy proven CAN and receiving cyclosporin (CsA) or tacrolimus (Tac) based immunosuppression underwent a 40% dose reduction of their calcineurin inhibitor and were then randomised to receive either AZA (1 mg/kg/day) or MMF (1g bd). Renal allograft function was assessed by isotope GFR measurements. Allograft fibrosis was measured by computerised histomorphometry of protocol needle core biopsies performed at trial entry and 6 months later. Results 21 patients receiving cyclosporin (AZA 11, MMF 10) and 22 patients receiving tacrolimus (AZA 10, MMF 12) were recruited into the study. All groups were well matched for potentially confounding variables. The pre-trial decline in GFR was reversed in both Tac groups, the CsA + MMF group but not in patients treated by CsApatients treated with CsA + AZA (Table) . Renal allograft fibrosis increased during the 6 months of the trial in patients treated with CsA + MMF but remained stable in the other groups ( Chronic allograft nephropathy (CAN) remains a common cause for renal allograft loss that is minimally responsive to therapy once graft dysfunction is clinically evident. A screening test to identify individuals at high risk for CAN could be a valuable adjunct to patient care, but to be cost effective should be administered during routine evaluations by transplant clinicians. We have compared the resistive index as measured by Doppler ultrasound with subsequent biopsy findings on 91 renal allograft recipients undergoing clinic evaluation who had a subsequent protocol biopsy at least 3 months after renal transplantation. All ultrasounds were performed in the transplant clinic by the transplant surgical staff as part of the general patient evaluation without involving the radiology department or separate appointment time. The ultrasound exam was a directed exam measuring general dimensions, fluid collections, hydronephrosis, and a cortical resistive index and typically lasted less than 10 minutes. The RI was calculated as 100 x [1-(Vmin / Vmax)] and averaged over two measurements. Biopsies were evaluated histologically using the Banff 1997 criteria. Twenty-one patients had a RI > or = 80 (average 621 days post transplant). Among these individuals, the subsequent incidence of CAN (CG1, CG2, or CG3) was 38%. The length of time between initial assessment of an increased RI and biopsy proven CAN averaged 233 days. The remaining 70 patients with a RI < 80 had an incidence of CAN of 11.4% (p=0.018, two tailed Fisher's test). The incidence of subsequent acute rejection was equivalent in both groups (p = 1.0). These results suggest that RI is an early predictor of histologically relevant CAN, possibly a result of burgeoning vasculopathy. The technical expertise required to make this appraisal is well within the capabilities of transplant clinicians and trainees. Early evidence of subsequent chronic injury as determined by ultrasonography may allow for targeted heightened scrutiny for CAN allowing a change in therapy prior to clinically significant injury. Ultrasound should become a routine part of a transplant clinic evaluation. After kidney transplantation, an important loss of bone mineral density is observed. The exact mechanism of such a bone loss is unknown, but there is evidence for a high bone resorption state. Several factors may play a role in this bone loss: use of immunosuppressive treatments like corticosteroids or ciclosporine, disturbances in vitamin D metabolism and persisting hyperparathyroidism. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the role of persisting hyperparathyroidism in the bone turnover in the first year following kidney transplantation. Patients and methods. Twenty eight patients who underwent kidney transplantation in our center were studied. Three months (M3) and twelve months (M12) after transplantation, markers of bone formation (serum osteocalcin (OC)) and bone resorption (urinary levels of deoxypyridoline [DPD]) were measured as well as parameters of calcium metabolism, including intact parathyroid hormone (iPTH), 25(OH) and 1,25OH vitamin D. The glomerular filtration rate was assessed using 51CrEDTA urinary clearance. Results. Three months after transplantation, elevated levels of iPTH were observed in 86% of patients (mean iPTH = 91,32 ± 9,07 pg/mL), despite normal levels of 25OH, 1,25 OH vitamin D and preserved graft function (mean GFR = 56,51 ± 3,8 ml/mn/1,73m2). A positive correlation between iCa and PTH was found (r = 0,47 p<0.05). Levels of OC and DPD were increased, suggesting a high bone turnover. These markers of bone remodeling were significantly higher in the group of patients who had an elevated iPTH. At M12, the mean levels of iPTH were not different (84,75 ± 10,36 pg/mL , NS vs M3). There was no longer a correlation between iCa and PTH. Levels of OC significantly increased, whereas the DPD ones decreased, but there remained a high bone turnover state. Interestingly, the markers of bone turnover were not significantly higher in the group of patients who had an hyperparathyroidism. Conclusion. In spite of the persistence of a high basal iPTH one year after transplantation in the majority of kidney transplant recipients, there is a significant improvement of the parathyroid function. Taken together, these results suggests that the role of the persisting hyperparathyroidism in the high bone turnover at M12 might be minor when compared with other factors like immunosuppressive drugs. OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this retrospective study was to evaluate the limitation of 3-dimensional computed tomography (3DCT) in visualizing small renal arteries and the influence of sacrificing such arteries on posttransplant renal function. METHODS: Forty-nine cases of living-related renal transplants were enrolled in this study. Kidneys were harvested with open donor nephrectomy (OLDN) in 27 cases and with handassisted laparoscopic donor nephrectomy (HALDN) in 22 cases. 3D images and axial images of arterial phase of CT were evaluated for diameter of prehilar branches and aberrent arteries. The effect of following factors on renal graft function were compared between the groups divided in terms of sacrificing small renal arteries: pre/post graft function ratio (24h creatinine clearance (24CCr) of the recipient at 1 month posttransplant divided by split 24CCr calculated using DTPA renal scan), short-term graft survival, velocity of serum creatinine (s-Cr) decrease within 7 postoperative days which is expressed as the area under s-Cr curve (sCrAUC0-7 For study purposes, patients were divided into two groups based on ratio. Results: Out of 77 recipients, 39 were in high ratio group (2.73-5.4 ) and 38 were in low ratio (1.52-2.72 ). Mean serum creatinine at discharge in the two groups were 1.2 & 1.4mg% (P=0.017) and creatinine clearance were 59.4 and 61.8 ml/min respectively. In both the groups, there was a significant correlation between the ratio to serum Creatinine, creatinine clearance at discharge and serum creatinine at one month (Spearman's correlation, P=0.01 and P=0.04). By linear regression analysis, it was found that donor kidney weight/recipient body weight ratio in both the groups was independently affecting. Sr. Creatinine at discharge and creatinine clearance at discharge (r=0.67, P=0.001 and P=0.003 respectively). Conclusion -Donor kidney weight/recipient body weight ratio is a good predictor of renal function at discharge and 1 month. Although mesangial immunoglobulin A (IgA) deposits are occasionally observed in the allograft biopsies, the frequency and impact on renal function of the IgA deposition has not been clearly elucidated in living-related renal transplantation (RTX). Thus, we examined the correlation between the duration of IgA deposition and the outcome of RTX. Out of 41 living-related RTX cases, 15 cases were associated with mesangial IgA deposits in renal allografts, which were revealed by episode as well as sequential protocol biopsies (1 hour, 3 months, 1 year and 3 years after RTX). These cases were classified into 3 groups based on the results of biopsies. Group A (4 cases): IgA deposits were observed in 1-hour biopsies but disappeared within 3 months. Group B (3 cases): IgA deposits were found both in 1-hour and 3-month biopsies. Group C (8 cases): IgA deposits were first discovered more than one month after RTX. The allograft functions were compared among these groups in terms of proteinuria, hematuria and creatinine clearance (CCr) at one year post-transplantation, to determine the relationship between the appearance of IgA deposits and IgA nephropathy after RTX. One of 4 cases in Group A, 2 of 3 in Group B, and 5 of 8 in Group C had originally IgA nephropathy. The mean CCr was 56.9 ± 6.9 ml/min in Group A, 33.0 ± 16.1 ml/min in Group B, and 65.7 ± 17.7 ml/min in Group C, respectively (p < 0.05; Group A vs. Group B, p < 0.05; Group B vs. Group C). In Group A, hematuria and proteinuria were found in 50 % and 25 %, respectively, while both were in all the cases of Group B (p < 0.05 in proteinuria). The frequency of hematuria and proteinuria in Group B were also higher than those of group C (87.5 % and 37.5 %, respectively; p=0.063 in proteinuria). IgA deposits observed in 1-hour biopsies and maintenance of these deposits, especially in recipients with IgA nephropathy as their original disease, could represent a risk of allograft dysfunction, although allograft functions are rarely impaired only by IgA recurrence. These findings suggest that a combination of certain donors and recipient factors interfere with renal allograft functions. Hand-assisted retroperitoneoscopic nephrectomy (HARS) is a new surgical approach for living donor nephrectomy. The HARS technique was, in a prospective study, compared to transperitoneal laparoscopic nephrectomy (LAP) and open nephrectomy (OPEN) with regard to the perioperative renal function and hormonal response. Methods: 36 donors were included and divided into HARS, LAP and OPEN groups according to the surgical technique applied. During the operation and on postoperative day 1 and 2 renal function and hormone output (aldosterone, plasma active renin, N-ANP, BNP and catecholamines) were measured. Donor renal function and allograft outcome was then followed for one year. Results: There was an activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system as demonstrated by elevated levels of aldosterone and active renin in arterial blood during surgery. Increased levels of active renin were maintained in the OPEN group postoperatively. The concentrations of aldosterone were higher in the OPEN group during surgery compared to the LAP group. There was no change in N-ANP and BNP responses during surgery but a marked six-fold increase of these peptides on postoperative days 1 and 2 in all groups. A general output of catecholamines during surgery was seen, though endoscopic techniques had a higher catecholamines release. Urine flow rate decreased in all groups during the operation, though there were no significant differences between the groups. A reduction of sodium concentration in the urine was seen in all groups. GFR decreased from 150 ml/min preoperatively to about 50 ml/min at 60 min into surgery, recovering to 100 ml/min on the first postoperative day, with a similar pattern in all donor groups. Postoperatively, kidney function in donors seems to be less compromised with HARS compared to LAP, demonstrated as a smaller rise in creatinine at time of discharge. HARS recipients have a better creatinine clearance than the other groups in the early post-transplantation period. Conclusion: Evaluation of a newly developed surgical technique, HARS, shows that the renal function is somewhat favorable for donors and recipients compared to open surgery and transperitoneal laparoscopic approaches. The hormonal response shows only small differences between the different surgical techniques. Poster Board #-Session: P133-III  The left kidney is usually chosen for laparoscopic live donor nephrectomy principally because of the greater length of its vessels. Laparoscopic right nephrectomy is technically easier, although some concern has been expressed because of it relatively shorter vessels. We report our experience with laparoscopic right donor nephrectomy. We investigated retrospectively the occurrence of CMV disease and aimed to determine the risk factors for CMV under G(n=75) or V(n=136) prophylaxis (oral G, 1 g tid: V, 450 mg/day) in our kidney (K) and simultaneous pancreas-kidney (SPK) transplant patients operated between 1 July, 2001 -February 28, 2003 . Methods:Two hundred and eleven patients (Mean age 48.5± 14.6 yrs, 82 F, 182 K, 29 SPK, 71 Living donor) using prophylactic oral G or V were included in the study.178 patients received Thymoglobulin and 33 received Campath1H as pre-conditioning agents. Mean duration of prophylaxis against CMV was 4.5± 1.6 months and timing of CMV disease was 4.1± 1.8 months after transplantation. Minimum follow up was 6 months and 176 patients were followed for one year. Results:Fifteen of 211(7.1%) and 18 of 176 (10.2%) patients developed CMV infection at 6 months and 1 year follow-up, respectively. No patient developed tissue invasive CMV disease. Risk factors (Table 1) for CMV infection were evaluated using Mantel-Haenszel and Cochran's tests. At 6 months, V prophylaxis resulted in lower incidence of CMV than G (p=0.052).Donor CMV positivity led to a higher incidence of CMV infection at 6(p=0.014) and 12 months (p=0.003). Prophylaxis longer than 3 months resulted in a lower incidence of CMV infection at 6(p=0.04) and 12 months(p=0.009). D+/R-pts. had higher risk of developing CMV infection at 6(p=0.013) and 12 months(p=0.018). Whilst prophylaxis with V is more effective compared to G at 6 months (p=0.052), the two groups were not different for duration of prophylaxis(V:4.3+/-1.3months vs G:4.8+/-2months,p=0.06) and D/R groups( Table  2) .Conclusion:V appears to be more effective than G for prevention of CMV infection in K and SPK recipients using antibody pre-conditioning, and should be used >3 months in high-risk patients. Purpose: In patients with delayed graft function (DGF), a current practice is to withhold calcineurin inhibitors due to their nephrotoxic propensity, presumably to facilitate recovery of function in the allograft. We examined this practice using results of a six month, multicenter, randomized trial using a quadruple immunosuppression regimen. In this study, CsA dose was adjusted to target levels using CsA concentrations twohours post dose (C2). DGF was defined as either a reduction from baseline serum creatinine (SrCr) ≤20% or the need for dialysis over the first three days posttransplantation. Methods: Adult renal transplant recipients were recruited at 14 centers. All patients were to receive a regimen of CsA, basiliximab (20mg, Days 0 and 4), mycophenolate mofetil (1 gm BID), and prednisone (per center protocol). The C2 targets were 1.7 and 1.5 ug/mL for Months 1 and 2, respectively, with progressively lower targets over the following 4 months. The study allowed delay of CsA and/or use of antilymphocyte therapy during DGF. Results: 33/119 patients met the definition of DGF. The mean (± SD) age was 52 (± 12) years, 82% were male, 21% were African American, and cold ischemia time was 21.4 (± 7.7) hours. 31/33 received both doses of basiliximab with 6 patients receiving ATG. All but 3 patients started Neoral by Day 3 and remained on Neoral while in the study. Biopsy-proven acute rejection occurred in 3 (9%) of the DGF patients, 2/6 in the ATG treated patients and 1/27 in the Simulect® only patients. There was one failed graft and no deaths. 25/33 (76%) completed the study; with 6/8 discontinuations occurring Abstracts within the first 18 days of the transplant. Renal function, as measured by SrCr, showed good recovery with values comparable to patients with initial graft function (IGF) from the same study; mean (± SD) values were 6.0 (± 3.2) mg/dL vs. 1.8 (± 0.9) on Day 7, and 1.6 (± 0.7) vs. 1.6 (± 0.7) at study end. Conclusions: These data suggest that for the great majority of patients with DGF, good recovery of function in the kidney allograft can be achieved by C2-monitored Neoral at reduced levels with basiliximab induction, without an increased risk of acute rejection. These results await corroboration from clinical trials designed to assess this question more directly. Nephrotoxicity of calcineurin inhibitors is an important cause of renal failure after organ transplantation. Studies in healthy volunteers showed that, in contrast to cyclosporin, a short course of tacrolimus did not influence renal function. Also in cadaveric renal allografts tacrolimus was less nephrotoxic than ciclosporin (1) (2) . The function of a cadaveric renal allograft is strongly influenced by the quality of the kidney and ischaemic times. The quality of kidneys from living donor is generally good and ischaemic times are short. Therefore in these patients renal function of the donated kidney can be compared with the renal function of the donor. In doing so, the long-term nephrotoxicity of tacrolimus can be assessed. Methods: All consecutive recipients of living donor kidneys transplanted under tacrolimus-based therapy and with a functioning graft at year 1 were included (n=41). Serum sickness (SS) is a disease encountered in transplanted patients receiving xenogeneic heterospecific antibody therapy such as antithymocyte globulin (ATG) at the induction phase. Its pathogenesis results from a sensitization to the xenogenic reagent leading to an immune complex disease with symptoms including fever, cutaneous rash and prominent arthralgia. No obvious dominant xenogenic Ag has been identified as being responsible for this disease. It has recently been shown that rabbit as well as horse ATG express the dominant xenogenic Ag, the gala1-3gal disaccharides, against which humans and old world primates have natural Ab. Moreover, it is now well known that this Ag may elicit an induced Ab response. The aim of our work was to determine whether anti-Gal Ab could be involved in the development of SS. For this purpose, we studied the kinetic modulation of circulating anti-Gal Ab titers at the day of transplantation, at the onset of the disease and four to five weeks later at a stable state. Twelve patients that received ATG and subsequently developed SS were compared with patients also treated by ATG but without SS (n = 12). Finally a group of patients receiving no ATG served as a control group (n = 8). None of these latter control patients showed any modulation of their anti-Gal Ab. On the contrary, in the SS group, 6 of the 12 patients showed a mean increase of 70% (32-120%) of their anti-Gal IgG titer versus 4 of the 12 patients from the ATG without SS group who had an equal mean increase of 70% (42-100%). This difference is not significant and suggests that the exposure of patients to gal positive xenogenic reagents may induce an evoked Ab response that does not seem to be responsible for the pathogenesis of the SS. However, the anti-Gal modulation we observed was simply a reflection in the periphery of a potential immunization but did not necessarily reflect the local inflammatory phenomenon, in particular inside joints, involving immune complexes. An additional study will be conducted on these patients to further explore their potential circulating immune complexes. This study compared the pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD) of ISA247, a new-generation calcineurin inhibitor, with cyclosporine (CsA) using data from a phase II, randomized, multi-centre, open-label study in stable renal transplant patients. Methods Stable renal transplant patients (≥6 months posttransplant) on an established dose of CsA were randomized to either continue CsA or switch to ISA247 for a 12 week period. ISA247 was estimated in pre-clinical and phase I studies to be at least 3-fold more potent that CsA and was dosed at one-third of the established CsA dose (mean study dose; 3.0±1.5 vs 1.2±0.6 mg/kg). At weeks 1, 6, and 12, serial whole blood samples were drawn and drug concentrations were determined. PK and PD were evaluated using standard non-compartmental analysis and a calcineurin inhibition assay respectively. A direct PK-PD correlation was performed using a sigmoid E max model. Results: A total of 132 patients were recruited and randomized to ISA247 (n=65) and CsA (n=67), respectively. Patient demographics were similar between the groups with the exception of age (47.1±10.5 vs 52.0±11.0 years, p<0.05). Time to maximum concentration (t max ) and t 1/2 were similar between the two drugs. For ISA247, the maximum concentration (C max ) and the area under the concentration-time curve from 0-8 hours (AUC (0-8) ) were approximately one third those of CsA. Background: The persistence of circulating isoagglutinins without histologic evidence of allograft injury after ABO incompatible (ABOi) renal transplantation has been described as accommodation. It has been assumed that the mechanism underlying accommodation prevents the activation of complement by isoagglutinins. Methods: During the study period 11 ABOi transplants were performed with planned protocol biopsies at 1, 3, and 6 months. A total of 23 biopsies were performed on 10 patients. One patient who died of West Nile encephalitis in the early post-transplant period with normal renal function was excluded from this analysis (no protocol biopsies). Biopsies were considered C4d+ when the staining was diffuse and present in the peritubular capillaries. Results: C4d staining was present in 37%, 71%, and 75% of protocol biopsies performed at 1, 3, and 6 months, respectively. 9 out of 10 patients had at least one C4d+ biopsy. Median isoagglutinin titers at each of these timepoints was comparable between patients with C4d+ and C4d-biopsies (Table 1) . Only one patient with a C4d+ biopsy had histologic evidence of antibody-mediated rejection (Banff Grade 2A, Table 2 ). Mean creatinine clearance for the nine patients with at least one C4d+ biopsy was 62.25 +/ -25.5 ml/min at a mean follow-up of 9.5 months. Graft and patient survival were 100%. Conclusions: C4d staining is present in the majority ABOi allografts that have undergone accommodation. C4d staining is not an indication of antibody mediated rejection and should not trigger therapeutic intervention in the absence of allograft injury. Introduction: Due to the continuing shortage of cadaveric donors in Japan, ABOincompatible living kidney transplantation is being carried out. Our previous studies showed that the long-term graft survival in ABO-incompatible living kidney transplantation was comparable to that in ABO-compatible living kidney transplantation. However, it has not been investigated previously the impact on HLAidentity in result of ABO-incompatible living kidney transplantation. One-hundred and twenty-seven recipients underwent ABOincompatible living kidney transplantation at our institution between January 1989, and December 2000. Of these patients, 5 were grafted from an HLA-identical sibling donor (I). The remaining 122 recipients received grafts from an HLA-non-identical donor (N). Both groups were similar in terms of recipient age, donor age, warm ischemic time and total ischemic time. Three or four sessions of plasmapheresis were carried out prior to transplantation. Cyclosporine or tacrolimus, methylprednisolone and azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil were used for immunosuppression. Splenectomy was done at the time of kidney transplantation in all patients. Results: Graft loss was seen in one of the five HLA-identical recipients due to chronic rejection. Five-and 10-year graft survival rates were 80.0% I vs 72.0% N and 80.0% I vs 54.2% N, respectively. The incidence of acute rejection in the HLA-identical recipients was much lower than that in the HLA-non-identical recipients (20% I vs 67.2% N). Conclusions: Long-term graft survival in ABO-incompatible kidney transplantation from an HLA-identical sibling donor was much better than that from an HLA-nonidentical sibling donor and with a lower incidence of acute rejection. These results suggest that ABO-incompatible living kidney transplantation could be performed safety if the donor were an HLA-identical sibling. Purpose: To induce allograft tolerance through mixed chimerism, a non-myeloablative conditioning regimen was tested in three recipients of HLA mismatched kidney transplants. Methods: Three patients received combined kidney and bone marrow transplantation from HLA haploidentical donors following conditioning with cyclophosphamide (60mg/kg x2), thymic irradiation (7 Gy), anti-CD2 mAb and a limited course of cyclosporine (CyA). Results: Case 1; A 22 y.o. woman developed mixed chimerism (T cell 5.2%, Granulo 90.6%) on day 7 with no GVHD. Chimerism became undetectable by day 14 but there was no evidence of rejection on sequential biopsies and her immunosuppressive medications were slowly tapered and finally discontinued by day 240. Her renal function remained stable, with serum creatinine of 1.2 mg/dl on day 440. Normal biopsy at 1 year was obtained and specific hyporesponsiveness has been demonstrated in MLR and CML. Case 2: A 22 y.o. man developed similar transient chimerism (T cell 3%, Granulo 60%) on day 7. After day 10, he developed acute tubular necrosis, believed to be secondary to engraftment syndrome, but the kidney allograft gradually recovered after steroid pulse therapy. On day 45, a kidney biopsy prompted by a moderate creatinine elevation suggested humoral rejection with positive C4d staining. Although no anti-donor alloantibody was detected in his serum, he was treated for humoral rejection and CyA was switched to Prograf, resulting in improved allograft function (creat 1.8) on day 171. His immunosuppression has been steadily tapered to current level of Prograf (trough 4 ng/dl) and prednisone (2.5 mg/day). A kidney biopsy on day 87 revealed no rejection and specific hyporesponsiveness was demonstrated in vitro. Case 3:A 39 y.o. man, too recently treated for complete evaluation, developed evidence of humoral rejection 10 days post transplantation. He currently has compromised allograft function, not requiring institution of dialysis. Further results will be available at the time of presentation. Conclusion: Induction of allograft tolerance via mixed chimerism appears to be achievable in recipients of HLA mismatched kidneys, but may require intensified suppression of humoral responses. Poster Board #-Session: P148-III Background: Loss of bone mineral density (BMD), fractures, and avascular necrosis are significant problems after solid organ transplantation. Whereas pre-existant bone disease related to hyperparathyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and physical inactivity may, in part, play a role, corticosteroids have been held as the major culprit for this rapid bone loss. Loss of BMD has been associated with duration and cumulative dose of steroids. One advantage of steroid-sparing immunosuppression would be minimizing steroid-related side effects, including the loss of BMD. Methods: We studied the impact of prednisone-free immunosuppression in 13 kidney transplant recipients. All were treated with polyclonal antibody for 5 days, steroids discontinued on POD 6, calcineurin inhibitor, and either MMF or sirolimus. Bone mass was studied by X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA scan). Recipients were studied at transplant and one year later. Bone density, T and Z-scores were obtained at the femoral neck and lumbosacral spine. Paired t-test analysis of the above was carried out to evaluate for significant differences between baseline and one year post transplant. Chronic diarrhea is a frequent adverse event in transplant patients. Inreased paracellular permeability has been demonstrated as a disease enhancing factor in chronic inflammatory bowel disorders. However, it is not known to which extent the mucosal damage caused by chronic diarrhea in transplant patients affects intestinal paracellular permeability. In the present study, permeability of small and large bowel was assessed in 18 renal graft recipients suffering from chronic diarrhea (faecal output > 200g/day, duration ≥ 2 weeks). Immunosuppressive therapy consisted of low dose corticosteroids and MMF plus either tacrolimus (FK506, n=13) or ciclosporin A (CsA, n=5). Urinary recovery of 51 Cr-EDTA during 0-6 h and 6-24 h after oral ingestion was used to assess paracellular permeability of small bowel and colon respectively. The results were compared between the two groups and with the results of normal healthy volunteers using Wilcoxon's Rank Sum Test. Small intestinal paracellular permeability was not significantly altered. In contrast, colonic paracellular permeability in renal transplant patients affected by chronic diarrhea was clearly increased. In addition, patients on CsA had a significantly higher colonic permeability compared to those on FK506 (figure). These preliminary results suggest that mucosal damage associated with chronic diarrhea in transplant recipients is more pronounced in the colon. Patients on CsA also seem to be more prone for conditions leading to damage of the tight junctions of the colonic epithelium. Poster Board #-Session: P150-III VASCULAR COMPLICATIONS OF ALLOGRAFT NEPHRECTOMY. Molly M. P. Eng, 1 Dilly M. Little, 1 Richard E. Power, 1 John G. Calleary, 1 David P. Hickey. 1 1 Transplantation and Urology, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. Purpose: Allograft nephrectomy (AN) is a hazardous procedure that carries high mortality and morbidity. The two most common complications identified are significant haemorrhage peri-operatively and infection. Major haemorrhage controlled by iliac vessel ligation is an under reported complication. We retrospectively reviewed our experience of 1407 renal transplants and 126 AN performed in an 11-year period (January1991 to December 2001). We identified 9 patients with significant vascular injury and individual case notes were studied. The aim of this review was to analyze the factors associated with vascular complications post AN and to assess the safety of managing these injuries with early iliac vessel ligation. Materials and Methods: 1407 renal transplants were performed in our institution from January 1991 to December 2001. Over this 11-year period, 126 transplant nephrectomies were performend of which 9 patients suffered significant vascular injury. Patient's records were reviewed for demographic data, surgical techniques, indication for AN, patient's risk factors and outcome post emergency iliac vessel ligation. Results: Our vascular complication rate post AN is 7.14%. The vascular injuries consisted of 4 patients with pseudoaneurysms of external iliac artery, 2 patients with major haemorrhage of anastomotic site and 3 patients with iatrogenic injury with iliac vessel laceration at the time of nephrectomy. Only 2 of the 9 patients required immediate vascular bypass surgery (2 femoral-femoral cross over), 2 patients at the later study period had successful endovascular stenting of iliac vessel pseudoaneurysms. None of the patient suffered limb loss. Pre-operative local infection rate was high in the vessel injury group and often involve multi-resistant organisms.Three of the 9 patients died. The causes of death were 2 from sepsis at 1 week and 1 month post-operatively and 1 from intra-cerebral haemorrhage 3 months after AN. On follow up, only 1 patient from the study required further revision of their vascular reconstruction 4 years later for symptomatic claudication. Conclusion: We recommend that in the event of major bleeding and infection at the transplant vascular anastomotic site, immediate iliac vessel ligation can be performed safely without risk of limb loss for control of haemorrhage. Primary repair of injured vessel is associated with re-bleeding. Immediate vascular bypass reconstruction may not be necessary and patients can be observed in view for delayed vascular procedure if critical ischaemia occurs. Poster Board #-Session: P151-III Introduction: Acute renal failure that develops after orthotopic liver transplant (OLTX) and which requires renal replacement therapy (RRT) is a poor prognostic sign. Oneyear reported mortality ranges from 28% -85%. Our center has previously reported that patients developing the need for RRT post OLTX had a one-year survival of only 41.8%. This study generated a predictive model to identify patients at risk for RRT. Materials and Methods: Source of data was a prospectively maintained database. OLTX performed between 1/1/1996 and 12/31/2001 was included. Combined kidney-liver transplants or pre-operative RRT pts. were excluded. 724 OLTX were studied. Patients were divided into Group I: no RRT, n=637; Group II: hemodialysis only post OLTX, n=17; and Group III: Continuous RRT post OLTX, n=70. Pre and peri-operative variables between the groups, which were identified as significant factors in a univariate analysis, were included in a stepwise logistic multivariate analysis to determine odds ratios for the development of the need for RRT. Actuarial patient survival was calculated for all groups and compared between groups. Results: Actuarial patient survival at one year was 91.0%, 70.6%, and 49.1% for Groups I, II, and III respectively. Variables significant in the multivariate analysis included preoperative serum creatinine > 1.9 mg/dl (OR 3.57), pre-operative BUN >27 mg/dl (OR 2.68), ICU days >3 (OR 10.23) and MELD score >21 (OR 2.5). A formula including these variables was developed to give a score to be used in a clinical prediction model of developing the need for RRT: PRHD (Probability of requiring dialysis post transplant) = (-2.4586 + 1.2726 (Creatinine > 1.9) + 0.9858 (BUN >27) + 0.4574 (MELD Score>21) + 1.1625 (ICU days >3). Patients with a PRHD score of 0.12 or higher were more likely to develop need for RRT post-operatively. When applied to OLTX recipients transplanted in 2002, correct classification occurred in 15 out of 20 patients who received RRT and 111 of 121 who did not. Conclusions: This model allowed us to identify patients at high risk for developing the need for RRT post-operatively. Strategies for these patients to prevent or ameliorate ARF and reduce the need for RRT post-operatively are needed. Poster Board #-Session: P152-III Purpose: Both oral ganciclovir and valacyclovir decrease the incidence of cytomegalovirus (CMV) disease after renal transplantation (RTx). Moreover, valacyclovir has been shown to reduce the risk of acute rejection in D+R-patients (pts). The aim our study was to compare the efficacy and safety of oral ganciclovir and valacyclovir in the prophylaxis of CMV disease after RTx. Methods: A total of 83 patients (pts) was prospectively randomized to 3-month treatment with either oral ganciclovir (1 g t.i.d., n=36, GAN group) or oral valacyclovir (2 g q.i.d., n=35, VAL group), with the dose adjusted by renal function. A third group (C, n=12) received no prophylaxis and was managed by deferred therapy. CMV seronegative recipients of seronegative grafts were not enrolled. The pts were followed up to 24 months post-RTx or until death or graft loss (mean 22.6 ± 3.3 months). The pts were monitored using CMV nested PCR in whole blood. Results: No differences were found among the groups in their demographic characteristics, immunosuppressive protocols, or D/R CMV serology. Background. CMV is a major cause of morbidity in Kidney Transplantation (KTx). Valganciclovir (Valcyte) is a recently approved anti-viral against CMV. We have observed an increased incidence of leukopenia in KTx pts receiving Valcyte vs. Ganciclovir prophylaxis and MMF-based maintenance immunosuppression (IP). Few studies have analyzed the efficacy and safety of preemptive Rx for CMV infection with the use of Valcyte. Aim: To investigate whether the preemptive management of CMV is safe, effective and associated with fewer side-effects compared to routine CMV prophylaxis in KTx pts. Methods: This is a single-center retrospective observational study that includes 322 KTx. Pts received a 30mg intraoperative dose of Campath-1H and 3-days of iv steroids for induction. Mainteinance IP consisted of MMF and Tacrolimus without steroids. Pts were divided into 2-eras: In era 1 (10/01-9/02; n=164), all pts received Valcyte (450mg qd) for 3 months. In era 2 (10/02-8/03; n=158), D -Rpts (n=37) were not monitored or treated; D + Rpts (n=13) received Valcyte (450mg qd) for 3 months and all R + pts (D -,n=36 and D + ,n=72) were monitored by quantitative DNA CMV PCR q2 wks for 3 months. Presence of ≥200 copies of CMV in peripheral blood initiated Valcyte (450mg qd) for 1 month or until the blood was cleared of the virus. CMV infection/disease and side effects of protocols were compared. Results: Pt demographics (age, sex, cause of ESRD, cadaver vs. living donor KTx) were comparable between eras. Mean follow-up was 12.1 months (16.5 months for era 1 and 7 months for era 2). Overall CMV infection rate was 4.6% (3.6% in era 1 and 5.7% in era 2, p=0.43). CMV tissue-invasive disease rate was 2.2% (3% in era 1 and 1.3% in era 2, p=0.45). The WBC count was 2.5±1.1 in era 1 and 3.1±1.5 in era 2 (p=0.01). The incidence of leukopenia (WBC<3) was 75% in era 1 and 47% in era 2 (p<0.0001). Admission for leukopenia dropped in era 2 (3.2%) when compared with era 1 (4.8%; p=0.58). 1-year pt and graft survival were respectively 96.6% and 95.3% in era 1 and 96.6% and 96.6% in era 2. Conclusions: Compared to a routine prophylaxis, the use of a preemptive magement of CMV in KTx pts is associated with a lower rates of leukopenia and similar incidence of CMV infection/disease and. Purpose: Concerns have been raised about the possibility of increased of cytomegalovirus (CMV) disease as result of the use of potent immunosuppressive drugs. We are assessing prospectively the efficacy and safety of oral ganciclovir and valganciclovir as prophylaxis for CMV disease in patients with highly potent immunosuppression. This prospective study assessed the efficacy of 3 months CMV prophylaxis in a randomized trial of three different immunosuppressive protocols in kidney transplantation. Method: Between May 2000 and December 2001, 150 patients were randomized in a single center prospective trial, equally divided into 3-arms, of cadaver or non-HLA identical living donor first renal transplant recipients (n=50 per group). Group A received Tacrolimus and sirolimus. Group B received tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil. Group C received Neoral® and sirolimus. Each group received daclizumab induction and methylprednisolone maintenance. Oral ganciclovir 1000 mg tid was used in 92 patients. The remaining 58 patients received a single dose of 900 mg/day of Valganciclovir, the valine ester of ganciclovir, which provides oral bioavailability superior to that of oral ganciclovir. Blood was sampled before transplantation from the donors and recipients for CMV serology and nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for CMV DNA, and after transplantation from the recipients only at monthly intervals until 6 months. Patients were observed for the development of any CMV-like illness during follow-up. Results: The CMV serologic status was D+/R+ in 70, D+/R-in 21, D-/R-in 21 and D-/R+ in 38 pairs. Of 150 patients followed for 12 months, only 2 developed cytomegalovirus infection, both patients at 120 days posttransplantation. One of the patients received ganciclovir and the other valganciclovir. There were 11 incidents of acute rejection among the three groups. Only 10 patients discontinued treatment early, 2 due to leukopenia. Conclusions: Oral ganciclovir has been used with success for CMV prophylaxis, but it must be administered in large, divided doses (1000 mg TID) to be effective. These results suggest that prophylaxis with a single dose of 900 mg/day of valganciclovir for at least 3 months safely and effectively prevents cytomegalovirus infection in kidney transplant recipients on highly potent immunosuppression. Poster Board #-Session: P159-III  were the most common valganciclovir adverse events. One patient developed acute rejection. No graft losses or deaths occurred. Early discontinuation of valganciclovir occurred in 20% of patients secondary to severe, persistent leukopenia, thrombocytopenia and/or diarrhea. None of these patients developed CMV disease. Conclusions: A high rate of CMV disease was noted among the D+/R-population. The administration of ATG as an induction agent also increased the incidence of CMV disease. Despite the low dose of valganciclovir, hematologic adverse events were common. However, valganciclovir, at 450 mg daily for six months, is effective, safe and well tolerated for prophylaxis of CMV disease in RTR. Despite the introduction of newer anti-viral medications for prophylaxis, cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection is still the most common opportunistic infection following solid organ transplantation. We recently reported that the overall incidence of CMV disease at 1-year posttransplant was 14% (4% tissue-invasive, 10% noninvasive) in 129 kidney or pancreas transplant recipients with 3-months Ganciclovir or Valganciclovir prophylaxis. (Am J Transplant 2003; 3:731) . However, of the18 patients who developed CMV disease, 83% (n=15) had received Thymoglobulin induction treatment, and 25% of all Thymoglobulin treated patients developed CMV disease. 4 of 15 (27%) patients had tissue-invasive CMV disease. In the light these findings we extended CMV prophylaxis with Valganciclovir to 6-months in Thymoglobulin treated patients and prospectively investigated the incidence, timecourse, and clinical patterns of CMV disease. 50 Thymoglobulin treated transplant patients (43 kidney, 3 kidney/pancreas, 4 pancreas after kidney) received 6-months CMV prophylaxis with Valganciclovir 450 mg po qd. There were 28 male, 22 female, 39 Caucasian or Hispanic, 11 African-American, age 29-67, and median follow-up of 15 months (range 9-21 months). In terms of CMV antibody status, 25 were Donor (D) + / Recipient (R) +, 11 were D -/R+, 8 were D+/R-, and 6 were D-/R-. Only 4 patients (8%) had diagnosis of non-invasive CMV disease by blood CMV-PCR (range, 5,000-100,000) and one of them had also tissue-invasive CMV disease (CMV esophagitis). Patients developed CMV disease 4-8 weeks after completion of 6-months CMV prophylaxis, and all responded to Valganciclovir treatment. These results indicate that 6-months Valganciclovir prophylaxis significantly decreases CMV incidence (from 25% to 8%) in Thymoglobulin treated patients. Poster Board #-Session: P161-III Of the centers which use CMV prophylaxis, most used it for at least 3 months (87-97%, across various groups), though none reported use for longer than 6 months. 29% of centers restart CMV prophylaxis after pulse steroid therapy for acute rejection, but most (>90%) restarted it after thymoglobulin or OKT3 therapy. Diagnosis: 56% of centers use a single test for the diagnosis of CMV infection, while the rest use up to 3 tests. CMV PCR is the most commonly used single test (35%). Treatment Practices: 44% use IV ganciclovir, 31% use valganciclovir, 10% use IV ganciclovir followed by valganciclovir, while the rest use other products, including combination therapy, for CMV disease. Duration of treatment of CMV disease varies from 2 weeks (20%) to 6 months (20%). 32% of centers do not restart prophylaxis after treatment of CMV infection, the rest restituted prophylaxis for upto 6 months. Ganciclovir Resistance: 11 of 77 centers (14%) of centers have seen patients with ganciclovir resistance, although these centers have reported a total of 14 cases. Conclusions: 1. Valganciclovir is most commonly used for CMV prophylaxis, usually for 3-6 months. 2. Although all D+/R-recipients receive CMV prophylaxis, over 50% of D-/R-recipients do not receive any anti-viral prophylaxis. 3. IV ganciclovir remains the drug of choice for treatment of CMV disease. 4. Ganciclovir resistance is not seen/ appreciated at most centers Poster Board #-Session: P163-III Background: Despite antiretroviral prophylaxis, CMV disease continues to be a significant problem in high risk renal transplant recipients. Aim: To compare the tolerability and efficacy of oral ganciclovir for 6 months with the standard 3 month course. Methods: A retrospective analysis of 108 high risk CRT and LRT patients (CMV positive donor/CMV negative recipient) followed a minimum of 9 months after transplantation. A cohort of patients transplanted between 1/01 and 4/03 (n=40) were compared with a cohort of patients treated for 3 months (n=68) transplanted during the previous 18 months. A logistic regression analysis was performed to determine risk factors for CMV disease. Variables that were statistically significant in the univariate analysis were included in the multivariable model. Results: There were no significant differences in cadaver kidney use, recipient race, gender, age, transplant history, renal diagnosis, opportunistic infections, hepatitis C seropositivity, graft loss, or preexisting diabetes between groups. All patients were able to complete the course of ganciclovir therapy. Each patient who developed CMV disease was successfully treated. The use of any cytolytic therapy was slightly higher in the 6 months group (97.5% vs. 73.5% p=.001), however, the use of tacrolimus, MMF, and Rapamycin were not significantly different between the two groups. The multivariate model included the use of 6 months of ganciclovir, type of induction therapy, use of cytolytic therapy, and tacrolimus levels at 1 month. In this multivariable model, 6 months of ganciclovir was associated with a significantly lower risk of developing CMV disease (odds ratio 0.25, 95% confidence interval 0.07-0.95, P=.042). In high risk renal transplant recipients, six months of oral ganciclovir prophylaxis is associated with a lower rate of CMV disease than three months. Background. Nephronic reduction of kidney transplants has been considered benign. However, pre peri and post transplantation injuries in cadaver transplantation may have led to an underestimation of its magnitude and possible implications. Our aim was to analyse the consequences of kidney mass on transplantation outcome. Methods. The weights of 1142 kidney grafts were prospectively collected immediately before grafting. Donors and recipients <15 years of age, simultaneous kidney/pancreas grafts and technical failures before day 7 were excluded from the analysis. The analysis was performed on Cockroft calculated creatinine clearance and proteinuria in 964 patients for whom all the necessary information was available. Results. Using a mixed linear model to analyse the effect of the Donor Kidney Weight/ Recipient Body Weight ratios (DKW/RBW) on graft function adjusted according to others studied covariates, we observed that the smallest kidneys transplanted into the largest recipients (DKW/RBW < 2 g.Kg -1 , n=88) increased dramatically their creatinine clearance by 2.38 mL/min every month for six months (p<0.0001) and by 0.27 mL/min thereafter (p<0.0001). Conversely, creatinine clearance did not change for the largest kidneys transplanted into the smallest recipients (DKW/RBW ratios ≥ 4 g.Kg -1 ). Moreover, because proteinuria could be the result of an hyperfiltration and is considered to be the principal marker of kidney damage, we then investigated whether the high filtration rate observed with low DKW/RBW ratio have resulted in the occurrence of a persistent proteinuria. Using a Cox model analysis, we showed that the risk of having a proteinuria above 0.5 g.day -1 was significantly increased for the low DKW/RBW ratios < 2 g.Kg -1 with 50% of patients having a proteinuria in this group, compared with DKW/RBW ratios ≥ 4 g.Kg -1 (p<0.001). In cadaver transplant recipients, graft mass has a rapid impact on graft filtration rate and proteinuria. Avoiding major kidney/recipient inadequacy should have a significant impact on long term transplant function. Background: The optimal duration of abstinence which predicts freedom from alcoholic relapse has not been well established in patients with Alcoholic Liver Disease (ALD) being evaluated for liver transplantation. In the absence of conclusive data, six months abstinence has become a widely used requirement. Methods: We performed a retrospective cohort study on all patients with ALD alone, who underwent a primary liver transplant at the University of Wisconsin between 1984 and 2003. Information on pre and post transplant drinking behavior, and addiction counseling and therapy were abstracted from a prospectively constructed database and medical records. Relapse was defined as any recorded alcohol use. Results: Of 1100 liver transplant recipients from 1984 to 2003, 170 primary liver recipients who had ALD alone were included. All subjects had prolonged alcohol use (>50 g/day). Sixty nine percent (118/170) were male and the mean age was 52 years. Fifteen percent (25/165) had a drinking relapse with a median interval from transplantation to relapse of 37 months. In 17 of 25 (68%) the first relapse episode was 2 years or more after transplantation. Pre-transplantation duration of abstinence was categorized as < 6, 6 to12, 13 to24, and >24 months and was associated with rates of relapse of 21%, 23%, 7% and 13% respectively. Those abstinent for less than 12 months pre-transplantation had a significantly higher risk of relapse (Odds ratio 2.40, 95% CI 1.01-5.82, P=0.048) as compared to those abstinent for more than 12 months. In multivariable analysis, duration of abstinence pre-transplantation was the only significant factor predicting relapse (Odds ratio 2.98, 95% CI 1.09-8.19, P=0.03), whereas age, gender, race, pre-transplant counseling and addiction therapy did not predict relapse. Patient (log rank P=0.67) and graft survival (P= 0.82) posttransplantation did not correlate with length of abstinence from alcohol before transplantation. Conclusion: Patients with ALD who have pre-transplant periods of abstinence of less than 12 months are at increased risk for alcohol relapse post transplantation. Patient and graft survival are not significantly impacted by alcohol relapse. Since many patients do not survive 12 months of pre-transplant observation, criteria other than duration of abstinence need to be considered in patients with shorter periods of abstinence. Poster Board #-Session: P167-III Background: Survival following liver transplantation for HCV is significantly poorer than for transplants performed for other causes of chronic liver disease. Retransplantation for HCV may be associated with a poor outcome, leading some to suggest that retransplantation in HCV is not justified. Methods: A UNOS star file (5/91-12/01) was reduced to 18079 cases by excluding recipients <18yo, deaths and graft loss within 30d, recipients, multi-organ transplants, and implausible data. Kaplan-Meier graft and patient survival was calculated for primary and retransplants in the HCV-and HCV+ cohorts. Cox analysis was conducted to identify variables differentially associated with outcome in primary and secondary grafts. Variables considered included: donor and recipient age, gender, race, history of malignancy, combinations of donor-recipient gender and race, warm and cold ischemia, retransplant number, recipient labs (alb., creat., PT, T.bili), diabetes and pre-transplant life support. Results: There were 10562 HCV-and 7517 HCV+ recipients. Mean recipient age was 49.8 ± 11.7 in HCV-versus 49.4 ± 8.4 in HCV+ recipients (p=0.03). Males comprised 55.3% of HCV-and 70.4% of HCV+ patients. The percentages of white and black recipients were 87.0% and. 7.4% in the HCV-cohort, vs. 88.1% and 7.1% in the HCV+ cohort. Retransplantation rates were 6.2% in HCV-vs. 7.0% in the HCV+ (p= .04). Reasons for retransplant in HCV-vs. HCV+ were HCV(5.2 vs. 58.3 %), HBV(8.2 vs. 1.7%), tumor (1.4 vs. 3 .0%), alcohol(12.4 vs. 5.1%). Five-year graft survival of first and second grafts was 77.6 % and 59.5% (p< .000) in HCV-and 66.3% and 52.1% (p< .000) in HCV+. Retransplant, recipient and donor age, warm ischemia, and creatinine independently predicted graft survival in both cohorts, while recipient malignancy, donor race, female to male transplants, cold ischemia, albumin, and life support were independently significant in HCV-cohort. White to black race, and recipient diabetes were independently significant in the HCV+ cohort. The adjusted RR for graft failure in retransplanted patients was 1.80 in the HCV-cohort while it was 1.89 in the HCV+ cohort. Conclusion: Multivariate analysis demonstrated that the adjusted relative risk of graft failure incurred by retransplantation is similar in HCV-and HCV+ recipients (RR 1.8 vs. 1.89). These results suggest that further careful study is required to determine cases in which retransplantation for HCV+ patients is not justified. Poster  Post-liver transplant (OLT) patients remain on continuous risk of progressive hepatitis C (HCV) after initial successful antiviral treatment, due to long-term immunosuppression. Patient and graft prognosis is determined by development of severe graft fibrosis or even cirrhosis. We demonstrate for the first time beneficial effects of the concept of an antiviral maintenance therapy after 12 months basic treatment course on graft morphology in liver transplant patients with recurrent HCV. Between 1995 and 2003, a total of 23 patients with bioptically confirmed recurrent HCV after OLT were included in this study. Antiviral treatment started with a 12 months basic course using interferon-a 2b (IFN, IntronA™, 3x3Mio IE/week/Peg-Intron™, 50µg/week, Essex-Pharma, Germany) and ribavirin (Rb, Rebetol®, 3x200mg/day) Essex Pharma, Germany). Irrespective of virological response, a maintenance combination therapy was intended, with individual dose reduction only if necessary. Graft function (AST, ALT) and virological response (quantitative HCV-RNA) were determined continuously. Impact on fibrotic graft damage was classified according to Ishak and Knodell. Follow-up after initiation of treatment ranges between 1 and 82 months. Treatment period exceeds 12 months in actually 20 patients. Initial biochemical response was 90%. At completion of basic treatment course 14 patients (70%) achieved serological clearance of viremia. Continuation of full dose antiviral treatment (n=14) resulted in sustained clearance of viremia up to 90 months post-OLT. Median stage of fibrosis remained low (actual 1,3± 0,8). In 3 out of 6 initial virological non-respopnders, therapy had to be stopped due to side effects. All of them developed severe biochemical and morphological disease progression (actual stage of fibrosis: 3,0). In 3 initial virological non-responders a median maintenance treatment of 16 months (range: 9-48 months) did not lead to clearance of viremia but to a limitation of graft fibrosis (actual stage of fibrosis: 2,0). We recommend antiviral maintenance therapy after a 12 months basic course, if tolerable for the patient. In virological responders, it prevents virological relapse and progression to severe graft fibrosis. In virological non-responders, it seems to be effective in limiting severe graft fibrosis despite persistent viremia. The optimal timing of treatment for recurrent hepatitis C (HCV) after liver transplantation (LT) is undefined. Aim: To evaluate the effect of early interferon (IFN) therapy on long term fibrosis progression in recurrent hepatitis C. Method: Charts of all patients (pts) undergoing LT for HCV at our center from 03/14/1998 to 11/07/2000 were retrospectively reviewed. Pts with recurrent HCV and protocol biopsies at 4 month, 1 year and 3 year were considered for our study. Pts with concomitant HBV or active alcohol use after LT were excluded. Biopsies were graded (0-18) and staged (0-6) in a blinded fashion by a LT pathologist using the Ishak score. Results: 31 pts met criteria and were included in the study, 11 had mild recurrence and received no treatment, while 20 received IFN based treatment for significant recurrence (4 viral responders, 2 relapsed). IFN was started ≤6 months post LT (mean of 3.1) in 12 pts, and > 6 months post LT (mean 12.9) in 8. Biopsies performed prior to initiation of treatment (mean 2.4 vs mean 11 months) had similar mean grade (3.75 vs 3.63) and stage (1.0 vs 0.63) in each group respectively. Both the ≤6 month and >6 month groups received prolonged IFN treatment, mean 22 months (range 5-36) vs 18.6 months (range 3-34). Pts treated ≤6 months post LT had a slower rate of fibrosis progression and less inflammation at 3 years, compared with IFN > 6 months, despite poor viral responses, with 1 sustained responder per treated group. In addition, the stage at 3 years was similar in the early treatment group to the untreated pts who had been considered to have mild recurrence. (Table) . Conclusion: This analysis of 3 year data on post LT recurrent HCV suggests that early and prolonged IFN therapy may be associated with a reduced rate of fibrosis progression and inflammation despite lack of viral eradication. The data is preliminary but warrants further investigation. Background: Early virologic response (EVR), defined by >2 log decrease in HCV RNA after 12 weeks of peginterferon + ribavirin (Peg+RBV), identifies patients with chronic hepatitis C (HCV) likely to sustain viral clearance after cessation of therapy. Aim: To measure tolerance to Peg+RBV therapy and its impact on achieving target doses (TD) and EVR in a cohort of liver transplant (LTx) recipients. Methods: We retrospectively reviewed records of all patients treated with Peg (α2a or α2b) and RBV who have completed at least 12 weeks of therapy at our institution since 2001. Therapy was initiated at half-dose Peg and either 400 or 600 mg/d of RBV, and increased at two week intervals aiming for the TD or maximum tolerated dose (MTD). Patients: Thirty-four patients (35 courses) received at least 12 weeks of Peg+RBV. Median age was 52 years (44-60), median weight was 80kg (52-136), 71% were men, and 89% were infected with HCV-1. Calculated creatinine clearance was 87.2 ml/min, 4 patients had Cr.Cl < 60 ml/ min and sixteen had Cr.Cl. in between 60 and 90 ml/min. Therapy was started at a median of 19.6 months (3-102) after LTx. Patients were maintained on a variety of immunosuppressive regimens, 90% were off of steroids. Results: Fifteen patients (43%) achieved an EVR. Characteristics of these 15 patients were compared to 19 without EVR. Patients with EVR were more likely to achieve >80% of RBV TD (33% vs. 17%) and >80% of Peg TD (87% vs. 37%). The mean RBV-TD for the group was 1065 mg/d. The overall median RBV-MTD dose was 600 mg/d (0-1200) and the mean was 569 +/ -300 mg (53.4% of TD). Fourteen patients (40%) used G-CSF, 7 achieved EVR and 7 did not. Eleven (31%) patients used erythropoetin, 5 achieved EVR and 6 did not. Treatment was held in 17 patients: anemia (7), neutropenia (3), infection (3), rejection (1), depression (1), abdominal pain (1), and chest pain (1). Two patients died; one of a perforated duodenal ulcer and HCV-induced allograft failure and one from sepsis. Summary: Lower EVR in LTx recipients is related to greater HCV-1 prevalence, older age and inability to achieve TD of Peg+RBV due to renal impairment, poor bone marrow response and coexistent immunosuppression. Conclusion: Early stopping rules do not apply to treatment of HCV after LTx because of difficulty in achieving antivirals target doses. The adequate length and goals of treatment of HCV after LTx have not yet been adequately defined. The rapid recurrence of severe hepatitis C viral (HCV) hepatitis after liver transplantation is a problem. Positive cryoprecipitate (CP) levels are associated with poor outcome in the non-transplant population. We have demonstrated an association between CP and poor outcome after transplant. For our previous analyses, we used pre and posttransplant CP levels to define a patient's CP status (any positive equals CP positive). The effect of transplantation in CP is not known. Therefore, we analyzed the effect of post-transplant CP status. Methods: Using our longitudinal database, survival for all recipients of liver transplants for cirrhosis due to HCV was analyzed (1991 onward) based on the presence or absence of CP. Any of the 97 patients (105 grafts) with a cryocrit > trace was defined as CP positive. All liver transplant biopsies were analyzed (in a blinded fashion) and activity and fibrosis were graded using the Batts-Ludwig scale. Severe activity was defined as moderate or worse activity and severe fibrosis was defined as bridging fibrosis or cirrhosis. Graft survival, and survival until the onset of severe activity and fibrosis were determined using Kaplan Meier estimates. Survival analyses were performed for the entire population (overall survival) and after censoring patients who died or lost their grafts for reasons other than recurrent HCV (HCV specific survival). The log rank test was used to compare survival and Cox multivariate analysis was used to determine risk ratios (RR). Results: Ninety seven patients had either a pre or post-transplant cryocrit, and 88 (91%) had a post-transplant CP level. Seventeen (19%) of the post-transplant patients were CP positive. Background Hepatitis C (HCV) is the leading indication for orthotopic liver transplantation in the United States, and recipients of orthotopic liver transplant for HCV invariably develop recurrent disease. As recurrent HCV is associated with an accelerated rate of cirrhosis, decompensation, and death, transplant centers will be faced with an increasing number of patients requiring retransplantation. However, the risk factors for death and retransplantation following the developing of cirrhosis from recurrent HCV is unclear. We reviewed records of patients who underwent liver transplantation for cirrhosis due to HCV between January 1990 and December 2001. Patients who developed recurrent cirrhosis from HCV were identified and divided into two groups, those who did and did not undergo retransplantation. We then performed a multivariate analysis of the effects of various prognostic factors on survival. During the study period, 511 patients underwent transplantation for HCV cirrhosis. Of these, 81 patients (16%) developed recurrent cirrhosis from HCV; 51 were relisted for transplantation, and 28 underwent retransplantation. Using Kaplan-Meier survival curves, 1, 5, and 10 year patient survival was 96%, 64%, and 33%, respectively, for patients receiving a second liver transplant and 94%, 60%, and 32%, respectively, for patients who did not undergo a second transplant (p = 0.80  The purpose of the current study is to determine whether all hepatitis c viral quasispecies infect allografts after liver transplantation. If only a portion associate with and subsequently infect allografts, interventions targeting specific viral-allograft interactions could be developed to alter disease recurrence after liver transplantation. Methods: In 7 patients undergoing liver transplantation for HCV-induced end stage liver disease, blood samples were obtained prior to removal of the diseased liver, and liver biopsies were obtained from explanted liver, uninfected allograft 2 hrs after reperfusion, and infected liver 1 week to 2 months after transplantation. Cellular blood compartments (red blood cells, neutrophils, monocytes and lymphocytes) were isolated from blood samples in 2 patients by Ficoll gradient centrifugation. Serum compartments (immunoglobulin (Ig) bound virus, low density lipoprotein (LDL) bound virus and virus not bound to Ig or LDL) were isolated in 3 patients by immunoprecipitation with protein G beads and anti-LDL antibody. RNA was extracted from blood cell fractions, serum, serum fractions and liver biopsies, reverse transcribed and amplified by nested PCR with primers flanking hypervariable regions 1 and 2 (HVR1 and 2). The PCR product was cloned and directly sequenced to identify quasispecies variants within each sample. Results: HVR1: Genetic complexity and diversity decreased with reperfusion (complexity (Shannon entropy): serum 0.49±0.26 vs. postperfusion liver 0.29±0.14, p=0.04; diversity (maximal amino acid divergence): serum 10±7% vs. postperfusion liver 5±5%; p=0.03) but was not significantly different between postperfusion liver and infected liver quasispecies. HVR1 quasispecies not identified in the serum inoculum were recovered from postperfusion liver. These previously unidentified quasispecies were isolated from serum compartments but not cellular blood compartments. The predominant infecting quasispecies were serum rather than cell derived but were not derived or excluded from any single serum compartment. HVR2: HVR2 quasispecies were much less variable then HVR1 and did not demonstrate selective association or infection. Conclusions: Serum, not blood cell, derived HVR1 quasispecies selectively associate with and infect allografts after liver transplantation. This selectivity occurs primarily during reperfusion and is not due to infection by or exclusion of a single serum compartment. Extended criteria donor (ECD) liver utilization has expanded the limited donor pool for patients awaiting orthotopic liver transplant (OLT). Many centers approach ECD livers with caution as the outcomes following their use remains unclear. PURPOSE: To analyze outcomes of OLT using ECD livers compared to a control group of standard criteria donor (SCD) liver allografts. METHODS: All OLT recipients at our center between Jan 2002-Oct 2003 were categorized as having received an ECD or SCD liver. ECD allografts were defined as having any one or more of the following: donor age > 60 yrs, biopsy exhibiting >40% macrovesicular and/or >75% microvesicular steatosis, any donor down time (± CPR), use of 2 or more pressors within 12 hrs of procurement, or liver function studies > 5 x upper limit of normal. Parameters that were reviewed included: recipient demographics (age, sex, MELD, mean follow-up, length of stay), graft ischemic times (total and warm), laboratory data, and clinical outcomes (death, biliary complications, rejections  Biliary complications continue to be leading cause of morbidity and mortality after liver transplantation. Incidence of such complications is higher when cut down liver allografts such as reduced (R), split (SLT) and living donor(LDLT) are used. In this study, we reviewed our experience with biliary complications and compared the incidence and outcome of biliary complications in various graft types. Between 1/1998 and 12/2003, 158 pediatric liver transplants were performed in our institution. The following variables were analyzed: Patient demographics, type of liver allografts (R, LDLT, SLT, and Whole), graft anatomy and type of biliary reconstruction, cold and warm ischemia times and complications (biliary leak and stricture, hepatic artery thrombosis (HAT). We also analyzed the therapeutic approach to biliary complications. The mean recipient age was 6.8 years (r,18 days-20 years). 57 (36.1%) whole grafts, 32 (20.3%) split grafts, 7 (4.4%) reduced size grafts and, 62 (39.2%) living donor grafts were transplanted. Bilio-enteric anastomosis was performed in 114 (72.2%), and duct to duct anastomosis was done in 44 (27.8%). Eleven patients (6.96 %) had biliary complications. Hepatic artery thrombosis was diagnosed in 6 (3.79%); (see Table) 1 patient died on POD# 1, 2 underwent re-OLTx. Grafts were salvaged in other 3 of which, only 1 developed biliary complication. Seven of 11 biliary complications (63.6%) Abstracts required surgical intervention including drainage, revision, or conversion from ductto-duct to hepatico-jejunostomy. Last 5 (36.3%) managed by non surgical approach including percutaneous drainage and balloon dilatation. In only one case non surgical approach was failed necessitating surgical revision. Conclusions: Although overall incidence of biliary complications is low in our series, most of the biliary complications occurred in cut down livers. Non surgical approach should be the first choice of treatment. Biliary Complications Stricture Stricture Bile Leak Bile Leak Leak from liver Biloma HAT Roux-en-Y Duct-duct Roux-en-Y Duct-duct cut surface/or accessory duct Whole -- BACKGROUND: Post-transplant de-novo autoimmune hepatitis (d-AIH) is increasingly described as a long-term complication after pediatric liver transplantation (LT). D-AIH is characterized by graft dysfunction, the development of autoimmune antibodies (AA), and histologic evidence of hepatitis in liver transplant patients without previous history of autoimmune liver disease. This study is a matched casecontrol, univariate analysis which examines risk factors for developing d-AIH. METHODS: From 1984 to 2003, 810 pediatric LTs were performed at a single center. 50 patients developed positive AA and graft dysfunction. 9 patients were excluded because biopsy findings were not consistent with autoimmune hepatitis. The remaining 41 patients were matched with a control group for sex, initial diagnosis, and age at the time of transplant. RESULTS: The indications for LT were: biliary atresia n=19, fulminant hepatic failure n=14, α-1-antitrypsin deficiency n=2, OTC deficiency n=2, Alagille's syndrome n=1, Crigler-Najjar n=1, Budd-Chiari syndrome n=1, and PFIC Type 2 n=1. The overall incidence of d-AIH was 5.1 %, with 80.4% of these patients developing d-AIH after 1999. The female to male ratio was 1.7:1. The mean age at LT was 3.6 years, and the mean time from transplant to the development of autoimmune hepatitis was 7.0 years. 22 of the patients in the d-AIH group were on cyclosporine, azathioprine and prednisone as their primary immunosuppressant, while 19 were on tacrolimus and prednisone. The d-AIH group had a mean of 2.8 total episodes of rejection compared to 1.0 episodes in the control (p<0.05). More specifically, the d-AIH group had a mean of 2.0 vs 0.7 epsiodes of acute rejection (p<0.05) and 0.2 vs 0.03 episodes of steroid resistant rejection (p<0.05) in comparison to the control group. The following variables were analyzed and found not to be significant in the development of d-AIH: age, sex, initial diagnosis, and primary immunosuppression. CONCLUSIONS: The number of episodes of rejection is a significant risk factor in developing d-AIH. In this center's experience the incidence of d-AIH is 5.1%, with the majority of these cases occuring after 1999. We are in the process of investigating this trend, which may be related to changes in immunosuppression protocols. A multivariate analysis is underway. We used Cox proportional-hazard models to evaluate associations between total number of HLA matches and mismatches (on a scale from 0 to 6) and 5-year graft survival, where graft failure was defined as retransplantation or death from transplant-related cause. Multi-variable models were used to evaluate statistical interactions and adjust for the effect of potential confounding variables. Results: Of 61,148 liver transplants in 55,193 recipients, 29,131 first time-transplants met the selection criteria for this analysis. Among recipient-donor pairs analyzed, the median number of HLA matches was 1 (range 0 to 6), median number of mismatches was 5 (range 0 to 6). We found no significant interactions between HLA match/mismatch and ethnicity, gender, transplantation during childhood, or recipient diagnoses of viral hepatitis or autoimmune disease. After adjusting for potential confounding due to age, diagnosis, ethnicity, gender, hepatitis C status, live donor, simultaneous multiorgan transplant, recipient medical condition before transplant, and transplant year, we found no association between the degree of HLA match or mismatch and 5-year graft survival (all p > 0.1). Conclusions: After controlling for potential confounding variables, the degree of donor and recipient HLA match or mismatch was found to have no effect on 5 year liver graft survival. Importantly, we found no increase in risk of graft loss with increasing HLA match level irrespective of recipient etiology of liver disease. Backgrounds: Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the main cause of death after renal transplantation. The impact of CVD after liver transplantation is less well established. Methods: We analyzed the long-term cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in a cohort of 311 consecutive adult recipients of a first liver transplant. Patients were transplanted between 01-01-1979 and 31-12-2000, and had survived for at least 1 year after OLT. No patient was known with CVD at the time of transplantation. We determined whether cardiovascular events could be predicted at one year after transplantation by established cardiovascular risk factors or by transplant-related characteristics. Results: The mean duration of follow-up was 6.8 years. Five-and 10-year patient survival rates were 88 and 84%, respectively. A total of 32 cardiovascular events occurred in 23 patients. Systolic hypertension, smoking, hypercholesteremia, hypertriglyeridemia, diabetes and proteinuria all were associated with CVD. Multivariate analysis showed that systolic blood pressure (P=0,01) and smoking (P=0,006) were significant and independent risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Hypertensive patients in whom treatment had controlled the systolic blood pressure to values <140 mmHg had a strongly reduced risk of CVD compared with patients with a systolic blood pressure ≥140 mmHg (with or without antihypertensive treatment). During follow-up 52 patients died, 11 of them (21%) due to a cardiovascular event. CVD was the principal cause of death after the 10th year post-transplant, causing 6 out of 11 deaths. The cumulative incidence of cardiovascular death 20 years after transplantation was 38%. The mean age at cardiovascular death was 60 years, which is low compared with a mean age of 78 years for cardiovascular death in the general Dutch population. Conclusions: CVD is a major source of morbidity and mortality after liver transplantation, and probably occurs prematurely. CVD can be predicted by classic risk factors such as systolic hypertension and smoking. Aggressive reduction of these risk factors may effectively reduce the prevent these complications. Poster Board #-Session: P185-III BACKGROUND: Significant advances in perioperative care and immunosuppression have resulted in a broadening of the indications for organ transplantation. Specifically, advanced age is no longer considered a contraindication to transplantation in most centers. Although short-term studies of elderly liver transplant recipients have demonstrated that the incidence of complications and overall patient survival are similar to those of younger adults, it is apparent that minimal center-specific, long-term data are available. Moreover, few data are available pertaining to patient survival in liver transplant recipients aged over 65 years at the time of transplant. METHODS: From January of 1998 to December of 2002, 84 patients 65 years of age or older received primary liver transplants at our center. This group of patients was compared with two groups of younger adult recipients; group 2 aged 60-64 years (n = 183) and group 3 aged between 18 years and 59 years (n = 1245) who received primary liver transplants during the same period. The most common indications for transplantation in all groups were alcohol related cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma, hepatitis B and C virus infection, primary biliary cirrhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, and cryptogenic cirrhosis. There was no difference in the preoperative severity of illness between the groups. Results. Overall, length of hospitalization was similar for both groups, and there were no significant differences in rejection or infection rates (surgical or opportunistic), repeat operation, or need for repeat transplantation between the groups. The only significant difference identified between the groups was long-term survival. Mean survival was 102.7 months in the older group, 149 months in the 60-64 year old group and 158 months in the younger group. Overall, there was no statistically significant difference in survival between the three groups. Consistent with previous observations, the commonest cause of late mortality in elderly liver recipients was malignancy, whereas most of the young adult deaths were related to infection. CONCLUSION: Although older recipients > 65 years at this center did as well as younger recipients in the early years after liver transplantation, long-term survival is less convincing. Therefore, judicious choice of elderly candidates must be undertaken to optimize survival in this patient cohort. Background: Valganciclovir (VGCV) is indicated for the prevention of cytomegalovirus disease (CMVD) in kidney, heart, and kidney-pancreas transplant recipients at high risk for CMVD. The efficacy and safety of VGCV in liver transplant (LT) recipients has not been established. A preliminary sub-group analysis of LT recipients in the Phase III trial (PV16000) reported a higher, but statistically non-significant, incidence of overall CMVD with oral VGCV 900 mg QD, compared to oral ganciclovir (GCV) 1 g TID. Because of its improved pharmacokinetics, 450 mg of oral VGCV offers convenient once-daily dosing while delivering systemic GCV exposure equivalent to that of oral GCV 1 g TID. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of lowdose VGCV vs. GCV for CMVD prophylaxis in LT recipients. Methods: In 2002, CMVD prophylaxis regimen at our transplant center was changed from GCV to VGCV. LT recipients at high risk (D+/R-) or moderate risk (D±/R+) for CMVD received either oral GCV 1g TID or VGCV 450 mg QD (both adjusted for renal function) for 90 days following transplant. Adult LT recipients between 01/01/01-02/28/03 were retrospectively reviewed for their CMVD prophylaxis and immunosuppression regimens, occurrence of CMVD (CMV viremia with fever or tissue invasive CMVD), and hematological toxicity. Results: Forty seven GCV recipients (9 D+/R-and 38 D±/R+) and 42 VGCV recipients (7 D+/R-and 35 D±/R+) were identified. Mean follow-up was 27 ± 5 months for the GCV cohort and 15 ± 3 months for the VGCV cohort. All but 3 VGCV recipients (no steroids) initially received tacrolimus/MMF/steroids for immunosuppression and a majority of them remained on the same regimen. Fifteen GCV recipients (13 with steroids and 2 with antibody) and 8 VGCV recipients (7 with steroids and 1 with antibody) were treated for rejection. Two patients in each cohort developed CMVD (4% in the GCV cohort vs. 5% in the VGCV cohort, p=1.0), including 1 CMV hepatitis in the GCV cohort and 1 CMV gastritis in the VGCV cohort. All CMVD cases occurred in the D+/ R-group and after completion of CMVD prophylaxis (113-261 days post-transplant). None of these 4 patients were treated for rejection before the onset of CMVD. No patients exhibited ANC < 500 /mm 3 during CMVD prophylaxis. Conclusions: Compared to oral GCV, low-dose VGCV appears equally efficacious and safe in the prevention of CMVD following LT. Our findings support the high-risk of D+/R-recipients and the concern for delayed-onset CMVD after completion of CMVD prophylaxis.  To compare the efficacy of preemptive therapy (guided by CMV antigenemia) with ganciclovir among liver transplant recipients pretreated with thymoglobulin or campath to that of standard immunosuppression.METHODS. We studied consecutive liver transplant recipients at our center from Jan 2001 to April 2003. From Jan -June 2001 patients received only postoperative maintenance immunosuppression with tacrolimus and prednisone (Group 1).From July 2001-Sept 2002 patients were pretreated with thymoglobulin 5mg/kg body weight (Group2) and as of Sept 2002 received pretreatment with 30 mg of alemtuzumab (Group 3). Both groups (Group 2 and 3) also received maintenance immunosuppression with tacrolimus. Significant CMV antigenemia was defined as presence of 1 positive cell/2x10 5 leukocytes in high risk (Donor +/ Recipient -) or ≥ 10 CMV positive cells/2x10 5 leukocytes in low risk group (Recipient + or Recipient/Donor-). All transplanted patients with significant antigenemia received preemptive therapy with 5mg/kg /day of IV ganciclovir titrated to renal function, continued until two antigenemia tests were negative.CMV disease was diagnosed histologically. RESULTS. Of 201 patients 65 belonged to Group 1, 64 to Group 2, and 72 to Group 3. The three groups did not differ in respect to sex, age, indication of transplantation, MELD score and donor or recipient CMV status. CMV antigenemia developed in 55 %( 36/65) in Group 1, 47 % ( 30/64) in Group 2 and 54 % (39/72) in Group 3 respectively (p=.5). Significant CMV antigenemia was noted in 22 % (14/65) in Group 1, 28 % ( 18/64) in Group 2 and 26% (19/72) in Group 3 respectively (p=.2). Recurrence of CMV antigenemia was found in one case each of Group 1 and Group 2. Positive CMV antigenemia occurred predominantly within a month of transplantation (Median 30 days; 25th-75 th = 19-50days). Median duration of positive CMV antigenemia was 7 days in each group (25 th -75 th = 3-21 days). Histologically proven CMV disease was noted in 1 patient in Group 1and 2 patients in Group 2. None of the patients in Group 3 developed histologically proven CMV disease.CONCLUSION.CMV antigenemia directed preemptive therapy with ganciclovir is comparable in preventing CMV disease at one year in liver transplant recipients pretreated with thymoglobulin or alemtuzumab Liver transplantation is considered the only curative treatment for HCC, because it simultaneously cures the malignant disease and the cirrhosis. However, due to the organ shortage and the increasing waiting time, intention to treat analyses showed a reduced efficacy of OLT, due to tumor progression and drop-out from the list (up to 20% in published series). TACE/TAE has been used as neo-adjuvant therapeutic option in patients with HCC in the waiting list for OLT, with conflicting results. In this study, we analyzed the outcome of a group of patients with HCC, treated with TACE/TAE during the waiting time for OLT. Patients: from July 1999 to July 2003 we treated with TACE/TAE 302 patients at our Institution, equal to 698 treatment sessions in total. Fifty-nine of them fitted our criteria for liver transplantation ("Milano" criteria) and were treated with 74 sessions of TACE/ TAE (1.2 treatments/pt) during the waiting time: 38 patients had single lesion < 5 cm, 12 patients had 2 or 3 lesions, max 3 cm. Nine patients fitted the criteria after reduction of the tumor size (HCC down-staging) with TACE/TAE. Results: Twenty-one patients underwent liver transplantation after a mean waiting time of 289 days (range 25-740); 3 patients died during the waiting time, due to liver failure, and 27 patients are still alive in the waiting list without tumor progression. There were 6 (10.2%) drop-outs because of tumor progression, with a cumulative probability of drop-out at 6, 12, 18 and 24 months of 3.9%, 7.1%, 12.5% and 17.1%, respectively. Out of the 9 down-staged patients, one had tumor progression and was excluded from the list, one died during the waiting time due to liver failure, 3 patients underwent liver transplantation, and 4 are still alive in the waiting list without tumor progression. Out of 21 transplanted patients (mean follow-up 11.4 months, +/-10.3), one single HCC recurrence occurred, 20 months after OLT. Conclusion: TACE/TAE seems to be an effective means to control tumor growth in patients with HCC awaiting OLT, and it allowed to achieve a low drop-out rate from the waiting list. It can be particularly helpful in centers where the pre-OLT waiting time is estimated to be long. The incidence of seizures (SZ) after liver transplant (LT) is reported to be 10-40% and are a major cause of morbidity. Treatment of seizures after LT is complicated by the fact that most anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) induce hepatic cytochrome P450,34A enzymes and interfere with immunosuppressant drug metabolism. The best treatment regimen for SZ after LT has yet to be defined. We retrospectively reviewed 532 LT cases performed between 1993 and 2003 for the incidence of and efficacy of treatment for, SZ after LT. Fifty one (10.0%) patients had SZ post LT of which 32 were treated with an AED and 19 were treated with benzodiazepines and/or a change in their immunosupressant regimen. The annual incidence rates varied between 4.5% and 14.7% with no discernable increasing or decreasing trend over time. Of the 32 who were treated with an AED, 11 remained on phenytoin at 30 days and 6 remained on levetiracetam at 30 days with the remaining15 having their AED discontinued within 30 days. In the phenytoin treated group, only 6 of 11 (55 %) remained seizure-free at 30 days while 6 of 6 (100%) in the levetiracetam group were seizure free at 30 days post-transplant (P<0.001). Patients who were treated with levetiracetam required significantly lower doses of cyclosporin (P=0.02) and FK-506 (one third to one half the comparable dose) to maintain therapeutic immunosupressant levels compared to patients who were treated with phenytoin. The frequency of rejection was similar (9% vs. 0%) in the phenytoin and levetiracetam groups. In our experience, SZ occur in approximately 10% of LT recipients. Treatment with levetiracetam, which does not induce the hepatic metabolism of various immunosuppressant drugs, is more efficacious and is associated with significantly lower doses of immunosuppressant medications and no increase in rejection episodes. Levetiracetam appears to be both efficacious and economically valuable as a treatment regime in LT patients. Liver disease, particularly from viral hepatitis, is a common co-morbidity in renal transplant recipients and has traditionally has been an important late cause of death.We examined the use and outcome of liver transplantation following kidney transplant in a national cohort. Methods Using SRTR/OPTN data, liver and liver/kidney transplant recipients from 1995 to 2001, who were previous recipients of a kidney alone, were identified. Unadjusted Kaplan-Meier patient and graft survivals were determined and compared by etiology of liver disease. Deaths and retransplantations were included as graft failures. In order to study those patients who only underwent liver transplantation for hepatic disease, patients with primary hyperoxaluria were excluded resulting in 143 patients who were included in the analysis. The annual number of liver and liver/kidney transplants in patients with previous kidney transplant remained relatively constant over the duration of the study, ranging from 10 to 21. Hepatitis C (HCV) was the underlying diagnosis in 35% of the recipients, hepatitis B in 9%, and either congenital hepatic fibrosis or polycystic liver disease in 26 %. Acute liver failure accounted for 11% of the cases. The primary cause of death was infection in 41% of patients, 5% died of renal failure. None were reported to have died of recurrent liver disease. The outcome of liver and liver/kidney transplantation after prior kidney transplantation is relatively poor when compared to primary liver recipients. The outcome is significantly worse in patients transplanted with HCV as compared to non-HCV disease. Future studies should focus on understanding the mechanisms accounting for these poor outcomes. Poster Board #-Session: P192-III Background: Recurrence of Hepatitis C (HepC) has been a most difficult dilemma in liver transplantation (OLT). Effect of immunosuppresion on recurrence of HepC including the use of steroid, mycofenolate mofetil(MMF), and IL-2 antibody has been reported with large discrepancies. Since 1999, we have been performing a prospective randomized study comparing immunusuppression protocols that includes steroid-free regimen in patients with HepC. The first 50 patients were randomized to Daclizumab+tacrolimus (FK) or Steroids +FK without preemptive antiviral strategy (Phase I) and we have had a mixed results (unpublished). We are currently conducting the second phase with a modified protocol including use of MMF and preemptive antiviral therapy. Here are our early results from the second phase of the study. Patients and Methods: OLT recipients with HepC were randomized to 2 treatment arms: Daclizumab+FK+MMF (study arm) and Steroids+FK+MMF (control arm). Study group received no steroids except for the treatment of biopsy proven rejection. Both arms received pre-emptive anti-viral therapy with Pegasys ® and ribavirin. Results: Twenty-six patients have been enrolled (10 in study arm and 16 in control). All patients are alive. One patient in the study arm had suspected profound neurological toxicity from tacrolimus and was withdrawn from the study. Incidences of rejection in the first 3 months were 0% in study arm and 40% in control arm. A patient in the study arm developed severe rejection after 6 months requiring OKT 3. This patient was crossed over to the steroid (control) arm. Eight have received protocol 1-year biopsy (6 in control 2 in study arm, Table) . Two patients in the control arm (33%) showed advanced fibrosis but none in the study arm. Comparing the common side effects of steroids (study vs control): hypertension (33% vs 63%), PTDM (11% vs 44%), and wound infection (22% vs 31%) (all of them, p=NS). Conclusions: OLT recipients with HepC tolerated steroid free protocol. There is a trend in lowering steroids related side effects in steroid-fee patients. However, its effect on HepC recurrence has yet to be determined until the completion of the study.  Hepatic artery (HA) stenosis is a common complication of post liver transplantation. Surgical reconstruction has been the first choice for treatment. Emerging interventional radiologic technique makes it possible to repair without surgery. The aim of this presentation is to evaluate current indication of HA stenting and outcome. Methods 23 patients underwent HA stent for HA stenosis between 1998 and 2003 in our institution. Origins of ESLD were Hepatitis C (n=15), Hepatitis B (n=2), Cryptogenic (n=2), Laennec's cirrhosis (n=1), α-1 anti-trypsin deficiency (n=1), Allagera syndrome (n=1) and polycystic liver (n=1). 14 patients were female and 9 were male. Age ranged from 21 to 61 year old (Mean 49). 8 patients (35%) had history of previous HA revision. 15 patients newly developed HA stenosis. Stenosis locations were anastomosis (n=13), distal (n=7) and proximal side (n=3). Patients were followed by DUS and Angiography. Charts were reviewed retrograde. Results 20 patients survived after the HA stenting procedure more than 2 months. 3 patients died from liver failure (n=2) and HA aneurysm. 20 patients were followed for mean 26±13 month (3-62 month). One of 20 patients died from renal failure 2 year after HA stenting. Post stenting anticoagulation was both of Aspirin and Plavix (n=9), Aspirin only (n=8), Plavix only (n=4) and none (n=2). The indication for angiography which found stenosis were abnormal DUS (n=11), follow up angiography post surgical HA revision (n=5), liver enzyme elevation (n=2), Routine follow up DUS post OLTx (n=2). Mean hospital days were 2.7 days (n=18). 10 patient's hepatic arteries were normal after stenting. However, 10 patients (43%) developed hepatic arterial complications again. 8 patients developed restenosis, total HA thrombosis (n=1) and left HA thrombosis (n=1). 8 patients of the 10 patients who developed recurrent problem were successfully treated interventionaly: re-stent (n=7) and dilation (n=1 Objective: There are scarce data relating donor brain injury to outcomes after heart transplantation. We tested the hypothesis that the duration of donor brain injury had an adverse effect on recipient rejection and mortality in pediatric heart transplantation. Methods: Ninety-three pediatric patients from 1997 to 2003 underwent orthotopic heart transplantation at our center. The donor and recipient medical records were reviewed. The primary outcomes were the number of rejection episodes and the time to first rejection. Secondary outcome was mortality. Results: Of the 93 recipients of cardiac allografts, 8 (9%) and 2 (2%) received second and third allografts respectively. Overall mortality for the group was 7% (6/93). Median time duration of donor brain injury to declaration of death, death to organ removal, and graft ischemia time were 38, 24, and 3.3 hours respectively. Cox regression analysis (adjusting for UNOS status, ventilator dependence, ECMO/VAD status, diagnosis of congenital heart disease, gender and CMV mismatches, and type of immunosuppression) demonstrated that recipients of donor hearts with relatively long periods from brain injury to death declaration (96 hours) or from death to organ removal (34 hours) had significantly lower rejection rates [HRs = 0.3 (p=0.01) and 0.5 (p=0.05) for injury and death times, respectively]. In this series, prolonged donor heart ischemia (4.6 hours) did not impact rejection rates. The longer duration of neurohormonal discharge and stress related to donor brain injury and death, may attenuate factors in the recipient associated with rejection. Further study of these phenomena are warranted. Purpose: Traditionally advanced age has been considered a contraindication for heart transplantation (Tx). However, this concept has been challenged, with patient selection relying on physiologicage rather than chronologic age. The following study was conducted to determine the impact of advanced recipient age on postoperative outcomes following Tx. Methods: Between January 1 1990 and August 27 2003, 928 patients underwent first time cardiac transplantation. For the purpose of this analysis, patients were stratified according to age (< 65 years vs. 65 years) and early and late outcomes were compared. Results: Among 928 transplant recipients, 101 patients were 65 years of age or older while 827 were younger than 65 years. Mean follow-up was 4.63 years (range 6 months to 11 years). Survival rate for older recipients was 95%, 91%, 89%, 84%, 80%, and 74% at 1 -, 6 months, 1-, 3-, 5-, and 7 years. Survival for younger recipients was 99%, 91%, 89%, 83%, 77%, and 51% for the same time periods (early phase: p=0.94, late phase: p=0.53). Early on older patients had a greater number of readmissions when compared to the younger cohort (p<0.0001). However, readmission due to infection was similar between the two study groups (Early phase: p=0.77, Constant phase: p=0.57). Conclusion: Orthotopic heart transplantation in older patients is feasible with long term survivals similar to younger cohorts. Given these data selected patients 65 years or older should not be denied orthotopic heart transplantation. INTRODUCTION: Brain death (BD) induces an inflammatory and procoagulant phenotype which can lead to microvasculature dysfunction and activation of platelets perfusing the donor heart. Point of care assays for objectively assessing organ viability were established in a dog model and the clinical relevance confirmed in human hearts. METHODS: BD was induced in dogs by inflation of an intracranial foley balloon (n=6). After 1 hour, BD hearts were assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) for ICAM-1, e-selectin, thrombomodulin and tissue factor (scored 0-3) and compared to normal hearts (control, n=10). Endothelial function was assessed using hyperemic flow response in the LAD after a 10 second of occlusion (transit time flowmeter) and % transgraft change (aorta-coronary sinus) in platelet function, measured using TEG-α (see fig) and whole blood aggregometry (Ω). Ten consecutive human heart donors underwent a similar analysis to assess correlation with primary graft dysfunction after transplantation, defined as the postoperative need for mechanical support. Results: IHC showed an increase in tissue factor (2.5±0.6 vs. 1.6±0.9) and decrease in thrombomodulin ( Background. To increase the number of livers available for transplantation a non-heart beating donor (NHBD) liver transplant program was started after obtaining hospital ethical committee approval. Methods. Controlled donors with a warm ischaemia of less than 30 minutes were considered, preferably less than 65 years of age. A 5-minute 'stand off ' period was observed from asystole to skin incision. A super-rapid technique with aortic and superior mesenteric vein perfusion was utilised for the retrieval. Methods used to assess the suitability of these livers for transplantation included serum liver function tests, morphological and histological assessment and hepatocyte viability testing. Results. In the first 2-½ years of the programme 38 livers were retrieved from NHBDs. Of these 21 were considered suitable for transplantation. A further 17 were not used due liver appearance in 12 (steatosis in 9, abnormal consistency in 3), prolonged hypoxia and hypotension post withdrawal of therapy in 4 and poor perfusion in one. Mean donor age was 40.5 years (range 0.75-67), 21 were males. Cause of death was head trauma in 6 donors, intracranial bleed in 16 and anoxic / ischaemic brain injury in 16. Mean warm ischaemia time (systolic BP < 50 mmHg to aortic perfusion) was 14.1 minutes (7-31). Twenty-two patients were transplanted (one liver split for 2 grafts) and the indications included viral hepatitis in 10, familial amyloid polyneuropathy in 2, primary sclerosing cholangitis in 2, acute liver failure in 2, autoimmune hepatitis in 2 and, alcoholic liver disease, cryptogenic cirrhosis, factor VII deficiency and hepatoblastoma in one each. The average age of the recipients was 37.6 years (0.7 -72 years) and 13 were males. All grafts had good early function except one right lobe split graft. There were three deaths due to ischaemic brain injury, chronic rejection and multi-organ failure following re-transplantation for primary non function respectively. One graft was lost to hepatic artery thrombosis and the patient was retransplanted. Overall patient and graft survival is 86% and 82% respectively at a mean follow up of 12 months.Conclusion. Grafts from controlled NHBDs should be considered for organ donation. The procedure is demanding on staff, time and resources. Early results suggest that this is a significant new source of grafts but careful donor selection and short cold ischaemia are mandatory. Introduction. Although organ preservation techniques have improved over the years, prolonged cold ischemia time (CIT) has been shown to be detrimental to deceased donor liver transplant outcomes. Anecdotal evidence suggests that this effect has become less significant over time. In order to test this assertion, we analyzed both the shortterm and the long-term impact of CIT on graft survival in 4 separate eras. Methods. Using Cox regression models adjusted for several donor and recipient factors, we estimated the impact of CIT on both short-term (0-90 days post-transplant) and long-term graft failure. For the long-term analysis, only grafts functioning for a minimum of 90 days were included, and the relative risk of failure within 3 years post-transplant was estimated. Multiorgan, split/reduced and heterotopic transplants were excluded. The distribution of CIT among the transplants still functioning at 90 days was similar to that of all transplants. The 4 transplant eras were chosen as follows: 1988-1991 (N=9231); 1992-1995 (N=13155); 1996-1999 (N=15670); 2000-2001 (N=8449) . With the exception of the earliest era, after adjusting for donor and recipient factors, CIT had a statistically significant effect on outcome in the early post-transplant period (see table) . Further, this effect appears to be increasing over time. CIT did not have an impact on long-term outcomes in any of the four eras. Conclusions. Extended CIT continues to have a negative impact on liver transplant outcomes, even more so in recent years. Recipients of extended CIT livers should be carefully chosen in order to minimize short-term graft losses. Introduction: Synthesis is one of the most relevant functions of the liver, and could be altered when the liver is suffering the stress of transplantation. Objective: To evaluate the function of synthesis of the liver from aged donors in the postoperative period. Material and methods: Case-control study with 65 liver transplants with a graft from donors older than 60 yrs of age, and 65 cases from younger donors. All were elective, primary, whole organ. 76 variables were analysed to evaluate comparability of groups. There were no differences between groups except for cause of death and levels of hepatic enzymes of the donor (lowers in the aged donor group). The reconstruction of main bile duct continuity was performed with end-to-end anastomoses with a T-tube inside in all these cases. Daily postoperative bile production was measured through collection in the T-tube drainage bag. Daily blood samples were collected during fist 15 days after transplantation. Initial graft function was quantitatively measured with the Hospital Clinic of Barcelona Score. Data were compared with the student's t test and chi-square with Fisher's correction when appropriate. A value of p< 0.05 was considered significant. Results: There were no differences between groups for blood transfusion, Haemonetic use, plasma transfusion (5.1±0.3 vs 4.9±0.4, p=0.958) and platelet transfusion during surgery. There were no differences between groups in the level of AST and ALT, bilirrubin, GGT, AF, or albumin. There were no differences between groups in primary non-function, graft dysfunction or graft loss during fist month after transplantation. There were no differences between groups for the bile production at the moment of implantation. Protrombine time and bile production were lower in the group of aged donors during first week after transplantation. Differences disappeared at 15-day. Although the total number of cases with intrabdominal bleeding was not different between groups (6.2% vs 12.7%, p=0.238), there were more postoperative laparotomies because of bleeding in the group of aged donors (1 vs 8, p<0.018). Although global evaluation of graft function of the grafts from aged donors showed no differences when compared with younger donors, more intensive care in the replacement of liver function synthesis products could be necessary after liver transplantation with grafts from donors over 60 years of age. Poster Board #-Session: P205-III Introduction : Ischemic preconditioning (IPC) protects the liver against cold and warm ischemia and improves graft function following transplantation in animals. No clinical trials of IPC have been reported. Therefore, a randomized prospective trial of safety and efficacy of five min of hepatic IPC was carried out in human cadaver donors. Methods:Donors of 62 adult recipients at our center were randomized 1:1 either to standard (STD) recovery or to IPC. Hepatic hilum was clamped for five min soon after laparotomy and before intraperitoneal dissection. Primary end points of graft injury and function were peak aspartate (pAST) and alanine transferases (pALT) (U/L) and international normalized ratio of prothrombin (pINR) after transplant. Results:Sixty two donors were enrolled; 28 to STD recovery and 34 to IPC. Age, gender, body mass index (BMI), and % donors with macrosteatosis were not significantly different between the two groups. All continuous data represent means +/-SD. Heart rate, mean blood pressure and pressor use in operating room did not change significantly in IPC group before and after IPC vs. STD group. Recipient age, disease severity score and cold ischemia were similar in both groups. The mean warm ischemia was significantly longer in the IPC group. Age(yrs) MELD CI (min) WI (min) pAST pALT pINR STD 53+/-8 20+/-7 415+/-87 37+/-6 1651+/-1313 1214+/-1257 2.2+/-0.5 IPC 49+/-10 19+/-8 384+/-92 41+/-6 2159+/-2504 1510+/-2090 2.3+/-0.8 All grafts functioned immediately and one patient in STD group was retransplanted within 6 mths. Histological parameters were similar between IPC and STD groups. Median length of stay in IPC recipients was 8 vs.10 days in STD. This difference was not significant. Six mth graft and patient survival was 91 in IPC vs. 79 and 82% in STD, respectively, not significantly different. Although we intended to enroll 126 patients, the study was terminated due to the apparent lack of benefit from IPC. Conclusions: 1. Five minutes of IPC in cadaver liver donors is safe and does not cause splanchnic congestion, when performed immediately after opening the abdomen. 2. Five min of IPC did not decrease allograft injury or improve function. 3. Alternative protocols of IPC must be considered, such as longer intervals of hilar clamping. Composite tissue allotransplantation (CTA) is an emerging field requiring an amalgamation of microsurgical technique and immunosuppressive management. Although the technical aspects of CTA have followed logically from replantation, the discipline remains immunologically undefined. Furthermore, of the immunosuppressants available for use in CTA, many have human specificity and cannot be evaluated in small animals. Based on an evaluation of specimens from transplanted human limbs, we have recently introduced a classification system to standardize CTA rejection. We have shown that vasculitis, dermitis, myositis and perineural involvement can be seen during rejection, but given the sporadic availability of human tissue, the progression of the immune response remains undefined. To permit systematic study of the progression of CTA rejection, we have established a non-human primate (NHP) model. NHPs provide anatomical, antigenic and immunological similarity to humans, and can be used to test most human-specific agents. Limb transplantation in NHPs could markedly impair their social development. We have therefore designed our model to incorporate all elements of a limb CTA yet leave no functional deficit even in the case of rejection or excision. Our model involves a transplanted radial forearm flap including bone, muscle, nerve, tendon, artery, vein and skin. To validate this model, 5 animals have undergone autotransplantation and 8 have received allografts with and without immunosuppression (subtherapeutic tacrolimus, mycophenolate and prednisone to allow for rejection to be temporally characterized). Donor-recipient pairs for CTA were selected based on MHC non-identity, blood type and size. All procedures were well tolerated by all animals with no adverse functional consequences. The model allows for protocol biopsies to be performed without threatening the viability of the flap. Autografts showed no evidence of rejection and served as the baseline for CTA comparison. Nonimmunosuppressed allografts showed an infiltrate initially arising within 3 days in the perivenular tissue leading to graft congestion and failure without a prominent dermal infiltrate. Subtherapeutically immunosuppressed animals rejected in 2 weeks with a marked dermal lymphocytic infiltrate similar in magnitude and distribution to human cases seen to date. Thus, we have established a NHP model for CTA that is responsive to immunosuppression and allows for the systematic evaluation of CTA histology and therapeutic maneuvers to improve allograft survival. Poster Board #-Session: P207-III Chronic rejection of the graft after lung transplantation is characterized by massive fibrosis of the small airways. Stable lung allograft outcome has been correlated with the persistence of donor-derived leukocytes including T cells and alveolar macrophages in the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). Since γδ T cells have also been shown to be important for the homeostasis of the epithelium we investigated their possible protective role in maintaining lung epithelium using the model of bleomycin-induced fibrosis. Epithelial injury was induced by intratracheal instillation of 0.1 U bleomycin in C57Bl/ 6 wild type and γδ T cell knockout mice. Cellular analysis of the BAL leukocytes was done using flow cytometry (FACS Calibur). To monitor epithelial proliferation miniosmotic pumps containing BrdU were implanted subcutaneaously. Immunohistochemistry and morphometric analysis on 30 µm section was used to asses the number of proliferating cells per volume of epithelium. Analysis of the cellular infiltration into the airways revealed a significant reduction in total number of macrophages and T cells that migrated into the airways in the γδ-TcR knockout mice suggesting retention of these cells within the lung parenchym. Histological analysis of lung sections revealed that bleomycin-treated C57Bl/6 wildtype mice had multifocal and random areas of consolidation of the pulmonary parenchyma. In contrast C57Bl/6 γδ TcR knockout mice showed a diffuse and homogeneous consolidation of the pulmonary parenchyma throughout all lung lobes. The "volume density of lesion" revealed a significant greater volume of lesion in the γδ TcR knockout mice than in the C57Bl/6 wild-type strain at day 14. Evaluation of the epithelial repair using BrdU incorporation showed that the number of proliferating epithelial cells in the airways was significantly higher in the first week, but significantly lower in the second week in the C57Bl/6 wild-type mice compared to the C57Bl/6 γδ TcR knockout mice. Conclusion: These results suggest that γδ T cells induce early epithelial repair following epithelial injury. Retention of donor-derived γδ T cells may therefore protect the grafted lung from ischemia-reperfusion injury and alloimmune insult, thus partly accounting for the better graft outcome in transplant recipients with persisting donor passenger leukocytes. PURPOSE: Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in the gene encoding ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM), characterized by progressive cerebellar degeneration, variable immunodeficiency, and extreme radiation sensitivity. Recurrent sino-pulmonary infections due to immunodeficiency are a major cause of mortality in A-T patients. In mice, mutation of Atm leads to a phenotype that recapitulates many of the symptoms of A-T. In this study we investigated whether the T cell deficiencies observed in this model were due to defects in the thymic microenvironment in which T cells develop, or defects intrinsic to T cell progenitors. METHODS: Effects of thymic environment were examined by reconstituting irradiated wild-type C3H (H-2 k ) mice with Atm -/-(H-2 b ) or wild-type (Atm +/+ ) bone marrow cells. Effects of progenitor intrinsic defects on T cell development were examined using a clinically applicable conditioning regimen to engraft wild-type bone marrow in Atm -/recipients. To measure functional immunity, we compared the ability of C3H/Atm -/chimeras and Atm +/+ controls to reject skin allografts. RESULTS: Both Atm -/and Atm +/+ bone marrow cells engrafted in irradiated C3H recipients, resulting in greater than 99% donor type multi-lineage chimerism. Analysis of T cell development in the thymus of bone marrow transplant recipients revealed defects in the ability of T cell progenitors derived from Atm -/-HSCs to develop. Treatment of Atm -/recipients with anti-T cell antibodies, and a single dose of cyclophosphamide was sufficient to result in greater than 99% donor type multi-hematopoietic lineage chimerism. Unmanipulated Atm -/mice (H-2 b ) exhibited delayed rejection of skin allografts from allogeneic B6.CH-2 bm1 mice (Median survival time (MST) = 17 days, n =7) when compared to normal littermate Atm +/+ controls (MST= 11 days, n=5, P=0.002). In contrast, Atm -/mice reconstituted with wild-type C3H bone marrow were able to reject skin allografts with the same kinetics observed for Atm +/+ mice receiving conditioning alone (MST=13 vs. 12 days respectively, P=0.52). These data suggest that replacement of Atm -/hematopoietic compartment by bone marrow transplantation can overcome the immunodeficiency observed in Atm -/mice. CONCLUSIONS: We show that the replacement of the hematopoietic stem cell compartment in Atm -/mice using a non-myeloablative host conditioning regimen can overcome the immune deficiencies observed in these mice. Therefore, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation may prove to be of therapeutic benefit in A-T patients. Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality from allogenic stem cell transplantation. We have previously shown that a CD8 + /TCRlymphoid bone marrow population (Facilitating Cell, FC) can promote engraftment of allogenic hematopoietic stem cells (SC) in mice without inducing GVHD. Phenotypically, FCs express CD8 as well as CD3 in association with TCRβ and a unique 33 kD protein (FCp33). FC has low-level expression of co-stimulatory m-RNA (CD28 and CD40L) but high abundance of Il2 and IL10. Also, FCs express various markers (CD44, c-kit, Thy1.2 and CD25) common to developing T-cells. Considering the phenotypic similarity of FC to prothymocytes, experiments were designed to elucidate 1) the role of thymus in FC mediated allogenic bone marrow transplantation and 2) possible production of other mediators (TGFβ, IFNγ and NO synthetase) known to assist in allogenic transplantation through immuno-suppression. Thirty thousand male FCs (CD8 + /TCR dim/-) and ten thousand female SCs (SCA1 + /c-Kit + /Lin -) were inoculated into lethally irradiated (950 cGy) female allogenic and syngenic mice. Thymocytes, splenocytes and bone marrow cells were collected on day 5 post transplantation. Cells were further subjected to genomic DNA PCR for the male Y chromosome (SRY) to allow tracking of the donor FC. Due to low number of FC in the recipients, exact quantification of FC migration to the various organs failed when a real time PCR was used. Using a 32 P labeled primer however, allowed us to obtain SRY (FC) and GUS specific PCR product in allogenic and syngenic recipients. In allogenic recipients, the highest amount of FC specific (SRY) PCR product was detected in the spleen followed by thymus and bone marrow. In syngenic recipients, thymus had more FC specific (SRY) PCR product than spleen followed by bone marrow. The importance of the thymus in this setting is further underscored by the fact that FC function is abrogated in thymectomyzed allogenic recipients. In separate RT-PCR experiments, expression of TGFβ, IFNγ and NO synthetase was found to be higher in FC than in Tcells. These data demonstrate for the first time that the thymus plays an important role in FC function. These findings also support the notion that FCs may be specially equipped to facilitate allogeneic SC transplantation without inducing GVHD through various immuno-regulatory mediators. ( Background: Multiple transfusions, previous transplants or pregnancies cause sensitization to MHC antigens which limits access to transplantion. However, in some cases, donor specific transfusion (DST) induces tolerance and prolongs graft survival. DSTs between HLA class I and/or II haplo-mismatch combinations induce long-term allograft acceptance in humans. Here we examined the effect of DS spleen cell injection with single MHC class I (HLA-A2) discordance between donor and recipient on humoral responses in an HLA-A2 transgenic mouse model. Methods: Spleen cells (1x10 5 -1x10 7 cells) of HLA-A2 transgenic C57BL/6 mice were injected IV in C57BL/ 6 mice (n=10) at week 1, 2 and 3 to induce sensitization to HLA-A2. Blood was collected every week for 2 months after the injection. These mice were challenged with 1x10 5 HLA-A2 transgenic spleen cells at week 20 after the initial sensitization followed by collection of blood every week for 1 month post-challenge. Anti-HLA-A2 IgG and IgM antibody levels were measured by ELISA to determine if mice were sensitized or developed unresponsiveness to HLA-A2. A human anti-HLA class I and class II ELISA (One Lambda) was modified for detection of mouse anti-HLA-A2 IgM and IgG. Results: Anti-HLA class I IgM and IgG, but not anti-HLA class II, were detected in all mice which received the first 3 injections, while non-treated mice were negative for both antibodies. The level of anti-class I IgM peaked at week 2 and decreased promptly (74±9.1, 77±9.6, 311±196 and 127±44 arbitrary units at week 0,1,2,3 post-sensitization, respectively). The anti-class I IgG level began to increase at week 2 and reached peak levels at 3 to 4 weeks, then decreased gradually (78±24, 216±161, 516±253, 512±232 and 417±135 at week 1,2,3,4,7 respectively). These results suggest that mice were sensitized to HLA-A2. However, no anti-class I IgM or IgG were detected in these mice after the challenge at week 20 (IgM: 81±18, 88±16, 81±12, 86±11; IgG: 374±126, 308±129, 305±116, 359±167 at week 19,20,21,22 respectively), suggesting induction of non-responsiveness against HLA-A2. Confirmation of tolerance induction in these mice is underway using skin transplantation. Conclusions: 1) Donor specific spleen cell injection induces antibody unresponsiveness in an HLA-A2 transgenic mouse model with a single MHC class I (HLA-A2) discordance between donor and recipient. 2) The mechanisms responsible are unclear, but initial sensitization appears to be important in development of antibody unresponsiveness. Introduction: Costimulatory signals and growth factor signals are of central importance in T cell activation and T cell effector function. However, it is unclear how these signals interact with each other in regulating CD4+ T cell activation and CD4+ dependent allograft rejection. A better understanding of the potential crosstalk between costimulatory pathways and growth factor signaling during CD4-mediated rejection is important in transplantation research. The aim of this study is to evaluate the role of CD28/CD154 costimulation and growth factor signals in the CD4-mediated allograft rejection. Materials and methods: Fully mismatched DBA/2 skin allograft was transplanted onto the wt C57BL/6 mice and B6.CD8 -/knockout (CD8KO) mice. Graft survival was determined in the absence or presence of CTLA-4Ig/MR1 treatment (0.5mg/each, i.p., given on days 0, 1, 3) to block CD28/CD154 costimulation and/or rapamycin (RAPA) treatment (3mg/kg, i.p., given on days 0, 1, 2, then every other day for 14 days) to block growth factor signaling. Also, the DBA/2 skin allograft was transplanted onto CD28 -/-/CD154 -/double knock out (CD28/CD154DKO) mice and treated with RAPA, and graft survival was determined and compared with the wt controls. Conclusion: Our data suggest that CD28/CD154 costimulatory signals and RAPA-sensitive growth factor signals have overlapping roles in determining the effector function of CD4+ T cells, CD28/CD154 signals confer growth factor blockade resistance rejection and blocking CD28/CD154 signals or genetic mutation of CD28/CD154 molecules renders CD4-mediated rejection sensitive to RAPA. Valujskikh, 1 Peter S. Heeger. 1 1 Immunology and The Glickman Urologic Institute, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH. Interactions between the innate and the adaptive immune systems are poorly understood. Notably, murine viral infections activate recipient DCs to produce IFNa and IL-12, and induce a low frequency of T cell precursors (1/10 5 -1/10 6 ) to differentiate and markedly expand (up to 10,000 fold) into a potent high frequency effector repertoire capable of curing the infection. The frequency of minor antigen reactive, anti-male T cell precursors in female C57BL6 (B6, H-2 b ) mice is similar to the frequency of anti-viral T cell precursors in these animals. Still, transplantation of male heart grafts into syngeneic female recipients induces only a modest expansion (20-100 fold) of effector T cells that do not mediate rejection. To better understand the influence of innate cytokines on the effector T cell repertoire in this model, we transplanted male B6 hearts into female B6 recipients and administered recombinant IL-12, IFNa or control PBS. 7/10 mice treated with 1 mcg IL-12 on day 3 posttransplant acutely rejected the male heart grafts (MST 15 d). None of the control male hearts were rejected (MST >60 d, n=8). Syngeneic female hearts transplanted into female recipients and treated with IL-12 were not rejected (MST >60d) suggesting that the effect of the IL-12 was to activate the anti-male T cell repertoire. All heart grafts in IL-12-treated recipients exhibited histology consistent with acute rejection. We next performed recall IFNg ELISPOT assays using recipient spleen cells isolated on d 7 and 14 posttransplant to directly assess the effects of IL-12 on the donor-reactive immune repertoire. IL-12 specifically induced a10 fold increase in the numbers of anti-donor CD4 and CD8 T cells following graft placement (1000-2000 anti-male IFNg producers per million) compared to controls (100-300 per million n=3-6 per group, p < 0.05). In contrast to the marked effects of IL-12 on graft outcome, exogenous IFNa did not induce clinical or histologic evidence of male heart graft rejection (MST>30d, n=3) and there was no effect on the recipients' anti-male immune repertoire. The findings demonstrate that minor antigen disparate male heart grafts can be rejected by syngeneic females if sufficient innate immune signals, particularly IL-12, are present to fully expand/activate the anti-graft T cell repertoire. Further definition of the relevant links between innate and adaptive immunity in cardiac transplantation could provide novel targets for controlling the anti-graft immune responses and ultimately prolonging graft survival. Allo-immune activation is one of the most significant post transplant events, which results in increased expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Our studies have demonstrated that the immunosuppressive agents cyclosporine (CsA), tacrolimus (TAC) and sirolimus (SRL) induce expression of cyclin inhibitor p21, implicating it to be a unifying mediator of their anti-proliferative effects. Cyclin inhibitor p21 plays a unique role in cell cycle regulation. Therefore, we hypothesized that cyclins and cyclin inhibitor p21WAF1/CIP1 are key components of allo-immune activation and inflammation. In vitro and in vivo alloantigen and mitogen stimulation of lymphocytes results in increased expression of cyclins (D3, G and E), IL-2 and pro-inflammatory cytokines, which was inhibited by cyclosporine. Lymphocytes from p21WAF1/CIP1 -/-mice exhibited augmented response to allogeneic and mitogenic stimuli. The over-expression of p21WAF1/CIP1 inhibited circulating and intra-graft expression of proinflammatory cytokines and prolonged graft survival in a rat heart transplant model. Therefore, p21 can potentially inhibit lymphocyte proliferation and alloimmune activation similar to immunosuppressive drugs. In this study, we also provide evidence that recombinant p21 protein inhibits lymphocyte proliferation by entering into cells and localizes in side nucleus, interact with transcription factors nuclear factor-kB (NF-kB), and nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFATc and NFATp) and also by inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokines. The results were compared with immunosuppressive drugs; CsA, TAC and SRL currently used to treat organ transplant recipients. Our studies provide evidence that recombinant p21 protein is a novel and viable alternate strategy to achieve immunosuppression. Background: The adaptor protein SLP-76 is critical in linking proximal T cell receptor signaling events to downstream second messengers. Recruitment of SLP-76 to glycolipid-enriched microdomains (GEMs) through its constitutive association with the adaptor protein Gads is required for generation of a productive signal. We have developed a polypeptide fragment of SLP-76 that includes the proline-rich Gads binding site; expression of this fragment in the Jurkat T cell line acts in a dominant negative fashion through blocking the association of SLP-76 and Gads. The goal of these studies is to evaluate the effects of expressing this dominant negative peptide on T cell development and T cell function in an in vivo setting. Methods: A retroviral vector containing a chimeric cDNA including a 150bp region of SLP-76 fused with the fluorochrome DS-RED2 was generated (hereafter termed the Gads Binding Fragment or GBF). Bone marrow infected with the GBF retrovirus was then used in the generation of radiation bone marrow chimeras. Single cell suspensions from thymus, spleen and lymph node were evaluated for CD4 and CD8 populations. Functional studies to evaluate calcium flux and CD69 upregulation following T cell receptor (TCR) crosslinking were preformed using FACS. Results: In radiation chimeras expressing the GBF, total thymocyte cell number was reduced. There was impaired development of single positive thymocytes with a decrease in the CD4+CD8-to CD4-CD8+ ratio. In response to TCR stimulation, there was decreased calcium flux in both the double positive and single positive subpopulations. Analysis of peripheral lymphoid organs demonstrated a severe decrease in the number and proportion of both CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes. Conclusions: Blockade of the interaction between SLP-76 and Gads adaptor proteins can be achieved in vivo through expression of the GBF and results in impaired thymic development and T lymphocyte function. These findings suggest that conditional expression of the GBF in mature T lymphocytes may allow for modulation of in vivo immune responses. BACKGROUND: Manipulation of classic costimulatory pathways such as the B7family (CD80/86)-CD28 or CD40-CD154 pathways has been shown to modulate immune responses and to promote tolerance induction. More recently, new "alternative" costimulatory molecules, such as the B7-family programmed death-1 ligands (PD-L)1/ B7-H1 and PD-L2/B7-DC, have been suggested to play a role in determining the outcome of immune responses, including graft rejection. We have investigated the expression and function of these alternative costimulatory molecules on dendritic cells (DC) obtained from the liver (an inherently tolerogenic organ), spleen, or bone marrow. METHODS: DC mobilized in vivo with the DC hemopoietin Flt3 ligand were isolated from the livers and spleens of C57BL/10J mice while bone marrow (BM) DC were generated in vitro by culture in GM-CSF or GM-CSF+IL-4. Freshly-isolated DC or DC stimulated with the Toll receptor ligands LPS or CpG were analyzed for expression of PD-L1 and PD-L2 by flow cytometric analysis, for naïve T cell (C3H/HeJ) allostimulatory activity (MLR, in the absence or presence of neutralizing anti-PD-L mAbs), and cytokine production. RESULTS: In vitro-propagated "immature" BMDC constitutively and differentially expressed these ligands depending on the presence of IL-4. Freshly-isolated liver and splenic DC expressed low constitutive levels of PD-L1, with higher levels on splenic DC, while PD-L2 was not detected. Upon stimulation of hepatic and splenic DC with LPS or CpG, expression of both ligands was upregulated to similar levels. Hepatic DC were poorer allostimulators in comparison to splenic DC when freshly-isolated and upon stimulation with LPS. This differential allostimulatory capacity was lost when hepatic and splenic DC were triggered with CpG. Blockade of PD-L1 and PD-L2 with specific mAbs increased T cell proliferation induced by hepatic or splenic DC in MLR, with hepatic DC requiring a greater amount of blockade in comparison to splenic DC. CONCLUSIONS: These data provide the first description of expression of PD-L1/2 on freshly-isolated and stimulated DC from liver and secondary lymphoid tissue. The upregulation of these inhibitory molecules upon stimulation and their ability to regulate T cell responses suggests that they may play a key role in modulation of immune reactivity, including that induced by liver transplantation. Transplanted solid organs are placed in stressful conditions that can illicit innate immune responses from sources such as natural killer (NK) cells. Using a rat model of orthotopic liver transplantation, we have previously observed that a significant population of recipient NK cells infiltrate allografts. As an effector cell, NK cells likely contribute to the graft cytokine environment and may mediate cytotoxicity against stressed or foreign cells. To better understand the role of these infiltrating NK cells, we sought to characterize receptors expressed by these cells and determine what functions these receptors may mediate during transplantation. We identified and cloned the rat homolog to the human NK activation receptor, NKp30, directly from rejecting liver allografts. Rat NKp30 (rNKp30) mRNA is constitutively expressed in primary rat NK cells. RNKp30 RNA expression was detected specifically in allografts, but not in syngeneic grafts nor cyclosporine-treated allografts by Northern blot analysis. These data suggest that NKp30 may affect transplantation. In this report we characterized the expression of rNKp30 and its putative ligand(s). NK cell receptor diversity may contribute to effective immunity. To determine the variance of rNKp30, rNKp30 cDNA was cloned from multiple rat strains. Sequence analysis identified five single-nucleotide polymorphisms. To examine the cellular localization of rNKp30, we generated antibodies and determined that rNKp30 is expressed on the cell surface of transfected cells by flow cytometry and fluorescent microscopy. Immunoprecipitation and Western blot assays of either tunicamycin-treated or endoglycosidase-treated rNKp30 transfected cells reveal that this receptor varies in its glycosylation pattern of N-linked carbohydrates. Western blot analysis of labeled membrane proteins demonstrates that all glycosylated forms of rNKp30 are transported to the surface. These carbohydrate molecules may prove important for ligand recognition. Putative rNKp30 ligand expression was determined by flow cytometry on cells stained with an rNKp30-Fc fusion protein. Putative ligands are expressed by rodent cell lines, Nb2 and Yac1, the rat hepatoma line, FaO, and a subpopulation of primary rat peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Further studies characterizing rNKp30 and identification of its ligand will help elucidate the role of NK receptors in transplant immunology. Introduction:Transcriptional profiling of gene expression by microarray analysis during the allograft response is a powerful approach in the characterization of the molecular processes responsible for transplant rejection. Microarray analysis was utilized to identify genes that changed significantly in response to allograft rejection. Methods: Thirty-two heterotopic rat heart transplants were performed. Sixteen allografts (Wistar-Furth to Lewis) and 16 isografts (Lewis to Lewis). Four rats in each group were sacrificed on days 1, 3, 5 and 7. Messenger RNA expression in transplanted rat hearts was examined by cDNA microarray analysis using the Affymetrix RG_U34 gene chip, representing 30,000 sequences. Subsequent fold change analysis was performed comparing isografted left ventricle (LV) to allografted LV. Results: One gene that changed significantly during allograft rejection was secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor (SLPI). SLPI is part of the inflammatory response serving to minimize local tissue damage and cell necrosis through inactivation of leukocyte serine proteases produced by infiltrating leukocytes during graft rejection. Fold change analysis showed that compared to isografted left ventricle, expression of SLPI was higher in allografted LV by factors of 12 fold, 52 fold and 10 fold on days 3, 5, and 7 posttransplant, respectively. There was no significant fold change between the two groups on day 1 post-transplant. To confirm the microarray data, immunohistochemistry was performed on corresponding left ventricles showing an increase in SLPI protein in allografted tissue compared to isografted tissue for days 3, 5, and 7 post-transplant. In addition to the expected expression of SLPI in neutrophils and macrophages, SLPI is also seen in the cardiac myocytes which is a novel finding. Conclusion:This study shows that SLPI is upregulated in allograft rejection. SLPI expression in myocytes suggests a mechanism of protection from tissue damaging proteases. Serine protease inhibitors have been shown to reduce myocardial necrosis in a rabbit model of heart transplant and therefore may be useful therapeutic agents to enhance the body's control of tissue damage associated with transplant rejection. B cell lymphomas associated with Epstein Barr virus (EBV) infection remain a serious complication in immunocompromised individuals, including iatrogenically immunosuppressed transplant recipients. EBV-specific cytotoxic T cells prevent the outgrowth of activated, proliferating B lymphoblasts in immunocompetent individuals through induction of apoptosis. We have previously shown that EBV+ B cell lymphomas derived from patients with post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) show differential sensitivity to FasL-mediated apoptosis, and complete resistance to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis. Based on these findings, we sought to determine whether EBV itself could modulate apoptosis through dedicated death receptors in infected B cell lymphomas. Unlike uninfected control cells, BJAB lymphoma cells latently infected with the B95.8 strain of EBV (BJAB_B95) are completely resistant to apoptosis triggered through Fas or the TRAIL receptors DR4 and DR5. However, BJAB_B95 cells remain sensitive to etoposide-and staurosporine-induced cell death, indicating mitochondrial-dependent pathways of apoptosis are intact. Flow cytometry shows moderately decreased expression of Fas at the cell surface in BJAB_B95 compared with BJAB, whereas the expression of TRAIL receptors is unchanged. Western blot analysis reveals impaired processing and activation of caspases 8 and 3 following death receptor engagement in BJAB_B95 cells. However, concomitant treatment with cycloheximide restores caspase activity and sensitizes BJAB_B95 cells to both FasL-and TRAIL-mediated apoptosis, suggesting the translation of inhibitory protein(s) driven by latent EBV infection confers resistance to death receptor apoptosis in EBV-infected BJAB cells. Furthermore, expression of LMP1 in BJAB cells does not affect FasL/TRAIL sensitivity, demonstrating the expression of this single viral gene is not sufficient for establishing apoptosis resistance. Alternatively, we have developed reagents for silencing various EBV latent genes using RNA interference to determine which EBV gene is necessary for mediating resistance to FasL-and TRAIL-driven apoptosis. In summary, we conclude that EBV itself can protect latently infected host B cells from death receptor-dependent apoptosis. Determining how EBV infection contributes to this apoptosis resistance and which latent genes are involved may aid in the treatment of various EBV-associated neoplasms. Poster Board #-Session: P220-III We have developed a protocol for down-regulating antibody to donor HLA (DSA), permitting successful transplantation of patients with DSA. In 49 patients treated, 63% had no DSA at the end of treatment while 73% sitll had Ab to 3rd party HLA. At a mean follow-up time of 13 mos., 89% of patients had eliminated DSA but only 19% had no 3rd party Ab. The differences were highly significant (P<0.001) at both time periods. Presence/absence of antibodies were determined using the most sensitive and specific tests available: solid phase immunoassays and flow cytometric crossmatches. Tests for anti-idiotypic Ab revealed anti-Id in 6 of 10 patients tested. Although failure to find anti-Id may have been due to lack of an appropriate specimen, these results suggest that anti-Id is not the primary means of long-lasting elimination of DSA. Ab elimination does not appear to be due to clonal deletion. In a patient who discontinued immunosuppression, Ab of the original specificity for donor recurred and, in at least one patient, we were able to detect B cells specific for donor antigen after DSA was eliminated. We examined the effect of anti-thymocyte serum (ATS). In 2 patients receiving ATS weeks after completing the desensitization protocol and in 6 patients who were sensitized only to 3rd party, ATS treatment had no effect on the patient's Abs. However, a recurrence or increase of DSA occurred in 8 of 8 patients who received ATS while undergoing desensitization. Although ATS binds to B cells, cell activation assays provided no evidence that the binding activated B cells. Rather we believe that the failure of antibody to recur, after desensitization treatment is completed, reflects a balance between regulatory T cells and donor-specifc B cells and until that balance is acheived, elimination of regulatory T cells permits continued differentiaion of these B cells to plasma cells. This process may also require adequate antigen presentation as stopping treatment without transplanting results in a huge rebound of DSA and antibodies that cannot be routinely eliminated are those specific for antigens expressed at low levels, DRw53 and DRw53. There are still lacking data supporting a role for NKT cells in the maintenance of human tissue-specific tolerance. We are interested in studying NKT cell role in kidney transplants and its correlation with graft function. Peripheral blood TCR Vα24 + Vβ11 + NKT cells were phenotyped according to CD4 and CD8 expression in normal controls (NC), in 10-years rejection-free cadaver kidney allografts maintained with minimal immunosuppression (long term rejection free [LTRF] ), in patients with acute rejection (AR) and in patients with acute tubular necrosis (ATN). Results were expressed as percentages of CD4 + CD8 -(CD4 + NKT) or CD4 -CD8 -(double negative -DN NKT) Vα24 + Vβ11 + cells. The percentages of Vα24 + Vβ11 + cells were 0.09, 0.14, 0.02 and 0.09 % on gated lymphocytes respectively in AR, ATN, LTRF and NC groups (ANOVA, p=0.263). CD4 + NKT cells account for 42.86, 6.17, 11.11 and 17.86 % and NKT DN cells for 37.5, 11.04, 22.22 and 52.11 % of Vα24 + Vβ11 + cells, respectively in the same groups. The differences between the frequencies of CD4 + and DN Vα24 + Vβ11 + cells were only significant in NC groups (p<0,05). Although total Vα24 + Vβ11 + cells did not significant differ among the groups, the lowest frequency was observed in the LTRF group. Probably, intragraft localization of NKT cells as part of a tolerogenic status is a plausible explanation. Of note, the greater number of CD4 + NKT (IL-4 producing NKT cells) observed in AR patients, compared to DN NKT, raises the question about the importance of specific subsets in precise events, such as kidney allograft rejection. Functional studies associated with intragraft cell population phenotyping are critical to establish the role of NKT in kidney allografts. Poster Board #-Session: P222-III Both murine and human studies have suggested the possibility of adoptive transfer of HBV-specific immunity after liver transplantation, which may be attributed to the presence of significant number of functionally active lymphoid cells in the liver allografts from HBV immune donors. In this study, we characterized the resident lymphocytes, and identified the HBV-specific lymphocytes in liver allograft biopsies taken from 18 HBV immune donors. Liver-derived lymphocytes were prepared by mechanical dissociation and enzymatic digestion. The number, location, and phenotype of resident lymphocytes in huam liver allografts were determined by immunostaining and flow cytometry. The frequencies of HBV-specific T cells and B cells were determined by enzyme linked immunospot (ELISPOT) assay. 0.6-6(3.7±1.9)×10 6 lymphocytes could be recovered from 1 gram of liver tissue. These resident lymphocytes were predominantly located in the portal tracts and also scattered throughout the liver parenchyma. The majority of CD3+ T cells expressed CD8 (67.3±14.1%), while a smaller proportion expressed CD4 (23.3±9.7%). Cells expressing the natural killer cell marker CD56 constituted 25.4±9.1%. The frequencies of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBs-Ag) or hepatitis B core antigen (HBc-Ag)-specific IFN-γ-secreting T cells were 6.4±5.7 and 11.6±9.9/10 6 resident lymphocytes respectively. The antibody against HBs-Ag (anti-HBs)-secreting B cells could also be detected in 4 liver allografts (3.2±4.2/10 6 resident lymphocytes). In conclusion, considerable number of HBV-specific lymphocytes reside in liver allografts from HBV immune donors, and these may account for donor-derived immune response in liver recipients. OKT3 is a potent immunosuppressive agent that has been used to successfully reverse acute transplant rejection for decades. A humanized OKT3 with two alanine replacements on the CH2 domain (hOKT3γ1 Ala-Ala) was generated to retain the immunosuppressive activity of OKT3 but to reduce the side effects. This study reports the effect of OKT3 and hOKT3γ1 Ala-Ala on T-cell proliferation and phenotype in human mixed lymphocyte cultures (MLC). Human CD3 + T-cells were purified from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) via density centrifugation and consequently labeled with CFSE. These cells were then co-cultured for 7 days with irradiated allogeneic PBMC in a MLC in the presence or absence of OKT3 or hOKT3γ1 Ala-Ala. CFSE labeling allowed us to assess the phenotype of the proliferating T cells within MLC via multiparameter flow cytometry. Phenotypic analysis of proliferating cells in MLC demonstrated an early logarithmic expansion of mainly CD4 + , CD45RO + memory T cells, whereas OKT3 or hOKT3γ1 Ala-Ala prevented the logarithmic expansion of T cells in MLC (see figure) . Both OKT3 and hOKT3γ1 Ala-Ala induced expansion of mainly CD8 + T-cells, with both memory and naïve phenotypes. However, at day 7 the T cells in the mAb treated cultures showed diminished activation demonstrated by reduced CD25 expression and ³H-thymidine incorporation. In contrast, untreated MLC showed high levels of CD25 and ³H-thymidine incorporation at this time. In addition, no obvious activation induced T cell death was observed in the anti-CD3 treated MLC. These results suggest that anti CD3 mAb (OKT3 and hOKT3γ1 Ala-Ala) induced mitogenic proliferation of T cells, which prevented clonal expansion of alloreactive T cells in MLC. The kinetic advantage of the rapidly induced T cell proliferation by anti-CD3 mAb may affect alloantigen specific T cell proliferation and play a role in therapeutic effects of these anti-CD3 antibodies. The development of noninvasive diagnostic tests that provide insights into the presence or mechanisms of allograft response,e.g. rejection or tolerance, is still a challenge. Recently the advent of Protein Chip technology has extended the application of mass spectrometry to the study of proteins from complex biological samples. We applied Protein Chip technology toward discovery of allograft response biomarkers. Three groups (4 recipients/group) of skin transplant recipients were studied. In group I, C3H recipients of DBA2 skin allograft were tolerized with MR1 (anti-CD154 ) plus CTL4Ig plus rapamycin therapy. The group II, C3H recipients of DBA2 grafts were untreated, while untreated C3H recipients in group III received syngeneic skin transplants. Clinically apparent rejection in group II was noted at day 10. Blood samples were drawn on day 7 before overt rejection and the serum was filtered. Protein chips were spotted robotically with day 7 serum and the protein profiles were identified by surfaceenhanced laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (Ciphergen). On day 7, 161 peaks (proteins) were identified. The inter-group comparison was analyzed via a t-test like score with a measure of correlation accounting for the "signal-to-noise" ratio of choosing a mass point as being differentially expressed. The significance of results was assessed using permutation analysis. Peaks that have a 90% of confidence value as being differentially expressed are designated as different. On day 7, expression of 23 proteins were elevated in group I as compared to group II and 26 proteins were elevated in group I vs. III. The protein peaks that were decreased in group I when compared to groups II and III were 6 and 11 respectively. In contrast, no significant difference was detected between groups II and III. These findings support the potential of proteomic pattern technology as a noninvasive diagnostic test for monitoring the allograft rejection. Moreover, the patterns noted in tolerant allograft recipients and recipients of syngeneic grafts were identified at day 7. We will now focus on precise identification of proteins that predict tolerance or allograft rejection. Costimulatory molecule expression on dendritic cells can be down regulated with corticosteroids and IL-10, yet this has not translated to induction of tolerance in vivo. It has been demonstrated that soluble HLA-G can bind and induce apoptosis of CD8 + activated T cells and is involved in the induction of tolerance. Recent studies have suggested that tolerance of alloantigen specific T-cells is induced by semi-mature dendritic cells, defined by the expression of costimulatory molecules CD86 and CD80. The goal of our study is to evaluate the effect of HLA-G tetramer treatment of immature dendritic cells on their expression of CD86 and CD80. Bone marrow cells were cultured from BN rat femurs and sorted with anti-rat dendritic cell (OX-62) Micro Beads. Dendritic cells were treated with HLA-G tetramer for three days. Cultured cells were analyzed by flow cytometry using antibodies for MHC class II (I-A), CD80 and CD86. Treatment with HLA-G tetramer produced a significant increase in CD80 expression, decrease in CD86 while the expression of MHC II was not altered.  HLA-G treated cells retained their immature stage as confirmed by low expression of MHC II, down regulated CD86 expression, and allowed the expression of CD80. It can be concluded that the expression of CD86 and CD80 on dendritic cells is modified by treatment with HLA-G. Studies are necessary to further characterize modified dendritic cells. We will analyze the function of HLA-G modified dendritic cells in vitro using antigen-presentation assays and also observe their effects in vivo via transplant models. Spontaneous liver allograft acceptance is associated with activated T cell apoptosis in the liver, suggesting unusual interactions between the hepatic milieu and immune cells. Hepatic stellate cells (HSC) located in the sinusoid and presinusoidal space represent 5-8% of liver cells. HSC actively participate in the fibrogenesis in liver disease, but little is known of the role in regulating immune responses. In this study, HSC were isolated from B10 (H2 b ) livers, and cultured in plates for 2d (quiescent) or 7-10d (activated). Quiescent HSC expressed very few surface molecules and cytokines. Activation by in vitro culture induced expression of MHC class I, CD40, CD80 and ICAM-1, but not MHC class II, and also induced expression of IL-1Rα, TGFβ1, MIF and IL-6 (RNase protection assay). Further stimulation by IFN-γ did not enhance cytokine expression, however, exposure to DC activated allogeneic T cells markedly upregulated expression of inflammatory cytokines including IL-1α, its receptor and IL-6, but expression of MHC class II remained negative, suggesting a lack of APC machinery. Consistently, activated HSC stimulated low thymidine incorporation and CTL activity in allogeneic C3H (H2 k ) T cells. Interestingly, when B10 HSC were added into a DC/T allogeneic MLR culture, T cell proliferative responses were significantly inhibited in a dose dependent manner, which appeared to be related to activation of HSC, as quiescent HSC showed no inhibitory activity. The inhibition was so powerful that 50% of suppression was achieved at T:activated HSC ratio of 1:40, and 90% inhibition at a ratio of 1:20. This inhibition was unlikely MHC restricted, as HSC from C3H (syngeneic to T cells) also suppressed T cell proliferative responses. Despite inhibition of T cell responses, IFN-g production was not reduced, suggesting that HSC do not interfere with T cell activation. The TUNEL staining data indicated that the low [³H]TdR uptake was associated with elevated levels of T cell apoptosis. We utilized TCR transgenic mouse lines to examine the influence of HSC on antigen-specific T cell responses, and revealed a massive reduction in the antigen-specific CD4 + and CD8 + T cells after stimulation of antigens for 48 and 72 hours, respectively. These data strongly suggest that HSC are capable to regulate immune responses, which is initiated by becoming activation by stimulation of activated T cells, and then induce massive activated T ell apoptosis. The transcription factor Foxp3 has been identified as the key molecule controlling the development and function of regulatory CD25+ T-cells. To understand the biology of Foxp3 in allogeneic reactions and to study the effect of immunosuppressive drugs on Foxp3 expression, we measured mRNA expression levels of unstimulated PBMC obtained from patients treated with Rapa/CsA (N=12), Tac/MMF/steroids (N=18), or Tac/MMF/anti-CD25 mAb (N=16). We also analyzed Foxp3 expression in a mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) of PBMC from healthy volunteers in the presence and absence of Rapa (10 ng/ml), anti-CD25 mAb (5 µg/ml), Tac (10 ng/ml) and CsA (100 ng/ ml). In unstimulated PBMC from patients we could not show an effect of the immunosuppressive treatment, as comparable mRNA expression levels were measured before and after kidney transplantation (14 days-6 months post-transplantation). However, Foxp3 mRNA expression was significantly induced after in vitro allostimulation. Kinetic examination of the MLR showed a 20-fold higher Foxp3 mRNA expression after 5 days of culture. Both calcineurin inhibitors CsA and Tac, and anti-CD25 mAb significantly inhibited the in vitro induced Foxp3 gene transcription (range 70-90%), whereas Rapa did not inhibit but rather delayed the induction. In conclusion, allogeneic activation of human peripheral blood cells leads to the production of the transcription factor Foxp3. This suggests that the regulatory activity of CD25+ T-cells or the generation of these cells is induced by allo-antigen. Rapamycin, in contrast to calcineurin inhibitors or anti-CD25 mAb, does not interfere with this immunosuppressive countermechanism. Recurrent hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection after liver transplantation can be a significant problem. Although hepatitis B immune globulin and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors are effective in the prevention and treatment of recurrent hepatitis B, resistance to these drugs as well as cost issues require the development of other novel treatment options. To this end, we have sought ways to develop a dendritic cell (DC)-based vaccine for the treatment of HBV infection. DC are specialized antigen-presenting cells with powerful immunostimulatory properties. In this study, murine bone marrow-derived DC propagated in vitro were transfected with an adenoviral (Ad) vector to express the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg). Ad-HBsAg-transfected DC stimulated strong and specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses to HBsAg-expressing tumor cells. Furthermore, vaccination of mice with Ad-HBsAg-transfected DC also protected these animals from a subsequent lethal tumor challenge, whereas no protection was conferred in mice immunized with Ad-EGFP (green fluorescence protein)-transfected DC. Immunity was antigen-specific, as wild-type tumor (HBsAg negative) grew normally. Vaccination with HBsAg protein, a clinicially utilized preparation that confers immunity to HBV infection, did not protect against tumor challenge even though it induced a strong antibody response. These studies describe for the first time the contributions of humoral and cellular immune responses to tumor immunity induced by Ad-transfected DC compared to protein vaccination. DC-based vaccination can be a potential treatment not only for HBV but for other viral infections as well after liver transplantation Many patients with HCC demonstrate evidence of prior HBV exposure, suggesting that the presence of the virus in a quiescent state may promote tumorigenesis. Recently, new costimulatory molecules (ICOS-L and B7-H1) have been described, which appear to be involved in regulation of peripheral T cell activation. In the present study we investigated expression of ICOS-L and B7-H1 on human TEC and performed T cell co-cultures to investigate the role of these novel B7 family members in regulation of T cell responses. Primary TEC were cultured from human kidney, and compared with the human TEC cell line HK-2. Expression of different B7 molecules was studied by PCR and FACS analysis, or in situ in renal sections by immunostaining. Cocultures were performed with purified peripheral blood T cells, which were stimulated with a non-mitogenic anti-CD3 antibody. T cell activation was monitored by proliferation (thymidine incorporation) or production of cytokines (IFN-gamma and IL-10) as measured by ELISA. We found that TEC lack expression of CD80 and CD86, but do express ICOS-L and B7-H1 in vitro and in vivo. Stimulation with IFN-gamma resulted in increased expression of B7-H1, whereas ICOS-L expression was marginally increased upon stimulation with CD40L, with no effect of IL-1, IL-17 or TNF-alpha. Furthermore, we show that TEC are able to provide a costimulatory signal to TCR-triggered T cells, resulting in strong IL-10 production. Blocking studies revealed that IL-10 production was partially mediated by ICOS-L. In contrast, B7-H1 appeared to be involved in inhibition of proliferation and cytokine synthesis. In addition, we demonstrate that TEC are able to alter the cytokine profile of fully activated T cells, which were incubated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies. Coculture with TEC resulted in an inhibition of IFNgamma production by activated T cells, but a strongly increased production of IL-10 (up to 5 ng/ml). In conclusion, interaction of tubular epithelial cells and kidney infiltrating T cells via ICOS-L and B7-H1 may change the balance of positive and negative signals to the T cells, leading to IL-10 production and limitation of the local immune response. Von Hippel-Lindau protein (pVhl) regulates the mammalian hypoxia response through continuous degradation of α-subunits of the Hypoxia Inducible Factor (Hif) family of transcription factors under conditions of normal oxygen tension. Hypoxia, or deficiency in Vhl, leads to the accumulation of active Hif-α with subsequent transcription of hypoxia response genes. We have observed that thymocytes from mice with T lineagespecific deletion of Vhl (hereafter, Vhl-/-) exhibited increased apoptosis in vivo and in vitro. As thymocyte death is regulated by the strength of signals received through the TCR, we examined the responsiveness of Vhl-/-thymocytes to TCR crosslinking. Unlike controls, Vhl-/-thymocytes fail to induce capacitative Ca+2 entry (influx mediated by phospholipase C activation and release of intracellular Ca+2 stores) upon TCR crosslinking; however, thapsigargin-releasable intracellular Ca+2 stores are intact, and these stores induce control equivalent extracellular Ca+2 influx in these cells. Ca+2 mobilization following TCR crosslinking is rescued in thymocytes from mice bearing conditional deletion of both Vhl and Hif-1α demonstrating the essential role of Hif-1α in the Ca+2 defect of Vhl-/-cells. Thus, Vhl-/-thymocytes are capable of normal Ca+2 signaling via intracellular stores, but have a specific defect in Ca+2 flux in response to TCR stimulation, which is a result of increased Hif-1α activity. TCR proximal signaling events cause activation of phospholipase C-γ 1 (PLCγ 1 ) followed by inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP 3 ) mediated release of intracellular Ca+2 stores and opening of plasma membrane Ca+2 channels. Interestingly, similar patterns of total phospho-tyrosine blotting were observed in stimulated control and Vhl-/-thymocytes, and surprisingly, PLCγ 1 is phosphorylated in Vhl-/-cells upon TCR crosslinking. Together these data suggest that activation of Hif-1α inhibits TCR-induced capacitative Ca+2 entry, although TCR proximal signals and activation of PLCγ 1 are intact. Since low oxygen tension alters lymphocyte activation in vitro and hypoxic foci are present in lymphoid organs, Hif-1α may regulate the responsiveness of lymphocytes stimulated under physiological conditions. Given the key role of a rise in intracellular calcium in coupling TCR signals to downstream events such as cytokine gene expression and cell cycle entry, these findings demonstrate a novel target and approach to modulating T cell responses. Background: It has been recently demonstrated that a change in MELD score of 5 points or greater over 30 days (∆-MELD) is an independent predictor for death in patients awaiting liver transplantation and that a higher absolute MELD score at the time of transplantation increases post-transplant mortality, particularly at high MELD scores. We hypothesized that patients with a progressive rise in MELD immediately prior to transplant might experience greater post-operative mortality than patients with identical but stable MELD scores. Methods: Using the STAR dataset, the data from all adult liver transplantations (recipient age >17) performed in the U.S. between 2/1/2002 and 11/14/2003 were analyzed. MELD scores from the day of transplantation and from 25-35 days prior to transplantation were calculated and used to compute a ∆-MELD score. Post-transplant survival times and 90-day mortality rates were primary endpoints. Logistic regression and proportional hazard models were developed to analyze the influence of the dependent variables. Results: There were 1510 liver transplants included in the analysis. The average MELD score at transplantation was 24.0 (23.6-24.4, 95% CI) and the average 30-day ∆-MELD prior to transplantation was 3.1 (2.8-3.4 However, logistic regression modeling showed that none of the excess mortality was attributable to the high ∆-MELD score (p=0.22 for ∆-MELD > 5) and the excess risk was attributable to absolute MELD score at the time of transplantation (p=0.02). Conclusion: Pre-operative ∆-MELD is not an independent risk factor for post-liver transplant mortality. Mortality of patients with rapidly worsening chronic liver disease who undergo transplantation depends primarily on absolute MELD score at the time of transplantation but not the rate of change immediately preceding transplant. Since it has been shown that patients with a high ∆-MELD score have increased mortality without transplantation, allocation policy should consider these patients as high risk. Background: Priority for liver transplantation is based on the Model for Endstage Liver Disease (MELD) score which was developed, in part, to permit only objective variables (creatinine (Cr), bilirubin and international normalized ratio (INR)) to determine status for liver transplantation. We performed a study to determine if higher MELD scores could be achieved by using selected laboratory methods which: 1) differ in terms of instrumentation or methodology from those used in our clinical laboratory and 2) were selected specifically to return the highest Cr, bilirubin and INR. Methods: Twenty-nine consecutive patients listed for liver transplantation who received phlebotomy for routine indications were enrolled in this IRB-approved study. MELD scores were calculated using bilirubin, Cr and INR from standard methods in our hospital laboratory (standard) and using the highest Cr, bilirubin and INR from standard or alternative methods (alternative). Changes in priority for transplantation were measured based on percentile change on the transplant list at our center. The standard determination of serum Cr and bilirubin in our laboratory is the Roche Hitachi 917 instrument and INR is determined by the Stago STA-R instrument. The Ortho Vitros 950 and Dade Dimension RXL were used to measure Cr and bilirubin and the BeckmanElectra 1400C and Instrumentation Laboratory ACL3000 instruments were used to measure INR by alternative methods. Results: The mean increase in the MELD score between standard (13.6) and alternative (18.4) methods was 4.8 points or 26 %, (p = 0.004). The mean difference for each laboratory variable was (standard vs. alternative): Cr (0.95 vs. 1.13 mg/dl, p = 0.06), bilirubin (3.6 vs. 3.6 mg/dl, p = ns) and INR (1.40 vs. 1.98, p < 0.0001). The mean increase in priority for transplantation was 22.3 percentiles (standard, 58th percentile vs. alternative methods, 80th percentile) and 14 % of patients moved to one of the top five positions on the list. Conclusions: 1) Patients listed for liver transplantation at our center achieved higher MELD scores and therefore a higher priority for liver transplantation using specific laboratory methods which yield higher Abstracts laboratory values than standard methods used in our clinical laboratory. 2) While the MELD score is determined only by "objective variables," there may be considerable and clinically relevant variation in the MELD score based on the selection of laboratory methods used for the determination of Cr, bilirubin and INR. Poster Board #-Session: P234-III In the vast majority of measured events, MELD scores were not significantly associated with the frequency of these events. Significant correlations between MELD scores and frequency of events were noted only among hospitalized days in the 60 days immediately preceding LTX. Conclusions: The MELD scoring system does not appear to accurately predict morbidity among patients awaiting LTX. If waiting list morbidity is to be reduced, a more accurate and comprehensive tool is needed to both measure morbidity and to reduce it. Poster Board #-Session: P240-III Table 1 ). With the exception of albumin and growth failure, all factors had a statistically significant association with post-transplant graft failure (see Table 2 ). Conclusions. These preliminary results suggest that the effect of serum albumin in the PELD model should be re-evaluated. Serum creatinine appears to be a good candidate for inclusion in the PELD model. (20), HCV /HCC (11), HCV/HBV (8), HCV/EtOH(4), HCV/HIV (2).Baseline liver biopsies were available for 31/45 (69%) HCV+ donor livers. HAI ranged from 1-5/18 and fibrosis stage 0-2/6. Patient and graft outcomes between HCV recipients receiving HCV+ and HCV-donor livers were calculated using Kaplan-Meir statistics.Mean F/U was 5.1±0.5 years. RESULTS: One-, 3-and 5-year graft survival for HCV recipients of HCV+ donor allografts was 78%, 72% and 69%, respectively. No difference in graft survival was noted between this group and HCV recipients of HCV-donor allografts (73%, 67% and 59%, 1-, 3-and 5-year graft survival respectively, p=NS).No difference in 1-, 3-and 5year patient survival was noted between the 2 groups (85%, 77% and 72% vs 81%, 74% and 68%, HCV+ vs HCV-donors, respectively, p=NS). Causes of graft failure in the 45 recipients of HCV+ donor allografts were HCV recurrence (6), chronic rejection (1), hepatic artery thrombosis (1) and portal vein thrombosis (1). Fourteen deaths occurred in the HCV+ donor allograft group with 2 deaths occurring less then 30 days after OLTx. The remaining causes of death included HCV recurrence (5), cardiac event (3), sepsis (2), pneumonia (1) We initiated an aggressive protocol combining neoadjuvant radiochemotherapy and orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) for patients with unresectable stage I or II hilar cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) in 1993. Though our initial results were promising, the increasing shortage of donor livers has forced the use of sub-optimal grafts. Purpose: to review the impact of marginal, high-risk or living-donor grafts on outcomes for patients undergoing combined neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy and OLT for CCA. Methods: We reviewed outcomes for all patients enrolled since initiation in 1993. Eligibility criteria included diagnosis of unresectable hilar CCA by intraluminal brush or biopsy, or a CA-19.9 level >100 with a radiographically malignant stricture. The protocol consisted of external beam radiation with bolus 5-FU infusion followed by Ir-192 brachytherapy and maintenance 5-FU or capecitabine, until OLT. A staging laparotomy was performed prior to OLT to rule out evidence of metastatic disease. We assessed outcomes for recipients of standard deceased donor grafts compared to those who received marginal, high-risk, or living donor grafts. In addition, we compared time from enrollment to OLT during the first and last 5 years of the protocol. Results: 56 patients have enrolled since 1993, of which 28 have received OLT, 6 are awaiting OLT, and 22 fell out due to disease progression. Survival of all patients recieving OLT was 82% at 5 yrs. Outcomes for recipients of standard grafts (group 1) compared to those with marginal, high-risk, or living-donor grafts (group 2) are shown in table 1 Grafts in group 2 included 4 living donors, 2 pediatric donors, 2 older donors, 2 donors with cancer, a donor with diabetes and prior renal transplant, a donor with a fatty liver, and an amyloid donor. Time from enrollment to OLT prior to 1997 was 4.1 months vs 9.8 months after 1997 (p<0.001). Conclusions: Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy followed by OLT provides excellent results in selected patients with hilar CCA, though the use of sub-optimal grafts does have a marked impact on outcome. Given the severe shortage of donor organs, as well as the dismal alternatives for patients with unresectable hilar CCA, the use of sub-optimal donor livers may be justified. Poster Both living donation and expanded criteria (EC) donor livers are increasingly utilized to treat recipients whose survival is not well reflected by conventional MELD allocation. EC is commonly due to older donor age, steatosis, underlying liver disease, or warm ischemia. EC livers are often offered to centers outside of standard MELD allocation, and the outcome after transplantation of these organs is unknown. We analyzed our center-specific experience with transplantation of expanded criteria donor livers, defined for this study as (1) livers imported from out of region, or (2) Previous reports have implicated a negative impact on survival of advanced donor age. We propose that well-selected liver grafts from donors over age 70 that are exposed to short cold ischemia of less than 6 hours has similar short and long term function without an increase in primary non-function or delayed graft function. Patients and methods: We retrospectively reviewed the donor and recipient records of all patients at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania receiving a liver allograft from a heart-beating cadaveric donor over the age of 60 between April 1996 and November 2003 (n=86), of those 22 were over 70 years of age. Graft and patient survival were analyzed by Kaplan-Meyer statistics. These results were compared to a contemporary group of patients receiving grafts < 50 years of age. Results: Of the donor group 60 years of age and older, the mean recipient age was 55±1.0 years. 26.2% of the recipients had hepatitis C, 23.8% had alcoholic cirrhosis, and 13.1% had known hepatocellular carcinoma. The mean cold ischemic time was 6.4±0.24 hours in this group. There was a shorter mean cold ischemic time in patients who had received livers from donors over seventy years of age ( Follow up data demonstrated a sharp increase in the percentage to 47% at 6 months following OLT. Univariate analysis demonstrated the following variables were associated with an increase in a patients likelihood to return to work within 6 months following OLT: male gender, preoperative employment, creatinine < 2 (mg/dl) at OLT, and cause of donor death (traumatic). Increasing recipient age, presence of both ascites and dialysis at transplantation, and postoperative graft failure were associated with a lower chance of returning to work. Multiple regression analysis indicated that male gender and preoperative employment were significant positive predictors that a patient would return to work within six months following OLT. Increasing patient age, presence of both ascites and dialysis at time of transplantation, and postoperative graft failure were negative predictors of this outcome. MELD scores at OLT were analyzed by groups (6-10, 11-20, 21-30, 30-40) , with respect to post OLT employment, but failed to reach significance. Certain demographic variables and pre-transplant employment are significant predictors of employment 6 months after OLT. Surprisingly, a lower pre-transplant MELD score was not a predictor that a patient would return to work after OLT. ) . 2001 costs were 7.8 % higher than in 2000. CWI was associated with higher cost; higher population density was associated with lower cost. Conclusions: Cost reports filed by DSAs generate plausible estimates. The SCF approach provides estimates of the impact of total organs retrieved, the role of input labor costs, and changes in cost over time. Potential donor supply needs to be updated. This analysis suggests that costs per organ rise with total potential supply, though the estimated magnitude is questionable. Future analyses may offer insights into why and how some DSAs are more successful in converting potential donors. Since its implementation in February 2002, the predicted financial burden of MELD implementation coupled with worsened outcome was expected to have a major impact on the survivability of liver transplant (LT) programs. There are multiple reports now showing similar clinical outcomes between the pre and post MELD era, however, there is a lack of information regarding the financial implications of MELD. Here we present a comparative analysis of LT hospital charges before and after MELD implementation at our institution. Methods: We tabulated the detailed hospital charges for the liver transplant admission for 125 consecutive patients transplanted between January 1,1999 and June 30, 2003 . Patients dying within 72 hours of liver transplantation (n=2) were excluded, leaving 123 patients for analysis. We classified the charges in to the following major cost-centers: In-patient Room, Operating Room (including anesthesia, supplies and blood utilization), Laboratory, Pharmacy and Organ Acquisition Charge (OAC). Subsequently, the patient population was divided in to the pre and post MELD era. Median total charges, median charges for these cost centers, total median charges excluding OAC (TC-OAC) -as it was independent of MELD and clinical parameters of 1 yr patient survival and length of stay (LOS) were compared. Results: (Table 1) OAC increased significantly (by 16.5%) and remained the major component of total charge, accounting for 24.2% and 32.5% in pre and post MELD era respectively. Despite this, total charges only increased slightly (4.8%) in post MELD era while there was a reduction (3.9%) in total charges excluding OAC, however these differences were not significant. There was a significant reduction in OR charges and a significant increase in laboratory charges in the post MELD era. Median length of stay was comparable between the 2 groups as was 1 yr patient survival and stayed within the national norms as reported by the scientific registry of transplant recipients (SRTR). Contrary to what was expected, implementation of MELD allocation scheme resulted in neither an increased financial burden nor a decreased post-transplant survival after liver transplantation. Background: Improvement in graft survival and reduction in the rates of acute rejection have been associated with the use of newer immunosuppressive medications. With the associated increase in drug acquisition cost, a cost effective analysis is warranted to assess the different regimens. Methods: For the purpose of this analysis three different regimens namely CsA+MMF,TAC+MMF, and RAPA+MMF were evaluated. All patients were assumed to be on 5 mg of prednisone. The cost effectiveness of these regimens was estimated using a Markov model of progression through three stages namely,1) stable posttransplant,2) acute rejection,3) graft loss.Patients were assumed to have acute rejection only in the 1st year and acute rejection to be treated with 5 days of anti-lymphocyte therapy. Progression probabilities were derived from multiple published data including United Network of Organ Sharing (UNOS). A three % discount rate was used for cost ($) and effectiveness (years). Costs were estimated from societal perspective and were obtained from published data and expert opinion. Extensive sensitivity analysis was done to test the effects of varying values of input parameters on the model results. Incremental Effectiveness Incremental In patients with metastatic disease immunomodulation was shown to significantly improve survival. However, immunosuppression cessation alone did not have a significant impact on survival in this patient population. In a subset analysis immunomodulation conveyed a survival advantage in patients whose donor histology was melanoma (40% vs. 0%, p=0.03) but not in those whose histology was choriocarcinoma or renal cell. CONCLUSIONS: 1) The benefit of immunomodulation is primarily seen in patients who present with metastatic disease 2) Melanoma appears to respond most favorably to immunomodulation. Squamous cell cancers (SCC) of the skin occur with higher frequency in transplant recipients than in the general population. SCC of the anorectal verge, account for 2 to 4% of all colorectal cancers. These tumors are managed varying from local excision to system chemotherapy and radiation. Methods: Our group examined all cases of squamous cell cancer of the perineum and anus for patient demographic and tumor characteristics. Results: 54 cases of SCC involving the perineal (n=19) and the anorectal canal (n=35). The majority (72%) of these tumors were identified in renal recipients. Mean age at diagnosis was similar as was the time to malignancy development. Interestingly the incidence of stage I disease was significantly lower in the anorectal group. Perineal SCC was managed by local resection (89%), while anorectal SCC were resected in 63% (p<0.03). Chemotherapy was then utilized in 63% of anorectal patients versus 21% of perineal tumors (p<0.05). Despite these differences in tumor stage and cancer management strategies there was no significant differences in patient survival. While Post-transplant Lymphoproliferative Disease (PTLD) remain a significant complication of transplantation and immunosuppression, little is known about how disease presentation influences survival. Methods: 871 recipients of solid organ transplants from our database were retrospectively examined. Survival analysis from time of PTLD diagnosis to death was performed by LIFEREG procedure and regression analysis along with chi square test. Results: Study group includes recipients of 417 kidney, 289 heart, 114 liver and 51 pancreas transplants. Median age at diagnosis of PTLD was 49.7 years. Lymph node was the most common site of presentation of PTLD in each type of organ transplant, followed by allograft involvement in kidney, liver and pancreas transplant recipients. GI Tract, liver, spleen and lung were also frequently involved sites at presentation. Survival was significantly shorter after diagnosis of PTLD with CNS involvement (in all organ tx), allograft involvement (heart and liver tx), liver involvement (kidney and heart tx). PTLD involvement of spleen, GI tract, Lymph Node and Lung did not effect survival in any type of organ transplant recipients. Multiple sites of PTLD involvement (compared to single site involvement) was associated with decreased survival in kidney, heart and lung but not pancreas transplant recipients. Conclusions: 1.) CNS involvement of PTLD carries a uniformly poor prognosis in all types of solid organ transplants studied here. 2.) Allograft involvement in recipients of life sustaining organ transplants (heart and liver) are associated with poor outcome compared to those with PTLD in allografts of life enhancing transplants (kidney and pancreas). 3.) While GI tract is a common site of PTLD presentation, it is not associated with a higher rate of death. 4.) PTLD involvement of non-lymphatic organs (CNS, heart allograft, liver ) carries a worse survival rate than involvment of lymphatic organs (LN, spleen, GI tract). Infusion of EBV-specific T-cells has been proven to be a powerful treatment of EBVassociated lymphomas (PTLD) in bone marrow transplanted patients. To achieve comparable long lasting EBV-control in solid organ transplantation (SOT), higher numbers of specific T cells and more frequent cell infusions are necessary. Beside the immunosuppressive therapy in SOT, we hypothesized that negative regulatory CD4 + CD25 + T cells (T-regs) could also be causative for diminished function of administered T-cells. Therefore, the influence of T-regs on the generation procedure (a) and function (b) of EBV-specific T-cell lines was determined. experimental design An important concern was that T-cell lines generated from patients with elevated T-reg frequencies still contain relevant numbers of these cells and therefore have impaired anti-tumour function. Indeed, T-regs influenced the generation procedure. Starting with T-reg enriched PBMCs, T-cell lines could only be generated in 2/5 volunteers, instead of 5/5 out of PBMCs or T-reg depleted PBMCs. At day 5, IFN-γ secretion was decreased in all T-reg enriched cell cultures. However, if the generation of the EBV-specific T-cell line was successful, no significant differences in phenotype, IFN-γ level, cytotoxicity or FoxP3 expression -a marker of T-reg function -were found. To mimic the influence of T-regs on adoptively given cells, the generated T-cell lines were cultured with PTLD-like cells plus PBMCs +/-autologous T-regs. Proliferation responses were not influenced by T-regs enrichment, probably due to the activated phenotype, but IFN-γ secretion was decreased in 3/5 experiments. Interestingly, the IFN-γ decrease and the impairment in the generation procedure took place in the same 3 volunteers, whereas 2 were not affected by autologous T-regs. Our data give evidence that T-regs can interfere with the generation process and function of specific T-cell lines. Therapeutic strategies, like depletion of T-regs with anti-CD25mabs, may benefit adoptive immunotherapy in PTLD-patients.  Aggressive squamous cell cancers tend to occur more commonly in younger patients, while length of immunosuppression is similar to the indolent skin cancers observed in transplant recipients. Further analysis is necessary to assess whether overall intensity and/or individual immunosuppressive agents may affect the biologic nature. Despite the higher incidence of recurrences and cancer specific mortality observed in the aggressive skin malignancy group, the interval from transplant to recurrence was paradoxically shorter in the non-aggressive group. This contradictory data indicates further analysis is necessary to determine the origin of and the impact of immunosuppression on the development of post transplant skin malignancies as well as the role of immunosuppression reduction. Melanoma has long been recognized as a malignancy with prolonged recurrence intervals. In several instances, the use of a single donor with metastatic melanoma has been reported to result in multiple recipient cancer transmissions. We examined all cases of donor utilization with the diagnosis of melanoma, recognized either prior to or after donation. These cases were examined for donor and recipient demographics, tumor characteristics and recipients survival. Results: 38 recipients of solid organ transplants from 13 donors (12 cadaveric and one living-related kidney) with melanoma were identified. Organs transplanted included 27 kidneys, 6 livers, 3 hearts, and 2 pancreases. The majority of the donors were female (12:1), with a mean donor age of 43.1 ± 8.0 yrs. Ten donors had a prior history of wide local excision of melanoma. The majority of tumors were later identified as Clark's level III lesions, with 3 donors noted to have advanced stage III disease. Mean recipient age was 42.5 ± 17.5 yrs., with an equal gender distribution. Of the 38 recipients there were 29/38 (76%) tumor transmissions confirmed, of which 7/29 (24%) involved the allograft and 28/29 (97%) developed metastatic disease. Mean time from transplantation to tumor recognition was 14.0 ± 12.7 months. Fourteen transmissions (48%) were associated with melanoma brain metastases misdiagnosis as cerebral bleed in the donor compared to two donor transmissions in ten correctly diagnosed patients (p<0.05). Transmission rates were not affected by recipient allograft type (extra-renal 9/11 vs. renal allograft 20/ 27). Donor transmitted melanoma resulted in a high mortality rate (19/28;66%). All patients with metastatic disease died from their malignancy, while 6 recipients with allograft alone disease were rendered disease free by incidental or therapeutic nephrectomy (p<0.05). A history of metastatic melanoma should be a contraindication to organ donation, independent of disease free interval. A significant proportion of donortransmitted melanoma arise from cases were the donor had a misdiagnosis of the etiology of their cerebral hemorrhage. This data suggests that, in instances where the etiology of cerebral hemorrhage is unclear, a limited brain autopsy should be performed. In cases where melanoma is discovered to involve the allograft, explantation should be performed, or when involving extra-renal allografts, immediate re-transplantation should be considered. Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) is a serious post-transplant complication often associated with Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV). Clinical studies have shown that effective cellular immunity is key to protection from PTLD, although the precise mechanisms by which the EBV memory response fails is not clear. Two important immuno-regulatory cytokines are TGF-β and IL-10. TGF-β is important in reactivation of EBV from the latent to the lytic state and IL-10 is a growth factor for EBV-transformed cells. However, both of these cytokines are also known to inhibit various aspects of cellular immunity. Whether TGF-β and IL-10 in the microenvironment have overlapping functions in inhibiting EBV-reactive immunity is not known, and could have important implications for the development of PTLD. To further understand the roles of these immuno-regulatory cytokines in the immunobiology of PTLD, we assessed the ability of TGF-β or IL-10 to inhibit two parameters of cellular immunity, IFN-γ production and memory CTL restimulation. Purified, adherent APC were pre-treated with medium, TGFβ, or IL10, overnight. The pretreated APC were then cultured with syngeneic CD3+ T Abstracts cells and irradiated syngeneic EBV-stimulators for 5 days. After the culture period, IFN-γ accumulation in the supernatant was measured and CTL activity assessed using standard methods. Supernatants from CD3+ cells cultured with APC pre-treated with either TGF-β or IL10 demonstrated significantly reduced levels of IFN-γ (p=.01, t-test) compared to CD3+ cells cultured with control APC or CD3 cells cultured with EBVstimulators alone. Supernatants from CD3+ cells cultured with IL-10-pretreated APC demonstrated the most significant reduction. However, when CTL activity was assessed, only CD3+ cells cultured with TGF-β treated APC exhibited significantly reduced CTL activity (p=.03). CD3+ T cells cultured with IL-10 treated APC demonstrated CTL activity equivalent to controls. Our data provide two important points. First, CTL activity is separable from IFN-γ production, and second, that although memory CTL restimulation does not require APC, the APC microenvironment can influence memory CTL restimulation. Given the importance of CTL in protection from PTLD, the APC microenvironment could therefore influence clinical outcome. Poster Immunosuppression(IM) is known to cause PTLD and DNSM in kidney transplant recipients. The recommended management of these patients includes discontinuation of IM and appropriate cancer(CA) therapy with surgical ablation, chemo and/or radiotherapy.These patients are forced to return to chronic dialysis after IM is discontinued. In our center, some kidney transplant recipients with PTLD and DNSM refused to return to dialysis and continued IM on their own. Following this defying gesture from these patients we worked with them to develop a new protocol to minimize the risk of CA recurrence yet maintain function of the transplanted kidney. A multidisciplinary team approach was used including oncology, transplant and social services.The protocol included rigorous CA management, minimization of IM and conversion to SLR based IM.Whole body CAT scan or MRI at 6 month intervals and frequent surveillence by transplant and oncology teams were integral to this protocol. 13 patients have been treated in this manner; the mean age was 57±11 yrs. Two pts had PTLD, 2 lung CA, 2 thyroid CA and one each had Hodgkin's lymphoma, leukemia, mixed parotid tumor, colon, renal cell, prostate and breast CA. Mean follow-up since transplant and diagnosis of CA is 4.5±3yrs and 2.3±1.7yrs, respectively. CA was diagnosed 4.3 to 80 months after transplant and treated according to standard of care.One patient with breast CA refused chemo and radiotherapy after surgical ablation and died of metastatic disease 3 months later. All other patients remain cancer-free. Prior to diagnosis of CA, all were on calcineurin inhibitor(CNI) based immunosuppression; after CA diagnosis all patients were converted to SLR and CNI was discontinued or minimized. 12/13(92%) patients maintained a functioning graft with a mean serum creatinine of 2.2±0.9mg%. Our data indicates that minimization of IM and conversion to SLR maintains graft function and reduces recurrence of PTLD and DNSM. Patients choosing this treatment plan must be compliant with rigorous follow up protocols. Multi-center trials and long term follow up is required before this mode of therapy can be routinely recommended. Poster Board #-Session: P262-III Transplant glomerulopathy (TGP) is present in about 15% of patients with chronic rejection and is characterized by duplications of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM). Risk factor analysis suggested that immune responses are important in the pathogenesis. In a rat model of chronic rejection we previously identified antibodies reactive with the GBM, especially the heparan sulphate proteoglycan (HSPG) perlecan. Here we investigated whether patients with TGP have circulating antibodies reactive with GBM, and identified the antigens recognized by these antibodies. Sera from patients with TGP were collected and tested for anti-GBM and anti-HSPG reactivity. Furthermore, normal kidney biopsies were stained with IgG purified from patients with TGP and colocalization with known HSPGs was investigated. The identity of the antigen was investigated after purification of human GBM preparation using an affinity column with IgG from a patient with TGP. Sera of 12/16 patients with TGP contained antibodies reactive with GBM isolates but not with the Goodpasture epitope (collagen type IV), and only 50% showed presence of anti-HLA antibodies. Seven out of 12 sera reacting with GBM also reacted with highly purified HSPG, which contained both perlecan and agrin as shown with specific antibodies. Indirect immunofluorescence with patient IgG revealed a GBM staining pattern on normal human kidneys. Double staining and confocal microscopy especially showed co-localization with anti-agrin antibodies. Next we affinity purified the antigen(s) involved from human GBM using patient IgG. After elution, this resulted in an antigen(complex), that was recognized by all seven patients that recognized the HSPG. Importantly, this antigen(complex) was also recognized by specific antibodies against agrin, but not by antibodies against perlecan. In conclusion, we identified a humoral response directed against the GBM heparan sulphate proteolgycan agrin in patients with TGP. This supports a role for humoral responses reactive with tissue specific antigens in the pathogenesis of TGP. INTRODUCTION: Chronic allograft rejection is a major cause of graft loss. Vascular fibrointimal proliferation plays an important role in the pathogenesis of chronic graft rejection. We identified a smooth muscle-specific protein whose expression is strongly down regulated by TGF-β and is markedly reduced in chronic graft rejection. METHODS: Tissues from naïve and chronically rejecting monkey renal allografts were solubilized and subjected to 2D-electrophoresis. Proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes and tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins were identified by immunoblotting. A heavily phosphorylated protein was excised and analyzed by Mass Spectrometry. Peptides corresponding to the sequenced nucleotides were used for generating polyclonal antibodies. RESULTS: By blotting PVDF membranes with anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies we consistently observed that the level of a 57-kDa protein (isoelectric point 6) was markedly reduced, or absent, in rejecting but not in naïve or nonrejecting animals. Partial sequencing by mass spectrometry suggested that this 57-kDa protein is novel. Immunohistochemical studies showed the protein to be localized to smooth muscles. Remarkably, immunohistochemical staining of kidneys from monkeys experiencing chronic graft rejection with intimal hyperplasia failed to detect the protein in the smooth muscle layer of the vessels, confirming our in vitro studies on the disappearance of this protein from rejecting allograft tissues. Because growth factors are released in rejecting grafts, we reasoned that the absence of the protein might be due to the inhibition of its expression by a growth factor. We examined the effect of TGF-β, IFN-γ, PDGF, and TNFα in the smooth muscle cell line CRL-1999. We found that only TGF-β blocked the expression of this protein, as there was a marked decline in the protein and its mRNA (n=6). In contrast, TGF-β induced marked increase in α-actin expression. Solubilization with detergents studies indicated that this protein is associated with the cytoskeleton. CONCLUSION: We identified a 57-kDa cytoskeleton-associated phosphoprotein that appears to be smooth muscle-specific. Because it is heavily tyrosine phosphorylated, this protein might function as an intracellular signaling molecule. Our data implicate this protein in mediating the effects of TGF-β on smooth muscle and in playing a role in the pathogenesis of graft rejection. Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transdifferentiation (EMT) is a process characterized by phenotypic transformation of renal tubule epithelial cells to myofibroblasts. Through a profibrotic process, these myofibroblasts synthesize de novo α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA) and downregulate the expression of E-cadherin on cell surface. Although EMT has been shown to be a common final pathway to various insults to the kidney, it remains unknown whether it is also involved in chronic allograft nephropathy (CAN), a condition associated with significant tissue fibrosis. In a transplant model of CAN, we performed Fisher 344→Lewis (n=4) and Lewis→Lewis (n=3) kidney transplants in 3 month old recipients. Allograft recipients received 1.5mg/kg/d of CsA for 10 days. Three months following transplant, blood and urine samples were collected and transplanted kidneys harvested for analysis. We measured serum creatinine and urine protein levels. We also performed semi-quantitative PCR and immunohistochemistry analysis to assess αSMA and E-Cadherin mRNA and protein levels in syngeneic and allogeneic kidneys Allograft recipients had findings consistent with CAN: significant tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis and vascular wall thickening. Serum creatinine levels and proteinuria were significantly higher in the CAN group. Moreover, αSMA gene product and protein expression were higher and E-Cadherin gene and protein expression were lower in CAN compared to syngeneic transplants. There was > 5 fold increase in αSMA:E-Cadherin mRNA ratio (normalized to S26 internal control) in CAN compared to syngeneic grafts. Our Study demonstrates for the first time that EMT and CAN are associated. Strategies to delay/arrest EMT in kidney transplantation might therefore have the potential benefit to delay the progression of CAN. Persistent differentiation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts and lack of fibroblast apoptosis have been implicated in the fibrotic response associated with various forms of solid organ chronic rejection. Yet, the mechanisms that regulate myofibroblastic differentiation and apoptosis of myofibroblasts are still poorly understood. In the present work, we tested the hypothesis that endothelial apoptosis initiates the release of fibrogenic mediators. Human embryonic fibroblasts were exposed to medium conditioned by apoptotic or non-apoptotic human umbilical vein endothelial cells (EC) in vitro. We found that medium conditioned by apoptotic EC inhibits apoptosis of human embryonic fibroblasts in vitro whereas medium conditioned by non-apoptotic human EC does not. Western analyses revealead that mediators produced by apoptotic EC induce rapid phosphorylation of AKT, followed by increased protein levels of Bclxl in fibroblasts in vitro whereas proteins levels of p53, cIAP-1, cIAP-2 and XIAP were not modulated. Long-term exposure (4 and 7 days) of fibroblasts to medium conditioned by apoptotic EC increased protein levels of alpha-smooth muscle actin, desmin and vimentin and induced phenotypical changes characteristic of myofibroblastic differentiation. Moreover fibroblasts exposed to mediators produced by apoptotic EC were found to produce a significantly greater amount of collagen type I, again a distinctive feature of myofibroblastic differentiation. Blockade of phosphatidylinsositol-3 (PI3) kinase activation with LY294002 in fibroblasts exposed to mediators produced by apoptotic EC inhibited overexpression of alphasmooth muscle actin. Using mass spectrometry, we identified one of the fibrogenic mediators present in the medium conditioned by apoptotic EC as a fragment of the Cterminal domain V of the proteoglycan perlecan. We found that supplementation of serum-free medium with chondroitin-4-sulfate, a glycosaminoglycan anchored on the domain V of perlecan, induces myofibroblastic differentiation and resistance to apoptosis in fibroblasts. We propose that apoptosis of EC initiates the degradation of pericellular proteoglycans and liberation of fibrogenic fragments which in turn activate PI3-kinasedependent fibrogenic pathways. Sustained endothelial injury could result in chronic activation of this paracrine fibrogenic loop and may represent the basis of maladaptive fibrotic responses that characterize various forms of solid organ chronic rejection. The pathogenesis of graft coronary artery disease (GCAD) are still not fully understood. Accumulating evidence suggests that allo-response and tissue-specific immunity may contribute to the development of GCAD. To study this, we developed a novel minor antigen (mHC)-mismatched mouse GCAD model, and monitored the immune response to both allogeneic and tissue-specific antigens (cardiac myosin, CM). Methods: Hearts of FVB mice (H-2 q ) were heterotopically transplanted into DBA/1 recipients (H-2 q , minor mismatch, n = 6) and C57BL/6 mice (H-2 b , MHC mismatch, n = 6). No immunosuppression was used. At 8 days, intragraft CD4 + and CD8 + T cell, B cells (B220 + ), macrophages (Mac-1 + ), and dendritic cells (CD11c + ) were quantified by immunostaining. In minor mismatch group, circulating allo-antibody production by flow cytometry and allo-and CM-specific T cell responses by ELISPOT were monitored at 8, 56, and 112 days. GCAD indices were assessed at 56 and 112 days. Results: All allografts in MHC mismatch group were acutely rejected within 9 days, whereas all allografts in minor mismatch group survived more than 112 days and developed GCAD (% of luminal narrowing, intima/media ratio, % of diseased vessels: 38 ± 11%, 0.7 ± 0.2, 81 ± 10% at 56 days, 53 ± 7%, 0.9± 0.2, 92 ± 4% at 112 days). At 8 days, infiltration of CD4 + , CD8 + T cells, macrophages, dendritic cells but not B-cells were significantly decreased in the cardiac allografts of minor mismatch group in comparison to MHC mismatch group. Accordingly, the frequencies of IFN-γ-and IL-2-but not IL-4producing alloreactive T cells were significantly lower than in minor mismatch group at 8 days. In minor mismatch group, allo-antibody production and the frequency of alloreactive T cells were the highest at 56 days, followed by drastic decrease at 112 days. Alternatively, the activation of CM-specific Th1-, Th2-, and B-cell responses was detected only after 56 days, and steadily increased up to 112 days. Conclusions: In this mHC-mismatched GCAD model, early stages of GCAD are associated with low frequency T cell alloresponse and allo-antibody production. Alloresponse diminishes later, and tissue-specific immunity dominates host anti-graft immune response. This suggests that while subthreshold alloreactivity may contribute to initiation of GCAD, the perpetuation of GCAD occurs due to progressive activation of host autoimmunity against tissue-specific antigens shared by donor and recipient. Chronic allograft rejection represents the main cause of long-term graft dysfunction. Excluding organ-specific manifestations, the most common histopathological characteristic is chronic vascular rejection (CVR). Adventitial inflammatory infiltration, medial smooth muscle cell (SMC) destruction and intimal thickening involving inflammatory cell infiltration are the typical CVR features. Its pathophysiology remains poorly understood however, substantial evidence suggests that anti-HLA antibodies are involved in the process. The adventitial infiltration is chronologically related to medial SMC destruction, specifically targeted by immunoglobulins, and continued as long as medial SMC persist. We hypothesize that adventitial inflammatory infiltrate may play an important role in the development of the lesions of CVR. In the rat aortic interposition model, in which an aortic abdominal segment of a BN rat is grafted into a LEW recipient (histoincompatible rat strains ), a typical chronic vascular rejection is observed. Adventitia was separated by microdissection from the rest of the graft layers at various time-points after transplantation. Systematic analysis of the microanatomy and cellular composition of the adventitial infiltrate were performed. Over a period of 2 months, T-cell infiltrate increased, its composition changed from an equal number of CD8+ and CD4+ to a majority of CD4+ T cells, and shifted from an initial Th1 to a Th2 polarization. In the same time, percentage of CD134 positive cells, a molecule involved in T-cell help to the B cells, increased only in the subpopulation of T CD4+. An important finding was the detection of B lymphocytes in the adventitial infiltrate. Moreover, these cells exhibited a particular disposition; they were clustered in nodular aggregates located in the outer part of the graft adventitia. Staining with anti-immunoglobulin heavy-chain isotype showed that a nucleus of immature double positive IgM+ and IgD+ B-cells, was surrounded by a ring of single positive IgM+ Blymphocytes. This structural organization suggests that adventitial B cell aggregates are germinal centre-like structure. This study is the first to report the implication of VALT (Vascular-Associated Lymphoid Tissue) in alloimmunity, which may play a critical role in the generation of alloantibodies responsible for the development of the lesions of chronic vascular rejection. Akpinar, 1 Jodie M. Keary, 2 Edwin Preston, 1 He Xu, 1 Roger Kurlander, 2 Douglas A. Hale. 1 1 Transplantation Branch, Bethesda, MD; 2 Hematology DLM, Bethesda, MD. Background: Donor bone marrow (BM) prolongs skin graft survival and generates chimerism in mice conditioned with antilymphocyte serum and sirolimus (Sir). Application of this strategy in humans requires adaptation to and testing in large animals. Methods: Skin grafts were performed between ABO matched, outbred cynomolgus monkeys on day 0. Treatment consisted of antithymocyte globulin (ATG, 100 mg/kg total in 5 doses on days 0,1,3,5,7) and a 30-day course of Sir and/or tacrolimus (Tac). BM, harvested from either living or cadaveric donors, was infused at day 7. Immune phenotyping and alloantibody assessment were done by flow cytometry. Blood drug levels were monitored. Chimerism was measured by genotyping using human specific Short Tandem Repeat kit. Results: Treatment related morbidities were observed. Initially, high Sir levels (>40ng/ml) were targeted in 10 primates and wasting (8), lethargy(4), mucocutaneous ulcerations (8), pancytopenia(8), hyperlipidemia(10), pneumonitis(4) and death(4) were encountered. Supra-therapeutic levels of Sir (>100 ng/ml) did not prolong graft survival longer than the therapeutic level (10-25 ng/ml) did. When Sir+Tac were used at 10 ng/ml levels, all monkeys had toxicity culminating in death due to systemic CMV. ATG was associated with >95% lymphocyte depletion; recovery began within 15 days and was complete by 6 weeks. Two primates succumbed to cytokine release after the first dose of ATG. Overall median graft survival was 8 days in controls (n=2) and 24, 13, 13, 67, 52 and 40 days in primates treated with ATG (n=4), Sir (n=4), Sir/BM (n=2), ATG/Sir (n=3), and ATG/Sir/BM (n=7), ATG/Tac/BM (n=2) respectively. No consistent chimerism was detected. The range of infused BM cell number was between 65 million and 2 billion cells/kg and the median graft survival in monkeys that received <200, >200 and <600, and > 600 million cells/kg was 69, 45 and 36 days respectively. The higher doses of BM were obtained from sacrificed donor and contained a higher number of progenitor cells and less T lymphocytes. All recipients developed alloantibody within 3 weeks. Conclusion: Efforts to translate a nonmyeloablative murine tolerance model into cynomolgus monkeys have been disappointing and emphasize the increased immunologic barrier associated with allotransplantation in larger animals and humans. Efforts to modify the treatment protocol with strategies that can facilitate donor BM engraftment and prevent sensitization in this large animal model are ongoing. PURPOSE P-glycoprotein, encoded by multidrug resistance gene 1 (MDR-1), is a drug efflux pump that regulates the uptake of cyclosporin (CsA) across the intestinal wall. Previous studies have shown subjects possessing the C3435T T allele of MDR-1 to have reduced uptake of p-glycoprotein substrates. We hypothesised that genetic variation of MDR-1 contributes to variation in CsA uptake and therefore dose requirements. We examined the association of both the non-coding C3435T and the coding G2677T (Ala 892 Ser) polymorphisms with CsA dose normalised trough ratios. METHODS 92 consecutive adult heart transplant patients transplanted between 1996 and 1999 were studied retrospectively at years 1, 2 and 3 after transplantation. Target 12 hour post dose (trough) CsA level was 100 -150 ng/ml. No patients were receiving concomitant CYP inducers or inhibitors. Genotyping for C3435T and G2677T was performed using Sequence Specific Primer PCR (SSP-PCR). Trough CsA concentrations were measured by the EMIT whole blood immunoassay and dose normalised trough ratios were calculated as trough concentration/0.5 x dose in previous 24 hours and are given as ng/ml/mg. Low dose-normalised trough values indicate high dose requirements to achieve target trough concentration. RESULTS Genotypes were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Possession of the G2677T T allele was associated with lower mean dose-normalised trough values. Mean values (ng/ml/mg) for 2677T allele carriers vs non carriers were 1.43 vs 1.65 (n= 92 p < 0.04), 1.38 vs 1.59 (n=86 p <0.03) and 1.3 vs 1.7 (n= 68 p < 0.003) at years 1, 2 and 3 respectively. In contrast, there was no association between mean dose-normalised trough values and the C3435T polymorphism. Mean values (ng/ml/mg) for 3435T carriers vs non-carriers were 1.43 vs 1.48 (ng/ml/mg, n= 92, p = ns), 1.40 vs 1.43 (n = 86, p = ns) and 1.39 vs 1.37 (n = 68, p = ns) at years 1, 2 and 3 respectively. CONCLUSION Possession of the G2677T T allele but not the C3435T T allele is associated with higher CsA requirements to achieve target trough concentrations. Prior knowledge of MDR-1 genotype may therefore be helpful in determining correct CsA dose and predicting the effect of concomitant p-glycoprotein substrates. Host-derived NK cells infiltrate solid organ allografts early after transplantation. In the DA→ Lewis, high-responder, orthotopic model of liver transplantation 56.4±6.2% of the mononuclear cells in the allograft 24 hours after transplant are NKP-P1+, TCR-NK cells. Moreover, we have determined that cyclosporine (CSA) does not prevent the infiltration of NK cells into liver allografts. However, the direct effects of immunosuppressive drugs on NK cell function remains unclear. The purpose of this study was to determine the effects of immunosuppressive drugs on primary rat NK cells. NK cells were purified from normal Lew rat spleens and primary NK cell lines were established and analyzed for proliferation in the presence of increasing doses of CSA (0-100 ng/ml), FK506 (FK, 0.1-100 ng/ml) or Rapamycin, (RAPA, 0-10 ng/ml). Proliferation was analyzed 1-7 days after initial culture. NK cells demonstrated robust proliferation both in the absence and presence of CSA. In contrast, FK significantly (p< 0.05) inhibited proliferation at high doses and RAPA significantly (p< 0.05) inhibited the proliferation of NK cells in a dose-dependent manner. In related experiments we have determined by intracellular staining and flow cytometry that NK cells are a major source of IFN-γ secretion in liver allografts. Since IFN-γ is such a pivotal cytokine in the response to alloantigen we analyzed the effects of CSA, FK and RAPA on IFN-γ production by NK cells. Primary NK cells secrete robust levels of IFN-γ. Neither CSA, FK nor RAPA inhibit IFN-γ production by NK cells. To determine if immunosuppressive drugs alters the ability of NK cells to kill, cytotoxicity against tumor targets was analyzed in the presence of absence or presence of immunosuppressive drugs (CSA, 100 ng/ml, FK,100 ng/ml and RAPA,10 ng/ml). CSA and FK did not effect NK cellmediated killing while cytotoxicity was significantly (p< 0.05) inhibited in the presence of RAPA. These data indicate that activated NK cells may contribute to the rejection response in CSA and FK treated allograft recipients. Furthermore, NK cells retain effector function in the presence of CSA and FK and thus could actively contribute to the elimination of virally infected or transformed cells in transplant patients. In contrast, NK cell proliferation and killing are significantly diminished by RAPA treatment. Understanding the differential effects of these immunosuppressive drugs on NK cell effector function is important in clinical transplantation. Introduction: Melatonin (5-methoxy N-acetylserotonin, MLT), the main secretory product of the pineal gland, is a multifunctional neurohormone. First, it protects tissues from damage through free radicals and attenuates ischemia/reperfusion injury in solid organ grafts. Second, it acts synergistically on a variety of cellular antioxidants. Third, it displays a complex, dose-dependent immunoenhancing and -suppressing effect in vitro and -vivo. The aim of this study is to probe for the immunoregulatory effect of MLT during the course of acute allograft rejection. Materials and Methods: In the acute model, hearts were transplanted from LBNF1 to LEW rats and anastomosed heterotopically to the abdominal great vessels. In the accelerated model, LEW rats were sensitized with BN rat skin 7d prior to cardiac transplantation (Tx). Recipients were treated with 20(I) and 200mg MLT/kg/d (II) po. respectively; animals receiving saline served as controls. Graft survival was monitored daily through abdominal palpation. Serum samples were obtained and levels of allospecific antibodies (allo-Ab) (FACS) and total Ig (ELISA) measured. Standard MLR and cytotoxicity assays were run. Results: High dose MLT therapy (200mg/kg/d/po) abrogated acute rejection and significantly prolonged allograft survival (mean±sd; control: 6.3±1d vs. I: 7.3±1.1d vs. II: 12.3±1d; p<0.0001; n=12/12/8). Circulating allo-IgM were significantly decreased at d10 and 14 post Tx in group II (p<0.01), whereas in group I at d10 levels were increased compared to group II (p<0.01). No difference in total Ig between the groups was noted. Cellular proliferative efficacy and cytotoxicity were reduced in the high dose group in comparison to group I and controls. In 4/7 recipients, 200mg/MLT/ d abrogated accelerated rejection (84±27h vs. control: 28±6h; p<0.05). Conclusion: Abrogation of acute and accelerated allograft rejection and significant prolongation of Tx survival have been achieved for the first time by employing the neurohormone melatonin. Our results suggest an involvement of MLT in humoral and cellular immune pathways following perfused organ transplantation. These findings may indicate a novel therapeutic immunosuppressive approach, based on modulation of the neuroendocrine/immune axis. Abstract# 1345 Katsunori Tanaka, 1 Nozomu Shirasugi, 2 Fumihiko Inoue, 1 Takurin Akiyoshi, 1 Osamu Aramaki, 2 Qi Zhang, 2 Kenji Matsumoto, 1 Masaki Kitajima, 1 Masanori Niimi. 2 1 Surgery, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Tokyo, Japan; 2 Surgery, Teikyo University, Tokyo, Japan. INTRODUCTION: MCI-186 (3-methyl-1-phenyl-2-pyrazolin-5-one) is a newlydeveloped free radical scavenger which has been shown to reduce reperfusion injury in isolated perfused hearts. Here we studied the effect of MCI-186 on survival of fullymismatched cardiac allograft in mice. METHODS: CBA mice (H2 k ) were given intravenous injection (single dose) of 10mg/ kg MCI-186 or control saline the same day as transplantation of a heart from C57BL/ 10 mice (H2 b ). A mixed leukocyte culture (MLC) assay was also performed. We have previously shown that apoptosis plays a role in the progression of tubulointerstitial fibrosis (Kidney Int 1999; 56:2147-59) and that the antifibrotic molecule pirfenidone (PFD) ameliorates fibrosis by decreasing transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 (Am J Transplant 2002; 2:111-9) in experimental chronic cyclosporine (CsA) nephrotoxicity. As a result, we decided to study the effect of PFD on the expression of apoptosis-related genes in this model. Methods: Salt-depleted pair-fed rats were administered vehicle (VH), VH+PFD 250 mg/kg/d, CsA 7.5 mg/kg/d or CsA+PFD. Physiologic and histologic changes were studied in addition to apoptosis by TUNEL. The mRNA expression of the pro-apoptotic genes p53 and Fas-ligand (L), and that of caspase 3 (CPP32) were studied by real-time PCR (LightCycler) and that of the antiapoptotic gene Bcl-xL by Northern blot analysis. Results: Administration of PFD in CsA-treated rats significantly reduced the scores for tubulointerstitial fibrosis, tubular injury and calcinosis (p <0.01 vs CsA). The number of apoptosis (+) cells was increased by CsA but significantly reduced by PFD (CsA+PFD 16±2 vs. CsA 68±19 per 20 fields at X200, p <0.01 vs. CsA). The number of apoptotic cells significantly correlated with the fibrosis score (r=0.85, p <0.001). The histologic changes and number of apoptotic cells were not affected by PFD in VH-treated rats. The administration of PFD downregulated CsA-induced apoptosis by decreasing the expression of p53 and Fas-L (both of which were increased by CsA) and by increasing that of Bcl-xL (reduced by CsA). The net result was a decrease by PFD in the activity of caspase CPP32, previously increased by CsA. These changes were not observed in VH-treated rats. Conclusion: Thus, another mechanism for PFD's beneficial effect on fibrosis in chronic CsA nephrotoxicity may be through decreasing apoptosis. Whether or not this effect is related to the pro-apoptotic activity of TGF-β remains unclear and warrants further investigation. Introduction: T cells are essential in allograft rejection. Thus, blocking T cell activation and T cell proliferation remain a key strategy in preventing transplant rejection. Although CD28/CD154 costimulatory signals play an important role in T cell activation, blocking CD28 and CD154 costimulatory pathways is not effective in all transplant models. Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) is an antagonist of the de novo pathway of purine biosynthesis, which is critical to lymphocyte proliferation. The aim of this study is to evaluate the effect of the CD28/CD154 costimulatory blockade and MMF treatment on the alloimmune response in vivo. Materials and methods: Lethally irradiated BALB/c mice were adoptively transferred with 80-100 x 10 6 CFSE-labeled C57BL/6 spleen and lymph node cells. Recipient mice were treated with CTLA-4Ig/MR1 (0.5mg/each, i.p.) and/or MMF (100mg/kg/day, p.o.) on days 0, 1, 2, and proliferation of donor T cells in the allogeneic hosts was determined 3 days later by flow cytometry. Fully mismatched skin transplantation was performed using BALB/c (H-2 c ) and C57BL/6 (H-2 b ) mice as donors and recipients, respectively. CTLA-4Ig (0.25mg) and MR1 (0.2mg) costimulatory blockade were administered i.p. on days 0, 2, 4 and days 0, 2, 4, 6, respectively. MMF (100mg/kg) was given by daily gavage from day 0 to day 14. Rejection was defined as total absence of viable allograft tissue. Results: In the in vivo allogeneic response, the CTLA-4Ig/MR1/MMF combined treatment markedly inhibited the proliferation of CFSE-labeled CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, while CD28/CD154 costimulatory blockade or MMF alone exhibited minimal effect in this regard. MMF was particularly potent in blocking CD8+ T cell proliferation in vivo. In addition, this combination significantly prolonged the skin allograft survival when compared with CD28/CD154 costimulatory blockade or MMF alone. Thymoglobulin (Thymo) has been reported to reduce the risk of rejection after transplantation, and may attenuate ischemic-reperfusion injury. The role of Thymo after LDLT, however, remains poorly defined. We compared the outcome of patients that received no polyclonal antibody induction therapy (Group 1; n=33) with those that received a course of Thymo (Group 2; n=33). Methods: Thymo was initiated within the first 6 hrs after LDLT and continued for 7-10 days; daily dosage was adjusted to maintain absolute lymphocyte counts of <0.2. All patients received a tapering dosage of methylprednisolone and tacrolimus (Tac; group 1, 80%; group 2, 92%) or Neoral cyclosporine (Cya; group 1, 20%; group 2, 8%; p=NS). In group 2, initiation of Cya/ Tac was routinely delayed to the 3 rd -5 th post-op day. Ganciclovir was given for 3 mo. to all CMV+ recipients that received Thymo and to all CMV-neg recipients of CMV+ grafts. All complications were recorded prospectively. Results: Demographic characteristics (age, sex, cause of liver disease) were similar in both groups. Median follow-up was 826 days in group 1 and 360 days in group 2 (P<0.01). The proportion of patients free of rejection during the first 6 months was 60% in group 1 and 94% in group 2 (p <0.001 by Log rank test). Six patients in group 1 had steroid-resistant rejection requiring OKT3 (n=5) or thymo (n=1); all 6 of these patients were receiving tacrolimus. All rejection episodes in group 1 were mild and treated successfully with steroids. Thymo was well-tolerated in all patients. There was no significant difference in the incidence of bacterial or CMV infection in the two groups. One patient in group 2 that acquired EBV from the graft developed PTLD, which has been treated successfully. Among Hepatitis C virus infected (HCV)-patients the incidence and severity of recurrent HCV was similar in group 1 and 2. Patient and graft survival at 2 years was 83% and 81% in group 1, and 83% and 83% in group 2, respectively. Causes of death in group 1 were small graft syndrome (n=2), myocardial infarction (1), and sepsis (2); and in group 2 were hemorrhage (1), recurrent hepatoma (1), and sepsis (3). Conclusions. Thymo significantly reduces the risk of acute rejection in LDLT recipients without increasing the risk of infectious complications. Reducing the risk of rejection may be of particular value in recipients of marginal size grafts in whom rejection may compromise function, impair regeneration, and promote graft failure. (1).Post-operative complications HAT (3), PVT (4), BS (4), Bowel perforation (2) Pseudotumor cerebri (1). In conclusion we found the use of a Basiliximab for induction therapy decreases the risk of acute rejection but increases the rate of infection especially EBV and CMV. As we enter an era of new and more potent immunosuppressive agents that are more effective in preventive early rejection and increasing long term graft survival we will face new challenges such as more effective mechanisms to diagnose and treat viral infections. Background: Because recent studies have shown a higher incidence of acute rejection in partial liver grafts, living donor liver grafts, and split cadaveric donor grafts, we decided to compare the incidence of acute rejection in our partial liver grafts and cadaver split grafts compared to whole liver grafts. We studied the outcome of all our liver transplants from 1999 when we began doing living donor adult partial liver transplants and adult cadaveric split liver transplants. Results: In 4 years we have performed 137 whole liver transplants, 27 adult partial living donor grafts, and 24 adult cadaveric split liver grafts. At 4 years, patient survival for a living donor liver transplants is 96%; survival in the split cadaver graft group is 80%, and survival in the whole liver graft group and 68%. The groups were equally matched by age, gender, type of immunosuppression, and average MELD score. There were no significant differences in acute rejection (p=0.2902). When we stratified acute rejection into subgroups of grade, early vs. late, steroid resistant, and recurrence after treatment, we noted a trend toward less severe rejection in the living donor group compared to the whole cadaver organ and split cadaver organ groups (p=0.08). Conclusion: In our series we found no differences between whole organ, split, or LDLTxs regarding the incidence of rejection episodes. But we noted a lower incidence of steroid resistant and multiple rejection episodes in LDLTxs. The advantage of less cold ischemia time and better immunologic matching appears to be more crucial than liver volume. Background/Aim: MMF is increasingly used in LT patients, mainly because of adverse effects of other immunosuppressive drugs. Nevertheless, little is known about PK and PD of MMF in these patients. As a consequence, most protocols include fixed doses of MMF. Therefore, we sequentially determined the PK and PD of mycophenolic acid (MPA, the active metabolite of MMF) in LT patients to assess whether MPA monitoring could be advisable after LT. Methods: a) 15 LT recipients treated with MMF (1g bid, orally), tacrolimus and daclizumab were included in the study; b) 12-hour plasma MAP PK profile after one dose of MMF was determined on days 6, 10 and 16, and at months 3 and 6; c) PD (assessed by the inhibitory capacity of serum MPA on the proliferation of CEM cells, a cell line insensitive to other immunosuppressants, and expressed as the % CEM proliferation) was also determined in 7 of these patients on day 6 and at months 3 and 6, before and 1 hr after one dose of MMF. Results: A great interindividual variability was observed in MPA PK profiles at any time. Although there was a gradual increase in MPA AUC and C-min throughout the study, a high proportion of patients had AUC below the recommended range (30-60 µg.h/mL): 85% on day 6, 92% on day 10, 64% on day 16, 30% at month 3 and 38% at months 6, with similar percentages in relation to recommended ranges of C-min (1.0-3.5 µg/mL). An acceptable inverse correlation (r²= -0.754). was observed between plasma MPA concentrations and % CEM proliferation. When AUC and C-min were within the recommended ranges, % CEM proliferation was low for almost all samples, but when these PK parameters were below the recommended ranges, % CEM proliferation was very variable and, therefore, unpredictable. No relationship between MPA PK and Abstracts efficacy of MMF could be established because only 1 patient developed rejection, probably due to the concomitant administration of tacrolimus and daclizumab. Gastrointestinal symptoms were the only side-effects attributed to MMF which showed a significant relationship with MPA PK. Conclusions: 1) MPA monitoring seems to be necessary in LT patients treated with MMF, at least during the first postoperative months, and 2) the dose of 1 g bid of MMF, habitually administered after LT, could be insufficient to maintain an adequate level of immunosuppression during the periods in which patients could not concomitantly receive other powerful immunosuppressants. Introduction: We infused unmodified cadaveric donor bone marrow at the time of transplantation in order to increase chimerism and hopefully induce tolerance in liver recipients. Materials and methods: We attempted withdrawal of immunosuppression in patients that were at least 3 years post-transplantation, without history of autoimmune disease and no rejection for at least a year before entering the study. Patients were accepted irrespective of BM infusions. Immunosuppression was reduced by 1/3 upon enrollment in the study, an additional 1/3 at 12 months and completely at 24 months. Patients with rejection, disease recurrence, or non-compliance with the follow-up were removed from the study. In addition to routine follow up a liver biopsy and chimeric studies were performed at every phase of the study and 6 months following complete withdrawal. Results: One hundrend and seven patients entered the study. Forty six had donor bone marrow infusions (5X108 cells/kg) at the time of transplantation ( group A ) and 61 had not ( group B ). Follow-up is till November '03: Four patients died (group A: n=3, group B: n=1) due to cardiac death (n=1), complications of biliary surgery (n=1), dialysis (n=1), and chronic rejection (n=1). Withdrawal of immunosuppression was stopped in 84 patients: (34 (74%) from group A and 50 (82%) from group B ) due to rejection (n=75), non-compliance (n=7), or hepatitis-C recurrence (n=2). Two patients ( group A) developed chronic rejection. One died as previously mentioned and the second lost her graft and was retransplanted. Twenty one patients, 11 (24%) from group A and 10 (16.5%) from group B, remain immunosuppression-free for 3 to 34 months (average 21.8 months C 2 monitoring of cyclosporine microemulsion (CsA-ME) provides clinical benefits compared to C 0 monitoring in de novo liver transplant recipients. However, CsA-ME absorption after liver transplantation can be impaired by factors such as paralytic ileus, cholestasis and clamping of external biliary drainage that do not affect renal transplant patients. This analysis compared CsA-ME absorption following liver and renal transplantation. Methods: Data was obtained from two multicenter, prospective, randomized trials. The LIS2T study included 499 de novo liver transplant patients randomized to CsA-ME C 2 monitoring (n=250; C 2 target for months 1-3: 0.8-1.2µg/ mL) or tacrolimus C 0 monitoring (n=245), with or without azathioprine. All patients received steroids and were followed for 6 months. The MO2ART study included 299 de novo renal transplant patients managed by CsA-ME C 2 monitoring (C 2 target for month 1, 1.6-2.0µg/mL; month 2, 1.4-1.6µg/mL; month 3, 1.2-1.4g/mL). Absorption of CsA-ME was evaluated by C 2 level per 1mg/kg/day CsA-ME at different time points. The number and cause of dose changes in the LIS2T study was also analyzed. Results: The ratios of C 2 per 1 mg/kg/day in liver and renal transplant recipients are described in the table. The mean number of dose changes per patient in the CsA-ME group of the LIS2T study was 19 (median 17, range 1-62) and in the tacrolimus group it was 16 (median 15, range 1-58), with no difference in proportion of patients receiving one or more dose changes to achieve target level or due to adverse events, unsatisfactory effect, drug intolerance or other reasons. In the CsA-ME and tacrolimus cohorts in LIS2T, 6.4% and 2.0% of dose changes were <5% of total dose, respectively. Conclusions: CsA-ME absorption in the early post-transplant phase is markedly lower in liver transplant patients compared to renal transplant recipients. Absorption of CsA-ME continues to improve until the end of month 2 following liver transplantation, whereas in renal transplantation absorption plateaus by the end of month 1. Dose changes should take this increase in absorption into account in order to avoid overshooting the pre-defined C 2 target range. Use of C 2 monitoring does not affect the number or cause of dose changes compared to tacrolimus C 0 monitoring. A greater proportion of dose changes <5% total dose were performed in the CsA-ME group and may be clinically irrelevant. No acute rejections (AR) occurred in the steroid withdrawal group, 3 borderline ARs and 1 AR grade I (Banff classification) in the control group. Conclusions: This study suggests that the addition of MMF to a CsA-based immunosuppressive regimen in pediatric renal transplant recipients has increased significantly the safety of steroid withdrawal in this patient population. Steroid withdrawal was associated with a marked catch-up growth in the presence of stable graft function, a significant reduction in cushingoid appearance and a reduced need for hypertensive medication. FSGS is the etiology of 10-15% of pediatric end stage renal failure. Following transplantation, recurrence of FSGS accounts for a significant percentage of graft loss. In a report from NAPRTCS over a decade ago, prior to the use of mycophenolate mofetil or IL-2 receptor antibodies, the recurrence rate was found to be 20%. The aim of this study was to determine whether newer immunosuppression regimens have had an impact on recurrence rates. 218 children have been identified in the NAPRTCS database since 1998 who have been transplanted with modern immunosuppression regimens. In a preliminary report of 72 of these patients, 29% had recurrence. The recurrence rates did not differ by prior dialysis status, gender or donor source (38% LD vs 23% CAD) but recurrence did tend to decrease with increasing recipient age. The recurrence rates were 44%, 41% and 19% for the < 6, 6-12 and ≥ 13 yr olds respectively (p = 0.1 by logistic regression). Recurrence rates were 35%, 22% and 17% for white, black and hispanic patients respectively. Recurrence was not significantly affected by choice of calcineurin inhibitor (CyA 35%, tacrolimus 26%) or choice of induction agent ( polyclonal antibody 31%, IL 2 receptor antibody 32%). Graft failure rates were 14% in patients without recurrence and 29% in patients with recurrence ( P=0.14). 5 of 6 graft failures in the patients with recurrence were attributed to recurrence (6th attributed to non adherence). In conclusion, it does not appear that current immunosuppressive regimens have altered the rate of recurrence of FSGS after pediatric kidney transplantation. Although not statistically significant, a trend was seen toward increased recurrence in white patients, in recipients of living donor grafts, in those patients treated with CyA and in younger patients. A. To examine the demographic, treatment related, and regimen factors associated with non-adherence for adolescent kidney transplant recipients one year after their transplant. B. Participants completed the Medication Adherence Measure (MAM), a semi-structured interview assessesing self-reported medication adherence. Subjects were asked to describe their medication regimen and to report the number of doses taken, taken late, or missed the week prior to the interview to obtain a comprehensive adherence profile. Non-adherence scores were calculated by dividing the number of missed doses by the number of doses the patient was prescribed for each medicine and an average across all medicines in the regimen. Adherence scores for doses taken and taken late were similarly calculated. In addition to self-report, a Biomedical Marker Score was obtained. A nephrologist rated adherence by comparing blood serum levels of immunosuppressant medications to the expected range. When the actual lab value fell within 80 to 120 percent of the expected range, an adherence score of 0 was assigned. Lab values 40 to 80% and 0 to 40% of the expected range were assigned scores of -1 and -2, respectively. C. 21 adolescents (mean age = 16, 86% male, 71% Caucasian) participated in this study. 46% of this sample reported at least some non-adherence; 19% reported missing more than 10% of their prescribed doses during the referent week. Medication non-adherence was positively correlated with patient age, with older patients more likely to be nonadherent. Non-adherence was also associated with patient ethnicity, with Caucasian patients being more adherent than minority patients. For treatment related variables, non-adherence was associated with being older at the time of transplant and with having been on dialysis during prior to transplant. Regimen variables associated with non-adherence included being on more medications and having a higher number of prescribed doses per week. Self-reported non-adherence was positively correlated with nephrologist rated non-adherence based on Tacrolimus serum levels, but patient report revealed more non-adherence than did ratings based on blood serum levels. D. The results suggest several risk factors for adolescent non-adherence after transplant Abstracts including demographic, treatment related, and regimen variables. These results also indicate that adolescents may be fairly accurate reporters of their own non-adherence if questions are posed in the right way. Implications for interviewing patients about adherence are discussed. Background: More potent immunosuppressive agents are associated with an increased risk of viral-associated morbidity. Post-transplant viral surveillance identifies viral load but its ability to predict likelihood of developing viral disease versus remaining asymptomatic with subclinical infection is limited. Such a tool could guide use of preemptive therapy. In the HIV/AIDS population, lymphopenia is a well-established marker of infection risk. Methods: We undertook a retrospective case-control study of pediatric renal transplant recipients to evaluate the temporal relationship between lymphopenia (absolute lymphocyte count < 1000 cells/mm³) and subsequent development of viral disease vs. subclinical infection. Cases were patients with primary CMV or EBV disease, defined as new detection of viral DNA by real-time quantitative PCR (DNAemia) associated with clinical symptoms. Controls were patients with subclinical CMV or EBV infection, defined as asymptomatic DNAemia. Cases and controls were matched by donor and recipient EBV and CMV status and time post-transplant. Only subjects with monthly viral surveillance for the 4 months prior to diagnosis were included to reduce the possibility that lymphopenia was viral-mediated. Measures of all absolute lymphocyte counts (ALC) available in the 8 weeks prior to viral diagnosis were used. Results: Four cases and 8 controls were available for analysis. Characteristics of cases and controls were similar with respect to time post-transplant (mean: 8 m vs. 10 m) and CMV and EBV donor and recipient status (CMV D+/R-: 3/4 vs. 6/8 and EBV D+/R-: 3/4 vs. 7/8). The mean ALC in the 8 weeks prior to diagnosis of viral disease was 915 cells/mm³ (± 184) compared to 2350 cells/mm³ (± 450) in those with subclinical infection (p<0.001). Conclusion: Patients with viral disease were significantly more likely to have lymphopenia in the 8 weeks prior to diagnosis compared to those with subclinical infection. We conclude that lymphopenia may be an important predictor of a patient's risk of developing viral disease. Background. New-onset diabetes has been described in pediatric transplant recipients, with reported incidence of up to 20%. In children, tacrolimus appears to be particularly associated with an increased risk for diabetes after transplantation. However, limited information is available regarding the incidence and features of pre-transplant status of abnormal glucose tolerance in pediatric kidney transplant recipients. To determine a patient's risk for developing post-transplant diabetes mellitus (PTDM) in children, an oral glucose tolerance tests (OGTT) was performed in 53 nondiabetic pediatric recipients before transplantation between August 1999 and January 2003. The subjects were classified into three groups by World Health Organization criteria on the basis of OGTT. These patients received either a ciclospoline (CsA)based or a tacrolimus (FK)-based immunosuppressive regimen post-transplantation. However, the recipients who showed abnormal glucose tolerance in the pre-transplant OGTT chose the CsA-based regimen. Results. The mean age of 53 patients was 9.7 ± 5.4 years (range 2.5-18 years), with 35 males and 18 females. The mean post-transplant follow-up was 27 ± 14 months. Fasting plasma glucose level before transplantation was within normal limit (<110 mg/dl) in all patients. Cox proportional hazard regression demonstrated that MELD score was significant determinant for short term mortality (Table) . Among preoperative variables, leukocytosis (p=0.012) and ascites (p=0.058) were significantly associated with short term mortality in Group B, and urgent status (p=0.014) and positive culture of fungus (p=0.071) were significantly associated in Group C. The present study demonstrated that MELD score is a good predictor for 90-day mortality in our ALDLT series. However, additional risk factors also affect the short term survivals of the recipients with moderate or high MELD scores. This suggests that a special model in addition to MELD score may be required to predict the outcomes after ALDLT. The use of adult-to-adult living donor liver transplantation (A2ALLTx) is an accepted technique. No > 3 years prospective comparison of A2ALLTx to adult deceased donor liver transplantation (ADDLTx) has been reported. Patients and Methods: This is a prospective, IRB approved comparison of A2ALLTx to ADDLTx. The data includes: age, sex, race, primary liver disease, waiting time, Pretransplant CTP/MELD score, peri-operative mortality, acute and chronic rejection, post-transplant complications, charges, graft survival, and patient survival. Results: In six years 284 liver transplants were performed in 273 pts. 209 Ltx from ADDLTx (73.6%) and 75 A2ALLTx (26.4%). Data comparing ADDLTx vs A2ALLTx showed no difference in sex, race, primary disease, presence of HCC, peri-operative mortality or immunosuppression. Hepatitis C (HCV) was the most common reason for transplantation in both groups (46.4% vs 39%). Data regarding overall patient/ graft survival, rejection, pre-transplant MELD score, charges, biliary complication rate and re-transplantation rate are shown in Table 1 . Comparison of patient/graft survival, retransplantation rate in patients with and without HCV is shown in Table 2 . Conclusion: Overall, the A2ALLTx, in a lower risk, younger recipient group, is as durable a liver replacement technique as the ADDLTx. Patients with A2ALLTx presented less acute rejection and less histologic HCV recurrence with no difference in histologic severity or re-transplant rates. Biliary complications were more common in A2ALLTx but were not associated with increased graft loss compared to ADDLTx. Segmental liver grafts from live donors continues to supplement the severe shortage of cadaver organs. Grafts need to be of adequate size to support the recipient in liver failure, yet sufficient mass must remain to prevent donor liver failure. Few studies have elucidated how small this remnant can be. Most centers accept 30% remant liver volume as being sufficient, however there is little data to define a safe minimal size. We evaluated post-donation graft dysfunction in living donors and correlated it with remnant size and pre-transplant histology. Methods: Ninety five consecutive adult donors of right lobe grafts were evaluated for remnant size and abnormal histologic features on pre-donation biopsy and correlated to peak post-operative serum Bilirubin, AST, ALT, Alkaline Phosphatase INR, postoperative complications, and lengths of stay. Remnant liver size was based on estimation by measurement of relative CT volumes. Data was analyzed using SPSS software and compared using 2-tailed t tests. Results: Remant volumes varied from 20% to 50% estimated total liver volumes. There was no statistical difference in post-operative complications, or lengths of stay in comparing the groups of 20%-25% remant volume,or 26%-30% remnant volume to the larger remnants. However there was a significantly higher peak in serum bilirubin, AST, and ALT in the 20%-25% remnant group compared to the others (p<0.01, p<0.01, and p<0.01 respectively). There was no difference in peak INR or alkaline phospatase related to small size. Of histologic abnormalities only grafts with macrosteatosis estimations of greater than 10% showed significant dysfunction compared to the other grafts. Dysfunction was detected in elevated bilirubin, AST, and ALT (p<0.014, p<0.009, and p<0.005 respectively) in the mildly steatotic livers. No difference in INR elevation was detected in the steatotic group. Conclusion: Donors could be safely left with estimated remnant volumes of 20% without increases in complications or lengths of stay. There is a slight trend toward liver dysfunction as evidenced by significant increases in bilirubin and transaminases, but not INR in donors with small remnant volumes. Macrosteatosis greater than 10% in donors behaved similarly. While it is tempting to be assured that patients with small remnants do well, it is cautionary that there is a measurable difference in liver dysfunction in small and macrosteatotic remnants. Introduction: The relevancy of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) and growth hormone (GH) in liver regeneration and metabolism after liver resection or liver transplantation is not well understood. The aim of this study was to analyze IGF-1 and GH in donors and recipients before and after living-donor liver transplantation of the right hepatic lobe. Methods: 16 donors and 15 recipients were investigated before and on day 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, and 10 as well as 6 months after right lobectomy or liver transplantation of the right lobe, respectively. GH was measured by immuno-radiometric assay (IRMA, BioSource), IGF-1 by RIA of Mediagnost. Results: Before transplantation GH of recipients was elevated (8,03 ± 2,46 ng/ml), IGF-1 was reduced (73,20 ± 12,82 ng/ml) compared to healthy donors before lobectomy (GH: 0,60 ± 0,06 ng/ml, IGF-1: 157,07 ± 18,88 ng/ml), p<0,01. After transplantation IGF-1 of recipients continuously increased until 6 months and reached donor IGF-1 before operation on POD 7. GH decreased and was bisected already an POD 2 (3,49 ± 0,77 ng/ml), p<0,05. There was no significant difference after POD 3 to donor GH before operation. GH of the donors increased until POD 3 (3,29 ± 0,79 ng/ml, p<0,01) and was still increased after 6 months. IGF-1 of the donors strongly decreased by 60% after lobectomy until POD 5 (63,67 ± 9,67 ng/ml, p<0,01) and was still slightly decreased after 6 months (141,87 ± 14,38 ng/ml). Discussion: Postoperative changes in GH and IGF-1 in donors and recipients after living-donor liver transplantation of the right hepatic lobe are completely different. Right lobectomy of healthy donors induced a strong decrease of IGF-1 and as a consequence an increased secretion of GH. In contrast, recipients show continuously increasing IGF-1 and decreasing GH after living-donor liver transplantation in parallel to improved liver function. Thus, liver function seems to have an important influence on the GH/IGF-1 axis. Further investigations are necessary to elucidate the meaning of these changes. [Background] Living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) between adults has now become a legitimate alternative to cadaveric LT. Right lobe grafts have been predominantly used between adults with acceptable results. However, operative mortality for the right-lobe donor is realistic and estimated to be as high as 1%, due to a smaller remnant liver. To minimize the risk for the donor, left-lobe grafting could be an ideal option in adult-to-adult LDLT. The purpose of this study was to assess the feasibility of left-lobe LDLT between adults based on a single-center experience. [Methods] Between October 1996 and November 30 2003, 110 adult-to-adult LDLTs using either a left-lobe graft (n=89) or a right-lobe graft (n=21) were performed at our institution. Among 89 left-lobe donors, 72 donors were blood-type identical, while16 were compatible and 1 was imcompatible to the recipient. Indications for LDLT were liver cirrhosis in 35 cases (27 cases with HCC), fulminant hepatic failure in 26, cholestatic liver disease in 22, retransplantation in 3 and others in 3. Twenty-eight patients were ICU-bound. The actual graft weight (GV) to the recipient standard liver volume (SLV) ratio (GV/SLV) was used for graft size evaluation. [Results] The mean graft weight was 452g (range 220-750g), which resulted in 40.3% (range 21-66%) of the recipient SLV. Nine grafts were extremely small (GV/SLV<30%). The overall 1-, 3-and 5-year patients survival were 79.3%, 77.1% and 71.6%, respectively, which were not different from those of right-lobe LDLTs. Twenty-two grafts (24.7%) were lost to chronic rejection (n=2), hepatic infarction (n=4), disease recurrence(n=3), GVHD (n=1), hepatic artery thrombosis (n=2) and other causes (n=10). Small-for-size syndrome occurred in 20 cases (22.5%), which led to only one direct graft loss. Graft size and donor age did not affect the patient survival. Major donor morbidity included biliary stricture (n=2), bile leak from cutting surface (n=2), gastric stasis ( A decade ago, segmental portal vein thrombosis was a contraindication to liver transplantation (LTx), but development of techniques such as thrombectomy and vascular interposition graft make it possible to offer LTx to these patients. Complete/extensive thrombosis of the venous splanchnic system, however, is not manageable by conventionnal LTx techniques and is associated with a very poor prognosis. Multivisceral Tx including the intestine is done for this indication but remains a highrisk procedure. One alternative is the performance of a Cavo-Portal-Transposition (CPT) e.g. perfusion of the liver by recipient caval flow, but data on this procedure are scarce (<30 case-reports). Therefore, results of LTx using CPT at a single-center were analyzed. Methods/Results. Of 116 LTx done in a 2-year-period (05/2001-05/2003), 5 (4.3%) {2females/3males; mean age: 53 (41-71); 3 Budd-chiari, 1 reTx/chronic rejection, 1 cryptogenic cirrhosis} undergone CPT. All had complete chronic splanchnic thrombosis (intraoperatively-confirmed) associated to advanced liver failure (child C), major portal hypertension and moribund condition. CPT was done by completely diverting the inferior recipient vena caval flow into the graft vena porta directly (2) or via an interposition iliac vein (3). Normal anatomical infrahepatic caval flow was completely interrupted (5). Graft function was adequate immediately postTx. Portal hypertension (ascites/varices/hypersplenism) substantially improved postTx but this was a slow process associated to a long hospital stay: 77days (17-145). Graft and patient survival are 100% at 3 mths; 1 patient (71yo) died >3 mths due to biliary leak/sepsis unrelated to CPT. At last follow-up (8mth-2yr) liver synthesis capacity and gut function are satisfactory in the 4 survivors. Conclusion: CPT represents a salvage procedure which provides adequate survival (80%) in moribund patients with diffuse splanchnic thrombosis not amenable to conventionnal LTx, and who would otherwise rapidly succumb. CPT avoids technically/immunologically more challenging multivisceral Tx. The intriguing observation that liver and gut can function satisfactorily in absence of direct anatomical portal drainage from the gut into the liver probably reflects the spontaneous development of extra-anatomical portocaval collaterals. One penalty of CPT, however, is the persistance of some degree of portal hypertension. Background: SLT for 2 adult recipients is a procedure that is slowly developing as issues regarding donor and recipient selection are better defined. It remains a technically demanding procedure and optimizing the surgical technique of the split will play an important role in its success and ability to expand the donor pool. Results: Since 1999, we have performed 28 right lobe/left lobe splits (transplanted into 28 adult recipients) from 14 deceased donors. In the first 9 donors, the split was performed exactly similar to the way we perform adult living donor procedures. The inferior vena cava was preserved with the left lobe graft, along with the middle hepatic vein and all the main hilar structures, including the common hepatic artery, portal vein, and common bile duct (CBD). In the last 5 donors, we have modified the procedure to include the cava with the right lobe graft. This had the advantage of maximizing outflow of the right lobe graft (by preserving all short haptic veins draining into the cava) and allowed back-table reconstruction of large middle hepatic vein (MHV) tributaries using vein grafts from the donor (thus minimizing warm ischemic time for the right graft at time of implantation). Outflow of the left lobe graft was then based on the common confluence of the MHV and left HV. In the last 3 donors, we have modified the split further to preserve the CBD with the right lobe graft (Fig) . Biliary drainage of both grafts is then possible with a single anastomosis in both recipients (right graft via CBD, left graft via single left hepatic duct). Prior to this modification, 9 of the 11 right grafts required 2 separate biliary anastomosis; since then, all 3 right lobe grafts have had a single biliary anastomosis. All 14 left lobe grafts have had a single biliary anastamiosis. Conclusions: The surgical procedure of adult SLT continues to undergo modifications. Optimizing the surgical technique will play a crucial part in the success of this procedure. Split liver transplantation (SLT) increases the pool of available organs for pediatric orthotopic liver transplantation (pOLT). With increased cooperation and communication between transplant centers, SLT can further increase the number of donor allografts. Herein, we report a multi-center experience of 56 pOLT using a left lateral segment (LLS) allograft. Methods: The current study consists of a retrospective review of 56 pediatric LLS transplants performed at 2 collaborating pOLT centers between 9/1997 and 10/2003. Median patient follow-up was 20 months. Results: A summary of donor demographics is presented in Table 1 . Liver splitting was performed in-situ and ex-vivo, 64% and 36% of the time respectively. The celiac axis was maintained with 60% of the LLS, and arterial reconstruction was required in 16 (29%) of the grafts. Recipient data is summarized in Table 2 . The most common indication for pOLT was biliary atresia. 23 recipients were UNOS status 1 at time of pOLT and the remaining 33 had a median PELD score of 16. The overall allograft and patient survival rate at 1 year was 82% and 89%, respectively. Comparative UNOS averages for pediatric allograft and patient survival at 1 year were 79% and 87%. There was an 11% biliary complication rate: 1 bile duct stricture and 5 biliary leaks. Vascular complications included 5 HAT and 5 PVT accounting for an 18% vascular complication rate. Conclusion: SLT increases the number of allografts available for pOLT and does not have the safety concerns of living donor transplantation. With increased program collaborations, the number of available allografts is increased even further. While SLT is technically demanding, and has a significant learning curve, patient and allograft survival rates compare favorably with UNOS averages. Therefore, SLT should be considered as an option for pediatric liver transplant recipients. (p=NS)). However, at 6 months post-transplant, IgG serostatus was highly predictive of subsequent CMV disease between month 6-12 (CMV disease rate 1.3% in IgG seropositive patients vs. 10.0% in IgG seronegative patients (p=0.002)). IgM and IgG results during prophylaxis (day 28 and 56) were not predictive of CMV disease or viraemia. Conclusions: In D+/R-patients receiving 100 days of antiviral prophylaxis, the clinical utility of IgG or IgM measurements while on prophylaxis or at end of prophylaxis is limited in terms of predicting subsequent disease. However, a single IgG measurement at 6 months post-transplant may be very useful for stratifying patients in terms of risk of late onset CMV disease.  The direct and indirect role of HHV-6 and HHV-7 in post-SOT clinical syndromes is increasingly recognized. Studies suggest that their pathogenicity is exerted through their interaction with CMV. Indeed, CMV D+/R-SOT patients have the highest incidence of HHV-6 and -7 reactivation. In this study, we determined whether oral ganciclovir (OGCV) or valganciclovir (VGCV) prophylaxis, which reduced the incidence of CMV disease, is also effective in suppressing HHV-6 and HHV-7 reactivation. METHODS: 2,232 blood samples were obtained from 263 CMV D+/R-SOT patients who received OGCV (n=95) or VGCV (n=168) prophylaxis for the prevention of CMV disease. Samples collected prior to (baseline) and during (days 14, 42, 70, and 100) Abstracts anti-CMV prophylaxis, and at months 4, 4.5, 6, 8, and 12 post-SOT were quantified for HHV-6A, HHV-6B, and HHV-7 DNA using a LightCycler-based PCR assay (lowest limit of detection, 1 copy). Significant HHV-6 and HHV-7 DNAemia was defined as ≥1000 copies/mL. RESULTS: HHV-6A DNAemia was not observed at any time point. Four of 263 patients (1.5%) had significant HHV-6B DNAemia (peak level, 1096-91050 copies/mL). The prevalence of significant HHV-6B DNAemia was relatively constant before, during, and after prophylaxis (range: 0.6-1.4%). In contrast, the prevalence of significant HHV-7 DNAemia was higher (2.3-7.8%). Significant HHV-7 DNAemia occurred in 48 patients (18.3%). For these patients, the mean (median; range) for significant HHV-7 DNA levels were 3455 (1645; 1382-9211) prior to, 4904 (1672; 1007-80350) during, and 3868 (1981; 1045-48540) copies/mL after prophylaxis. CONCLUSION: The incidence of significant HHV-6 and HHV-7 DNAemia in this large cohort of CMV D+/R-SOT patients appears lower than the reported rates in a historical cohort of CMV D+/R-SOT patients who were not receiving anti-CMV prophylaxis [HHV-6 (27%); HHV-7 (45%)]. Nonetheless, the contrasting incidence and prevalence in HHV-6 and HHV-7 reactivation highlights the differential in vivo activity of GCV on β-herpesviruses: HHV-7 is least susceptible, compared to HHV-6 (and CMV), to prophylactic doses of OGCV and VGCV. We are assessing the clinical relevance of this finding, including a potential role for HHV-7 (and breakthrough HHV-6) in the pathogenesis of late CMV disease. Background: In solid organ transplant patients, both primary infection and re-infection can cause CMV disease with high morbidity. Pre-emptive therapy with intravenous (iv) ganciclovir has shown to be effective in preventing CMV end organ disease in solid organ transplant patients. Valganciclovir, given 900 mg daily, gives similar ganciclovir plasma levels to iv ganciclovir (5mg/kg od), and has been recently licensed for prophylaxis against CMV disease in solid organ transplant patients. We report here the results of a retrospective study, comparing the kinetics of decline in CMV load following either iv ganciclovir (GCV; 5mg/kg bd) or valganciclovir (VGCV; 900mg bd) in adult solid organ transplant patients receiving pre-emptive therapy. Methods: CMV viremia was monitored twice weekly on whole blood by CMV PCR. Patients with two consecutive positive CMV PCR results were treated with iv ganciclovir (5 mg/kg bd) or with Valganciclovir (oral 900 mg bd) at the discretion of the physician, until becoming CMV PCR negative (<200 genomes/mL blood). Primary study outcome was defined as time to become CMV negative and rate of decline in viral load after initiating antiviral therapy. Results: In total, 45 patients were included in the study. Twenty three patients were treated with iv GCV compared to 22 treated withVGCV. Mean baseline CMV loads and replication rate (r) prior to antiviral therapy were similar between both treatment arms (iv GCV: 3.85 log10 gen/ml; VGCV 3.81 log10 gen/ml; p=0.78, replication rate: iv GCV 0.4 ge day-1 vs 0.49 ge day-1, p=0.44). The time between the first positive CMV PCR sample and starting antiviral therapy was 9 days in both groups. Median time to become CMV PCR negative was 14 days in the ivGCV group compared to 15.2 days within the VGCV group (p=0.88). The half-life of decline in the ivGCV and VGCV treated groups was 1.73 days and 2.16 days respectively (p=0.7). None of the patients experienced symptomatic CMV disease. Conclusion: In solid organ transplant recipients, the decline rate of CMV load following pre-emptive therapy with valganciclovir (900mg bd) is not significantly different to that observed following iv ganciclovir therapy (5mg/kg bd). 10.1 9.5 0.8883 * 1 pt in Grp 2 had Liver-Kidney tx. * * 1 pt in Grp 1 and 4 pts in Grp 2 had K-P tx. # OI's include yeast, B-K, EBV infections Over-all incidence of CMV was 11.9% (n=23) with 13 (56.5%) in the high risk D+/Rcategory (7 in Group1, 6 in Grp2), 9 (41%) in the D+/R+ category (2 in Grp 1, 7 in Grp 2), and one in the D-/R-category (Grp1). Five patients in Group 1, and 2 patients in Group 2 developed CMV while on prophylaxis. Conclusions: Donor positivity is the greatest risk factor for developing CMV infection post transplant accounting for 97.5% of CMV post-transplant. Although CMV infection rates were similar in both groups, patients who received CMV Ig had fewer prophylaxis failures (2 vs 5 pts) and a significant delay in onset of CMV over patients who received oral Ganciclovir alone. Introduction: Donor passenger gastrointestinal lymphocytes have been implicated in the development of graft versus host (GvH) reactivity that in turn may contribute to post-transplant morbidity in intestinal transplantation. We asked whether Alemtuzumab or Campath-1H (C-1H) treatment could alter this activity. Methods: Pieces of cadaver donor intestines and draining lymph nodes were obtained before and ∼ 6 hours after revascularization (pre-and post-R) of donor organs with the recipients who had been either treated with or without C-1H immediately preoperatively or from donors treated with C-1H 2-8 hours prior to organ harvesting. Lymphocytes from these tissues were isolated and tested as responders in mixed lymphocyte reactions (MLR). Results: Cells isolated from intestinal mucosa, lamina propria and lymph nodes harvested pre-R reacted to both the recipient and third party lymphocytes with stimulation indices (SI) ranging from 8.6 to 194 (n=10). Post-R preparations in C-1H treated recipients reacted at significantly lower magnitude giving SI of 2.0 56.6 (p<0.01). Such reduction was not observed with post-R samples from patients not treated with C-1H. Lymphocytes from both proximal (jejunal) and distal (colic) regions gave similar alloreactive responses. Both the pre-and post-R samples had similar cellular yields, initial viability and flow cytometric profiles, suggesting that despite the functional changes there was no cellular or receptor loss by the short-term (6 hour) systemic exposure to C-1H in the intestinal graft or its lymph nodes once revascularization has occurred. Attempts at performing similar experiments from cadaver donors who were treated with C-1H 6-8 hours prior to organ harvesting were not successful as very few lymphocytes could be obtained from equivalent quantities of intestinal tissues (n=3). However, cadaver donors who were treated with C-1H for <3 hours before organ harvesting gave similar results as untreated donors (n=3) described above. Conclusions: Campath-1H treatment of the donor and/or recipient might bring about a drastic reduction in potential GvH reactivity by the donor intestinal lymphoid cells. Introduction: There is an increasing emphasis on using either a CI or steroid-free regimen in combination with either mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) or rapamcyin (Rap). Most desirable would be a maint. regimen that is both CI and steroid-free to minimize non-immunosuppressive side effects. We used an anti-T-cell antibody (Campath) for maint. ImmSx in a series of Px and KD Tx recips; early results are described. Patients and methods: From 1/03 to 11/03, 46 diabetic recips of either a simultaneous Px/KD (SPK) (n=11), a Px after KD (PAK) (n=16), a PxTx alone (PTA) (n=13) or a KD after PxTx (KAP) (n=6) were given Campath 30 mg IV x 3 for induction ImmSx and thereafter 30 mg whenever the absolute lymphocyte count exceed 200mm 3 (usually required at 2-4 month intervals). The only oral immunosuppressant was MMF (if enterically tolerated at target 2-3 gm/day), adjusted by neutrophil count, or Rap (target level 5-8). A concurrent group of patients (n=34) were given Campath only for induction with tacrolimus (target level 5-8) or cyclosporine (target level 150-200) and MMF as the intention to treat maint. ImmSx (SPK n=7, PAK n=15, PTA n=10, KAP n=2). Patient and graft survival and rejn episode rates were calculated for all cases with death with a functioning graft (DWFG) counted as a graft failure. Mean followup was 5 mos (range 1-10). Results: In the Campath maint. group, there were 3 technical failures (TFs), 1 SPK, 2 PTA, 2 DWFG (1 SPK, 1 PAK), 2 rejn graft losses (both PTA) and 6 reversible rejn episodes (1 SPK, 3 PAK, 1 PTA, and 1 KAP). In the CI maintenance group, there were no TFs, 2 DWFGs (both PTA), no rejn losses, and 6 reversible rejn episodes (1 SPK, 2 PAK, 2 PTA, and 1 KAP). Cytomegalovirus occurred in 1 Campath (PTA) and 2 CI (both PAK) maint. patients. There were no PTLD occurrences and 1 in the CI (a PTA) maint. group. In the SPK and PAK categories, there were no significant differences in actuarial pt graft survival and rejn episode rates. In the PTA category, the rejn episode rate (reversible and nonreversible combined) was higher in the Campath maint. group (p=0.02) Conclusion: Early results with a Campath maint. protocol in Px Tx recips are at least as good with those with CI maint., but so far there have more rejns in the PTA category. Nevertheless, the advantages of a CI-free and steroid-free protocol is attractive. Anti-T-cell maint. therapy in organ allograft recips should be considered as an alternative to conventional ImmSx. BACKGROUND: Improvement of rejection after intestinal transplantation (ITx) led to the use of a steroid free protocol based on rATG preconditioning and induction with low dose tacrolimus (TAC). METHODS: 36 children 5 months to 20 years received pre-transplant rATG 2-3mg/kg, followed by ITx (liver/intestine n=12, intestine n=15, multivisceral n=6, modified/ multivisceral n=1, liver/intestine/pancreas n=1, intestine/pancreas n=1). Posttransplant rATG 2-3mg/kg (total of 5 mg/kg), with TAC started within 48 hours. Target trough concentrations were of 15-20 ng/dl for 2 weeks, then 10-15ng/dl thereafter. Follow-up ranged from 1-20months (mean of 9 months). RESULTS: The first and second year patient/graft survivals were 100% and 97% respectively. 18/36 children experienced rejection (50%) which occurred at 3 to 30 days after ITx. 18 children remain free of maintenance steroids; 2 received prednisone for liver allograft rejection (3/9, 33%). Maintenance TAC monotherapy is as follows: 2 receive a single daily dose 3 days/week, 1 receives a single daily dose every other day, 12 receive a single daily dose 7 days/week (levels mean 9.8ng/dl), and 18 are receiving a 2 times/day dosing (levels mean 10.2ng/dl). Two patients are on rapamycin. Two patients developed EBV infection documented by EBV-PCR which resolved with antiviral therapy; 1 developed CMV enteritis. CONCLUSION: The use of rATG preconditioning induction has decreased the incidence and severity of rejection after ITx with improved patient and graft survivals. We speculate that the "steroid free" strategy with consequent improvement in infectious and toxic complications of immunosuppression may result in better short and long term survival. Ali Abdullah, 1 Joseph Seward, 1 Amy Magill, 1 Jorge Reyes, 1 Adrianna Zeevi, 1 Rakesh Sindhi. 1 1 Transplantation, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA. Background: pDC types 1 and 2 prime TH1 and TH2 responses, respectively. Crosssectional studies link rejection risk to relative TH1/pDC1 preponderance. Longitudinal validation during rejection, opportunistic infections (INF), or rejection-free state is unavailable. Methods. Frequencies (%) of lineage negative, HLADR hi cells, which were either CD123+ (pDC2) or CD11c+ (pDC1), were measured by flow cytometry in peripheral blood from 19 pediatric liver (n=10) and intestine (n=9) recipients. Samples were obtained before and within 90 days after transplantation (Tx) , and during rejection (REJ) and INF. Results: Median age was 3 years (0.5-20), time to pDC analysis was 41 days (7-71) in 6 subjects with no rejection, and 13 subjects with REJ. pDC were also measured in 3/13 REJ experiencing enteritis (INF) due to CMV, rotavirus and adenovirus respectively, after treatment of REJ. Results: pDC1 decreased significantly after Tx in Non-rejectors, and increased significantly with INF (Table 1) . Although pDC subtypes were altered minimally during rejection, their relative frequencies resulted in a significantly decreased pDC2/pDC1 ratio, suggesting TH1 preponderance. pDC2 were not affected in any clinical state. Conclusion: Early after Tx, clinical states of immune activation, e.g. rejection and opportunistic viral infection, may be characterized by a relative or absolute preponderance of the TH1-priming pDC1, while a rejection-free state may demonstrate a paucity of this phenotype. The role of pDC subsets in posttransplant immune monitoring needs additional study. INTRODUCTION: Patients with end stage heart, lung, or liver disease occasionally develop renal failure. Often, these patients are not considered for transplantation of the primary organ system because of increased morbidity and mortality associated with renal failure. Concurrent kidney transplantation has been performed successfully in this population of patients. Renal failure can also develop in the recipients of heart, lung, or liver transplants, further complicating their management. Kidneys from living or cadaveric donors have been transplanted into these groups of patients with success. The purpose of this retrospective analysis was to evaluate the outcome of extrarenal transplant recipients who received a kidney transplant at the time of or subsequent to heart, lung, or liver transplantation. METHODS: The entire heart, lung, and liver transplant databases of a single institution were reviewed and all patients who received a simultaneous kidney transplant or underwent renal transplantation subsequent to the extrarenal transplant were selected for the analysis summarized below. RESULTS: Twenty kidney transplants were performed in 19 extrarenal transplant recipients. This cohort of patients included 5 bilateral lung, 5 heart, and 9 liver recipients. Each of the 7 patients who underwent concurrent renal transplantation received the kidney from the cadaveric, extrarenal donor. Of the 13 kidney transplants performed after extrarenal transplantation, 10 were from living donors. The etiologies of renal failure in patients who received concurrent kidney transplants were multiple. The indication for transplantation in 9 of the 13 extrarenal recipients who subsequently received a kidney transplant was calcineurin inhibitor nephrotoxicity. Patient survival remains 100% to date. Of the 12 kidney transplants performed greater than year ago, 1 year allograft survival is 100%. CONCLUSION: Kidney transplantation represents an excellent form of renal replacement therapy in the recipients of extrarenal transplants. It can be performed safely at the time of extrarenal transplantation or remotely when renal failure develops with excellent short-term results. The leading indication for late renal transplantation is nephrotoxicity secondary to the use of calcineurin inhibitors. Immunosuppression protocols that limit exposure to these agents may decrease the incidence of renal failure following heart, lung, or liver transplantation. T helper cell polarization into Th1 or Th2 subsets has significant effects on the outcome of experimental solid organ transplantation. Th2 cytokines have been associated with alloimmune hyporesponsiveness in vivo, however, in several transplant models Th1 cytokines are required for tolerance induction. T-bet, a T box transcription factor, is critical for the development of Th1 responses. We investigated the role of T-bet in allograft rejection and tolerance using full thickness skin and vascularized cardiac transplant models. Survival of fully mismatched cardiac grafts in T-bet knockout (KO) recipients was slightly but significantly shorter than in wild type (WT) controls (6.1±0.3 days vs. 7.3±0.5 days, p<0.05). This accelerated rejection time-course was accompanied by a Th2-predominant alloimmune response and histologic and immunohistologic evidence of an antibody-mediated rejection process similar to that seen in human recipients with acute humoral rejection (AHR). Interestingly, and mimicking human transplant recipients with AHR, T-bet KO recipients were resistant to immunosuppression with either cyclosporine or rapamycin. In addition, administration of either CTLA4Ig (500ug IP on day 0, 250ug days 2,4 and 6) and/or anti-CD40L mAb (MR1, 500ug IP on day 0, 250ug days 2,4 and 6) to WT mice yields long-term cardiac allograft survival, however, in T-bet KO recipients treated with combined costimulatory blockade no allograft survived beyond 18 days. In contrast to IFN-g KO recipients, administration of exogenous recombinant INF-g does not reverse resistance to tolerance induction. Furthermore, in a class II mismatched model, BM12 skin grafts transplanted into T-bet KO recipients are acutely rejected similar to WT recipients, while cardiac grafts develop accelerated and more severe cardiac allograft vasculopathy (CAV) as compared to WT recipients. Interestingly, in this model IFN-g KO recipients accept skin grafts and are protected from CAV. Therefore, this suggests that the acute humoral and accelerated chronic rejection and resistance to tolerance in T-bet KO recipients are independent of IFN-g deficiency. We conclude that T-bet deficient mice provide a novel model for understanding mechanisms and developing novel therapies for AHR and chronic rejection in vascularized allografts. Yifa Chen, 1 Yilmaz Demir, 1 Anna Valujskikh, 1 Peter S. Heeger. 1 1 Immunology and The Glickman Urologic Institute, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH. CD4 T cells responding through the indirect pathway may provide requisite helper signals for induction of an isotype switch and IgG alloantibody production. To provide further insight into the mechanisms of this phenomenon we first showed that in the absence of CD4 T cell help, B6 (H-2 b ) TCR KO mice transplanted with allogeneic (H-2 k ) heart grafts, and B6 CD4 KO mice transplanted with allogeneic heart grafts, did not produce anti-donor IgG alloantibodies (n=3 per group) 30-60 days posttransplant. Control WT recipients of allogeneic heart grafts had detectable IgG alloantibodies in their sera within 7-14 days of the transplant. We next made use of an H-2 b -restricted TCR transgenic CD4 T cell, Mar, specific for an indirectly presented peptide derived from allogeneic male C3H heart grafts. Adoptive transfers of Mar T cells into B6 TCR KO or CD4 KO recipients of allogeneic C3H male heart grafts specifically led to activation of the Mar T cells via the indirect pathway (as assessed by flow cytometry and ELISPOT assays) and induced a high titer of specific, anti-donor IgG alloantibodies by 2-3 weeks posttransplant (n=3-4 per group) as assessed by flow cytometry. This result shows that CD4 T cells responding via the indirect pathway can provide the helper signals required to initiate an alloantibody isotype switch. We then asked whether the recipient B cells must have cognate interactions with the CD4 T cells responding via the indirect pathway in order to produce the alloantibodies. To assess this we transferred Mar T cells into recipients lacking MHC class II on B cells, followed by transplantation with an allogeneic C3H male heart graft. Notably, the recipients (n=4) rejected the heart grafts and the Mar T cells were indirectly primed to become Th1 effector cells. Nonetheless, we were not able to detect anti-donor IgG alloantibody in these animals by flow cytometry. Alloantibody was detected in the serum of control animals with MHC class II expression on B cells. The findings demonstrate that alloreactive CD4 T cells must have cognate interactions via their TCR with peptide/ MHC complexes on recipient B cells in order to initiate an antibody isotype switch. Designing therapies aimed at blocking such specific interactions regardless of the activation state of the responding CD4 T cells may be effective strategies for limiting alloantibody production in allograft recipients. Type I diabetes is a systemic autoimmune disease. In the human and mouse, a number of abnormalities in the development of antigen presenting cells has been defined and proposed to be contributing to the autoimmune process. Mixed chimerism reverses the autoimmune process in nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice and prevents the development of diabetes. The goal of this study was to determine the mechanism by which this occurs. It has been known that NOD mice lack HSA + /Ly6C + myeloid progenitor cells. We addressed if mixed chimerism restores this myeloid cell population and if these cells are required for the preservation of peripheral tolerance. We generated NOD/B10.BR mixed chimeras and found that the induction of mixed chimerism resulted in an increase in the HSA + /Ly6C + population to levels similar to those observed in the donor strain. Interestingly, the HSA + /Ly6C + cells in the chimeric animals were donor as well as NOD-derived. Similarly, we found that co-culture of NOD BMC in vitro with Flt3ligand (FL) developed an HSA + /Ly6C + phenotype that was primarily comprised of myeloid dendritic cells (DC). To determine whether FL was a key factor in diabetes progression, pre-diabetic NOD mice were treated with a 10-day course of FL. Strikingly, there was a highly significant delay in the development of diabetes, which correlated with reduced insulitis and restored production of myeloid DC. Moreover, there was a significant increase in the level of CD4 + /CD25 + T reg cells in pancreatic lymph nodes. These data indicate that mixed chimerism as well as FL treatment of NOD mice in vivo (and treatment of marrow in vitro) results in production of myeloid DC. This increase is correlated with an increase in tolerance and a decreased incidence of disease. In conclusion, these data suggest that the underlying myeloid abnormality in NOD mice is due to a block in development of myeloid DC, which is restored through treatment with FL and may provide a benign and novel approach to treat autoimmune diabetes. Reactivation of latent Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV) results in infection and disease, causing both morbidity and mortality in immunosuppressed patients. However, the molecular mechanism which leads to reactivation from latency is unknown. Recently, we have shown that allogeneic transplantation induces IE gene expression in MCMV latently infected mice and in MIEP-lacZ mice carrying a comparing b-reporter gene under the control of the HCMV Major Immediate Early Promoter (MIEP) and that TNF can substitute for allogeneic transplantation in inducing IE gene expression in some organs. Since induction of IE gene expression is an essential first step in CMV reactivation, identification of factors leading to induction of IE gene expression would be important in preventing CMV reactivation. Aim: To study the role of TNF receptormediated signaling on induction of HCMV IE gene expression. Methods: MIEP-lacZ transgenic mice were cross-bred with TNFR1, TNFR2, and TNFR1,2 knockout mice. Kidneys from these mice were transplanted into allogeneic recipient mice and removed 2 days after transplant. The contralateral donor kidneys were removed at the time of the transplant and were analyzed as controls. The extent of transgene expression was measured using a quantitative chemiluminescence assay for b-galactosidase activity and the level of induction was determined by comparing b-galactosidase activity in transplanted kidneys with that of the contralateral control kidney. Results: Genetic deficiency in the Type 1 TNF receptor has no effect on induction of IE gene expression, but genetic deficiency in both the Type1 and Type2 TNF receptors significantly decreases the induction of IE gene expression in an allogeneic transplant. Studies with TNFR2-/-MIEP-lacZ mice demonstrate that TNFR2 alone mediates MIEP-lacZ induction in an allogeneic transplant. Conclusions: TNF signaling is important for induction of IE gene expression in an allogeneic transplant and the Type 2 TNF receptor plays the major role in this induction. Given that Type 1 TNF receptor mediates induction of IE gene expression through soluble TNF in our system and that TNFR2 is known to mediate signal transduction of membrane-bound TNF, our results suggest that signaling of membrane-bound TNF mediates induction of IE gene expression through TNFR2 in an allogeneic transplant. Objective: The T-cell-growth factors signaling through Janus kinases (Jak1 and 3) and signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat1, 3, 5a/b and 6) induce full T cell response. Using the Stat5a/b double knockout, we examined the role of both proteins in acute allograft rejection. Methods/Results: Normal C57BL/6 Stat5a/b+/+ (H-2b) recipients acutely rejected C3H (H-2k) heart allografts (7.3±0.5 days; n=4). In contrast, Stat5a/b-/-mice rejected heart allografts in a delayed fashion (19.3±7.6 days; n=6; p<0.01). In vitro, T cells from Stat5a/b-/-mice failed to proliferate in response to conconavalin A (ConA) or alloantigens and at 24 hrs and 48 hrs displayed 30% and 90% apoptosis, respectively, as shown by TUNEL assay; T cells from Stat5a/b+/+ mice proliferated in response to ConA or alloantigen with only 5% apoptosis. Microarray analysis showed that at 24 hrs after activation Stat5a/b-/-purified T cells expressed predominantly pro-apoptotic mRNAs (ATM, bok, CIDE-A, CIDE-B, Bax, Nip3, CARD, Myd88, and blk) in comparison to activated Stat5a/b+/+ T cells. Western blot confirmed that after 24 hrs and 48 hrs of activation Stat5a/b-/-T cells expressed elevated level of pro-apototic Bax and no anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins in contrast to Stat5a/b+/+ T cells. However, PCR method showed that (at 24 hrs) ConA-stimulated T cells from Stat5a/b+/+ or Stat5a/b-/-mice produced similar amounts of interleukin (IL)2, IL4, IL10 and interferon-mRNA. Purified B cells from both Stat5a/b+/+ and Stat5a/b-/mice proliferated in similar fashion after stimulation with lipoplysacharides (LPS) and showed no apoptosis. As shown by FACS, sera from both Stat5a/b+/+ and Stat5a/b-/ -rejectors had identical concentrations of donor-specific IgM, IgG1, IgG2a and IgG2b alloantibodies. Conclusions: Although Stat5a/b are not required for cytokine production by T cells, Stat5a/b are important for T cell survival after activation. In contrast, Stat5a/b deficiency does not affect B-cell function, including proliferation, differentiation and immunoglobulin class switching. Thus, Stat5a/b-deficient recipients may mediate rejection of allografts following T-B cell collaboration by donor-specific IgM and IgG alloantibodies. Background: Activation of host toll-like receptor (TLR) system, which controls innate immunity, may progress into adaptive T cell immune responses. Our previous studies have shown that TLR4 plays a key role in triggering inflammatory response associated with Ag-independent hepatic ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury. This study was designed to analyze putative role of TLR4 in regulating liver inflammation following IL-13 gene transfer. Methods: Using a partial lobar liver warm ischemia model, groups of Balb/c wide-type (WT) and Stat6-deficient (KO) mice were assessed for the extent and severity of hepatic I/R injury (n=4/gr). Separate groups were injected with Ad-IL-13 or Ad-β-gal reporter gene (2.5x10 9 pfu I.P.). 48 h later, a midline laparotomy was performed, mice were heparinized, and an atraumatic clip was used to interrupt blood supply to the cephalad lobes of the liver. After 90 min of partial hepatic ischemia, the clip was removed, initiating hepatic reperfusion. Sham control WT mice underwent the same procedure, but without vascular occlusion. Mice were sacrificed after 6 h of reperfusion; liver tissue/peripheral blood samples were collected for future analysis. The hepatic I/R injury was assessed by histological Suzuki's grading. Results: WT, Ad-β-gal controls, as well as Stat6 KO and Stat6 KO mice treated with Ad-IL-13/Adβ-gal showed significant edema, sinusoidal congestion/cytoplasmic vacuolization, and severe hepatocellular necrosis (30-50%). In contrast, WT mice treated with Ad-IL-13 revealed minimal sinusoidal congestion without edema/vacuolization or necrosis. These correlated with decreased sGOT levels and local neutrophil accumulation, selectively in WT mice treated with Ad-IL-13. In addition, WT mice treated with Ad-IL-13 revealed markedly depressed TLR4 expression, yet augmented expression of Stat6 and HO-1, as compared with WT, Stat6 KO, or Stat6 KO + Ad-IL-13/Ad-β-gal groups. Unlike in controls, the expression of mRNA coding for TNF-α/IL-1β and IL-2/IFN-γ remained depressed, whereas that of IL-13/IL-4 reciprocally increased selectively in WT+ Ad-IL-13 group. Conclusion: This study documents that IL-13 gene transfer prevents hepatic I/R injury by downregulating TLR4 expression. Stat6 and HO-1 induction by IL-13 gene transfer exerts synergistic cytoprotective effect against hepatic inflammatory injury. Hence, activation of Stat6 is required for IL-13induced depression of TLR4 signaling during Ag-independent pro-inflammatory response induced by hepatic I/R. Monocytes up-regulate many co-stimulatory molecules when combined with T-cells in allogeneic mixed lymphocyte-endothelial cell (EC) reactions, but purified monocytes fail to express CD40 when co-incubated with EC alone. This suggests that host T-cells, monocytes, and EC are all required for optimal monocyte-mediated antigen presentation. In this study, we have hypothesized that monocytes act as a bridge between EC and Tcells, and that a 3 cell model more closely approximates the in vivo situation. To assess the interdependence of these cells, transwell co-cultures were established using purified human monocytes, T-cells and allogeneic EC. EC-conditioned monocytes were also co-incubated with purified T-cells to assess the order in which these interactions could occur. Antibodies against interferon-γ (IFNγ) receptor-1, IFNγ receptor-2, and IFNγ were added to assess the role of the IFNγ pathway in these interactions. Cells were analyzed by FACS for monocyte-derived CD40, a indicator of optimal monocyte activation. Co-incubation of purified monocytes with EC did not result in CD40 expression, but did result in EC membrane uptake as assessed by PKH EC membrane staining. In contrast, monocytes co-incubated with both EC and T-cells up-regulated surface CD40, indicating that T-cells were required for optimal monocyte activation. EC-conditioned monocytes also up-regulated CD40 but only after incubation with Tcells, indicating that the exposure to EC could be remote from the exposure to T-cells. When T cells were separated from monocyte-EC interaction by a transwell, monocytes did not express CD40. Furthermore, IFNγ receptor-1 blockade markly reduced CD40 expression during the monocyte-EC-T-cell interactions. The presence of anti-IFNγ also prevented monocyte-derived CD40 expression. In contrast, IFNγ receptor-2 blockade did not inhibit monocyte-derived CD40 up-regulation. These data demonstrate that both T-cells and EC provide stimulation for responding monocytes and that these interactions are contact and IFNγ dependent. These data suggest that monocytes can act as bridge between EC and T cells, facilitating membrane uptake in the periphery, but reserving full activation and costimulation until exposed to antigen activated T-cells. One mechanism by which the T-cells provide final monocyte costimulatory capacity is via the IFNγ receptor-1 pathway. This provides a mechanism by which antigen can be engulfed and transported to secondary lymphoid tissue without risking T-cell activation of non-antigen specific cells during transit. While employing global genetic profiling (microarray) to study the molecular mechanisms of hepatic ischemia/reperfusion (IR) injury in a rat syngeneic orthotopic liver transplant (OLT) model (LEW to LEW), we have focused on the expression of interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1). OLT survival after 24h cold (4C) preservation in UW solution was 100%. In contrast, OLT survival after 36h cold preservation was 0%. Compared with native livers (1088±99) and normal OLT without cold preservation (716±162), IRF-1 was significantly induced only in 36h (16798±1207), but not 24h (1412±381) cold-preserved OLT. To test the functional significance of IRF-1 induction in liver IRI, we utilized a mouse partial hepatic ischemia model. Indeed, 90 min of warm ischemia, followed by 6h reperfusion markedly increased intrahepatic IRF-1 expression, as measured by quantitative RT-PCR. It correlated with the hepatocellular damage (sALT levels/histology Suzuki criteria). IRI was ameliorated in IRF-1 KO mice, as compared with WT controls, and evidenced by lower sALT levels (691±294 vs. 4467±1737) and preserved liver architecture. To further dissect the mechanisms of IRF-1 mediated liver IRI, we then examined putative interactions between IRF-1 and the recently established TLR4-mediated proinflammatory pathway. Indeed, although IRtriggered intrahepatic IRF-1 induction was abolished in TLR4 KO mice, it was readily maintained in TLR2 KO and MyD88 KO mice. Furthermore, studies in IFNAR KO mice have documented that intact type-1 interferon pathway was required for IRF-1 induction. We have recently shown that liver IR activates TLR4, and that IP-10 is the key downstream effector mediating liver IRI. Thus, we measured intrahepatic IP-10 production in IRF-1 KO mice. Indeed, quantitative RT-PCR showed that IP-10 expression was completly prevented in IRF-1 KO livers subjected to IR. The level of TNF-α, one of the potential effector molecules in liver IRI, was also decreased in IRF-1 KO livers. Hence, IRF-1 expression is one of the critical elements in TLR4-initiated liver IRI. IRF-1 induction is mediated by TLR4, but not TLR2 activation, and it remains MyD88-independent. The requirement for IFNAR indicates that IRF-1 induction results from secondary response of TLR4 activation, and might be mediated by IFN-β produced from the primary response. Most importantly, IRF-1 is required for IP-10 production, which may explain why IRF-1 KO mice remain resistant against liver IRI. Badkground:: Ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI) remains an important clinical problem after liver transplantation. Recent studies have documented that toll-like receptor (TLR) system plays an important role in the activation of innate immunity, and in controlling adaptive host immune responses. This study was designed to address the putative role of TLR4 signaling in the mechanism of antigen-independent prolonged cold hepatic IRI. Methods and Results: Isogeneic orthotopic liver transplants (OLT) with rearterialization were performed in groups of wild-type (WT) Balb/c and TLR4-deficient (C.C3 TLR4 lps-d ; KO) mice. Donor livers transplanted from WT to WT mice were preserved in UW solution at 4°C for either 1h (Gr. 1) or 24h (Gr. 2). In Gr. 3, donor livers transplanted between TLR4-deficient mice were stored in UW solution for 24h. The sALT, TNF-α, IL-2, and IFN-γ levels in Gr. 2 recipients were markedly increased at 1h, 6h, 1d and 3d after reperfusion, as compared with Gr 1 OLTs. However, unlike in WT group, the cytokine expression levels were dramatically reduced throughout in TLR4 KO OLTs. Similarly, disruption of TLR4 signaling significantly diminished OLT level of IFN-γinducible protein 10 (IP-10), a chemoattractant for activated T cells. The wellfunctioning OLTs from TLR4 KO donors revealed diminished expression of capase-3, along with decreased levels of apoptotic endothelial cells/hepatocytes, as compared with relevant WT controls. This data was consistent with histological Suzuki's criteria of hepatic IRI. Thus, WT livers revealed notable sinusoidal congestion/hepatocyte vacuolization, with hepatocellular necrosis (10-20%) in d1 and d3 OLTs. In contrast, TLR4 KO livers showed only mild hepatocyte ballooning and 2-4% hepatocellular necrosis.Conclusion: This study documents, for the first time, the critical role of the TLR4 system in the mechanism of extended cold hepatic IRI after OLT in mice. Indeed, disruption of TLR4 signaling diminished the early proinflammatory responses and ameliorated hepatic IRI, indicating that this antigen-independent hepatic insult might be initiated by the activation of the sentinel TLR4 system. Thus, based on new concepts of hepatic IRI injury, these results provide the rationale for the development of novel therapeutic approaches in OLT patients. Background: In order to prevent tumor progression while waiting for a donor, adjuvant loco regional therapy has been recommended for patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) who are listed for liver transplantation. The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy of adjuvant therapy in patients with HCC while waiting for liver transplantation. Methods: We reviewed 77 patients with HCC and cirrhosis who were evaluated and listed for liver transplantation. We compared 36 patients (Group 1) who received pretransplant loco regional therapy with 41 patients (Group 2) who did not receive any pretransplant therapy. Treatments included 22 trans arterial chemo embolizations (TACE), 9 percutaneous ethanol injections (PEI), 4 radiofrequency ablations (RFA) and 7 liver resections. Groups were compared with respect to overall survival, recurrence free survival and dropout from the waiting list. In addition, all explants were examined for viable tumor, grade and vascular invasion. Results: There were no differences between the two groups with respect to age, gender, underlying liver disease, tumor stage (AJCC), time on the waiting list, immunosuppression, and number of patients exceeding the Milan criteria. Sixty-two patients underwent liver transplant, 29 of whom received pre transplant loco regional therapy and 33 who did not. There were no differences in survival between the two groups at 1 year (84% vs. 75%) and at 4 years (59% vs. 51%) (p=0.88). Recurrence free survival at 1 year (86% vs. 94%) and at 4 years (69% vs. 63%) was also not significantly different (p=0.08). Dropout from the waiting list due to tumor progression occurred with similar frequency in both groups (11% vs. 12%) (p=0.9). Viable tumor was found in 26/29 explants in group 1 and in all explants in group 2. Conclusions: These data suggest that pretransplant loco regional adjuvant therapy administered to patients with HCC while on the waiting list does not confer an advantage in terms of overall survival and disease free survival after transplantation. Furthermore, adjuvant therapy does not appear to prevent patient dropout from the waiting list. Background: Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) of liver tumors is offered to patients (pts.) awaiting liver transplantation (LTX) in order to decrease their tumor load. The study evaluates the efficiency of RFA by analyzing peri-ablation findings, and examining the explanted native liver. Material and Method: Retrospective collected data on 33 pts. who underwent RFA prior to LTX between January 1998 and May 2003 were reviewed. All pts. met T1 or T2 UNOS criteria. Post-ablation MRI's were obtained every 3 months until LTX. Gross and H&E stains of explants were reviewed. Percentage of viable to necrotic hepatoma at the ablation site was calculated by surface area mapping. Results: 25 pts. were male and 8 female. Liver disease was related to Hepatitis C (n=25), Hepatitis B (n=3), alcohol (n=3), cryptogenic (n=1), PBC (n=1). The approach was laparoscopic (n=29), open (n=5) or percutaneous (n=2). 3 pts. had 2 separate RFA sessions. A total of 41 tumors were ablated (6 pts. had 2 tumors ablated and 1 pt. had 3). Ultrasound was used to localize and assess intraoperative ablation. 3 pts. had residual tumors after ablation (2 were re-ablated and 1 was embolized). 1 pt. had a new tumor on follow-up immediate after RFA and it was ablated. 6 pts. (18%) had new tumors on pathology. 2 of these were not seen on MRI. No patient developed extrahepatic or port side spread of tumor. On the explanted specimens, 36 ablation sites were found, with dimensions between 1.2 and 6 cm (mean 3.1). Necrosis by mapping was: 100% n=15, 90-99% n=9, 70-80% n=3, 60-65% n=2, 45-50% n=4, 35% n=2, 10% n=1). The 3 re-ablated pts. had 95-100% necrosis on pathology. The pt. who had embolization developed multifocal disease and 35% necrosis at the ablation site. Mean follow-up was 21.7 months after LTX (0-57). 30 pts. (91%) are currently alive, free of recurrence. 3 pts. (9%) died after LTX, 1 of them (3%) with recurrent HCC (sternal metastasis). Conclusions: Extensive tumor necrosis was obtained in the majority of pts. (over 90% in 73%). 18% of pts. had new tumors found in explants, which emphasized close followup of all pts. who have had a diagnosis of HCC. The recurrence rate of HCC after LTX was minimal and survival was excellent. RFA appears to be highly efficient in reducing the tumor load before LTX and decreasing the risk of recurrence after LTX. Aim. Long-term survival has not been clarified for living-donor liver transplantation (LDLT) for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) so far. The purpose of the present study is to analyze survival and risk factors affecting tumor recurrence in LDLT for HCC in a single center. Method. From February 1999, 69 patients with unresectable HCCs with no extrahepatic lesions and no major vessel invasion and 8 patients with incidental HCCs received LDLT (male: 55, female: 22). There were no exclusion criteria of LDLT for the number and the size of the tumors. The age of the patients ranged from 21 to 69 years with a median age of 54 years. The number of the patients with the UICC tumor Stage I was 10, Stage II 13, Stage III 6 and Stage IVA 40. The tumor spread was within the Milano criteria in 21 patients and out of Milano criteria in 48 patients. Forty-eight patients had received transarterial chemoembolization, 34 patients had received cytoablation therapy for HCCs and 10 patients had underwent hepatic resection for HCC previously. Serum levels of alpha-phetoprotein at the time of transplantation ranged from 0.9 to 20.362 ng/ml with the median level of 29 ng/ml. Results. Sixteen patients died within the first three months after LDLT due to tumorunrelated causes. Patient survival and recurrence -free patient survival was 74.8% and 89.3% at 1y, 63.5% and 84.1% at 2y, and 63.7% and 80.7%, respectively. Recurrencefree patient survival with HCCs within the Milano criteria was 100% at 1y, 2y and 3y and that with HCCs out of Milano criteria was 80.9%, 71.9% and 66.7% at 1y, 2y and 3y. There was no significant recurrence-free patient survival between patients with HCCs within the Milano criteria and HCCs out of the Milano criteria. The risk factors of the histological findings with HCCs in the explanted livers which significantly affects the tumor recurrence were poorly differentiated HCC, tumor number greater than 4, maximum diameter of the tumor greater than 5 cm and microscopic vascular invasion (P < 0.05). Conclusion. Although tumor recurrence rate was higher in the patients with HCC out of Milano criteria, there was no significant difference in recurrence-free patient survival between patients with HCCs within the Milano criteria and patients with HCCs out of the Milano criteria. Overall recurrence-free patient survival of 80.6% at 3y was thought acceptable in LDLT for HCCs. OPTN liver allocation policy allows centers to apply for increased MELD/PELD scores for patients with exceptional diagnoses for whom their calculated MELD/PELD score may not represent their need for transplant. For the 12,981 adult candidates added to the OPTN liver waiting list between 2/27/02 and 8/27/03, 14.8% (1917) requests for exceptions were made, of which 67.1% (1287) were for candidates with hepatocellular cancer (HCC) and the remainder (630) were for other indications. For the 1688 candidates with approved MELD exceptions, the diagnosis and narrative text fields were categorized and we used a Kaplan-Meier method with competing risks to determine the rates of transplant, removal for death/too sick, removal for other reason, and continuation on the list as of November 29, 2003 within 90 days of initial listing or exception. Approximately 23% of patients with no exception received a transplant within 90 days, compared with 56.4% for patients with exceptional case applications. Death rates were 7.9% for standard cases, versus 5.0% for exceptions (p<0.05). Patients initially listed with low MELD scores (6-15) with exceptions experienced greater increases in the transplant rate (55.6 vs. 10.2, p<0.05) with little effect on death rates. Of patients with an initial MELD score of 16-25, transplant and death rates were 32.3 and 9.6 with no exception, versus 60.3% and 10.2% for exceptions. In the higher standard MELD categories (26-35), patients with exceptions had lower rates of transplantation (43.3% vs. 61.0%) but increased death rates (30.0% vs. 25.0). Patients with HAT had the highest rates of transplantation at 90 days (72.2%), followed by cryptogenic (69.2%), HPS (64.2%), and PSC (63.6%). The death rates for exceptional cases varied by diagnosis, ranging from 3.0% (PSC) to 23.3% (CAHC) and 27.8 (other). The most common reasons for upgrade requests and the associated transplant and death rates are as follows: ascites (42.6% and 19.1%, n=68), biliary complications (73.3% and 6.7%, n=45), cholangitis (64.5% and 6.5%, n=31), encephalopathy (35.7% and 28.6%, n=14) and portal hypertensive bleeding (57.9% and 15.8 %, n=19). Patients granted exceptional MELD scores have higher rates of transplantation and lower rates of death compared to standard cases with similar MELD scores. Standardization of upgrade criteria and continued scrutiny of the exception process will be necessary for continued improvement of the liver allocation system. End-stage renal disease (ESRD) requiring chronic dialysis constitutes a serious complication in 2%-13% of liver transplant (LTx) pts. Purpose: To describe the prevalence of ESRD and the survival of LTx pts requiring chronic dialysis in Canada. Methods: We studied 3,820 pts who received a LTx between Jan 1, 1981 and Dec 31, 2001 . Data was extracted from the Canadian Organ Replacement Register, managed by the Canadian Institute for Health Information. An attempt was made to match each LTx pt on dialysis with 2 dialysis controls (n=195) without a LTx (No LTx-Dialysis group). Results: 103 LTx pts (2.8%) developed ESRD requiring chronic dialysis. (LTx-Dialysis group) and 3,717 pts did not develop ESRD (LTx-No Dialysis group). Pts in the LTx-Dialysis group were older than pts in the LTx-No Dialysis group (48.5±13 vs. 43±19, P=0.0024). There was no difference in the primary disease. Chronic dialysis was initiated at 61.5±44.5 months (median 60) post-LTx. Pt's years post-LTx in the LTx-Dialysis group was 7.5±4 and in the LTx-No Dialysis group was 5±4 (P<0.0001) Survival post-LTx Survival 0-1 yr 1-3 yrs 3-6 yrs 6-9 yrs 9-12 yrs 12-15 yrs >15 Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital, Groningen, Netherlands; 2 Internal Medicine, University Hospital, Groningen, Netherlands; 3 Hepatobiliary Surgery and Liver Transplantation, University Hospital, Groningen, Netherlands. Backgrounds: Although the long-term prognosis after liver transplantation is generally reported as excellent, most series are uncontrolled, and there is limited information available about the survival after the 10th year post-transplant. It is unknown whether, or to what extent, liver transplant recipients regain a normal life expectancy. We therefore analyzed the survival and its determinants in all adult patients who were transplanted in our center between 1979 and 2001 and survived the first post-operative year. Methods: The hospital and outpatient charts of all patients were reviewed. For each patient we determined the life expectancy at the time of transplantation, based on age-, sex-and era-matched dutch population controls. We determined the patient survival rates and compared them with the expected survival. We also determined the number of expected years of life that were lost due to premature death, and the fraction of remaining life expectancy after transplantation that was actually achieved. The loss of expected years was related to specific causes of death. Results: 317 of all 402 (77%) patients survived the first year after transplantation, and constitute the study population. The median follow-up was 6.2 (range, 1.0-22.7) years. The 10-and 20-year survival rates of these 317 patients were 83% and 64%, respectively. Increasing age, original disease (HCV vs. all other diagnoses) and re-transplantation were independent risk factors for death. Patients died a median 10 years earlier than expected on the basis of the life expectancy of population controls. They survived for a median 54% (95% CI 4-78) of their life expectancy at the time of transplantation. This was independent of the age at transplantation. Graft failure due to de-novo or recurrent disease or infection occurred in a cumulative 15% of patients; these deaths tended to occur within a few years after transplantation and led to a median loss of 25 expected years of life. Death due cardiovascular disease and cancer occurred later, but reached cumulative incidences as high as 37 and 16%, respectively, causing a loss of about 10 years of life. Objective: Liver retransplantation (Re-OLT) based on Model for End Stage Liver Disease (MELD) has been associated with exceedingly poor outcomes. This study determined applicable pre-transplant parameters that accurately predict post-transplant survival, for appropriate selection of re-OLT candidates. Methods: Multivariate Cox proportional hazard regression analyzed multiple donor and recipient variables that may impact patient survival after re-OLT. This cohort included 32.909 primary OLT and 3,276 re-OLT recipients with complete data sets obtained from the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) over the last 10 years. Results: Eight recipient and donor-related factors were identified to impact survival following re-OLT. The first three recipient-related factors were similar to the MELD parameters: log creatinine, log bilirubin, and prothrombin time with hazard ratios (HR) of 2.132, 1.06, and 1.009, respectively. Additionally, recipient age had a significant HR of 1.018. HR of Warm (W) and cold ischemia times (IT) were 1.001 and 1.007 with median levels of 51 min and 9 hrs, respectively. Re-OLT within the first 7 days, after the first transplant, markedly increased (HR 1.53); while re-OLT within 7-30 or >30 days doubled (HR 2.153 and 2.131) the risk of death following transplantation. When WIT and CIT were held at median levels, post-re-OLT survival can be accurately predicted based on the MELD score, recipient and donor ages. One-survival outcomes are propotionately worsened with advanced recipient age, increased donor age or rising MELD scores. Thus, based on the model, a 50 year-old re-OLT candidate with a MELD score of 28 exhibits a 1-yr survival of 75%, which drops to 64%, if a 30 or a 50 yr-old donor organs were to be utilized, respectively. Further, the same 50-yr old patient, if retransplanted at a MELD score of 36 would exhibit a 59.8% survival estimate at one year. Worst patient survival outcomes (<60% at one-year) are predicted by the combination of MELD scores >24, recipient age >50 and donor age >50. Conclusions: Survival after re-OLT can be accurately predicted by combination of the MELD scores with recipient and donor ages. This application of this re-OLT model, that incorporates the MELD and donor organ and recipient criteria, for retransplantation organ allocation would efficiently utilize a scarce donor-organ pool and maximize re-OLT survival benefis. Angelo Luca, 1 Marta Ida Minervini, 2 Roberto Miraglia, 1 Salvatore Gruttadauria, 3 Giovanni Vizzini, Antonio Arcadipane, Bruno Gridelli. 3 1 Radiology, ISMETT, Palermo, Italy; 2 Pathology, ISMETT, Palermo, Italy; 3 Surgery, ISMETT, Palermo, Italy. PURPOSE: ALF treated with conservative therapy has a poor prognosis, although individual survival varies greatly. In these patients, the eligibility for OLT must be quickly established. The aim of this study was to assess the role of TJLB in the management of patients with ALF clinical presentation. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eighteen patients with ALF clinical presentation were referred at a single liver transplant center during a 52-month period. In all patients the TJLB was performed using a Quick-Core needle. Specimens were immediately evaluated at the frozen section examination and than submitted for permanent histology. Clinical data, and follow up were analyzed. RESULTS: The mean age was 45 years (range 22-66); women were the most affected (67%). At the admission prothrombin activity was 29±15%, INR 2.7±1.2, AST 2193±1956 UI, ALT 2940±2467 UI, bilirubin 15.5±8.4 mg/dl, lactate 5.3±3.9 mmol/ l. Etiology was VHB in 7 cases, Nimesulide (NSAID) toxicity in 4, herbal toxicity in 1, Amanita phalloides mushroom poisoning in 1, Wilson's disease in 1, and unknown in 4. TJLB was technically successful in all patients. There were no procedure-related complications. The mean number of cores was 1.9 (range = 1-4). Tissue specimens were satisfactory for diagnosis in all cases. In 15 patients, the preliminary clinical diagnosis of ALF was confirmed by TJLB; in 3 patients the initial diagnosis of ALF was modified for the presence of unknown chronic liver disease ("acute on chronic disease"). During the follow up seven patients with necrosis < 60% were successfully treated with medical therapy; seven patients with necrosis > 70% required OLT; four patients not eligible for OLT died, three of them had "acute on chronic disease" and one a submassive necrosis. All transplanted patients are still alive. There was a strict correlation (r=0,972, p<0.0001) between necrosis at the frozen section examination and necrosis at the histology. The average time for TJLB and frozen section examination was 80 minutes. CONCLUSION: In patients with ALF clinical presentation, the presence of submassive or massive liver necrosis and chronic liver disease are predictors of poor prognosis. TJLB and frozen section examination can be a quick and effective tool in clinical decision making, especially in deciding patient selection and the best timing for OLT. Activated liver NK cells target not only infected or transformed hepatocytes but also intact hepatocytes in a nonspecific fashion. But the mechanisms underlying NK cellinduced killing of self-hepatocytes are not clear. In the present study, we demonstrated that liver NK cells have cytotoxicity against normal syngeneic hepatocytes in mice. Poly I:C treatment enhanced hepatocyte toxicity of liver NK cells but not that of spleen NK cells. Unlike NK cells in other tissues, approximately 30-40% of liver NK cells constitutively express TRAIL. An in vitro NK cell cytotoxic assay revealed that hepatocyte toxicity of liver NK cells from both naïve and poly I:C-treated mice was inhibited partially by an anti-TRAIL mAb alone and completely by the combination with an anti-FasL mAb and perforin inhibitor, concanamycin A, indicating contribution of TRAIL to NK cell-mediated hepatocyte toxicity. Liver TRAIL + NK cells expressed high levels of CD69, indicating their naturally activating state. The majority of TRAIL + NK cells lacked expression of Ly-49 inhibitory receptors (Ly-49A, Ly-49C/I and Ly-49G2) recognizing self-MHC class I, indicating a propensity to targeting selfhepatocytes. Poly I:C treatment significantly upregulated the expression of Ly-49 inhibitory receptors on TRAIL -NK cells. However, such compensatory alteration was not seen at all in the TRAIL + NK cell fraction. Thus, TRAIL + liver NK cells have less capacity for self-recognition, and this might be involved in NK cell-dependent selfhepatocyte toxicity.In the case of hepatocyte transplantation, NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity would be a major obstacle to engraftement of autologous hepatocytes, because direct interaction of the hepatocytes transplanted via the portal vein with liver NK cells is inevitable. To address this possibility, CFSE-labeled syngeneic hepatocytes were infused into the liver via the portal vein in normal B6 mice. Seven days after hepatocyte transplantation, the fluorescence of the CFSE-labeled hepatocytes was undetectable in the liver. In contrast, when the recipient mice were treated with anti-AsGM1 sera prior to transplantation, hepatocyte grafts were clearly detected in the perisinusoidal area of the liver. These findings indicate that liver NK cell-mediated hepatocyte toxicity causes insufficient intrahepatic engraftment of transplanted hepatocytes. Body: Ligation of members of the SLAM (signaling lymphocytic activation molecule) family of receptors expressed on T, B and NK cells promotes intracellular tyrosine phosphorylation via interaction with SH2-containing adaptor protein, SAP (SH2D1A, DSHP), and mutations in SAP occur in patients with X-linked lymphoproliferative disorder. There are 6 known SLAM family members: SLAM (CD150), 2B4 (CD244), CD84, Ly-9, Ly-108 (NTB-A, SF2000) and CD2-like receptor activating cytotoxic cells (CRACC). As a result of our ongoing studies of the activation and function of T cells in vivo during development of allograft rejection, we report the first data on expression and significance of Ly-108 in alloresponses. Real-time PCR showed lack of Ly-108 mRNA in normal hearts whereas allografts (BALB/ c to C57BL/6) showed strong expression of the gene, as did murine thymus, spleen, and CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. Analysis of rejecting cardiac allografts by immunohistology showed localization of both Ly-108 and SAP proteins to infiltrating mononuclear cells. To test the importance of Ly-108 expression on allograft survival, we generated Ly-108-/-mice by homologous recombination. Proliferation of T cells stimulated in vitro with CD3 and CD28 mAbs was comparable for wild-type and Ly-108-/-mice. However, adoptive transfer studies of CFSE-labeled cells across a partial MHCmismatched (parent to F1) showed decreased proliferation of Ly-108-/-CD4, CD8 and NK cells vs. wild-type cells, especially when recipients were treated with a low dose of rapamycin. Consistent with this, survival of fully MHC-mismatched cardiac allografts in Ly-108-/-recipients was significantly prolonged compared to controls, and use of a subtherapeutic protocol of rapamycin (0.1 mg/kg/day, 14 d), which in wild-type controls led to rejection by 15 d post-Tx, led to mean survival of >100 d in Ly-108-/ -recipients (p<0.001). Comparison of the latter 2 groups showed a marked suppression of IFN-g, chemokine and chemokine receptor expression in Ly-108-/-recipients. In summary, using a knockout of a hitherto little studied member of the SLAM family, we report the first data concerning the remarkable therapeutic efficacy of targeting adaptor proteins in vivo. Targeting of such adaptor molecules provides a new approach to immunomodulation which may prove both highly selective and effective in regulating alloresponses and promoting long-term allograft survival. Key TCR-generated signals essential for T cell activation and proliferation include kinase-mediated activation of NF-kB and induction of cytokines and cytokine receptors. The classical NF-kB signalosome involves IKKa, IKKb and IKKg. Targeting of this complex has been dogged by the limited specificity and potency in vivo of various small molecules, and by the ubiquitous distribution of this complex. Recently, an additional IKK, IKKe (IKK-i) was described which is involved in the activation of T cell through CD3 and CD28 costimulation in vitro, though little is yet known as to the functions of this kinase in vivo. We report the first data concerning the role of IKKe in vivo. Of 18 tissues examined using real-time PCR, IKKe mRNA was expressed primarily in thymus, spleen, lymph nodes and peripheral blood leukocytes. Serially harvested mouse cardiac allografts (BALB/c to B6/129) showed IKKe mRNA expression was highly inducible during allograft rejection, rising from 3 d in conjunction with a T cell influx and peaking at up to 60-fold increase at 6 d, prior to rejection; the basal levels of IKKe were unchanged in isografts. The rise in intragraft IKKe expression correlated with the results of Western blotting and functional assays (immunoprecipitation and IKKedependent phosphorylation of NF-kB/p65). IKKe was localized to infiltrating T cells in rejecting murine cardiac allografts and rejecting human renal allografts. By contrast, IKKa, IKKb and IKKg mRNA were constitutively expressed in native hearts, isografts and allografts, and showed only minor changes (<2-fold increase) during allograft rejection. We therefore sought to analyze the importance of IKKe in alloresponses by generating IKKe-/-mice. Studies using adoptively transferred CFSE-labeled T cells (wild-type vs. IKKe-/donors, parent to F1 model) showed that alloactivation and proliferation of both CD4 and CD8 T cells was diminished using IKKe-/-vs. control cells. In addition, whereas control mice rejected cardiac allografts by 7 d, survival in IKKe-/-was prolonged to up to 18 d (p<0.05), and the benefits of targeting IKKe were enhanced by use of low-dose CsA (p<0.005). Analysis at 5 d post-Tx showed that in the absence of IKKe, intragraft expression of the other IKKs was largely unchanged but a marked impairment of IL-2 mRNA production was seen as compared to wild-type controls. We conclude that IKKe is a new and important target for potential therapy in experimental and clinical allografts. Preface: Memory CD4 T cells specific for alloantigens can play a significant role in allograft rejection and resistance to tolerance induction. However, little is known regarding the mechanism of action of memory cells in transplantation since no system exists to generate a large population of polyclonal allospecific memory cells. Because antigen-specific memory T cells can be generated from effector cells in vivo, we hypothesized that alloactivated CD25 + T cells would give rise to allospecific memory T cells in adoptive hosts. Methods: Mixed lymphocyte reactions were set up using Balb/c CD4 T cells and B6 APC. After 4 days, cells were sorted into CD25 + and CD25subsets and each subset was transferred into RAG2 -/hosts. Splenic memory T cells persisting 4 months post-transfer from recipients of CD25 + (memory CD25+ ) and CD25 -(memory CD25-) precursors were analyzed for cytokine production, proliferation, and accelerated rejection. In vitro, cells were labeled with CFSE, reactivated with donor specific (B6) or third party (B10BR) APC and assayed for IFNγ and divisions by flow cytometry from 12-84 hours (h). For in vivo studies, naïve, memory CD25+ or memory CD25-CD4 T cells were adoptively transferred into RAG2 -/recipients of B6 or B10BR skin grafts and assayed for graft survival. Naïve CD4 cells were used as controls in all studies. Results: Persisting T cells in adoptive hosts were small, CD25and CD44hi, consistent with resting memory cells. The response of memory CD25+ cells to B6 APC in Abstracts vitro was remarkable in that 10% produced IFNγ as early as 12h with a maximal response of 40% IFNγ + at 60h and 32% undergoing cell division by 84h. Response to third-party APC was minimal, demonstrating the donor-specific nature of the recall response. In contrast, IFNγ was produced by few (<2 %) naïve cells at all time points with 6% of cells undergoing division in response to B6 APC, while <0.5% of memory CD25cells produced IFNγ or divided at any time point. In vivo, memory CD25+ cells rejected B6 and B10BR grafts with MST 16d and 25d, respectively, whereas naïve CD4 T cells rejected B6 and B10BR skin grafts with MST 21d and 23d, demonstrating accelerated donor-specific rejection. Memory CD25cells did not reject B6 or B10BR skin grafts for >30d. Conclusions: We have developed a novel method of sorting on alloactivated CD25 + T cells to generate polyclonal allospecific memory CD4 T cells. These data establish that alloreactive CD25 + cells are precursors of potent memory cells which can be utilized as a powerful tool to study allospecific memory responses in vitro and in vivo. The classic reports on lymphocyte development hold that the Bursa of Fabricious gives rise to B cells and the thymus to T cells. Since these reports use transplants as a model for T cell responses, they would infer that rejection of grafts -at least of skin and tumor grafts -depends on T cells and hence only on the thymus. Our recent findings however expand this concept. T cell diversity was once thought to depend on the interaction of T cell precursors with thymic epithelial cells. Recent evidence suggests, however, that diversity might arise through interaction of developing T cells with other cells, the identity of which is not known. Here we report that T cell diversity is driven by B cells and by immunoglobulin. T cell receptor Vβ diversity of thymocytes in mice that lack B cells and immunoglobulin is reduced to 6 x 10² from wild type values of 1.1 x 10 8 ; in mice with oligoclonal B cells T cell receptor Vβ diversity of thymocytes is 0.01% of wild type. Adoptive transfer of diverse B cells or administration of polyclonal immunoglobulin increases thymocyte diversity in mice that lack B cells, 8 and 7 fold, respectively, while adoptive transfer of monoclonal B cells or monoclonal immunoglobulin does not. These findings reveal a heretofore unrecognized and vital function of B cells and immunoglobulin for generation of T cell diversity and suggest a potential approach to immune modification for transplantation -that depletion of B cells may constrain T cell responses independent of changes in humoral immune responses. Wei Gao, 1 Yuan Zhai, 1 Ronald W. Busuttil, 1 Hideo Yagita, 3 Mohammed H. Sayegh, 2 Jerzy W. Kupiec-Weglinski. Surgery, Los Angeles, CA; 2 Laboratory of Immunogenetics and Transplantation, Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; 3 Juntendo University, Japan. Although T cell costimulation blockade markedly prolongs allograft survival in various animal models, one emerging problem is its failure to control memory T cell-mediated rejection. A number of groups, including our own, have shown that host response to costimulation blockade is very sensitive to its immunological history. Not only allogeneic, but also cross-reactive viral/infectious agent-derived antigens, may prime recipients to abrogate the protective effects of costimulation blockade. Memory CD8+ T cells are considered the primary effector cells that escape the costimulation blockade. We have established a skin-sensitized murine cardiac allograft model to study memory CD8+ T cell-mediated rejection. We have shown that donor skin graft (Balb/c, 40 days prior to heart Tx) primed C57BL/6 recipients to reject subsequent cardiac allografts in an accelerated manner (MST=4.5d vs. 7d in naive mice). CD154 blockade (0.5mg at the time of heart Tx), which uniformly prolongs cardiac allograft survival in naive B6 mice (ca. 50 days), failed to protect cardiac allografts (MST=4.5±2d; n=8) in skin-sensitized hosts. We have also shown that CD8 depletion in conjunction with CD154 blockade synergistically prolonged cardiac allograft survival in sensitized recipients (MST=40±6d; n=6). In this study, we tested the role of three new costimulation pathways, 4-1BB, ICOS, OX40, all of which have been found to be expressed on activated T cells, in the memory alloreactive CD8+ T cell-mediated rejection. A single dose of blockingantibodies (0.5mg, i.v.) against ligands of each of the three costimulatory molecules at the time of cardiac Tx, resulted in significant prolongation of graft survival in skinsensitized recipients (anti-4-1BBL MST=15 days; anti-ICOSL MST>25 days; anti-OX40L MST>25 days), which was in sharp contrast to untreated (MST=5 days) or anti-CD154 treated (MST=4 days) controls. Correlated with cardiac allograft survival, alloreactive CD8+ T cell activation was increased in untreated (% of CD44 high CD62L low in total CD8 in PBL at day 10 post heart Tx, 5% to 25%) and CD154-treated (26.4%) recipients, but totally suppressed in anti-ICOSL-(3.1%) and anti-OX40L-(2.0%) treated recipients. Interestingly, anti-4-1BBL-treated mice showed a modest increase in activated CD8+ T cells (8.2%). In conclusion, ICOS and OX40 signalling are involved in the activation of memory CD8+ T cells, and their blockade might provide much needed novel therapies to inhibit memory T cell-mediated allograft rejection. Kewalramani, 1 Toshiro Ito, 1 Hugh Auchincloss, Jr., 1 Nader Najafian, 1 Mohamed H. Sayegh. 1 1 Transplantation Research Center, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA. T cell costimulation via the CD28-B7 pathway plays an important role in the regulation of alloimmune responses. Blockade of the CD28:B7 pathway with anti-B7 mAbs or CTLA4Ig prevents acute allograft rejection and induces tolerance in several, but not all, murine models of transplantation. In primates, B7 blockade delays allograft rejection but does not induce tolerance, and human trials with CTLA4Ig to spare calcineurin inhibitors are ongoing. The presence of CD28-independent pathways of allograft rejection is confirmed by the findings that CD28 deficient recipients reject both skin and vascularized grafts, albeit the latter with some delay. Understanding the effector mechanisms of CD28-independent alloimmune responses is critical for development of novel tolerogenic strategies involving CD28-B7 blockade to translate to primates and humans. We sought to explore the mechanisms of CD28-independent allograft rejection and specifically test the relative contribution of CD4 versus CD8 T cells in both skin and cardiac transplantation models. C57BL/6 mice deficient in CD28 were crossbred with either CD4 or CD28 deficient mice and F2 offspring were genotyped by PCR to establish founder colonies deficient in both CD28 and CD4 or CD8. We then investigated the role of CD4 + CD28and CD8 + CD28 --independent rejection using full thickness trunk skin and vascularized cardiac BALB/c allografts. The In the absence of CD28, neither CD4 nor CD8 T cells alone can mediate acute rejection of vascularized cardiac allografts, while either cell alone can effectively reject skin allografts. These results point to the differential roles of CD28-independent CD4 versus CD8 T cells in contributing to vascularized versus skin allograft rejection, and provide novel tools for studying the role of the new T cell costimulatory pathways in activation of these cells in vivo. Filatenkov, 1 Elizabeth Ingulli. 1 1 Center for Immunology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN. INTRODUCTION: T cells are understood to play a critical role in the rejection of various solid organs. Since the mechanisms of rejection of skin and cardiac grafts may be different, we were interested in comparing the activation of graft-specific CD8 T cells after skin or heart transplantation. METHODS: To address this, we have used a mouse model system in which we track, in vivo, the behavior of T cell receptor (TCR)-transgenic chicken ovalbumin (OVA)-specific CD8 and CD4 T cells in response to skin grafts mismatched for a single foreign "minor" antigen, OVA. Donor heart graft is obtained from transgenic mice that express OVA under the control of chicken beta-actin promoter on the surface of most cells (Act-mOVA). OT-I RAG deficient (CD8) and/or OT-II RAG deficient (CD4) TCR transgenic T cells were adoptively transferred into wild type congenic B6 recipients. This system allowed us to track graft-specific T cells and evaluate their contribution to graft rejection without risk of homeostatic proliferation as would be observed using lymphopenic recipients. Recipient mice received full thickness skin or heterotopic heart grafts from Act-mOVA B6 mice. RESULTS: OT-I cells accelerated skin graft rejection above the endogenous T cell response (mean survival time, MST=21 vs 34 days). Activation of OT-I cells was localaized to the draining lymph nodes. Intersestingly, after heart transplantation, adoptively transferred OT-I cells failed to accelerate graft rejection above the endogenous response (100% heart grafts survived > 40 days in B6 mice that received OT-I cells and in B6 mice that did not receive OT-I cells). Depite the inability to accelerate graft rejection, OT-I cells were not igorant but rather demonstrated evidence of antigen exposure as seen by proliferation (dilution of CFSE), clonal expansion ( Memory T cells pose a significant risk to transplanted organs because of their survival, migration, and activation advantages over naive T cells. Unknown, however, is whether CD4 and CD8 memory T cells share the same advantages. Here, we compared the ability of antigen-experienced CD4 vs CD8 alloreactive, wildtype (polyclonal) T cells to transition to the memory phenotype and be maintained and recalled independent of each other and of secondary lymphoid organs. Methods: Wildtype B6 mice were immunized with BALB/c splenocytes to generate either effector or memory T cells. Effector and memory T cells were harvested 4 days or >10 weeks after immunization, respectively, and purified by magnetic separation and high speed sorting (> 98% CD8+CD44high and CD4+CD44high T cells were obtained). 0.5 to 1 million cells of either subpopulation were transferred to splenectomized aly mice which lack secondary lymphoid organs. 12 weeks later, BALB/c skin grafts were placed to test for rejection. Rejection in this model denotes the presence of memory T cells as splenectomized aly mice do not mount primary alloimmune responses. Results: Either CD4 or CD8 memory T cells alone mediated the rejection of skin allografts even if the transplant procedure was delayed for 12 weeks after cell transfer (Table 1) . Similarly, either CD4 or CD8 effector T cells alone transitioned to the memory phenotype and mediated skin transplant rejection 12 weeks later (Table 2 ). However, more effector CD4 than CD8 T cells were required to generate the same memory response ( Conclusions: Alloreactive CD4 and CD8 memory T cells can be generated from effector T cells and can be maintained and recalled independent of each other and of secondary lymphoid organs. This is in contrast to viral immunity where CD8 memory generation and recall is dependent on the presence of CD4 help. Our findings underscore the threat of extralymphoid CD4 and CD8 memory T cells to the longterm survival of transplanted organs.  Methods: This is a sub-analysis of a prospective, randomized, single center study. Fifty-nine cadaveric renal transplant recipients were randomized to receive either SIR+FK+Steroids (n=37) or SIR+MMF+Steroids (n=22). Patients with diabetes pretransplant were excluded. Metabolic profiles evaluated were body mass index (BMI), fasting cholesterol (Chol) and triglycerides (TG) levels, incidence of post-transplant diabetes mellitus (PTDM), and metabolic syndrome. All patients had at least 1 year follow-up. Results: There were no differences in patient demographics between the two groups with 58% male, 78% African-American, and a mean age of 42 ± 12 years. The safety and efficacy data has been previously reported. At 1 year, the serum creatinine was significantly lower in the SIR+MMF group (1.3 ± 0.3 mg/dL) than the SIR+FK group (1.8 ± 0.7 mg/dL), p=0.03. By study design, SIR+MMF group had higher SIR trough levels (12.7±5.9 ng/ml) than SIR+FK group (10.2±4.5 ng/ml), p<0.01. The mean FK trough level was 5.0±2.2 ng/ml during the first year post-transplant. Prednisone daily doses were similar between the two groups. Regardless of regimens, all patients had significant increased in BMI from 26.8 to 28.4 and in Chol (↑21%) and TG (↑ 27%) levels, p<0.01. Lipid lowering therapy was required in 88% of patents. The prevalence of metabolic syndrome was 27% pre-transplant and 1 year incidence of 45%. There were no differences in changes in Chol and TGs and the incidences of PTDM and metabolic syndrome between the groups. Hypercholesterolemia is prevalent in the kidney transplant population. The recommended goal of therapy is an LDL cholesterol <2.6 mmol/L. At our center about half of kidney transplant patients (49%, 220/449) followed in our clinic are on a statin. A significant number of patients (63%, 139/220) on statin therapy are above target (>2.6 mmol/L). Of the 139 statin treated patients above target, 95 (68%) have LDL cholesterols that are between 2.6 and 3.6 mmol/L, the remaining 44 (32%) have an extremely elevated LDL (>3.6 mmol/L). In addition a small proportion of our patients have been intolerant (3) or developed rhabdomyolysis (4) with statin therapy and some are reluctant to start this drug given the bad lay press (9). In order to improve LDL cholesterol control we examined the short-term effect of the oral cholesterol absorption inhibitor, ezetimibe 10 mg daily, in stable kidney transplant recipients. Ten patients received the drug. Of these 5 were on tacrolimus, 2 on cyclosporine and 3 on sirolimus (no CNI). Patients were 48±13 years old, weight 84± 34 kg, 5/10 were female, 4/10 were diabetic and 8/10 were on a statin (2 were intolerant of statin therapy). The table shows the mean effect of ezetimibe on the fasting lipid profile after 4 weeks of therapy. There were significant improvements in total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol and the cholesterol ratio (TC/HDL). There was no effect on drug levels or serum creatinine. The medication was well tolerated. There was no difference in effect among patients on either CNI or no CNI or whether on a statin or not. Our results show that the proportion of kidney transplant patients with LDL cholesterols levels above target are substatntial. The use of ezetimibe improves lipid control in this population and is well tolerated. In addition the drug is effective in patients who cannot tolerate statins. Although the effect is limited to about 1 mmol/L reduction in LDL, up to 68% of the patients presently not in target could potentially reach target. How much this translates into reduced CVD events is not known. Obesity is a major health care issue in the general, end stage renal disease (ESRD), and renal transplant populations. Previous studies have suggested that chronic corticosteroids increase body weight after transplant. With the recent adoption of steroid-free immunosuppressive strategies, we evaluated the effect of steroid avoidance on body mass index. We examined 101 renal transplant recipients enrolled in NIH clinical transplant trials that received one of three immunosuppressive regimens: 1) steroid-free depletional induction therapy with Alemtuzumab followed by sirolimus or tacrolimus monotherapy; 2) steroid-free high-dose (20mg/kg) rabbit ATG (hRATG) induction followed by sirolimus or tacrolimus monotherapy; and 3) standard triple immunosuppression that included prednisone. Some recipients of hRATG had acute rejections and were converted to chronic prednisone therapy. The results are shown in the table below. Similar to the ESRD population on dialysis, recipients prior to transplant were overweight (BMI 26.0±0.5 kg/m²). There were no significant differences in pretransplant BMI between treatment groups. Despite of the avoidance of steroids, BMI increased post transplant in both depletional steroid-free strategies as well as standard therapy recipients. This increase in BMI represented an average weight gain of 4.6±1.4 kg post transplant. The lowest increase in BMI was seen in the hRATG group, although this was not significantly different than either the Alemtuzumab or standard therapy groups. Additionally, steroid withdrawal at a mean of 100 days post transplant had no impact on weight gain. Interestingly, the addition of chronic steroids following an acute rejection episode in the hRATG group was associated with a significant loss of weight compared to both Alemtuzumab and standard patients (p=0.01). These results demonstrate the overall increase in weight gain following kidney transplantation. Alternative strategies to prevent significant weight gain aside from steroid withdrawal should be considered. Understanding the underlying physiologic milieu that controls weight gain needs to be explored further.  Stephen C. Textor, 1 Mouhammed AbuAttieh, 1 Adit Mahale, 1 Sandra J. Taler, 1 Driscoll Nancy, 1 Augustine Jo Ellen, 1 Larson S. Timothy, 1 Gloor M. James, 1 Griffin D. Matthew, 1 Schwab R. Thomas, 1 Cosio G. Fernando, 1 Stegall D. Mark. 1 1 Transplant Center, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN. Hypertension after kidney transplantation poses major CV risk and affects long-term allograft outcome. The aims of this study were to compare different BP monitoring methods and to correlate these with renal function after kidney Tx. Methods: We studied 103 kidney Tx recipients (age 51.5 years, range 20-80 years) (89 living and 14 deceased donor) one year after Tx using clinic oscillometric BP (Dinamap), ambulatory (awake ABPM), and AHA trained RN readings. GFR was measured by iothalamate clearance and resistive index by ultrasound during protocol biopsy. Immunosuppression consisted of tacrolimus (72), sirolimus (23) or cyclosporine (8) along with mycophenolate and steroids. Mean creatinine was 1.55±.05 mg/dL and GFR was 55±2 ml/min/1.73m2. Overall, 87 % were identified as hypertensive, 84% of which were treated with medication (1.7 drugs /patient). BP Control rates ranged between 52% (clinic) and 81% (RN) during Drug RX. Concordance (Conc) was defined as agreement with clinic BP classification as "normotensive" or "hypertensive". [table] Despite BP therapy, Awake ABPM BP levels predicted reduced GFR (R=-0.41, p<.0001) better than clinic BP readings (R=-.24, p=.02). ABPM further predicted renal resistive index, which was highest in tacrolimus treated patients despite GFR similar to sirolimus regimens. Day-night Bp change was reduced compared to normal subjects (Day-night delta SBP: 6±2 vs 14±2 mm Hg, p<.001). Despite similar GFR and clinic BP, deceased donor kidney recipients had higher ABPM (142±4 / 73±2 mm Hg vs 135±1 / 79±1 mm Hg, p< 0.05). These data demonstrate important differences and potential misclassification between BP methods one year after transplantation. Elevated ABPM BP and loss of day-night rhythms independently predict cardiovascular events in hypertensive populations. Our results further indicate that ABPM is most closely associated with reduced GFR and elevated renal resistive index in treated hypertensive Tx recipients. These results will allow more precise characterization and management of BP in the long-term care of renal Tx recipients. We also examined achievement of treatment BP, Chol, and TG goals established by the NIH (JNCVII and ATPIII guidelines). Target BP, Chol, and TG goals were not achieved in 82%, 32%, and 48% of patients pretransplant, respectively. Posttransplant, target BP, Chol, and TG goals were not achieved in 54%, 52%, and 74% of patients. Conclusion: Metabolic complications are common and suboptimally controlled pretransplant. Apart from hypertension, the incidence and severity of these complications increased significantly posttransplant. Treatment of posttransplant patients did not achieve desired goals in a significant proportion of patients. Aggressive medical management should be initiated prior to transplant and continued in the posttransplant follow-up. 1 Viliami Tutone, 2 Graeme Stewart, 2 C. C. Tan, 2 R. S. C. Rodger, 2 Colin Geddes, 2 Alan G. Jardine. 1 1 Medicine and Cardiovascular Sciences, Western Infirmary, Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom; 2 Nephroplogy, Western Infirmary, Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom. Background Hypertension is common following renal transplantation and adversely affects graft and patient survival. However strategies for antihypertensive drug therapy and target blood pressure have not been clearly defined. Methods We undertook a prospective study of 622(57.2% male; mean age 45.2 +/-13.0) patients with functioning grafts from December 1994-June 2003. Blood pressure (BP) was determined from mean of three clinic readings and drug therapy recorded. We analyzed patient and graft survival after102 months follow up to assess the influence of hypertension and drug therapy. Results There were 158(2.9% per annum) deaths and 115(2.2% per annum) graft failures. Univariate analysis identified age (p<0.001, hazard ratio (HR) 1.066), creatinine (p=0.03, HR 1.002), diabetes (p<0.001, HR 3.989), pulse pressure (p<0.05, HR 1.013) as predictors of patient survival with creatinine (p<0.001, 1.012), number of antihypertensives (p<0.01, HR 1.413) and pulse pressure (p<0.05, HR 1.018) as predictors of graft survival. Mortality increased with increased systolic blood pressure. Patient survival was reduced with increasing number of antihypertensives (p<0.05) as was graft survival (p<0.05). Reduced patient and graft survival was seen in patients prescribed calcium channel antagonists (p<0.01). There was no increased patient mortality in those patients on beta blockers or ACE inhibitors although the number of patients on ACE inhibitors was small (11.3%) Abstracts Conclusion Hypertension is a risk factor for reduced patient and graft survival. This risk remains despite use of antihypertensives. Calcium channel antagonists are associated with greater patient mortality than beta blockers. Beta blockers may have a cardio protective effect and therefore reduce patient mortality. Purpose Among United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) Status 1 patients, we sought to compare the post-transplant mortality of patients not supported with a ventricular assist device (VAD) to those bridged to cardiac transplantation with an extracorporeal VAD or intracorporeal VAD. Methods A retrospective analysis was conducted using Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network data as of 5/31/2002 from the UNOS Thoracic Registry. The analysis was restricted to UNOS Status 1 first-time single organ cardiac transplant recipients between 1/1/1995 to 12/31/2001. The one and five-year mortality were compared among patients supported with an extracorporeal VAD (Abiomed, Thoratec)[Group 1], an intracorporeal VAD (HeartMate, Novacor)[Group2], or no VAD support [Group 3]. Mortality rates were estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method. Risk ratios were estimated using Cox proportional hazard regression models. For risk factors that exhibited non-proportional hazard over time, hazards were modeled either as a function of time or by stratification. Of the 10,523 patients transplanted as UNOS Status 1, 876 were supported with an extracorporeal VAD and 750 with an intracorporeal VAD. The one-year mortality was 21.2%, 17% and 14.7% in Groups 1, 2 and 3, respectively. The cumulative mortality at 5 years was 35.7%, 33.8% and 28.3% in Group 1, 2 and 3, respectively (p<0.00001). The hazard ratio for patients with intracorporeal VAD support compared to UNOS Status 1 patients without VAD support was 1.32 (95% CI: 1.09-1.59, p<0.001). The adverse effect of extracorporeal VAD use was nonproportional over time (p<0.001), with a hazard ratio of 1.47 (95% CI: 1.28-1.70, p<0 .001) at the first month which decreased gradually to a hazard ratio of 1.16 (95% CI: 0.98-1.38, p=0.09) 12 months following transplantation. Thus, compared to UNOS Status 1 patients not supported with a VAD, those bridged with an extracorporeal or intracorporeal VAD demonstrate a higher short and long term mortality following cardiac transplantation. Nirav Y. Raval, 1 Mandeep R. Mehra. 2 1 Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA; 2 Cardiomyopathy and Heart Transplantation Center, Ochsner Clinic Foundation, New Orleans, LA. Background: The use of HMG Co-A reductase inhibitors (statins) after cardiac transplantation has been suggested to decrease severe rejection and improve survival. Individual investigations leading to this suggestion are randomized (but not placebo controlled), include small numbers (and thus underpowered) and enroll heterogeneous patients (including retransplant recipients). The purpose of this pooled analysis was to quantify the benefit of statins on survival in de novo cardiac transplant recipients. Methods: Medline (1966 Medline ( -2003 was queried using keywords statin, HMG Co-A reductase inhibitors, cardiac, transplantation, transplant, cholesterol, atorvastatin, fluvastatin, lovastatin, pravastatin, and simvastatin. In addition, we searched cited literature and previously published systematic reviews. Summary outcome data were extracted from final trial reports. Of 36 articles retrieved, 3 randomized controlled studies met our population inclusion criteria (>18 years, de-novo heart transplant, statin therapy within 3 months of transplant, at least 1 year follow-up of statin treated and controls). Pooled data were meta-analyzed using Mantel-Haenszel testing in a random effects model that included tests for heterogeneity. Results: The 3 pooled studies included 246 patients (statin n=129, no-statin n=117) and 27 events (11%). Although individual studies trended to favor statin therapy for mortality at 1 year, the 95% CI's crossed unity. Pooled analysis demonstrated a significant reduction in mortality with statin use (RR 0.31 (95% CI 0.13-0.7, p=0.006) without significant heterogeneity (p=0.7) among studies. (Figure 1) At our transplant center cardiac allograft recipients undergo transplantation (Tx) following negative (=) IgG anti-human globulin (AHG) crossmatch (XM). Recent data from renal Tx studies suggested that recipients with pre-Tx sera containing Flow PRA identified IgG HLA antibodies (Ab) and displaying positive (+) IgG donor specific flow cytometry XMs (FCXM) experienced a high rejection frequency and graft loss. Therefore, we retrospectively evaluated the pre-Tx sera of 127 cardiac allograft recipients for the presence of HLA Abs and a (+) or (=) IgG donor-specific FCXM. The results were correlated to post-Tx rejection and patient survival. Recipients with little or no (< 5%) IgG HLA Ab experienced significantly fewer rejections (10%, 9/86 vs 56%, 23/41, p<0.001) and better graft survival (92%, 65/71 vs 78%, 32/41, p<0.01) than recipients with ≥5% (39 ± 19%) IgG HLA Ab. More importantly, those recipients with pre-Tx IgG HLA Abs (4 class I only, 3 class II only and 3 class I and II) and a (+) IgG donor specific FCXM experienced a 90% (9/10) rejection frequency and only had a 70% (7/10) one year graft survival compared with an 11% (7/64) rejection frequency and a 92% (59/64) survival for recipients with no HLA Ab and a (=) FCXM, p<0.01 for rejection and survival respectively. Recipients presenting with no HLA Ab and a (+) IgM FCXM experienced an 8% (1/13) rejection frequency and a 92% (12/13) survival. These data suggest that the pre-Tx presence of Flow PRA detected IgG HLA Ab in recipient sera correlates with a significant risk for rejection. Recipients presenting pre-Tx with both IgG HLA Abs and a (+) IgG donor specific FCXM are at risk for both rejection and graft loss. The presence of IgM may be beneficial to graft outcome. Having pre-Tx IgG HLA Ab information may influence clinicians to desensitize patients prior to transplantation and/or to choose different immunosuppressive regimens for those sensitized vs nonsensitized recipients. The goal of this study is to determine the effect of multiple pre-and post-transplant risk and protective factors on the incidence of acute cardiac allograft rejection ISHLT grade 3A (AR) among 634 patients participating in a multi-center double-blind comparatorcontrolled trial, randomized to either everolimus (EV) or azathioprine (AZA). Univariate logistic regression modeling of effect on AR was performed for risk factors: PRA, donor age, recipient age, recipient coronary artery disease (CD), body mass index (BMI), cold ischemia time (IT), use of LVAD, and hypertension. Of these, the use of LVAD was significantly associated with AR (p=0.002, odds ratio [OR]= 3.2, 95% CI 11.5-6.7). We also determine whether the above risk factors plus AR, mean CsA trough, mean steroid dose, creatinine level>200umol/mL, triglyceride 4.5 mmol/L, cholesterol 6.2 mmol/L, CMV, statin, ACE inhibitor, or calcium channel blockers (CCB) influenced the subsequent occurrence of IVUS-defined cardiac allograft vasculopathy (CAV) at one year (y), an endpoint studied because of its value as a surrogate for survival and MACE at 5 y after transplant. CAV was defined as an increase in maximal intimal thickness of 0.5 mm or more in any segment studied at both baseline and 1 y. Among the 211 patients with baseline and 1 y IVUS, there were too few patients with CMV or without statin use to determine whether these factors affected CAV. AR, and choice of statin were not risk factors for the occurrence of CAV. Of the risk factors analyzed donor age >50 y ((p=0.005, OR=3.6, CI=1.5-9.0) was associated with increased risk of CAV as was recipient CD (p=0.04, OR=1.83, CI=1.02-3.25) Conclusion: Metabolic risk factors did not influence AR or CAV at 1 y. In this mixed population, LVAD use emerged as a significant risk factor for AR, but AR itself did not influence the occurrence of CAV during the same interval. Patients receiving hearts from older donors, or whose reason for transplant is related to a diagnosis of CD may need their regimen tailored to address CAV. Chronic graft dysfunction with transplant vasculopathy (TV) represents a dominant cause of late heart transplant failure. The development of TV may involve cellular and humoral immunity as well as nonimmune factors. To assess the role of anti-donor immunity in the development of human TV we evaluated peripheral immune responses in 22 human cardiac allograft recipients with angiographic evidence of TV and 27 controls with normal angiograms. Recipient peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) were tested for immune reactivity to indirectly presented peptides derived from donor HLA molecules by IFNg ELISPOT. Serum anti-HLA class II alloantibodies were assessed by flow cytometry screening beads, and positive sera were further tested to determine specificity. There was no significant difference in immunosuppression regimens between the TV+ and TV-groups (predominantly a calcineurin inhibitor, an anti-proliferative agent and steroids). The number of HLA mismatches did not differ between groups (5.0 vs 5.2, p=NS) and there was no difference in the frequency of CMV positivity between groups. The TV+ group had longer follow-up (median 115 months) than the controls (median 54 months). Within the TV+ group, 6/22 (27%) had detectable responses to donor but not recipient HLA peptides and 9/22 (41%) had anti-donor HLA class II antibodies. Only 1 patient exhibited evidence of both cellular and humoral immunity. 8 patients had no detectable anti-donor immunity despite angiographic evidence for TV. In contrast, only 4/27 (15%) TV-controls exhibited anti-donor peptide immunity and 1/27 (4%) had anti-donor class II alloantibodies in the serum. The overall incidence of anti-donor immunity in the TV+ group (63%) was statistically greater than in the TVgroup (22%, p < 0.05). This held true for those patients in each group followed for the same time period of > 5 years. Our results provide strong correlative evidence that antidonor immunity participates in the development of TV in human heart graft recipients but further demonstrates the heterogeneity of the induced responses. Comprehensive approaches to assessing both cellular and humoral immunity will be required to identify those individuals at highest risk for this disease. Ultimately, a noninvasive ability to identify (and perhaps predict) those individuals with persistent anti-donor immunity should permit individualization of therapy aimed at prolonging graft survival. First year intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) measurements, including the change from baseline to 1-year maximal intimal thickness (MIT) greater than 0.5mm, have been recently reported to be a surrogate marker for long-term outcome after heart transplantation. This IVUS measurement most likely represents a heightened immune response of the recipient to the donor heart, which can lead to allograft vasculopathy and subsequent poor outcome. First year IVUS data can be analyzed by site-to-site analysis (recent reports) or by morphometric analysis (average of 10 sites, without matching sites which was done in the MMF Trial) in the same coronary artery from baseline to 1-year. Since intimal thickness is heterogeneous with most sites having little or no intimal thickening, morphometric analysis will not be sensitive to detect changes at any one particular site as it averages data from multiple (usually 10) sites. In this regard, morphometric analysis of the first year MMF IVUS data may not have accurately depicted the impact of MMF on first year MIT in the study patients. MMF has been reported to decrease intimal thickening in animal transplant models. The MMF trial involved 650 heart transplant patients from 28 centers to receive MMF (3000 mg/ day) or azathioprine (1.5-3.0 mg/kg/day), in addition to cyclosporine and corticosteroids. Baseline and 1-year IVUS were performed in 196 patients (102 MMF and 94 azathioprine patients) with no differences in IVUS results by morphometric analysis found between the study groups. Further analysis of the IVUS data using siteto-site analysis from baseline to 1-year will be performed at the Core IVUS Laboratory. The number of patients with change in MIT greater than 0.5mm from baseline to 1-year at any one site will be determined for MMF-treated patients compared to azathioprinetreated patients. Results of this analysis will be presented at the ATC Scientific Sessions 2004. Background: Cardiac allograft vasculopathy (CAV) is a major impediment to long-term graft survival. Intravascular Ultrasound (IVUS) is an invasive procedure that is more sensitive than coronary angiography and detects intimal thickening (early CAV) in the coronary arteries of the donor heart. There have been single center studies suggesting that the first year IVUS results might predict or be a surrogate marker for long-term outcome however this has not been established in a large multicenter study. Methods: First-year IVUS results and subsequent five-year clinical data follow-up were reviewed in 125 cardiac transplant recipients from 5 institutions skilled in performing IVUS in heart transplant patients. IVUS tapes (at baseline and 1-year follow-up) were re-analyzed at a core IVUS laboratory. The greatest change in maximal intimal thickness (MIT) from baseline to year 1 was recorded for matched sites in the LAD coronary artery. Patients were divided into two groups: Those with an increase of 0.5 mm in the MIT in any matched site and those without this increase. Analysis of the results is ongoing and will correlate these two IVUS groups with 5-year patient outcomes (death/retransplant, non-fatal major adverse cardiac events, cardiac function, morbidity factors, and subsequent development of angiographic/autopsy confirmed cardiac allograft vasculopathy). The results will serve to validate first year IVUS data as a surrogate marker for poor outcome after heart transplantation. Data has been collected and the complete analysis will be available at the time of the ATC Scientific Sessions. End-stage renal disease (ESRD) requiring chronic dialysis constitutes a serious complication in 2%-10% of heart transplant (HTx) pts. Purpose: To describe the prevalence of ESRD and the survival of HTx pts requiring chronic dialysis in Canada. Methods: We studied 2,555 pts who received HTx between Jan 1, 1981 and Dec 31, 2001 . Data was extracted from the Canadian Organ Replacement Register, managed by the Canadian Institute for Health Information. An attempt was made to match each HTx pt on dialysis with 2 dialysis controls (n=180) without a HTx (No HTx-Dialysis group). Results: During the follow-up period, 94 pts (3.7%) developed ESRD requiring chronic dialysis (HTx-Dialysis group) and 2,461 pts did not develop ESRD (HTx-No dialysis group). There was no difference on pts' age at HTx between the HTx-Dialysis group and the HTx-No Dialysis group (48±11 yrs vs. 45.5±16.5 yrs). There was no difference in the primary disease. The mean time elapsed between HTx and the initiation of chronic dialysis was 87±49 months (median 86.5). Pt's years after HTx in the HTx-Dialysis group was 9.7±4.3 and in the HTx-No Dialysis group was 5.6±4.7 (P<0.0001) Survival post-heart Tx Survival 0-1 yr 1-3 yrs 3-6 yrs 6-9 yrs 9-12 yrs 12-15 yrs >15 yrs Background Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection is a risk factor for cardiac allograft vasculopathy (CAV) in heart transplant (HT) recipients. However it is unclear whether baseline sensitization of the immune system to CMV, as expressed by positive serology for CMV, may represent a risk factor for CAV, beyond viral cytotoxicity. In this study we hypothesized that donor or recipient positive CMV serology might be a risk factor for CAV, regardless of signs of acute CMV infection, and despite anti-CMV prophylaxis. Methods Consecutive patients who underwent HT between 1994 and 2002 at our Center (n=331) were reviewed. All HT recipients who survived at least one year and underwent at least one coronary angiography were included in the study. Since 1994, all HT recipients seropositive for CMV (R+) undergo a prophylaxis regimen consisting of 4 weeks of intravenous ganciclovir, 5 mg/Kg/bid (14 days) and daily until Day 28 post-transplant. Seronegative recipients (R-) receiving the graft from seropositive donor (D+) additionally received CMVIgG until the 4 th postoperative month. Immunosuppression consisted of induction with OKT3 or daclizumab, and a 3-drug regimen of CSA, prednisone and MMF. Results Of the patients reviewed, 155 fulfilled inclusion criteria, and demographics were characterized by age 46±17years; 117(75%) men; and 45(29%) pre-transplant coronary artery disease. CMV serostatus was R+/D+: 55(35%); R+/D-: 32(21%); R-/ D+: 45(29%), and R-/D-: 23(15%) No baseline differences were recorded among groups, except that R+ were older than R-(50±15 vs. 42±17y, P<0.01). 21(14%) patients experienced clinical CMV disease, confirmed by a positive CMV-PCR. After a followup of 7 years, the estimated incidence of CAV was 61±13% in R+/D+, 70±22% in R+/ D-, 19±7% in R-/D+ and 20±12% in R-/D-, P=0.05. This trend was confirmed by multivariate analysis which showed that seropositive recipients had the highest risk of developing CAV, independent of recipient demographics, donor serology and CMV disease (OR[95%CI] = 2.22 [1.03 to 4.71] ; P=0.04). Conclusions Recipient CMV seropositivity is an independent risk factor for CAV, suggesting that CMV sensitization even in the absence of acute disease may play a role in CAV pathogenesis. However, the effect of sub-clinical viral replication on CAV requires further investigation. High-dose IVIg (intravenous immunoglobulins) administration has proven its efficacy in reducing anti-HLA antibodies titers in most patients. However, success varies from 50 to 87% of treated patients, and, due to the cost of treatment, it is of importance to devise an "in vitro" test which could predict the clinical response of the patients. It has been proposed that inhibition of the cytotoxic CDC crossmatch by a fixed dose of IVIg could predict the subsequent clinical response to IVIg. We initiated a protocol of desensitization of patients with a positive crossmatch against their potential living donor. Five patients have been so far treated with 3 monthly courses of 2 g/Kg of IVIg (ENDOBULIN, Baxter), with crossmatch negativation in 4 cases (the fifth case is still under treatment). In all five cases, adjunction of IVIg (25 mg/ ml) had no effect on the crossmatch test (Table I) Table I Patients received their transplant under a regimen of THYMOGLOBULIN, CELLCEPT, PROGRAF and steroids, with additional courses of IVIg on days -1/0, 20/21 and 42/ 43 post-transplant. One steroid sensitive rejection (Banff 1a) was seen and one graft was lost to vascular rejection. We conclude that, at the moment, there is no assay that should preclude IVIg treatment of sensitized recipients, particularly those with a potential living donor. Background: 30% of the kidney transplant waiting list is sensitized to allo-HLA molecules. These patients endure disproportionately long waiting times and inferior graft survival. Many of these patients have a live donor who has been excluded due to a positive crossmatch (+XM). Methods: A total of 58 +XM transplants were performed during the study period (2/98-11/03) utilizing our plasmapheresis/low dose CMVIg (PP/CMVIg) protocol. The first 41 patients (Group 1) were preconditioned with a one-size-fits-all protocol utilizing PP/CMVIg and standard immunosuppression. Results from this group are compared to the most recent 17 patients (Group 2) in which the therapeutic plan was individualized to match the level of risk of graft loss. Results:. Graft survival for Group 1 and 2 are 86% and 100%, respectively. Five patients in Group 2 were determined to be at high risk for graft loss (wide breadth of HLA reactivity, previous transplants and early graft losses, multiple repeat mismatches or donor reactive antibodies, rising or rebounding DSA titers) and their preconditioning was enhanced with splenectomy and/or anti-CD20. The rate of overall graft loss was 14.6% in Group 1 and 0% in Group 2 (p < 0.05). Graft loss due to severe antibodymediated rejection occurred in 4 patients (9.7%) in Group 1 and 0 patients in Group 2. Mean current creatinine clearance is 59.1 ± 38.0 and 70.6 ± 17.6 mL/min for patients in Group 1 and Group 2, respectively (p=NS). Mean follow-up times for Group 1 and Group 2 are 21.3 ± 17.7 and 2.3 ± 1.1 months, respectively. Conclusions: Lower rates of graft loss can be achieved in + XM transplants when the treatment plan is crafted to match the immunologic risk of the recipient. BACKGROUND: A positive cross-match between donor and recipient has been traditionally considered an absolute contraindication to kidney transplantation. In an effort to further expand our ability to utilize living donors for kidney transplantation, we have implemented a strategy to prevent immune mediated graft loss when the recipient has a positive cross-match against a potential living donor. METHODS: Between 7/01 and 6/03, 15 highly sensitized candidates to kidney transplantation, with cross-match positive potential living donors, were enrolled in this study. The average age was 34 years; 10 were African-American, 1 Caucasian and 4 Hispanic. One patient had a prior transplant. All patients received plasmapheresis QOD starting 1 week before the scheduled transplant. In 5 patients a single dose of Rituximab was given at the beginning of the treatment. If the cross-match by flowcytometry converted to negative after the initial 3 treatments, the transplant was performed as scheduled; otherwise the protocol was aborted. Post-operatively, the recipients continued to receive QOD plasmapheresis for the initial week. Immunosuppression therapy consisted in induction with Thymoglobulin x 5 days along with combination of tacrolimus, mycophenolate and steroids. Average followup was 1 year. RESULTS: Four patients failed to convert with pre transplant immunomodulation, and were not transplanted. The other 11 underwent uncomplicated kidney transplant. Oneyear patient and graft survival was 100%. All the recipients continue to do well to date. There were 3 early episodes of antibody mediated rejection successfully treated with plasmapheresis, and 2 episodes of cellular rejection treated with bolus steroids. The average serum creatinine at 6 months was 1.4 mg/dl. There were two episodes of systemic cytomegalovirus infection successfully treated with gancyclovir; in both cases the donor was CMV positive and the recipient CMV negative. No other significant infectious complications occurred. CONCLUSIONS: Pre transplant immunomodulation with plasmapheresis ± rituximab can effectively lower antibody titer and convert to negative a previously positive flowcytometry cross-match in over 70% of the cases. Kidney transplantation can be thereafter performed with high success and acceptable rate of rejection and infection complications on a standard immunosuppressive protocol. Mieko Toyoda, 1 Anna Petrosyan, 1 Lara Hilo, 1 Andy Pao, 1 Gail Rodich, 1 Matthew McIntosh, 2 Stanley C. Jordan. 1 1 Transplant Immunology Laboratory, Los Angeles, CA; 2 The EMMMES Corporation, Rockville, MD. Backgound: IVIG treatment (Rx) reduces crossmatch (CMX) positivity and increases rates of (Tx) in highly sensitized patients (HS pts). Here, we quantified anti-HLA class I and class II Ab levels in HS pts by ELISA and correlated them with Tx rates after IVIG-Rx and risk of AR. We also measured , anti-endothelial cell Ab (AECA), anti-CMV, total IgG and IgM. Methods: Pre-Rx serum samples obtained from 80 highly sensitized ESRD patients entered in the NIH IGO2 study (42 IVIG/38 placebo, Mean PRAs >80%) were submitted for ELISA. Anti-class I, class II and anti-CMV ELISA by kits, AECA and IgG/IgM ELISAs developed in our lab.Results: The Pre-Rx levels of anticlass I (43,404±102,943units), anti-class II (51,796±136,784 units) and AECA (16±11units) were elevated in 94, 76 and 31% of patients compared to normal (<300, <300 and <5.5, respectively). Anti-CMV levels were also elevated in 77% of CMV seropositive pts (141±177 vs. <36IU/ml). Total IgG and IgM levels were similar to normals. Levels of anti-class I and II Abs correlated (c.c. 0.849). PRA-G correlated with anticlass I (cc:0.312), but to a lesser degree with anti-class II (cc:0.223). Pre-Rx levels of anti-class I (18,256±28,331 vs. 65,379±139,082, p=0.054), class II (5,499±7,470 vs. 74,051±16,6391, p=0.023), PRA-G/M (61±28 vs. 73±26, p=0.028), PRA-G (60±28 vs. 76±27, p=0.01) in pts who received transplants were significantly lower than those who did not. Of 29 Tx pts, 5 lost their grafts.The pre-Rx AECA levels in these pts were higher than those with functioning graft (17.9±16.1 vs. 5.7±6.8, p=0.062). 10 of 29 Tx pts developed AR. Their pre-Rx anti-HLA class I, class II and AECA levels were higher than those without AR (class I: 35,458±42,468 vs. 9,655±11,996, p=0.054; class II: 8,981±8,531 vs. 3,759±6,440, p=0.065; AECA: 11.9±14.4 vs. 6.3±7.2, p=0.13). PRA-G/M and PRA-G did not discern those who developed AR. Conclusions: 1) HS pts show elevations of AECA and anti-CMV in addition to anti-class I and II Abs, suggesting a possible polyclonal activation of B-cells. 2) Pts with low anti-class I, class II and AECA levels pre-Rx have high rates of Tx, 3) Pts with higher anti-class I, class II and AECA levels pre-Rx have higher risks for AR and graft loss, 4) Modulation of anti-class I, class II, AECA and PRA by IVIG improves transplantation and reduces AR, 5) PRA G/M and PRA-G did not predict AR. An increasing number of recent studies have implicated a role for anti-donor HLA antibodies in the pathogenesis of early and late graft failure. We recently reported the effects of IVIG and Thymoglobulin induction treatment in B cell complement-dependentcytotoxicity (CDC), and T and/or B cell flow-cytometry (FC) cross-match positive kidney transplant (KT) recipients (Transplantation, in press). In this study, we investigated the effects of IVIG and Thymoglobulin induction treatment on the production of donor specific antibodies (DSA) in 10 KT recipients (9 female, 1 male, 8 Caucasian or Hispanic, 2 African-American, mean age 45± 13) with positive B cell CDC and FC cross-matches. Five also had a positive T cell FC cross-match. Only one allograft was from a cadaveric donor. There were 6 first, 3 second, and 1 fourth transplant. Mean peak PRA±SD was 40±30. Six patients had pre-transplant preformed DSAs by CDC and/or Flow Beads (Luminex). Two patients had anti-HLA class I (anti-A2, B57), 3 had anti-class II (2 anti-DR4, 1 anti-DR13), and 1 had anti-A26, B39 and DR7 (Table) . Each recipient received IVIG 100 mg/kg for 3 days and Thymoglobulin 1.5 mg/kg for 5 days after transplantation and maintenance triple immunosuppression with emulsion cyclosporin, mycophenolate mofetil (9 patients) or rapamycin (1 patient), and prednisone taper. DSAs were repeated at 6-12 months post-transplantation by Flow Beads. Three patients lost pre-transplant class II DSAs and 2 lost class I DSAs. One patient each with anti-class I and anti-class II DSA antibodies retained their DSA. However, 4 patients developed de novo DSAs to A29, DR 11, DR17, and DR18. One patient with pretransplant anti-A2 had acute humoral rejection and responded to treatment with plasmapheresis, IVIG, and Rituximab. Two patients with de novo DSAs lost their allograft at 15 and 18 months after transplantation due to polyoma nephritis and thrombotic microangiopathy. Remaining 2 patients with de novo DSAs have stable renal function.These results indicate that IVIG and Thymoglobulin induction treatment might downregulate DSAs, but do not prevent the development de novo DSAs. Clinical significance of de novo DSAs requires further follow-up. Pre-Tx DSA Post -Tx DSA  1  DR4  0  2  0  0  3  DR4  0  4  A2  A2, DR11  5  0  0  6  A26, B39, DR7  B39  7  0  A29  8  DR13  DR13, Introduction: High-dose IVIG is used in management of highly-sensitized patients. With increased use, reports of significant complications including acute renal failure (ARF), thromboembolic events and aseptic meningitis have emerged. Here we describe our experience with IVIG related complications. Methods: 3 products were used from 1997-2003: Gamimune-N 10% (n=76), Polygam (n=105) and Carimmune (n=98). Infusion-related side effects (headache, aseptic meningitis, stroke, myocardial infarction (AMI), acute renal failure, rigors, chills, etc.) were monitored. Viral PCRs (CMV, EBV, Parvo B-19 and Polyoma) were also performed on 55 patients receiving IVIG for desensitization. Results: Headache was the most common complaint (52%) in patients receiving Gamimune-N and this was related to infusion rate. No patient receiving Gamimune-N experienced AMI or ARF. Subsequent infusions were well tolerated when infusion rate decreased and pre-medications given. Between 4/01 and 2/02, 5 patients (4.7%) in the Polygam group experienced AMI. A Naranjo algorithm was done to assess causality and yielded moderate probability. This was reported to FDA Medwatch. Eight patients (8.2%) in the Carimmune group developed ARF 1-21 days after IVIG infusion. 5/ 8 had impaired renal function prior to IVIG infusion, all recovered. Reduction of osmolality reduced this complication. Viral PCR data showed only 1/ 55 receiving IVIG for desensitization experienced viral infection post-transplant (CMV/Polyoma); 4 had CMV viremia. Patients receiving IVIG at 2gm/kg on hemodialysis experienced fewer AE than those receiving IVIG off HD (>400 infusions). Conclusions: 1). IVIG products differ in osmolality, pH , sugar and sodium content, this results in specific side effects. 2). Polygam (sodium excipient) resulted in no ARF, but an increase in MI. The Carimmune product at 9% (sucrose excipient) resulted in an increase in ARF, but no AMI. Gamimune-N (isosmolar) was associated with more HA, but no patients developed AMI or ARF. 3). IVIG products tend to prevent viral infections post-transplant. 4). Administration of IVIG on HD appears to be safe and effective with minimal AE. This is likely due to removal of the excipient by the dialyzer and heparinization of the patient. 5). All IVIG products can be administered safely if side effect profiles are recognized with concomitant product modification and pre-medication given. Subclinical rejection has been defined as the presence of histological rejection in the absence of graft dysfunction, and may contribute to the development of chronic allograft nephropathy and poorer graft outcomes. The incidence of subclinical rejection has been reported to be as high as 30% on cyclosporin-based regimens. Here, we report the incidence of subclinical rejection in recipients on a tacrolimus-based regimen. 53 adult renal transplant recipients from our center were enrolled in a study wherein protocol biopsies were procured at 1,2,3,6, and 12 months. These were in addition to any clinically indicated biopsies that were performed for assessment of graft dysfunction. Donor source was as follows; 41 cadaver, 6 living-related, 6 living-unrelated. Initial immunosuppressive therapy included; ATG induction followed by Tacrolimus, MMF, Pred in 43 recipients, Sirolimus/Tacrolimus/Pred in 7 recipients and various alternative combination therapies in the remaining 3 recipients. Of the non-protocol biopsies performed to assess graft dysfunction there were 3 confirmed episodes of acute clinical rejection. Of the 130 protocol biopsies performed, 4 biopsies met the criteria for acute rejection (3.1%) and 18 (13.8%) exhibited features of borderline rejection using Banff 97 criteria. Importantly, a histological diagnosis consistent with polyoma viral infection (confirmed by urine cytology and PCR) was found in 5 protocol biopsies and in one instance where a non-protocol biopsy was performed to investigate graft dysfunction. In addition, there were 6 episodes of CMV viremia/disease and 3 cases of HZV. This study demonstrates an exceptionally low incidence of both clinical and subclinical rejection in our study population wherein the majority of recipients received antibody induction (83%), followed by a Tacrolimus-based maintenance regimen (94%). However, this is at the expense of a significant incidence of viral complications. These results underscore the need for balance between prevention of rejection and promotion of viral replication. Purpose: Standardized pathology scoring exists for both acute and chronic rejection, but there is an unmet need for assessing the severity of drug nephrotoxicity (DT) in an objective manner and evaluating its clinicopathological significance in pediatric renal transplantation (Txp) patients. By studying serial protocol renal biopsies, we aim to establish a DT score that would predict the clinical outcome of the graft based on creatinine clearance (CrCl) and hypertension (HTN). Methods: Our study aims to conduct a retrospective analysis of 140 consecutive protocol kidney biopsies (done at 3, 6, 12 and 24 months post Txp) from 50 patients with functioning renal allografts and on a steroid-free immunosuppression protocol. At present 70 biopsies have been reviewed in a blinded fashion by the pathologist. The severity of DT was arbitrarily scored in a semiquantitative fashion based on % glomerulosclerosis, tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis, isometric tubular vacuolization and arteriolar medial hyaline (0-none; 1-<25%; 2-26-50%; 3->50%). Linear correlation analysis with Pearson's correlation coefficient r was conducted between DT scores and CrCl and HTN. The non DT biopsies were scored for chronicity based on percentage glomerulosclerosis, mesangial matrix increase, tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis and arterial intimal fibrosis. Results: A diagnosis of DT was made in 25 of 70 biopsies; 5 were classified as acute rejection, and 40 as chronic allograft nephropathy. The average DT score was 3.6±1.9 and found to increase over time (delta DT scores 3 to 24 month post Txp : 2). The 3 month DT score correlated significantly with 24 month CrCl ( r=-0.996, p=0.05) but there was no significant correlation with HTN (r=0.11). There was no significant correlation with calcineurin inhibitor drug levels (r = 0.29) either. Average DT scores were similar in acute rejection and non rejection biopsies. The average chronicity score was 3.6±2.4, and these scores did not correlate significantly with graft outcome. Conclusion: A semiquantitative DT scoring system can be predictive of 2 year graft function. DT score can be an useful tool for early titration of calcineurin inhibitor drugs, to minimize accruing nephrotoxicity and preserve graft function. Inclusion of this DT score in standard biopsy pathology analyses may be considered after further studies to determine long term predictive value. Background: The complement system has been shown to be an important component of the immune response in various models of organ transplantation and ischemia/ reperfusion damage. The mannose-binding lectin (MBL) pathway of complement is activated by pattern recognition and leads to cleavage of the complement components C4 and C2. Genetic MBL variants with low MBL serum levels are frequent and are associated with recurrent infection. We hypothesized that low MBL levels may be associated with less damage in the setting of ischemia/reperfusion and rejection. As a consequence this may lead to less delayed graft function and improved graft survival in low MBL individuals as compared to patients with normal MBL levels. Methods: 266 pretransplant serum samples collected from consecutive cadaver kidney transplantation recipients between january 1990 and december 1994 at our institution were analysed for MBL concentration by ELISA. Subsequently the cohort was analysed for the occurrence of delayed graft function and rejection. All transplantations with a functioning graft three months after transplantation were included in the analysis for graft survival. Results: 36 % of the graft recipients had a MBL level below 400 ng/ml. There was no significant difference in the incidence of delayed graft function in recipients with a low MBL level (< 400 ng/ml) compared to those with a normal MBL level (≥400 ng/ml) (37.1 vs. 34.9%). Similarly there was no difference in the occurrence of acute rejection between both groups. However, average death censored graft survival was significantly longer in those recipients with a low MBL level (12.2 vs. 10.9 years, p=0.02). Multivariate analysis including traditional risk factors for graft loss showed a hazard ratio of 2.7 (CI 1.2 -6.3) for death censored graft loss if the pretransplant MBL level was above 400 ng/ml. If MBL levels were analysed as a continuous variable the hazard ratio for graft loss was 1.034 (CI 1.008-1.061) for every 100 ng/ml increase in the MBL level. Conclusion: In our cohort higher MBL levels are associated with poorer graft survival. Our data point to MBL as a progression factor for chronic graft loss in post mortal kidney transplantation. In the setting of inflammation triggered by ischemia/reperfusion or rejection high circulating MBL levels may lead to a potentiation of the inflammatory response and thereby increase tissue damage. Measurement of pretransplant MBL levels may give additional information for risk stratification prior to kidney transplantation. The Immune Tolerance Network international multicenter trial using the Edmonton Protocol was designed to explore the safety and efficacy of islet-alone transplantation in patients with Type 1 diabetes. Stringent enrollment criteria included metabolic lability, recurrent hypoglycemia or progressive complications of diabetes. Only optimal patients were selected based on strict weight limitation (£70kg) and adequate renal reserve (CC >80ml/min/1.73m). The trial involved nine sites in Canada, the US and Europe, with a target enrollment of 36 patients. The trial is ongoing and we anticipate all transplants to be completed in the next several months. All 36 participants have been enrolled and have received at least one islet transplant. Clinical follow-up will continue for three years post final transplant with the primary endpoint assessed at the one-year time-point. Updated information regarding the number of transplants, insulin independence, glucose control, complications related to transplantation and overall safety will be available for presentation. Conclusion: The preliminary findings from this trial support the safety and efficacy of islet-alone transplantation, and indicate that the Edmonton Protocol may be successfully replicated across centers internationally. Standardization of islet processing between centers remains a major challenge, but it should not delay the development of successful clinical protocols in the field of islet transplantation. Background: Islet transplants are an emerging treatment option for type 1 diabetes. Long-term outcomes and results in single-donor recipients will have important implications for the transition of islet transplants from clinical investigation to practice of medicine. Methods: We analyzed results of 24 consecutive islet allotransplants in 20 type 1 diabetic recipients followed for 59 to 1194 (685 ± 311) days. These recipients participated in 4 pilot clinical trials. Induction immunosuppression was with hOKT3g1 (Ala-Ala), anti-thymocyte globulin, or daclizumab; maintenance immunosuppression was with sirolimus plus tacrolimus, sirolimus plus mycophenolate mofetil, or everolimus plus cyclosporine. Peritransplant etanercept was administered in 10 recipients to promote islet engraftment. Results: Kaplan-Meier analysis of the entire cohort showed a 1-yr insulin-independent graft functional survival rate of 85%. Only 1 graft was lost in the 2nd or 3rd yr. Recipient survival was100%. Serious, unexpected, and protocol-related adverse events were not experienced; in particular, procedural complications such as portal vein thrombosis or bleeding and immunosuppressive complications such as opportunistic infections or malignancies were not observed. Severe adverse advents included transient neutropenia in 7/20, transient anemia in 1/20, transient LFT elevations in 3/20, and acute cholecystitis in 1/20 recipients. A subgroup analysis of single-donor islet transplant recipients showed that 16 of 18 of these recipients achieved insulin independence. To date, 11 single-donor recipients have maintained insulin independence for more than 1 yr. Their average body weight was 62 ± 5 kg; islet dose was 8.3 ± 2.7 KIE/kg; beta cell dose was 6.0 ± 3.6 x10^6/kg; days to insulin independence was 57 ± 28 days; 1yr HbA1c was 5.5 ± 0.5%; 2-yr HbA1c (n=7) was 5.1 ± 0.6%; 3-yr HbA1c (n=3) was 5.5 ± 0.3%; OGTT-2hr glucose was 136 ± 32 mg/dl, and acute C-peptide response to arginine was 1.1 ± 0.3 ng/ml. Conclusion: These preliminary results indicate that outcomes in islet recipients can now match outcomes previously only consistently attainable in pancreas transplant recipients. Thus, increased support for transitioning islet transplants into clinical care should become a priority for the transplant and diabetes community. Objectives: Beta cell replacement is the only therapy that can fully normalize glucose homeostasis in Type 1 Diabetes. The recent success of isolated islet transplants(IIT) using the Edmonton Protocol has led some to believe that it should replace wholeorgan pancreas transplants (WPT). Direct comparison of these therapies has not been reported. Methods: We compared our ongoing series of IIT performed 9/01-11/03(n=12 patients, 22 infusions, 9 Islet Transplant Alone, 3 Islet After Kidney) with consecutive WPT performed concurrently (n=23 patients, 20 Simultaneous Cadaveric Pancreas Kidney Transplants(SPK), 3 Cadaveric Pancreas after Kidney). Only pancreata declined for WPT (because of steatosis or age >50) were utilized for IIT. Compared with WPT, IIT donors were older (25.3vs.49.3 yrs), and obese (23.4kg/m² vs. 34.3kg/m²). Results: The average number of islet-equivalents (IEQ)/infusion was 551,100 (range 293,600-881,700; or 8,440IEQ/kg-recipient) and the total infused/patient 15,475IEQ/ kg. WPT and IIT recipients were similar in age(42 years) and BMI(24 kg/m²). WPT cold ischemia time averaged 13.25hrs; from cross-clamp to infusion of IIT was 15.25hrs (5.75hrs of recovery/storage and 9.5hrs of processing). Hospital LOS was markedly longer for WPT(12.6 versus 2.0days). Of 23 WPT's, 22 are still functioning (mean follow-up 383 days). The one failure was due to intractable perigraft infection and was explanted at one month. The kidney graft in this recipient as well as all SPK recipients retain excellent function (mean serum Creatinine 1.24mg/dl range 0.8 to 2.1 mg/dl). Of the12 IIT recipients (mean follow-up 393 days), 10 became insulin independent (1 withdrew), 4 remain totally insulin independent (up to 2.2 years) and 2 require only minimal insulin (<5units/day); three grafts failed (8, 9, and 17 mo.). One patient is awaiting a second dose. Conclusions: IIT was performed with older, obese donors and was associated with less morbidity and shorter LOS. However, more donors/recipient were needed to achieve insulin independence. Sustained IIT function was inferior to WPT. Fortunately, older and obese donors can be utilized successfully for IIT without decreasing utilization of young lean donors most suitable for WPT. At present, IIT and WPT should be considered complementary therapies in the treatment of type 1 diabetes. Practical and safety considerations in clinical islet transplantation have recently led to the increased use of islet storage in culture rather than immediate implantation. Culture allows patients to live remotely from the isolation center, and often improves the purity of the islet preparation, thereby reducing the packed cell volume, which in turn lowers the risk of portal vein thrombosis. Successful, prolonged culture has been made possible by the availability of insulin-transferrin-selenium (ITS) supplemented CMRL media. Of a total of 59 patients transplanted at a single institution to date, 45 have received completed islet infusions. Of these, 20 patients (32 procedures) received cultured islets (mean age 43±10; weight 69±12kg; pre-transplant insulin requirement 0.7±0.2 U/kg/ d; total islet mass 11,955±4,052 IE/kg) and 25 patients (63 procedures) received freshly prepared islets (mean age 43±11; weight 68±9kg; pre-transplant insulin requirement 0.6±0.2 U/kg/d; total islet mass 12,990±3,131 IE/kg). The mean culture time was 19.2±14.5 hours (range 6.5 to 60 hours). Prolonged islet culture generally reduces the post-purification tissue volume by 2 to 5cc. The volume of islet preparation transplanted was 3.9±1.7cc in the cultured vs 4.2±1.9 in the fresh group. Islet culture did not adversely impact graft survival as determined by attainment (90% cultured vs 95% fresh) or maintenance (75% cultured vs 76% fresh) of insulin independence within the first year. In terms of C-peptide secretion (>0.5ng/ml), 93% cultured and 95% fresh of grafts were functioning at one year, and 93% cultured and 85% fresh continued to function at two years. HbA1C was normalized in both patient groups (6.0% fresh vs 6.2% culture at one year; 6.3% fresh vs 5.9% culture at two years). In conclusion, a prospective comparison of one and two year outcomes with fresh and cultured islets demonstrates similar islet graft function rates. Islet culture additionally confers the benefits of increased practicality and safety. Therefore islet culture is beneficial in clinical islet transplantation. Introduction: Several clinical trials in islet transplantation are currently in progress utilizing fresh human islet allografts, including a multi-center trial. We proposed to assess the efficacy of in-vitro culture of human islets using an immunosuppression protocol similar to the one in Edmonton. : 15 consecutive patients (7 males, 8 females) with type 1 DM received human islet allografts isolated using automated method with minor modifications and cultured in Miami defined media and administered via ultrasound guided percutaneous transhepatic intraportal infusion. Immunosuppression consisted of daclizumab induction and sirolimus/tacrolimus maintenance. 14 patients became insulin independent (13 with 2 islet infusions and 1 with 1); 1 patient was awaiting a second infusion but was discontinued from immunosuppression and will not be discussed below. First transplant (Tx) averaged 6919± 1938 IEQ/kg (n=14; range 4592-12013) and second 7230± 2031 IEQ/kg (n=13; range 3577-10306), with total of 13633± 3010 IEQ/kg (n=14; range 6250-18403). Insulin requirements pre Tx were 0.48± 0.1 U/kg/day (n=13; range 0.29-0.58). Currently 9 patients are insulin independent with stable islet allograft function and glycemic control 888, 887, 864*, 822*, 782*, 770, 675, 628* and 419 days post first islet infusion (*=3 rd islet infusion). 9 out of 14 patients have had deterioration of metabolic control requiring the reintroduction of insulin (13± 7 units) on post Tx day 395± 112 (range 208-513). 5 patients received a 3 rd infusion and 2 are being considered for a supplemental infusion. 2 additional patients with deterioration of metabolic control were withdrawn from the trial (1 was lost to follow up and 1 discontinued immunosuppression due to intercurrent illness). There was no correlation between recurrence of autoimmunity and partial loss of graft function, but there was correlation with elevation of cytotoxic lymphocyte genes expression especially granzyme B. Conclusions: Human islet allografts cultured in Miami defined media resulted in insulin independence in 14 patients with normalization of glycemic control under steroid free immunosuppression regimen. However, there seems to be a partial loss of islet function or islet mass as a function of time similar to what is seen with fresh islets. The mechanism(s) of this loss need(s) to be clarified. The introduction of supplemental infusions when this occurs may result again in insulin independence. ANTI-PIG ANTIBODIES. R. A. Valdes-Gonzalez, 1 L. M. Dorantes, 1 G. N. Garibay, 1 E. Bracho, 1 L. Teran, 1 L. Silva, 1 P. Valencia, 1 L. Copeman, 2 D. J. G. White. 2 1 Surgery, Endocrinology and Pathology, Hopital Infantil de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico; 2 Robarts Research, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. Protocol 12 patients with type 1 diabetes were transplanted with neonatal pig islets and sertoli cells (35-100/islet) derived from a SPF herd of large white pigs. The cells were inserted into neovascularised collagen tubes created by implanting a closed stainless steel mesh containing an inner Teflon stent subcutaneously 8 weeks prior to transplantation. No immunosuppression was given. 11 patients received a second transplant 6 months after the first procedure. 6 of these recipients have a significant reduction in the requirement for exogenous insulin at more than 2 years post transplant with one patient being insulin independent for more than one year. Patients were monitored for lytic antibodies to porcine RBC and anti-GAL IgM and IgG antibodies. IgG isotypes were measured by FACS analysis using a pig kidney cell line as targets. Results All patients demonstrated an increase in anti-pig antibodies in response to the first transplant. Mean GAL IgM responses rose from a pre-transplant value of 1:90 to 1:180 (1 log 2 ). This declined to pretransplant levels (1:90) by 6 months. These anti-GAL IgM responses were significantly (P<0.01) less than those previously reported for islet transplants alone (in immunosuppressed patients) where the titre increased at one month from 1: 85 to 1: 980. Anti-GAL IgG responses in the two patient populations were comparable at one month. In this study mean IgG titres increased from 1:150 to 1:3200. By 6 months post transplant these had declined to a mean titre of 1:750. IgM Responses at one month to a second transplant were similar to those seen after the first transplant. Thus anti-GAL IgM mean titres increased from 1:90 to 1:190 (1.1 log 2 ). IgG titres increased from a pre-transplant level of 1:750 to 1:2500. Thus these anti-GAL IgG responses to a second transplant (1.7 log 2 ) were significantly less than those induced by the first transplant (4.4 log 2 P=0.03). Anti-pig haemolytic antibodies mimicked the results seen with anti-GAL IgM Conclusion Patients transplanted with a combination of porcine islets and Sertoli cells produce atypical humoral immune responses to their graft. Anti GAL IgM responses are significantly reduced, as is the secondary response by Anti-GAL IgG. Background. More than 5,000 islet equivalents (IEQ)/kg recipient body weight are generally required as a pre-transplant product release criteria in clinical trials of human islet transplantation. Despite improvements in the isolation methods, it is difficult to produce consistent islet yields that meet the minimal requirements for transplantation. The relative inefficiency of the islet purification process may not allow us to obtain enough islets for transplantation even when pre-purification counts are adequate. In this study, we determined the effect of an additional purification step, termed Rescue Purification (RP). Method. Twenty pancreata were processed by using a standard protocol of Liberase perfusion, mechanical dissociation with the automated method and continuous gradient purification. In all cases the less pure islet fractions and exocrine pellets were subjected to an additional RP step using discontinuous Eurocollins-Ficoll gradients (density: 1.132, 1.108, 1.096, 1.037). The islets obtained from the RP were combined and transplanted into recipients with type I diabetes. Results. The average IEQ from continuous and rescue purification were 344,572±138,036 IEQ and 140,888±113,589 IEQ respectively. The rescue purification yielded a 27.2%±18.3% contribution to the total IEQ. There were no significant differences in the quality of these islets, as assessed by viability and insulin secretion in vitro and in vivo following transplantation in diabetic nude mice. In 10 of 20 preparations (50%), the IEQ obtained from continuous gradients yielded less than 5,000 IEQ/kg in the absence of the RP. However the total IEQ/kg were higher than the minimal requirement of 5,000 IEQ/kg. In these cases, the transplant could not have been done unless the RP step was performed. All of the islet preparations were successfully transplanted and resulted in insulin independence and sustained C-peptide production, with normalization of HbA1C levels. Conclusions. An additional RP step may be of assistance to maximize the number of islet preparations that can be successfully used in transplantation protocols. Fiorina, 1 Alberto M. Davalli, 1 Federico Bertuzzi, 1 Paola Maffi, 1 Chiara Gremizzi, 1 Marta Bruno Ventre, 1 Lucilla Monti, 1 Ezio Bonifacio, 1 Emanuele Bosi, 1 Antonio Secchi. 1 1 Medicine, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. Background: Our aim was to study peripheral markers of insulin resistance, insulin secretion, autoimmunity and apoptotic/immunological processes in islet transplanted patients who experienced an early failure of the transplanted islet or not. Patients and Methods: 37 islet transplanted patients were enrolled, they were splitted in long term (Long= 17 pts with long-term islet fx) or short term functioning islet (Short,=20 pts, with lost of 50% of C-peptide within 6 months). In all the patients we analyze at baseline and twice during the follow-up (at best islet function moment and at failure moment) markers of: (i) Islet function (exogenous insulin requirment, C-peptide, glucose and insulin levels); (ii) Insulin resistance (HOMA IR); (iii) Insulin processing (Pro-Insulin/C-peptide ratio); (iv) Islet overworking (activin and amylin levels); (v) Apoptotic process (sFas and sFasL); (vi) Immunological process (sIL2r); (vi) Autoimmunity (Ab anti-GAD, anti-IA2, anti-insulin). Results: Long, but not Short, group showed a persistent C-peptide secretion up to 36 months (Long=1.7±0.4 vs. Short=0.6±0.2 ng/ml, p<0.05), with higher exogenous insulin requirment (p=0.04 and p=0.01 at 12 and 36 months respectively). An early and persistent increase of HOMA was evident in Short group (HOMA at full function point: Short= 7.5±2.3 vs. Long=3.5±0.5, p<0.01). A higher ratio Pro-Insulin/C-peptide ratio was evident in the Short group particularly at the time of failure (Short=32.4±11.9 vs. Long=7.0±1.6, p<0.05) as well as sFasL. SIL-r is high during all the follow-up in Long group, particularly at the failure moment (Long=4901±1033 vs. Short=2754±490 pg/ml, p<0.05). Increased islet working, as suggested by high activin levels, was evident in Short group. Finally, at 6 months a rise in Ab anti-GAD and IA2 (baseline: Short=1.07±0.62 vs. Long=2.52±1.21 AU; 6 months: Short=15.45±13.94 vs. Long=2.37±1.30 AU) were evident in Short group. Discussion: Patients who experienced an early worsening of islet function showed higher insulin resistance, altered pro-insulin processing and islet overworking, higher levels of sFasL lower levels of sIl2-r, suggesting a reduced tolerance process associated with recurrence of autoimmunity. Introduction: Although the pancreas was the first extrarenal organ to be used from living donors, this resource has been underutilized because of the potential morbidity of an open distal pancreatectomy in an otherwise healthy donor. With the advent of lap donor nephrectomy, the lap approach has become the procedure of choice for kidney donation because of reduced hospital stay and more rapid convalescence. It has been shown to be equivalent to the open procedure in terms of donor safety and quality of allograft. Consequently, we performed the first lap donor distal pancreatectomy in 1999 and present our initial experience with this procedure. Methods: Between March 1999 and August 2003 we performed 5 hand assisted lap donor pancreatectomies. All donors underwent standardized metabolic workup. The mean donor age was 48.4 yrs +/-8.7 with a BMI of 23.7 kg/m 2. The average length of surgery for pancreas donors alone (PTA) was 4.5hrs +/-0.13; for pancreas/kidney donors (SPK), 7.9 hrs +/-0.38. Mean blood loss was 330 mL +/-228. Mean recipient age was 36.6 yrs +/-9.4. OR time for PTA recipients was 8.4 hrs +/-2; for SPK recipients, 9.6 hrs +/-3.4. Results: Donor and recipient survival was 100% at up to 3-yrs follow-up. None of the donors required blood products perioperatively. There were no episodes of pancreatitis, leaks, or pseudocysts. One splenectomy was performed at the time of the original surgery for a non-viable spleen. The average length of hospital stay was 8 days +/-2. All donors are back to their pre-operative state of health and back to work. None of the donors have required oral antidiabetic medications or insulin. In the recipients, pancreatic and renal allograft function is 100% at 3-yrs. There were 2 instances of graft pancreatitis, 3 intra-abdominal infections, and 2 anastomotic leaks. There were 3 rejection episodes in one patient. Discussion: We conclude that (1) lap donor distal pancreatectomy is a safe procedure with excellent donor outcome; (2) . hand assisted (vs. fully) lap distal pancreatectomy is preferable, because of the added margin of safety due to increased tactile feedback and ease of pancreatic dissection; (3) the procedure can be accomplished with a single 6cm periumbilical incision and two 10-mm ports, resulting in excellent cosmesis and high donor satisfaction; (4) at 3-yr follow-up, graft and recipient survival are 100%. Masashi Tanaka, 1 Feny Gunawan, 1 Raya D. Terry, 1 Golnaz K. Mokhtari, 1 Anthony D. Caffarelli, 1 David T. Cooke, 1 Theo Kofidis, 1 Robert C. Robbins. 1 1 Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Stanford University, Stanford, CA. Ischemia reperfusion (I/R) injury is an important risk factor for the development of graft coronary artery disease (GCAD). We hypothesized that overexpression of SOD1 in donor hearts would suppress I/R injury and reduce GCAD. Methods: In one series, donor hearts of C57BL/6 (H-2 b ) transgenic mice overexpressing human SOD1 (Tg) or C57BL/6 wild-type (WT) mice were heterotopically transplanted into C57BL/6 recipients (n = 6 each group). Grafts were procured after 4 hours of reperfusion, and parameters of I/R injury including superoxide generation by the spin-trapping method; TNF-α and MCP-1 cytokine levels by ELISA; myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity by MPO activity assay; and cardiomyocyte apoptosis by TUNEL, caspase-3, -8, and -9 activities were measured. Graft injury was assessed by measuring serum levels of CPK-MB. In a second series, transgenic and WT hearts were transplanted into C-H-2 bm12 KhEg (H-2 bm12 ) mice (n = 7 each group). Cardiac graft beating (scale of 0 to 4) was assessed by abdominal palpation on days 14, 28, 42, and 56. After 56 days, MCP-1, ICAM-1, and VCAM-1 levels were measured by ELISA and GCAD was assessed by computerized morphometry. Results: In the first series, production of superoxide, TNF-α, and MCP-1 was significantly reduced in the Tg group in comparison to such production in the WT group. MPO activity was significantly decreased in the Tg group, indicating decreased neutrophil infiltration and activation. Cardiomyocyte apoptosis and caspase-3 and -9 activities were significantly decreased in the Tg group; caspase-8 activity was unchanged. Serum CPK-MB level was significantly decreased in the Tg group. In the second series, graft beating scores were significantly better in the Tg group at POD 28 (p = 0.01), 42 (p < 0.001), and 56 (p < 0.001). The production of MCP-1, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 were significantly decreased in the Tg group at 56 days. The SOD1 transgenic donor group showed significantly less luminal narrowing (SOD1 vs WT: 18 ± 12 vs 45 ± 17%, p < 0.01), intima/media ratio (SOD1 vs WT: 0.2 ± 0.1 vs 0.7 ± 0.3, p < 0.01), and % of diseased vessels (SOD1 vs. WT: 45 ± 27 vs. 78 ± 24 %, p = 0.04) at 56 days. Conclusions: Overexpression of SOD1 attenuates I/R injury and subsequent development of GCAD. Gene therapy approaches that target SOD1 may be useful in clinical cardiac transplantation. David Tom Cooke, 1 Jeremy I. Pearl, 1 Masashi Tanaka, 1 E. Grant Hoyt, 1 Robert C. Robbins. 1 1 Cardiothoracic Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA. Purpose: Overexpression of the human anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 by adenovirus mediated gene transfer in donor rat hearts decreases acute graft oxidative stress, as well as chronic graft coronary artery disease (GCAD). Other studies have suggested that TH2 cytokines, such as IL-4 and IL-10 may assist graft survival in solid organ transplantation, and TH1 cytokines, such as IL-2 may inhibit graft survival. We tested the hypothesis that human Bcl-2 overexpression in donor rat coronary arteries by adenovirus gene transfer would promote an early protective TH2 cytokine profile after allotransplantation. Methods: PVG (RT1c) hearts were infused by antegrade aortic injection with 1.0x10 9 pfu of either AdvBcl-2 (N=5) or AdvNull (N=5) in 300µl of PBS, heterotopically transplanted into the abdomen of syngeneic PVG recipients, and then reperfused for 4 days. Grafts were excised and retransplanted into allogeneic ACI (RT1a) recipients treated with one dose of oral cyclosporine (7.5mg/kg). Hearts were procured on postoperative day one. Donor heart tissue was evaluated by histology and protein extracts by ELISA and activated caspase-3 and -9 assays. Results: Human Bcl-2 was overexpressed in AdvBcl-2 treated hearts compared to AdvNull treated controls on postoperative day one (234.4±86.2 pg/mg vs. 44.2±7.9, p<0.05). Human Bcl-2 localized to the medial smooth muscle cells of large coronary arteries as well as the perivascular area, and patchy areas of adjacent myocardium. AdvBcl-2 treated hearts exhibited diminished apoptosis compared to controls, characterized by reduced activated caspase-3 (4.2±3.5 µM/mg vs. 60.7±12.3, p<0.01) and caspase-9 activity (2.8±2.8 µM/mg vs. 52.7±35.1, p<0.05). In addition, donor AdvBcl-2 hearts had reduced intragraft expression of ICAM-1. Moreover, AdvBcl-2 hearts expressed significantly high intragraft levels of IL-4 compared to control hearts (5836.2±951.2 pg/mg vs. 2734.4±332.7, p<0.05), increased IL-10, and reduced IL-2 (3961.5±538.8 pg/mg vs. 6212.6±479.8, p<0.05). Conclusion: Adenoviral gene transfer of human Bcl-2 in smooth muscle cells of donor coronary arteries reduces donor graft post-transplant apoptosis, and leads to an early intragraft TH2 cytokine profile in rat allografts, suggesting a role for gene therapy in human heart transplantation in the future. Ischemia reperfusion (I/R) injury and acute rejection are risk factors for the development of graft coronary artery disease (GCAD). We hypothesized that Bcl-2 overexpression in donor hearts would reduce GCAD by suppressing I/R injury and immune response during acute and chronic phase. Methods: Hearts of FVB (H-2 q ) transgenic mice overexpressing human Bcl-2 (Tg) and FVB wild-type mice (WT) were heterotopically transplanted into C57BL/6 (H-2 b ) mice. In the first series, parameters of I/R injury, including TNF-α and MCP-1 levels by ELISA, cardiomyocyte (CM) apoptosis by TUNEL, caspase-3, -8, and -9 activities were measured after 2 h (n = 5 each). In a second series, immune response during acute rejection was assessed at 8 days (n = 6 each). Intragraft T cell subsets (CD4 + and CD8 + ), B cells (B220 + ), macrophages (Mac1 + ), and dendritic cells (CD11c + ) were quantified by immunostaining. IFN-γ, MCP-1, IP-10, MIG, ICAM-1, VCAM-1 levels by ELISA, and CM apoptosis by TUNEL and caspase-3 activity were measured. In a third series, host spleen cell response to the allograft was assessed by flow cytometry (FACS) and mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) at 1, 3, 5, and 7 days (n = 3 each). In a fourth series, IFN-γ, MCP-1, IP-10, MIG, ICAM-1, and VCAM-1 levels by ELISA, CM apoptosis, and GCAD indices were assessed at 30 days (n = 8 each). The recipients in this series received cyclosporine A. Results: At 2 h, TNFα and MCP-1 levels, CM apoptosis, and caspase-3 and -9 activities were significantly decreased in the Tg group, but not caspase-8 activity. At 8 days, CD8 + , CD11c + , and Mac1 + cell infiltration were significantly decreased in Tg group but CD4 + and B220 + were not different. IFN-γ, MCP-1, IP-10, MIG, ICAM-1, VCAM-1 levels and CM apoptosis were reduced in Tg group. FACS and MLR did not show a difference in host spleen cell response (CD4 + and CD8 + cell count, proliferation profile, and TNF-α and IFN-γ production). At 30 days, IFN-γ, MCP-1, IP-10, MIG, ICAM-1, VCAM-1 levels and CM apoptosis were reduced in Tg group. The Tg group showed decreased luminal narrowing (17 ± 11 vs. 46 ± 12%, p < 0.01), intima/media ratio (0.2 ± 0.1 vs. 0.6 ± 0.2, p < 0.01), percent of diseased vessels (42 ± 23 vs. 98 ± 7%, p < 0.01). Conclusions: Bcl-2 overexpression in donor heart reduces I/R injury and the immune response during acute and chronic phase without affecting host spleen cell response. This reduction is correlated with a decrease in GCAD. Purpose: To evaluate the immunosuppressant activities of the water-soluble vitamin E derivative, α-tocopheryl (PEG-1000) succinate (TPGS, 80 IU/100g daily until rejection) vs. low-dose cyclosporine (CsA, 2.5 mg/kg for days 0-7) alone and in combination on cardiac allotransplantation. Methods: Heterotopic cardiac transplantation was performed in Wistar-Furth to Lewis rat strains. ISHLT rejections scores and graft survival time were determined. Graft function was measured by in situ sonomicrometry. DNA binding of NF-κB and AP-1 and expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) were determined by gel shift assay and Western blots, respectively. Direct effects on TPGS were evaluated in mitogen-stimulated lymphocyte cultures. Results: Graft survival in untreated allografts (6.8 ± 0.1 days) was prolonged by TPGS (10.8 ± 1.2 days, P<0.05) equipotent to low-dose CsA (12.0 ± 0.3 days, P<0.05). Combination therapy caused a synergistic action on graft survival (31.0 ± 3.7 days, P<0.001). Histological rejection scores were improved by monotherapy and combination therapy (untreated: 4.9 ± 0.3; TPGS: 3.3 ± 0.5, P<0.01; CsA: 2.6 ± 0.3, P<0.01; TPGS + CsA: 2.0 ± 0.3, P<0.001). Short-axis fractional shortening was improved by TPGS alone (P<0.05) while increases in systolic and diastolic length were prevented by TPGS or CsA alone or both in combination. Downstream protein targets of nitric oxide (e.g. nitrosylation of myocardial heme protein) was significantly inhibited by TPGS alone and abolished by CsA alone or in combination with TPGS. Western analysis revealed that iNOS protein was downregulated by nearly 50% by TPGS alone equipotent to low-dose CsA but apparently occurred via a NF-κB and AP-1 independent pathway. Combination therapy further decreased iNOS expression compared to either agent alone. In addition to decreased cell infiltration in vivo, we found that TPGS markedly inhibited mitogen-stimulated lymphocyte proliferation in vitro (68, 85 and 95% inhibition at 1, 10 and 20 µM TPGS, respectively, P<0.01 each vs. untreated). Conclusions: The vitamin E analog, TPGS, has significant effects in vitro and in vivo to limit cell proliferation and activation. This might explain the equipotent action of TPGS vs. low-dose CsA to prolong graft survival and limit histological rejection and explain its action to synergize with CsA on prolonging graft survival. Yamashita, 1 James McDaid, 1 Robert Öllinger, 1 Hongjun Wang, 1 Eva Csizmadia, 1 R. Neal Smith, 2 Miguel P. Soares, 1 Fritz H. Bach. 1 1 Immunobiology Reserch Center, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; 2 Pathology, Masachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. Aim: Up-regulation of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), a stress inducible 'protective' gene, prolongs allograft survival in rodents. We studied the combined effects of HO-1 induction and donor-specific transfusion (DST) in allo-transplantation (Tx). Methods: MHC incompatible DBA/2 (H-2 d ) cardiac grafts were transplanted into B6AF1 (H-2 k/d,b ) mice. Tx recipients received DST (20x10 6 of DBA2 splenocytes) either 7 days before (D-7) or immediately after Tx (D0). HO-1 was induced or inhibited by using cobalt-or zinc-protoporphyrin (CoPP or ZnPP, 5 mg/kg/day), respectively. Protoporphyrins were given i.p. to recipient for 15 days starting one day before DST without further treatments. Results: Untreated control mice rejected allografts with a median survival time (MST) of 11.5 days (n=6). DST (D0) alone did not prolong survival (MST: 9.5 days, n=6). In contrast, HO-1 induction plus DST (D0) significantly prolonged graft survival (MST: >100 days, n=8) with 87.5% of grafts surviving over 100 days; however, ZnPP treatment did not (MST: 8 days, n=7). DST (D-7) prolonged graft survival (MST: > 60 days, n=8) with 50% of grafts survived more than 100 days. HO-1 induction plus DST (D-7) led to a long-term acceptance in all grafts (MST: >100 days, n=7), while ZnPP treatment plus DST resulted in a prompt graft rejection (MST: 13 days, n=9). CoPP plus DST treated recipients carrying long-term surviving hearts accepted second heart grafts from the donor (n=6) but not third party (FVB, H-2 q ) strain (n=6) showing that those recipients were tolerant to the donor antigens specifically. Sub-lethally irradiated naïve B6AF1 recipients were reconstituted by adoptive transfer with leukocytes (50x10 6 lymph node and spleen cells) of tolerant animals. DBA/2 hearts survived for >100 days (n=3) in such animals. Depletion of CD4 + CD25 + T cells from the adoptively transferred leukocytes abolished the "tolerizing" effect (MST: 11 days, n=4). Animals receiving naïve B6AF1 leukocytes promptly rejected DBA2 hearts (MST: 12.5 days, n=6). Conclusion: Induction of HO-1 plus DST can lead to donor-specific tolerance to cardiac allografts based on the action of regulatory CD4 + CD25 + T cells. HO-1 induction may be worth considering in some strategies to achieve tolerance. Song Rong, 1 Joon-Keun Park, 1 When Zen, 1 Anke Schwarz, 1 Michael Leitges, 2 Hermann Haller, 1 Faikah Gueler. 1 1 Nephrology, Medical School Hannover, Hannover, Germany; 2 Experimental Endocrinology, Max Planck Institute, Hannnover, Germany. Protein Kinase C (PKC) contributes to vascular reactivity in response to hypoxia and is involved in different signaling pathways which are relevant for ischemia reperfusion injury and transplant rejection. The isoform PKC epsilon regulates various physiological functions including the activation of inflammatory and immunological reactions. The role of PKC isoenzymes in acute kidney transplant rejection has not been studied so far. Allogenic kidney transplantation was performed after removal of the right native kidney. Donor kidneys from 12-16 weeks old PKC epsilon knock out (-/-) donor mice (mixed background: C57Bl6/SV129) were transplanted into BalbC recipients. The contralateral kidney was removed at day 4. Donor kidneys from littermates (C57Bl6/SV129) served as wild type (WT) controls. Animals were sacrificed 24 hours and 6, 14, 21 and 28 days after transplantation. Plasma creatinine was measured spectrophotometrically. Kidneys were examined by western blot analysis and by immunohistology for infiltrating cells, adhesion molecules, i-NOS expression and apoptosis. PKC epsilon -/-mice displayed normal renal function and histology. Renal function and pathology deteriorated rapidly in rejecting kidneys from WT but not from PKC epsilon -/-donors. Recipients from WT donors died within 7-10 days after transplantation, whereas recipients from PKC epsilon -/-mice survived 4 weeks until the end of the planned observation period. Recipients from PKC epsilon -/-mice had only 2 fold creatinine elevation 6 days after transplantation and kidney function remained almost stable within the next 4 weeks. WT recipients suffered from severe loss of kidney function with 5 fold creatinine elevation 6 days after transplantation. The number of infiltrating monocytes and macrophages in recipients from PKC epsilon -/donors was dramatically reduced compared to WT donors. PKC epsilon deficient transplants showed almost no apoptosis 24 hours after transplantation, whereas WT transplants had severe apoptosis in all renal compartments, this difference in apoptosis remained even at d6 after transplantation. Our results indicate that PKC epsilon deficiency in renal allografts protects from severe acute rejection and early loss of renal function. This effect is most likely attributed to reduced apoptosis early after transplantation. Interspecies differences in immune responses have made correlation of results from animal models with the human transplant experience difficult to establish. We have developed a relevant model for studying human alloimmune arterial injury consisting of a SCID mouse reconstituted with allogeneic human PBMC and bearing human artery. Previous results demonstrated reproducible arterial injury with lymphocytic infiltration, endothelial destruction & intimal expansion by smooth muscle cells. The purpose of this work was to determine whether the Sirolimus (SIR), alone or in combination with cyclosporine (CsA) affects arterial injury in this model. CB17 SCID/ beige mice were transplanted with size matched human arteries and 7 days later, reconstituted with 3x10^8 PBMC. Mice (n=4) given only vehicle were compared to mice given CsA (5 mg/kg/d), SIR (0.1mg/kg/d), or CsA plus SIR. CsA was given at the time of PBMC, but due to reconstitution concerns, SIR was given 7 days later. The combination of CsA & SIR resulted in more reduction of myointimal expansion than separate use (P<0.01). This reduction was not caused by decreased human CD3+ cells in mouse blood (P>0.05) or human artery (infiltration) (P>0.05). Under these conditions, there was no statistical myointimal expansion difference between SIR treated & control (P>0.05), perhaps due to low dose (higher doses impacted reconstitution) or the timing of SIR administration (7 days after PBMC introduction). To study the mechanism by which CsA & SIR synergistically inhibit arterial injury, we determined that both CsA & SIR inhibit IFN gamma. Our results revealed that IFN gamma (0.2ug, 3X/week) given to human PBMC reconstituted, artery bearing SCID mice resulted in ENHANCED myointimal expansion. Under these conditions, CsA & SIR were not as effective at preventing myointimal expansion. Further studies with IFN gamma treated mice (0.2ug, 3X/week) in the absence of PBMC indicated that IFN gamma alone induced myointimal expansion. When CsA & SIR were given to these artery bearing SCID mice given IFN gamma, myointimal expansion was NOT reduced. While CsA & SIR synergistically ameliorate PBMC induced myointimal expansion in this model, they cannot prevent myointimal expansion induced by IFN gamma alone. Taken together, these data help to delineate the mechanism by which CsA & SIR ameliorate human arterial injury, and the the importance of reduction of gamma IFN as part of this mechanism. Angiogenesis is a characteristic component of chronic vascular processes including atherosclerosis and graft vascular disease (GVD). However, little is known of the mediators or the function of angiogenesis in the development of GVD. In this study, we used a MHC class II disparate cardiac transplant model in which B6.C-H2bm12 hearts transplanted into C57BL/6 are monitored for progressive GVD by histological analysis at 6 weeks posttransplant. Recipients were treated with the angiogenesis inhibitor endostatin/Fc (20mg/kg three times a week), either in the initiation phase (0-3 weeks) or in the progression phase (4-6 weeks). Remarkably we found that early treatment failed but that delayed treatment significantly inhibited the development of GVD (n=8, P=0.026 vs. control). Moreover, there was less fibrosis and less cellular infiltration of grafts in the delayed treatment group. VEGF is a major angiogenesis factor known to be predictive of GVD in humans. Moreover, VEGF is a chemoattractant and thus may accelerate GVD via monocyte recruitment into lesions. To evaluate this possibility, we treated animals with a blocking anti-VEGF anti-serum on alternate days; and hearts were harvested 28 days after transplantation for immunohistochemical analysis. We found that control-treated animals developed persistent infiltrates but we observed only a mild infiltrate, reduced numbers of monocyte/macrophages and minimal vasculitis in grafts from anti-VEGF treated mice (n=6). Since early monocyte recruitment is a predictor for disease progression, these data suggest that the early expression of VEGF may be of critical importance for subsequent monocyte recruitment and the late angiogenesis response. VEGF mediates its effects via 2 high affinity receptors flt-1 and flk-1. In an initial attempt to evaluate which VEGFR is involved VEGF-mediated leukocyte trafficking, we treated fully mismatched BALB/c recipients of C57BL/6 hearts with anti-flk-1 and anti-flt-1 monoclonal antibodies and found that they significantly prolonged graft survival (P=0.004). Together, these findings provide important new insights into the significance of angiogenesis in chronic rejection and the potential that angiogenesis inhibitors can therapeutically interrupt the progression of GVD. Moreover, we suggest that VEGF-VEGFR interactions may be of importance in early processes leading to GVD. Sheryl Shah, 1 Elaine Mansfield, 1 Neeraja Kambham, 1 Szu-Chuan Hsieh, 1 Rosa Liu, 1 Minnie Sarwal. 1 1 Pediatrics and Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA. Purpose: To develop risk stratification of acute renal transplant rejection (AR) episodes, by identification of a molecular marker predictive of graft outcomes following AR. Methods: Cox regression analysis was conducted between 25 AR biopsies with good (n=12) and poor (n=13) outcomes (incomplete functional recovery and/or graft loss) across a differentiated subset of 1340 cDNAs, identified from analysis of a 30,000 cDNA microarray. A chemokine, stromal cell derived growth factor (SDF-1) correlated with poor AR outcomes. Real-time PCR for SDF-1 and immunostaining for SDF-1β, CD20 and CD45RO was conducted on core biopsies; SDF-1β staining was also performed on tissue microarrays (TMAs) of normal tissues and transplant nephrectomies. PCR-RFLP genotyping of the SDF-1 3' G/A polymorphism was performed on all patients. Results: Reduced intra-graft SDF-1 mRNA was confirmed by PCR in patients with poor AR outcomes (73.08 ± 76.95 vs. 8.02 ± 11.2; p=0.018 for graft loss and 75.72 ± 77.39 vs. 22.53 ± 48.3; p=0.11 for graft function recovery). On TMA analysis, the 92 amino acid protein, SDF-1β, was ubiquitously expressed in lymph node, spleen, heart and liver. In normal kidney, SDF-1β localized to podocytes, arterial endothelium, tubular epithelial cells, but not mesangial or glomerular endothelial cells. SDF-1β staining intensity correlated with CD45RO and B cell density by CD20 staining in biopsies with graft loss. Although variable, core biopsies and TMA analysis revealed that AR had increased SDF-1β positive lymphocytes; in areas of fibrosis, interstitial SDF-1β was higher. Chronic rejection had reduced SDF-1β staining within arterial media. All AR patients, regardless of graft loss status, were G/G homozygotes indicating that expression differences of SDF-1 are not due to genetic differences at the SDF-1 locus. Conclusions: Reduced intra-graft SDF-1 mRNA may be used as a novel prognostic marker of graft outcome after AR. Further studies are needed to unravel the relationship between SDF-1 translation and transcription within the graft. B cell production, survival and APC function may be regulated by intra-graft SDF-1, which may result in resistance to conventional AR therapy and poor outcomes. Reduced vascular SDF-1β may have reduced ischemic neovascularization, resulting in greater tissue chronicity after injury. Manipulation of SDF-1 intra-graft expression may be valuable for graft rescue after AR. Purpose: Ischemia/reperfusion (IR) injury is a major cause of graft dysfunction in 30% of lung transplant recipients. IR injury in lung transplantation generates proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β, and results in donor respiratory epithelial apoptosis. We hypothesized that intratracheal administration of a non-replicating adenovirus, overexpressing the human anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2, will inhibit IR injury to rat donor lung allografts. Methods: 1.0x10 9 pfu of either AdvBcl-2 (n=7) or AdvNull (n=6) in PBS or PBS alone (n=8) were administered intratracheally to PVG (RT1c) rats. The left lungs were procured after 24hrs of in-vivo incubation. Donor lungs were orthotopically transplanted after 1hr (Group I) or 24hrs (Group II, AdvBcl-2 vs. AdvNull) of cold ischemia into allogeneic ACI (RT1a) recipients, and then reperfused for 2hrs. Peak inspiratory pressures (PIPs) were measured in all grafts, and donor pulmonary vein paO 2 was measured in Group II lungs. Allografts were excised and evaluated by histology, and graft protein extracts analyzed by ELISA, and activated caspase-3, -9 and -8 assays. Results: Human Bcl-2 protein was overexpressed in AdvBcl-2 treated lungs compared to AdvNull and PBS alone treated lungs at the time of transplantation (p<0.05), and localized to the alveolar epithelium. The human Bcl-2 overexpression in AdvBcl-2 lungs was identical in groups I and II. Human Bcl-2 expression was restricted to donor lung grafts, and no human Bcl-2 could be detected in heart, kidney and liver tissue or serum from donor animals. In Group I, AdvBcl-2 treated lungs had diminished PIPs (p<0.01) and intragraft IL-1β cytokine (p<0.05), compared to AdvNull and PBS alone treated controls. Also, AdvBcl-2 treated lungs had reduced caspase-3, -9 and surprisingly caspase-8 activity (p<0.05), as well as ISOL TUNEL positive nuclei (1.7%±0.7% vs. 4.7%±1.1%, and 6.1%±0.4%, p<0.05). In Group II animals, AdvBcl-2 lungs had higher donor pulmonary vein paO 2 (p<0.05) compared to AdvNull lungs, and maintained significant decreases in intragraft IL-1β production, caspase-3 activity, and ISOL TUNEL positive nuclei (3.6%±0.8% vs.19.3%±3.6%). Conclusions: Intratracheal gene transfer of human Bcl-2 ameliorates ischemia/ reperfusion injury, and preserves post-transplant lung function, and may one day be utilized as a gene therapy protocol in human lung transplantation. Abstract# 1453 A. Loverre, 1 C. Capobianco, 1 P. Ditonno, 2 M. Battaglia, 2 S. Palazzo, 2 A. Crovace, 3 G. Stallone, 1 B. Infante, 1 A. Schena, 1 S. Di Paolo, 1 F. P. Selvaggi, 2 E. Ranieri, 1 L. Gesualdo, 4 F. P. Schena, 1 G. Grandaliano. 1 1 Div of Nephrology, Italy; 2 Div of Urology, Italy; 3 Section of Veterinary Surgery, DETO, Univ. of Bari, Italy; 4 Chair of Nephrology, Univ. of Foggia, Italy. I-R injury in transplanted kidney, a key pathogenic event of delayed graft function (DGF), is characterized by tubular cell apoptosis and interstitial inflammation. Among the signaling pathways that regulate cell survival and inflammation, Akt-mTOR-S6k and NIK-NFkB may play a crucial role in the I-R-induced injury. The clinical relevance in transplantation of Akt pathway, is due its to specific inhibition by RM. The aim of this study was to evaluate Akt and NFkB axis activation in a pig model of I-R and in pts with DGF receiving or not R and the role of coagulation priming in this setting. I-R was induced in 6 pigs clamping the renal artery for 15 min. Biopsies were performed before, 15 min after I and 15, 30, 45, 60 min after reperfusion. In addition, we evaluated 12 pts with DGF and biopsy-proven acute tubular injury with no evidence of acute rejection treated with (6) or without RM (6). The activation of Akt, S6k and NIK was evaluated by confocal microscopy using antibodies recognizing the phosphorylated (p) and active form of the enzymes. In pig kidneys, we observed, by immunofluorescence, a significant interstitial deposition of fibrin upon reperfusion. Before I-R, pAkt was observed in podocytes and proximal tubular cells (PTC). In I-R pAkt increased in PTC, interstitial and mesangial areas in a time-dependent manner with a clear nuclear translocation. The same pattern of activation was observed for S6k. pNIK was detected before I-R only in mesangial cells. Following I-R, pNIK increased both at the glomerular and tubular levels with a peak at 30 min. This pattern of activation was confirmed in pts not receiving RM, while in pts treated with RM, we observed a significant reduction of S6k but not NIK activation. Interestingly, in cultured PTC thrombin induced a striking increase in pS6k and pNIK. RM inhibited thrombin-induced S6k but not NIK activation. Our data suggest that: 1. Priming of coagulation may play a pathogenic role in I-R injury. 2. Akt axis may represents an anti-apoptotic mechanism and its inhibition may explain the prolonged DGF observed in pts receiving RM. 3.The striking NIK activation observed both in I-R and in pts with and without RM-treatment, may be a powerful proinflammatory and RM-insensitive signal, potentially leading to progressive graft injury. Purpose: Ischemia/reperfusion (IR) injury in lung transplantation contributes to morbidity and mortality, and may increase the incidence of acute rejection and bronchiolitis obliterans. IR injury causes apoptosis of donor lung epithelium and produces pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β, TNF-α, and IL-12 and chemokines such as IL-8. Caspases are proteinases that direct apoptotic cascades. We have shown that blockade of Caspase-3 and -8 with a cell permeable caspase inhibitor can ameliorate IR injury in rat cardiac allotransplants. In this study we investigated the hypothesis that blockade of caspase-3 and -8 reduces IR injury in rat donor lung allografts. Methods: Donor PVG (RT1c) and allogeneic ACI (RT1a) recipient rats were pretreated with either 500µg of the reversible caspase-3 and -8 inhibitor DEVD-CHO in 300µl of PBS/10% DMSO i.p. (N=4) or vehicle alone (N=4) 2 hrs before orthotopic transplantation. At the time of donor lung procurement, animals pretreated with caspase inhibitor received intratracheal administration of 250µg of DEVD-CHO in 300µl of PBS/.25% DMSO, compared to vehicle alone in the control animals. The left lungs from donor animals were flushed antegrade with 250µg of DEVD-CHO in 25cc of low potassium dextrose and glucose perfusate (LPDG) or LPDG alone in control animals. After procurement, donor lungs underwent 1hr of cold ischemia; followed by 2hrs of post-transplant reperfusion. Allografts were then excised and graft protein extracts were evaluated by activated caspase-3 and -8 assays and ELISA. Results: Compared to vehicle treated controls, DEVD-CHO treatment significantly diminished donor lung apoptosis, as measured by reduced activated caspase-3 activity (58.7±25.1 µM/mg vs.168.0±53.2) and caspase-8 activity (52.5±20.8 µM/mg vs. 129.6±5.8). The DEVD-CHO treated group had significantly less IL-1β levels (1360.0±98.5 pg/mg vs. 1761.6±39.3) and reduced TNF-α (909.9±37.6 pg/mg vs. 1062.5±59.1) and IL-12 levels (2.9±0.3 pg/mg vs. 3.6±0.1) compared to the control group. In addition, the DEVD-CHO treated donor lungs had diminished intragraft levels of the chemokine GRO/CINC-1 (IL-8) compared to vehicle only controls (424.4±44.1 pg/mg vs. 605.2±161.4). Conclusions: Preoperative treatment of donor and recipient, in addition to intratracheal and perfusate treatment of the donor lungs at the time of transplantation with a caspase inhibitor reduces IR injury. Preoperative caspase inhibition may serve as an invaluable regimen in human lung transplantation. Ischemia/reperfusion-injury (I/R-I) of the liver remains a significant problem during liver surgery and transplantation. I/R-I is associated with liver apoptosis (Apo), which is mediated by death receptors (DR) such as Fas, TNF-α, and TNF-related apoptosisinducing ligand. Caspase 8 is presumed to be the apex of the DR-mediated Apo pathway. Synthetic small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) 21-23 nt in length, specifically suppress gene expression by RNA interference. Therefore, we evaluated the therapeutic efficacy of caspase 8 siRNA in a murine model of liver I/R-I. Methods: C57BL/6 mice were used. 45 or 70% of the liver mass was clamped for 90 minutes. In vivo delivery of siRNA was performed via portal vein by high-volume injection (0.2-0.5 nmol of siRNA in 1 mL containing 10% Lipiodol) 60 minutes before I/R-I. As a control, some animals received non-sense siRNA (siRNA-scrambled). Results: Liver uptake of siRNA was analyzed in transgenic mice that express β-gal (C57BL/6J-TgN(MTn-LacZ)204Bri), after administration of siRNA-LacZ. 3-4-fold decrease in β-gal activity was accomplished at 0.5 nmol. No significant change in β-gal activity was demonstrated in mice receiving non-sense siRNA. Immunohistochemical studies found that 70% of liver cells took up siRNA. Lower serum AST, assessed 6 hours after injury was found in animals treated with siRNA (AST=308±102 IU/L), compared with siRNA-scrambled (810±122) or saline (802±79, n=8, P<0.05). Caspase 8 activity was higher in saline (0.138±0.010 O.D. at 405) and siRNA-scrambled mice (0.131±0.009) versus siRNA-treated animals (0.058±0.014, P<0.05). Liver Apo assessed by ELISA was higher in controls (saline=Enrichment Factor=8.3±1.8; siRNA-scrambled=8.6±1.2) versus siRNA (3.8±0.9, P<0.001). 100% of the control mice died within 5 days. In contrast, 40% of the siRNA animals survived indefinitely. Conclusions: Small interfering RNA targeted to Caspase 8 provide significant protection against ischemia-reperfusion injury to the liver. This approach could be therapeutic in liver transplantation and other conditions associated with ischemia-reperfusion injury to the liver. Cold ischemia/ warm reperfusion (CI/WR) liver injury of steatotic livers prohibits their use in liver transplantation. The cellular mechanisms resulting in liver injury of steatotic livers after CI/WR still remains obscure. Recently, a lysosomal pathway of cell death in fatty liver disease was described involving the lysosomal protease, cathepsin B. However the role of this pathway in CI/WR injury of steatotic livers remains unknown. Thus, our AIM was to ascertain if inactivation of cathepsin B attenuates liver injury of steatotic livers after CI/WR. METHODS: Wild type (catB +/+ ) and cathepsin B-deficient (knockout) (catB -/-) mice were fed the methionine choline deficient (MCD) diet for 2 weeks to induce hepatic steatosis. Mouse livers were stored in the University of Wisconsin (U/W) solution for 24 hrs at 4° C and reperfused for 1 hr at 37° C in vitro. Lysosomal permeabilization was determined by cellular distribution of cathepsin B and D by immunohistochemistry. Liver injury was assessed by histology and transmission electron microscopy (EM). Hepatocyte apoptosis was quantitated using the TUNEL assay, and immunohistochemistry for activated caspase 3/7. RESULTS: After two weeks on the MCD diet, both wild type and cat B knock out animals equally developed hepatic steatosis. Cathepsin D cellular localization was punctate in both catB +/+ and catB -/animals fed standard or MCD diets under basal conditions consistent with its lysosomal localization. However, following CI/WR, cathepsin D immunohistochemistry was diffuse in wild type animals fed the MCD diet consistent with lysosomal permeazation. In contrast, cathepsin D remained punctate in MCD diet fed catB -/animals following CI/WR suggesting cat B is necessary for the lysosomal permeabilization. Histology and EM showed increased microscopic liver damage in catB +/+ vs. catB -/after MCD plus CI/WR. In particular, mitochondrial were condensed in catB +/+ but normal appearing in catB -/-MCD fed animals following CI/WR. TUNEL positive hepatocytes were 6.3-fold greater (p<0.002) in catB +/+ vs. catB -/with MCD plus CI/WR. Similarly, caspase 3/7 activity was 9.5-fold greater (p<0.002) in catB +/+ vs. catB -/with MCD plus CI/WR. In CONCLUSION these findings suggest for the first time that the lysosomal pathway of apoptosis occurs in steatotic livers after CI/WR. These observations suggest cathepsin B inactivation or inhibition maybe a therapeutic strategy for improving the function of steatotic livers for transplantation. Uwe Goettmann, 1 Paul Brinkkoetter, 1 Christian Karle, 1 Benito Yard, 1 Fokko J. van der Woude, 1 Claude Braun. 1 1 Vth Department of Medicine, University Hospital Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany. Pleiotropic effects of HMG-CoA-reductase inhibitors (statins), e. g. anti-inflammatory and immunmodulatory effects, are well recognized. Recent studies have shown that statins decrease I/R-injury in rats. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the effect of atorvastatin on cold preservation injury in isogeneic renal transplantation in rats. Male Lewis donor rats were pre-treated with atorvastatin (ATOR: 50mg/kg/d, n=7) or vehicle (VEH, n=7) daily by oral gavage 2 days prior to and on the day of explantation. After explantation one kidney was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for determination of heme-oxygenase-1 (HO-1) expression by light-cycler PCR. The second kidney was stored for 24h at +4° in UW solution and then transplanted in a bilaterally nephrectomized male Lewis rat. Serum creatinine was measured on days 0, 1, 3, and 5 after transplantation. After 5 days grafts were harvested for determination of monocyte infiltration and MHC II expression. Pre-treatment with atorvastatin improved renal function, as measured by lower serum creatinine on days 1 and 3 after transplantation (day 1: ATOR 2.04 mg/dl vs. VEH 3.10 mg/dl, p<0.0001; day 3: ATOR 1.26 mg/dl vs. VEH 3.47 mg/dl, p=0.009; t-test). Atorvastatin markedly reduced monocyte infiltration 5 days after transplantation (ATOR 9.48 ± 1.36 vs. VEH 19.77 ± 1.36 pos. cells/high power field, p<0.0001), whereas there was no difference in MHC II positive cells. In donor kidneys pre-treated for 2 days with atorvastatin, a significant up-regulation of the protective enzyme HO-1 was observed compared to animals pre-treated with vehicle. Our data demonstrate for the first time, that donor pre-treatment with atorvastatin improves renal function and decreases renal inflammation after prolonged cold storage and isogeneic renal transplantation in rats. The positive effect may be related to the upregulation of the protective enzyme HO-1 in kidney tissue by atorvastatin. This observation is of high clinical significance, since it could offer a new strategy to prevent transplantation-associated injury. Increased age is associated with inferior survival of renal transplants by mechanisms that are unclear. Oxidants participate in normal ageing and age-related diseases like atherosclerosis. We reasoned that same mechanisms may be involved in acute transplant vasculopathy. We investigated how mediators of oxidative stress may increase susceptibility to vascular injury in aged transplants. We employed low-responder allogeneic F344-to-Lew rat functional model of renal transplantation using nonimmunosuppressed young (donors and recipients 12 weeks of age) versus old (donors and recipients 52 weeks of age). Grafts were transplanted after 2-hours cold preservation in UW solution and harvested 7 and 10 days later. Additional group of old animals receiving continous 1.5 mg/kg CyA immunosuppression was included to the study design. Renal allograft pathology was scored according to Banff criteria. We studied intragraft expression and distribution of VCAM-1, lectin like oxidized LDL-receptor (LOX-1), hypochlorous acid/hypochlorite (HOCl/OCl -) modified LDL, and infiltration with ED-1+ macrophages and CD8+ lymphocytes. Intragraft in situ superoxide anion production was determined with dihydroethidium (DHE) assay on cryosections. Compared to young transplants old transplants demonstrated higher vascular lesion score and functional impairment. The degree of VCAM-1 expression and infiltration with ED-1+ monocytes/macrophages and CD8+ lymphocytes directly correlated with the transplant age. VCAM-1 and LOX-1 staining were localized predominantly on the endothelium of arterial vessels, shifting the distribution to vascular smooth muscle layer strongly dependent on age and the grade of vascular injury. LOX-1 staining colocalized with HOCl generated oxidized epitopes in the media of injured arteries. In corresponding areas we measured increased in situ superoxide anion production. Immunosuppression with CyA had no protective effect on features of vascular injury and LOX-1 expression. Induction of LOX-1 related oxidation pathways and increased susceptibility to oxidative stress may play an important role in promoting vascular injury in old renal transplants. Background. Ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury can be involved in almost all tissues and organs during pathosis. Over the past decade, an enormous number of studies have focused on the role of nitric oxide (NO). Cytotoxic nitric oxide (NO) is produced during ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury by expression of inducible NO synthase (iNOS). Therefore, continuous iNOS inhibition might prevent early graft dysfunction. FR260330 is a potent and selective inhibitor of iNOS activity by preventing iNOS monomers from dimerization. In this study, the effect of FR260330 in prevention of renal I/R injury was evaluated in the model of one kidney ischemia in Vervet monkeys. Methods. A total of 18 male Vervet monkey were randomly assigned to two groups (n=9). Transient (60 min) left renal ischemia was produced with simultaneous contralateral nephrectomy in FR260330 20 mg/kg/day treated and control groups. Renal function and other biochemistry determinations, and FR260330 concentrations were tested until day 15 after I/R injury. Results. All the monkeys were survival after 60 min I/R injury until sacrifice on day 15 at study termination. Serum creatinine in untreated group increased significantly to compare with FR260330 treated group on day 2, 3, 4, and 7 (p<0.05, ANOVA). Plasma concentration of FR260330 after oral administration showed that Cmas is 3.251 ± 2.526 mg/ml, and Tmax is 4 hrs. Conclusion. A selective inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase, FR260330 effectively prevents renal I/R injury in Vervet monkeys. Potential applications of FR260330 in prevention of delayed graft function patients and other I/R injury pathosis are thus suggested. Juan L. Contreras, 1 Cheryl A. Smyth, 1 Christopher Eckstein, 1 Carlton Young, 1 Guadalupe Bilbao, 1 Anthony Thompson, 1 Devin Eckhoff. 1 1 Surgery, UAB, Birmingham, AL. PI constitutively express TF and MCP-1. After exposure to blood, PI trigger a detrimental clotting reaction referred as IBMIR, effect associated with significant reduction in islet mass early after transplantation. TF as an initiator and MCP-1 as a chemoattractant have been demonstrated to play a critical role in this process. We hypothesized that statins, which have been demonstrated to decrease the activation of the coagulation/inflammation systems, may down-regulate TF and MCP-1 expression in isolated human PI. Methods: Immediately after isolation, groups of human hand-picked PI were incubated with Ator (10mmol/L) or vehicle for 3 days (n=5). TF and MCP-1 were determined from islet homogenates on day 1 by ELISA. To evaluate the effects of Ator on IBMIR, 5000 IEQ were perfused with ABO compatible human blood in vitro using loops of heparincoated PVS (flow ∼45 mL/min, 37 °C, 60 minutes). Plasma pro-insulin (hPI), βtromboglobulin (TG) and thrombin-antithrombin (TAT) complexes were quantified by ELISA. Results: Ator decreased spontaneous PI loss during culture (day 3, 91.2±2.4% viable islet cells) compared with vehicle (82.1±3.1, P<0.05). A dose-dependent decrease in TF and MCP-1 was demonstrated after Ator treatment (10mmol/L, TF=12.3±6.4 pg/ IEQ, MCP-1 3.8±2.1 pg/IEQ) compared with controls (TF=38.3±12.4, MCP-1 9.8±4.1, P<0.05). In vitro, Ator significantly reduced platelet aggregation (platelet counts in the loops: PI media=289±21x10 9 /L, PI=12.3±1.1x10 9 /L, PI + Ator=160.1±2.1x10 9 /L, n=6, P<0.001), platelet activation (TG: media=366±110 IU/mL; PI=891±156; PI+Ator=590±89, P<0.05), activation of coagulation (TAT: media=5.1±1.1 mg/L; PI=367±152; PI+Ator=122±88, P<0.05), and complement activation (C3: media=57.1±4 mg/dL; PI=16.3±7; PI+Ator33.8±8.9= P<0.05 ). In parallel with the activation of coagulation, PI destruction was higher in controls (proinsulin= 4998±324 pmol/L) compared with Atorv-treated PI (2656±556, P<0.05). Immunohistochemical analysis after PI perfusion demonstrated reduced platelets, PMNs, monocytes and fibrin surrounded the PI treated with Ator compared with controls. Conclusion: Atorvastatin significantly reduced human islet expression of TF and MCP-1. This effect was associated with reduced loss of islet mass after exposure to blood. The early use of statins may improve the results in islet transplantation. Analysis of the contributions of inflammatory chemokine/chemokine receptor pathways to the rejection of vascularized allografts in rodent models has led to the identification of key effector molecules (e.g. CXCR3, CCR5), and their targeting is now being tested in non-human primate allograft recipients. By contrast, little attention has been given to homeostatic or tissue-specific chemokine pathways and alloresponses. The chemokine TECK (CCL25) is expressed exclusively in the thymus and small intestine, and mediates gut-specific homing of CCR9+ T cells. We now report how manipulating the TECK/ CCR9 pathway can impair effector T cell infiltration and depress the robust rejection of small bowel transplants. We first studied CCR9 expression in peripheral T cells in naive mice. CCR9 was expressed by <5% of mesenteric and peritoneal lymph node and 15-20% of splenic CD4 and CD8 T cells. CCR9-/-mice showed negligible defects in T cell development in the thymus, only minor changes in the small bowel IEL populations, and had normal numbers of CD4+ CD25+ T-reg cells. Analysis of fully MHC-mismatched small bowel transplants (BALB/c to B6/129) using real-time PCR showed peak up-regulation of TECK (500fold) and CCR9 (12-fold) mRNA expression at day 3; upregulation was not observed in syngeneic small bowel transplants. Increased CCR9 mRNA expression was also found in recipient spleen and mesenteric lymph nodes, consistent with the induction of CCR9 expression by recipient T cells encountering donor antigen-presenting cells within secondary lymphoid tissues. Immunohistology showed markedly increased accumulation of CCR9+ T cells within serially harvested small bowel allografts, as compared to isografts or recipient small bowel. Lastly, and critically, wild-type B6/129 mice promptly rejected BALB/c SBT by 6-8 days, whereas CCR9-/-mice displayed prolongation of SBT survival for up to 15 days (p<0.0005). These studies indicate that besides its role in the normal homing of T cells to the small intestine, the TECK/CCR9 pathway promotes the recruitment of effector T cells to small bowel transplants. Our ongoing studies are directed towards further understanding how manipulating this pathway, alone or in conjunction with immunosuppression or costimulation blockade, may help to prevent acute rejection of small bowel allografts, and eventually promote a better outcome in clinical small bowel transplantation. Gwenola Boulday, 1 Marlies E. J. Reinders, 1 Soumitro Pal, 1 David M. Briscoe. 1 1 Transplantation Research Center, Children's Hospital, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. Local intragraft expression of IFNγ-inducible protein-10 (IP-10) is associated with ischemia-reperfusion injury and acute rejection. IP-10 dependent interactions are known to mediate the local infiltration of T cells into allografts. VEGF is expressed in the immediate post transplant period and in rejection, and induces the expression of the chemokine IP-10. However, little is known of the mechanism(s) or signals involved in the VEGF or cytokine-dependent regulation of IP-10. Here, we have analyzed VEGF and IFNγ inducible intracellular signal(s) that regulate IP-10 expression in endothelial cells (EC). EC were transiently transfected with a full length IP-10 promoter-luciferase construct and were cultured in the presence of VEGF or IFNγ alone, or in combination. We found that VEGF alone resulted in weak IP-10 promoter activation, as compared to IFNγ. In contrast, the VEGF+IFNγ combination resulted in a synergistic increase in IP-10 transactivation. VEGF mediates its primary functions via interactions with the VEGF-receptors Flt-1 and KDR. IP-10-promoter transfected ECs were next stimulated with the selective Flt-1 agonist PlGF (instead of VEGF), but it failed to induce IP-10, either alone or in combination with IFNγ. These data suggest that KDR is the functional receptor mediating VEGF-inducible IP-10. Post KDR intracellular signaling pathway(s) are reported to involve the PI-3K molecule. We next treated transfected EC with Wortmannin (a PI-3K inhibitor) or co-transfected them with the IP-10-luciferase construct and a PI-3K dominant negative mutant. Our findings were that both PI-3K antagonists inhibited the ability of IFNγ, VEGF or combinations to induce IP-10 transcriptional activation. Thus, PI-3K is central to cytokine-mediated expression of IP-10. To further assess the associated kinases and pathway(s), we used an active form of PDK1 (a critical signaling component of the PI-3K pathway) in co-transfection assays and found that it also led to the IP-10 promoter activation. Together these findings establish for the first time a role for the PI-3K pathway in IP-10 expression and suggest that PI-3K/PDK1 could represent novel targets to modulate IP-10-dependent T cell trafficking post transplantation. Haskova, 1 Atsushi Izawa, 1 Stuart W. Robertson, 1 Jocelyn Corradi, 1 David M. Briscoe. 1 1 Transplantation Research Center, Children's Hospital & Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) and the CXC chemokine receptor 3 (CXCR3) are two of a family of chemokines and chemokine receptors that are proposed to play a critical role in leukocyte trafficking into allografts and in effector cell activation. CXCR3 is the receptor for the chemokines IP-10, I-TAC and Mig that are produced mainly by activated Th1 and NK cells. The MCP-1 chemokine is produced mainly by monocytes and endothelial cells, and binds to its hematopoietic cell receptor CC chemokine receptor 2. Both CXCR3 and MCP-1 are expressed in association with rejection and promote the migration of T cells into inflamed tissues. We used fully MHC mismatched BALB/c -C57BL/6 tail to trunk skin or cardiac transplant models to determine the relative role(s) of donor or recipient MCP-1 and CXCR3. Compared with wild-type control mice (median survival time (MST)=9d, n=8) CXCR3-/-or MCP-1-/ -recipients did not show delayed rejection of fully mismatched skin allografts. To our surprise, when CXCR3-/-and MCP-1-/-mice were used as graft donors, all skin allografts survived significantly longer than their wild-type controls (MST=15d, 12d vs. 9d; n=10, 10 and 8 resp., p<0.0001). This finding is in contrast to results following cardiac transplantation in which CXCR3-/-cardiac allografts do not survive significantly longer, and our preliminary observation that the lack of MCP-1 expression in cardiac allografts does not affect leukocyte trafficking or acute rejection (MST=8d vs.9d, n=6 and 5 resp). Also, we found that wild-type cardiac allografts in CXCR3-/-or MCP-1-/-recipients had prolonged survival (p<0.005). We hypothesized that the reason for the different role of CXCR3 and MCP-1 in skin and cardiac allograft rejection is due to vascularization. To address this possibility, we developed a model in which fully mismatched skin grafts were allowed to heal in SCID recipients. Four weeks later SCIDs received recipient wild-type spleen cells, and subsequently rejected the vascularized skin grafts by day 16 (n=8). Adoptive transfer of CXCR3-/-or MCP-1-/-spleen cells in this vascularized skin model did not result in a significant prolongation of survival. We conclude that donor expression of CXCR3 and MCP-1 in the heart and skin have different functions in rejection. Our data imply that there are organ specific differences in the usage of chemokine pathways that mediate selective leukocyte trafficking into allografts. Ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury is often the cause of primary failure in orthotopic liver transplants (OLT). Expression of fibronectin (FN) by sinusoidal endothelium is an early event after liver injury. We hypothesized that FN-leukocyte interactions are critical in liver I/R injury. This study evaluated the efficacy of CS1 peptide mediated blockade of FN-α4β1 interactions in a 24h cold I/R model. Methods and Results: CS1 peptides (500 µg/rat) were administered through the portal vein of Sprague-Dawley (SD) rat livers before and after the 24h cold storage. SD recipients received a 3d-course of CS1 peptides (1mg/rat, i.v.). CS1 peptide therapy significantly increased the 14d OLT survival rate as compared with controls (100% vs 50%, n=6rats/gr, p<0.007). Moreover, it profoundly improved liver function, as assessed by sGOT levels (1251 ± 195 vs. 3733 ± 455, p<0.01) . CS1 treated OLTs at day 1 showed good preservation of lobular architecture with no evidence of congestion or necrosis, contrasting with severe necrosis and sinusoidal congestion in controls (score: 1.0 ± 0.5 vs 3.5±0.2, p<0.01). COX-2 (0.8±0.1 vs. 2.1±0.6, p<0.05) and iNOS (non-detected vs. 1.4±0.4), important mediators of inflammation, were significantly depressed in CS1 treated livers. Leukocyte migration requires adhesion and focal matrix degradation events. Interestingly, CS1 therapy had no effect on MMP-2 (gelatinase A) production (1.6±0.1 vs. 1.8±0.4, p<0 .3); however, it profoundly decreased MMP-9 (gelatinase B) expression (1.4±1 vs. 4.5±1, p<0.02) . T cells and monocyte/macrophages were the primary sources of MMP-9 in injured control livers. To evaluate whether FN-α4β1interactions specifically regulate MMP-9 expression, RAW 264.7 macrophage-like cells, which express α4β1, were cultured in FN coated plates. Indeed, MMP-9 mRNA expression increased by 2.5-3 fold in cells cultured on FN, as compared with cells cultured on polylysine. However, cells cultured in FN plates pre-treated with anti-FN Ab or cells incubated with an anti-α4 Ab, before being plated on FN, showed significantly reduced MMP-9 levels. MMP-2 was virtually absent in cultured macrophages. Conclusion: CS1 peptide therapy significantly decreased iNOS and COX-2 production, specifically down-regulated MMP-9 expression, and improved liver function/ OLT recipient survival. This novel study demonstrates the potential utility of targeting FN-α4β1 interactions for improving outcomes in OLT. Izawa, 1 Stuart W. Robertson, 1 Zdenka Haskova, 1 Masayuki Sho, 1 Mohamed H. Sayegh, 1 David M. Briscoe. 1 1 Transplantation Research Center, Children's Hospital & Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. Recent studies suggest that chemokine and chemokine receptor interactions: interferoninducible protein-10 (IP-10)/CXCR3 or monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1)/CCR2 play key roles in allograft rejection. VEGF, a known regulator of MCP-1 and IP-10 is expressed and is functional for leukocyte recruitment into allografts. In this study, we evaluated the interactions between VEGF-mediated trafficking of leukocytes and rejection, and MCP-1 or CXCR3 function in vivo. Fully MHC-mismatched hearts from BALB/c mice were transplanted into C57BL/6 wild type (WT), MCP-1, or CXCR3 gene knockout ( -/-) recipients; and were treated with either neutralizing VEGF antiserum or normal rabbit serum i.p. on days -1, 0, 2, 4, 6, 9, 12, 15 . Our findings were that anti-VEGF inhibited rejection and prolonged survival from 9 days (n=5) to as much as 14 days (n=5, p<0.005) in WT recipients. Anti-VEGF also prolonged survival in MCP-1 -/recipients (median survival time (MST) 15 days, n=2, -> 21 days, n=4) and in CXCR3 -/recipients (MST 15 days, n=3, n=6) . Histological examination of the grafts confirmed massive infiltration and vasculitis in rejecting WT grafts but less infiltrates and less vasculitis in all anti-VEGF-treated chemokine deficient recipients. To further address the role of intragraft chemokines for VEGF function, we also transplanted C57BL/ 6 WT, MCP-1 -/-, or IP-10 -/grafts into BALB/c recipients that were untreated or treated with anti-VEGF. Surprisingly, while IP-10 -/grafts had a prolonged survival, MCP-1 -/grafts were rejected at a similar rate as WT grafts (MST 9 days, n=6). Moreover, whereas anti-VEGF further prolonged survival of IP-10 -/grafts (MST 19 days, n=6, n=7) , in initial studies, anti-VEGF failed to prolong survival of MCP-1 -/grafts (MST 10 days, n=5). Taken together these data suggest that VEGF function in vivo is independent of recipient MCP-1 and CXCR3 interactions. Moreover, it appears that donor MCP-1 alone is not sufficient or necessary for the development of acute rejection of cardiac allografts; and that intragraft MCP-1 may be important for VEGF function in vivo. Our findings are consistent with the possibility that VEGF is a potent proinflammatory cytokine in rejection and that it is a potential therapeutic target. Importantly, these findings define VEGF as functional for leukocyte trafficking in vivo in both a chemokine-dependent and a chemokine-independent manner. Introduction: The destruction of the host intestinal epithelium by alloreactive CD8 effectors is a hallmark of GVHD pathology. We previously reported that host-specific CD8 cells dramatically upregulate expression of the integrin, CD103, following entry into the gut epithelium in GVHD. Given that CD103 recognizes an epithelial ligand (E-cadherin), these data suggested that CD103 may play a key role in targeting host epithelial compartments for destruction by host-specific CD8 cells. To test this hypothesis, we herein assessed the capacity of host-specific CD8 effectors with targeted disruption of CD103 to mediate GVHD pathology. Methods: Equal numbers of wild type Thy1.1 + and CD103 -/-Thy1.2 + 2C TCR transgenic (H-2L d -specific) spleen cells (SC) (H-2 b ) were adoptively transferred, along with C57BL/6 (B6) BM and SC (H-2 b ), into lethally-irradiated Balb/c (H-2L d ) hosts. Lymphocytes isolated from host organs were subjected to 4-color FACS analyses using mAb to the clonotypic TCR (1B2), Thy1.1 and Thy1.2. The percentages of host-specific wild type (2C-WT) and CD103 -/-(2C-KO) lymphocytes infiltrating the gut epithelium among gated 1B2 + CD8 + effectors, were compared at days 7, 14, 21 and 28 post-BMT. To determine the contribution of CD103 + CD8 + effectors to GVHD pathology, lethally-irradiated Balb/c hosts were transplanted with BM and CD8 cells from WT or CD103 -/-B6 donors. Results: 2C-WT and 2C-KO CD8 effectors (CD44 hi CD62L lo ) migrated with comparable efficiency into the gut epithelium by day 7 post-transfer. Thus, CD103 is not required for initial migration of CD8 effectors to the intestinal epithelium. However, the proportion of 2C-KO cells declined precipitously with time compared to 2C-WT cells: by day 28 posttransfer 2C-WT cells (comprising 50% of the total CD8 effectors) vastly outnumbered the 2C-KO cells (15% of the total CD8 effectors), indicating that CD103 is required for CD8 effector retention in the gut epithelium. The significance of such retention is supported by the finding that recipients of WT CD8 cells died more rapidly (MST = 11 days) than recipients of CD103 -/-CD8 cells (MST >30 days) and exhibited more severe epithelial lesions as evidenced by increased apoptotic bodies within the crypt epithelium. Conclusion: These data document an important role for CD103 in retention of host-specific CD8 effectors in epithelial compartments and demonstrate that such retention is causally related to the destruction of epithelial compartments, a cardinal feature of GVHD. Guenter Zerwes, Markus B. Streiff, Christian Buns, Marc Bigaud, Klaus Menninger, Adrien Kunkler, Sabine Riesen, Grazyna Wieczorek, Nigel Cooke, Rainer Albert, Marcel Luyten, Christian Beerli, Randall E. Morris, Gebhard Thoma. Transplantation and Immunology Research, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Basel, Switzerland. Introduction. Both epidemiological studies in renal allograft recipients and in vivo experiments using CCR5 KO mice indicate that the chemokine receptor CCR5 plays an important role in transplant rejection by affecting trafficking of T cells and monocytes. Thus, antagonists of CCR5 are considered to be of therapeutic value. We report here on the pharmacological properties of NIBR-1282, a highly potent and selective competitive CCR5 antagonist. Methods: NIBR-1282 was selected based on potency in in vitro assays using CCR5 transfected cell lines and human T cells. Assays were designed to provide information on molecular events (i) at the extracellular side of the receptor (radioligand binding assay), (ii) at intracellular sites i.e. G-protein association with the intracellular domains of CCR5 following receptor engagement; (GTPγS assay), (iii) downstream in the signal transduction pathway (Ca 2+ mobilization assay) and (iv) cell migration (chemotaxis assays). NIBR-1282 was tested for immunosuppressive activity in cynomolgus monkeys with and without co-administration of cyclosporine (CsA). Results: One of the best CCR5 antagonist designated NIBR-1282 had IC 50 values between 2 and 40 nM in in vitro assays, was about equipotent on human and cynomolgus CCR5 and acted as a competitive antagonist of MIP-1α binding to CCR5. NIBR-1282 had an oral bioavailability of 43% in cynomolgus monkeys. The compound was tested in a model of life-supporting renal allograft rejection in cynomolgus monkeys as monotherapy or in combination with a dose of CsA which was ineffective vs vehicle controls (MST=7 d; p=n.s.). NIBR-1282 was not efficacious as monotherapy but when administered in combination with the non-effective dose of CsA graft survival was statistically significantly prolonged (MST=51.5 d; p< 0.05 vs. CsA). No PK interaction between NIBR-1282 and CsA was observed demonstrating that the graft prolongation was compound related. Conclusion: We report here for the first time that administration of a low molecular weight CCR5 inhibitor can lead to significant prolongation of kidney allograft survival in cynomolgus monkeys in combination with a non-effective dose of CsA. Inhibition of CCR5 may offer new therapeutic opportunities for transplant patients. Thomas R. Jones, 1 Andrew B. Adams, 1 Rose Hendrix, 1 Thomas C. Pearson, 1 Christian P. Larsen. 1 1 Department of Surgery and Emory Transplant Center, Emory University, Atlanta, GA. Several studies have demonstrated roles for chemokines and integrin ligand/receptor pairs in the effector response to the allograft. In particular, studies have repeatedly demonstrated the importance of the IFN-γ dependent chemokines IP-10 and Mig. However, due to overlapping costimulatory and homing functions of these molecules, it has been difficult to determine the mechanisms of prolonged allograft survival. In addition, it is important to distinguish between non-specific inflammatory events and antigen-driven chemoattractant expression. In this study, C57BL/6 SCID mice were engrafted with either an allogeneic or syngeneic skin graft. After 1 month, mice were reconstituted with T-cells from wild type C57BL/6 or from IFN-γ -/-C57BL/6 mice. Grafts were harvested at various time points after reconstitution, then processed to isolate mRNA for quantitative PCR analysis. We found that MCP-1 (13.16-fold increase relative to unreconstituted grafts, p<0.05 v. syngeneic) and the IFN-γ dependent chemokines Mig (114-fold increase), IP-10 (58.7-fold increase), and I-TAC (71.8-fold increase, all p<0.04 v. syngeneic controls) are significantly upregulated 4 days after Tcell reconstitution, and decline rapidly thereafter. CD4 and CD8 T-cell transcripts were not significantly detected until day 8 of rejection. Several chemokine receptor transcripts became detectable at this time, but did not clearly correlate with the impressive expression of MCP-1 or the CXCR3 ligands. Grafts from animals reconstituted with Tcells from IFN-γ knock-out mice did not display upregulation of the IFN-γ dependent chemokines Mig, IP-10, and I-TAC, suggesting that IFN-γ production from alloreactive T-cells is required for this process. Interestingly, we also found that allografts, but not syngeneic grafts, display increased expression of the IFN-γ -dependent chemokines Mig, IP-10, and I-TAC prior to T-cell reconstitution, albeit at much lower levels than observed during rejection (10.9-fold, 4.3-fold, and 7.0 -fold upregulated, p<0.03 v. syngeneic controls). This baseline upregulation was eliminated by treatment with anti-IFN-γ monoclonal antibody, but not through depletion of NK cells, suggesting an antigen-specific IFN-γ -dependent inflammatory process in the absence of a T-cell response. In summary, we have demonstrated that an extensive array of signals is upregulated during T-cell mediated rejection of skin allografts, and that the first major events occur shortly after T-cell reconstitution but prior to the appearance of an infiltrate. Progressive improvement in the outcome of pancreas transplantation has been seen in recent years. An important reason for this improvement is the decrease in the rate of immunological graft loss. The latter has been seen with all types of pancreas transplants but has been more pronounced in the case of pancreas after kidney and pancreas alone transplants. To determine the impact of this clinical trend in the pathological material, we compared the pathology diagnosis of the first 100 and the last 100 biopsies performed in one transplant center. The first biopsies were performed between August 1992 and May 1994 and the later biopsies were performed between January 2002 and March 2003. There has been a marked decrease in the rate of acute rejection in the later biopsies in comparison to the earlier biopsies (p <.0000) (table 1). The severity of acute rejection also decreased and severe rejection was not observed in the latter group of biopsies (table 2) . Chronic rejection was seen in 4% of the earlier biopsies versus in 23% of the later biopsies (p=.0001). Severe chronic rejection/graft sclerosis was only seen in the later biopsies. A comparison of other diagnostic categories in the 2 groups showed that whereas post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder was seen in 4 instances in the earlier group, no such a diagnosis was found in the latter group. Pancreatitis and peripancreatitis were seen with equal frequency in both groups. Also, from the comparison of the two periods it was found that in the earlier period, coinciding with the implementation of the percutaneous biopsy technique in the program, there was a 12% rate of inadequate biopsies versus 5% in the later period. We conclude that a marked decrease in the rate of acute rejection has been seen in PBx after the introduction of more potent immunosuppressants. Despite this improvement, however, a significant increase in graft sclerosis (chronic rejection) is seen in the recent biopsies. The reasons for this increase remain to be clarified. Due to the 10 year interval between the 2 groups studied, aging of the grafts could account in part for the increase in graft sclerosis. Transplantation 1997,21; 227 and AJT 2003,75; 1186 Abstract# 1471 CONVERSION TO A CALCINEURIN INHIBITOR (CI) AND STEROID FREE REGIMEN AFTER PANCREAS (Px) TRANSPLANTATION (Tx). R. Gruessner, 1 A. Humar, 1 R. Kandaswamy, 1 A. Gruessner, 1 D. Sutherland. 1 1 Surgery, Univ of MN, Mpls, MN. Introduction: Standard maintenance immunosuppression in Px Tx recips (with or without a kidney tx) is a CI plus steroids and an anti-proliferative agent. Both steroids and CIs have significant side effects but at least steroids can be withdrawn in Px Tx recips with a low rejn risk. In pts with nephrotoxicity (common) or other CI sideeffects(diabetogenicity, neurotoxicity), CI withdrawal would be desirable if it could be done with a low rejn episode risk. We have tested the ability to do so in conjunction with a course of anti-T (and B)-cell therapy with Campath (alemtuzumab) in pts <1-10 years post Px Tx, with maintenance thereafter by mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) or rapamycin (RAP) alone. Patients and Methods: Between 1/03 and 11/03, we stopped CI (usually tacrolimus) and steroids (if still on) in 65 Px Tx recips. At the time CI was stopped we gave Campath (30 mg x 3); thereafter the pts were maintained on either MMF (most, target 2-3 g/day, but adjusted by neutrophil count) or RAP (if GI toxicity from MMF, target level 5-8). There were 21 simultaneous Px and kidney (Kd) (SPK), 22 Px after Kd (PAK) and 22 PxTx alone (PTA) recips. The median time of conversion was 32 mos post-tx (range: 2.7 -151mo) and the median follow-up time is 3 mo (range: 0.1 -7.7 mos). Reasons for conversion were pancreas or kidney rejn (n=15), nephrotoxicity, severe defined as a serum creatinine >1.9 mg/dl (n= 34) and mild as below this level (n=13), neuropathy (n=2), or diabetogenicity (n= 1). Results: After conversion, no patient deaths occurred. There were a total of 4 pancreas graft losses (1 SPK, 1 PAK and 2 PTA), all but one from a continuation of the rejn process that preceded the conversion. In contrast to the PAK category, where no kidney grafts were lost, 2 kidneys continued to deteriorate in the SPK category and dialysis was required. We also observed a total of 5 reversible rejn episodes (4 of the pancreas and 1 kidney rejn) after conversion. In pts converted for nephrotoxicity, except for those cited above, serum creatinine levels have remained stable or declined but the followup period is short. The early results of a CI and steroid withdrawal protocol concomitant with a course of Campath show promise as an a alternative to the standard long-term maintenance strategy for pancreas and pancreas-kidney recips. If rejn does not occur, the elimination of a nephrotoxic agent has the potential to increase the life span of transplanted or native kidneys, especially those with impaired function at the time of conversion. 1 1 Nephrology and Clinical Immunology, ITERT, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France; 2 Urology Department, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France. Sparing steroids, one of the cornerstone immunosuppressive agents currently used, can represent an advantage in the long-term follow-up of recipients of simultaneous pancreas-kidney transplantation (SPKT). We hypothesized that steroids can be safely avoided in the context of T-cell depletion, calcineurin blockade and purine biosynthesis inhibition, without increasing the incidence of acute rejection during the first 12 months after SPKT. Two steroid sparing immunosuppressive regimens were compared from January 1999 to November 2002 in a prospective, randomised, open label, one centre study. A total of 50 diabetic and uraemic patients received rabbit antithymocyte globulin induction (Thymoglobulin; r-ATG) for 10 days, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and cyclosporine microemulsion (CsA), both from the day of surgery. 25 patients (16 males, mean age 42 yrs) did not received steroids (avoidance group) and 25 patients (17 males, mean age 40 yrs) received in addition a 3-month low-dose prednisone taper course (withdrawal group). All patients achieved one year of follow-up. One patient in each arm (4%) experienced a biopsy-proven acute kidney rejection: 1 Banff 2a rejection on day 105 in the steroid avoidance group and 1 Banff 2a rejection on day 80 in the steroid withdrawal group. No episode of acute pancreatic rejection was diagnosed and no episode of kidney rejection was observed after the fourth month in any of the two groups. r-ATG was tolerated well in all patients (no premature discontinuation), with similar cumulative doses in both groups (656 mg vs 628 mg). One patient in the avoidance group died on day 2 because of cardiac failure. Similar 1year survival of the patients (96 and 100%), kidney (96 and 100%) and pancreas (84 and 92%) were noted in the avoidance and withdrawal groups, respectively. No statistical differences were observed in the pancreatic and renal functions, lipid profile, insulin levels, and viral infectious episodes. Up to day, no cancer was diagnosed. Complete steroid avoidance and a short 3-month steroid course, in the context of r-ATG, MMF and CsA, are equally safe and highly efficacious immunosuppressive regimens in diabetic recipients of SPKT. INTRODUCTION. The rate of acute rejection (AR) in SPK transplantation has been falling over the past decade raising the possibility that AR may be entirely eliminated. MATERIALS AND METHODS. From 9/2000 thru 11/2003, 84 SPK have been performed in patients with type 1 insulin dependent diabetes mellitus and end stage renal disease. These patients have been part of a prospective, randomized trial in which they received thymoglobulin (1.0 -1.5 mg/kg intraoperatively, and next 4 days) and zenapax (1 mg/kg x 2 doses, intraoperatively, and two weeks), tacrolimus and steroids as baseline immunosuppression. They were randomized to receive either mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) (1 gm BID), or rapamycin (Rapa) (4 mg/day -target trough level 8 -10 ng/ml). Forty patients received MMF, and 44 received Rapa. All patients received ganciclovir/cytovene and bactrim prophylaxis for CMV and PCP respectively. RESULTS. There have been 5 (12.5%) episodes of acute rejection (AR) in the MMF group -all except one in patients who were either off MMF (wound infection, pneumonia), or steroids. The AR occurred at 1, 3, 5, 6 and 8 months post SPK. Each of these episodes was steroid resistant but responsive to antibody therapy (OKT3 or Thymoglobulin). There has been one (2.3%) episode of AR in the Rapa group (off Rapa at the time) at 3 weeks (p < .05 vs MMF), responsive to thymoglobulin. There was one instance of CMV hepatitis (Rapa) which responded to ganciclovir. There was one case of Kaposi's sarcoma (Rapa) that responded completely to chemotherapy over a year ago with ongoing normal SPK function. There have been no lymphoproliferative disorders. There have been four deaths (2 MMF, 2 Rapa), two kidney graft losses (MMF group), three pancreas losses (1 MMF/2 Rapa). The lipid profile (cholesterol, triglycerides, HDL, LDL) is essentially normal in both groups, however, a larger proportion of Rapa patients are receiving lipid lowering agents. The overall actuarial survival with 1 1/2 year mean follow-up for patient, kidney and pancreas is 94%, 91% and 90%. CONCLUSION. In a randomized, prospective study with a mean 1 1/2 year follow-up, the incidence of AR has been limited with one exception to only those instances where recipient's immunosuppression was significantly reduced. There was a smaller percentage of AR in the Rapa vs MMF group. There were no graft losses associated with AR. Steroid elimination has been successful using Thymoglobulin (RATG) induction therapy in both renal and simultaneous pancreas-kidney (SPK) transplantation; however, little has been reported in solitary pancreas transplantation. We introduced a steroid withdrawal protocol in February 2002 in solitary pancreas transplant recipients. This study compares 22 solitary pancreas transplant recipients withdrawn from steroids to a historical control group of 37 solitary pancreas transplants who remained on prednisone maintenance therapy. This analysis included 18 Pancreas Transplant Alone (PTA), 20 Pancreas After Kidney (PAK) and 21 Simultaneous Pancreas-Living Donor Kidney (SPLK) transplant recipients transplanted between January 2001 and August 2003. Both groups received 7-10 days of RATG induction therapy, tacrolimus (FK506) with a goal trough level of 12 ng/mL and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF). There was no difference in sex, previous transplant history, CMV status, peak PRA or AB and DR mismatches between the groups. All patients were non-African American. There was no difference in doses of MMF and FK506 between groups. Overall and 1-year rejection rates were lower in the prednisone withdrawal group and graft survival was improved. Lymphocyte depletion induction therapy allows for prednisone-free immunosuppresion in SPK tx. However, lymhocyte depletion may increase the risk of viral infections, especially CMV. We have conducted a retrospective analysis examining the relationship between immunosuppression and the risk of acquiring CMV in 200 consecutive SPK tx at a single center spanning two eras: Era I: Prednisone + (n=100, Tx 7/95-12/99, mean f/u 32.4 mo). Tacrolimus/MMF/Pred. ± induction. Era II: Pred-free (n=100, Tx 1/ 00-4/03, mean f/u 27.1 mo). Tacrolimus /MMF or sirolimus, Ø pred. and Thymo or CAMPATH induction. Pertinent recipient and donor demographics were similar among pts in both eras. All pts received CMV prophylaxis except the D-/R-group. Table I shows the rates of CMV according to D/R CMV serologic status and use of corticosteroids. The cumulative rate of CMV was markedly reduced in the pred-free cohort. When examined according to D/R status, the rates of CMV in the high risk pts (D+) were reduced by over 50%. These results show that in SPK tx the rate of CMV can be significantly reduced by steroid avoidance even with lymphocyte depletion induction. Abstract# 1476 TRANSPLANT. Joshua J. Augustine, 1 Christopher T. Siegel, 2 James A. Schulak, 2 Donald E. Hricik. 1 1 Medicine, University Hospitals of Cleveland, Cleveland, OH; 2 Surgery, University Hospitals of Cleveland, Cleveland, OH. An increasing proportion of pancreas transplants (PTx) are being performed sequentially after a previous kidney transplant (KTx). This approach (PAK) generally requires an increase in immunosuppression at the time of PTx and may increase the risk of immunosuppressive side effects including nephrotoxicity. Since 1997, 23 PAKs have been performed at our center. We compared kidney function before and after PTx in 17 of these patients who had sufficient follow-up before and after PTx to allow calculation of the slope of 1/creatinine versus time (SLOPE). Maintenance immunosuppression was heterogeneous but all patients received calcineurin inhibitors. Eleven of the 17 patients were converted from cyclosporine to tacrolimus (FK) at the time of the PTx. Duration of follow-up prior to PTx ranged from 4 to 123 months (mean 30±29 months). Duration of follow-up after PTx ranged from 6 to 65 months (mean 26±17 months). Serum creatinine concentration at the time of PTx ranged from 1.0 to 2.5 mg/dl (mean 1.7±0.5 mg/dl). For the entire duration from the time of KTx to last follow-up, SLOPE was negative in 16 of 17 patients (mean -0.0081±0.0074 dl/mg/month). In 5 of 17 patients, SLOPE was positive for the time interval between KTx and PTx. For the entire cohort, mean SLOPE for the time interval between KTx and PTx was +0.0026±0.0034 dl/mg/month). SLOPE was negative in all 17 patients following PTx (mean -0.0146±0.0121 dl/mg/month). Four of the 17 patients have either been retransplanted (n=2) or returned to dialysis (n=2). Using a paired t-test analysis, post-PTx SLOPE was significantly lower than pre-PTx slope (p<0.05). In addition, post-PTx SLOPE was lower than the overall SLOPE measured from the time of KTx (-0.0146±0.0121 versus -0.0081±0.0074 dl/mg/month), suggesting that PTx was associated with a breakpoint in the linear relationship between 1/creatinine and time. Serum creatinine at the time of PTx correlated inversely with post-PTx SLOPE (R=-0.55, p<0.05). In 6 patients treated with FK before and after PTx, mean trough FK level rose from 6.4±2.1 ng/ml during the 6 months pre-PTx to 9.5±1.5 ng/ml in the 6 months post-PTx (p=0.002). Results of this analysis suggest that renal function deteriorates at an accelerated rate after PTx in many patients with a previous KTx. Higher serum creatinine at the time of PTx increases the likelihood of renal deterioration. Whether this change in renal function is a consequence of increased immunosuppression at the time of PTx or other factors remains to be determined. GRAFT PANCREATITIS: SIGNIFICANT IMPACT OF DONOR FACTORS AND TYPE OF IMMUNOSUPPRESSION ON OUTCOME. A UNOS ANALYSIS. Christoph Troppmann, 1 R. Perez, 1 A. Gruessner, 2 D. Sutherland, 2 R. Gruessner. 2 1 Dept. of Surgery, Univ. of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA; 2 Dept. of Surgery, Univ. of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN. Surgical complications after pancreas transplantation (PxTx) have significantly decreased over the past decade. But the impact of the multiple changes in practice (eg, increased use of enteric [ED]  In SPK recipients, BD was significantly associated with increased Pxitis, but Px loss due to Pxitis occurred significantly more frequently in solitary PxTx. Donor risk factors, preservation time as well as induction with depleting AB or agents other than tacrolimus/MMF were all independent risk factors for Px loss from Pxitis. CONCLUSIONS: Incidence of Pxitis in SPK can be further lowered through the preferential use of ED over BD. Minimization of Pxitis graft losses requires judicious donor selection, short preservation times, and the avoidance of depleting AB. Further investigations are warranted to devise appropriate immunosuppressive strategies for PxTx recipients at high immunologic and Pxitis risk. EFFECT OF CENTER VOLUME ON PANCREAS TRANSPLANT OUTCOMES. Aloke K. Mandal, 1 Nicholas Drew, 2 Jodi A. Lapidus. 2 1 Division of Liver & Pancreas Transplantation, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR; 2 Department of Public Health & Preventive Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR. Background: The number of cases often correlates with improved outcomes for several procedures, including abdominal organ transplantation. Given the unique nature of pancreas transplantation and the large variation in transplant center volumes, this study explores whether center volume affects patient and graft survival following pancreas transplantation. Methods: Registry data on all forms of solid organ pancreas transplants performed between 1995 and 2000 were obtained from the United Network for Organ Sharing. Patient and graft survival rates were followed until 2002. Based on data from United States transplant centers, center volume was categorized as: low (≤10/ yr), medium (11-20/yr), high (21-50/yr), and very high (>50/yr). Results: From 1995 to 2000, 6,876 pancreas transplants were performed: 2,143 at 87 low, 1,886 at 25 medium, 1,415 at 8 high, and 1,432 at 3 very high volume centers. Very high volume centers were more likely to do pancreas after kidney (PAK), pancreas transplant alone (PTA), pancreas with kidney (PWK), and repeat transplants while other centers more frequently performed simultaneous pancreas-kidney (SPK) transplants (p<.001, Log Rank test). In terms of recipient characteristics, very high volume centers were more likely to transplant older recipients and less likely to transplant minorities. While a quarter of the recipients at low, medium, and high volume centers had Medicaid; only 9% of patients at very high volume centers received Medicaid (p<.001). Low volume centers accepted pancreatic allografts from younger donors and had the longest waiting times. Very high volume centers used better HLA-matched organs. There were no differences in patient survival; however, both medium and high volume centers had better pancreas graft survival than low or very high centers. Female recipient, Medicaid coverage, and older donors all coincided with poorer graft survival (p<.001). Medium volume centers had the most late (>1 yr) graft failures (p<.001). Kidney transplant volume did not correlate with pancreas outcomes. Conclusions: Specific recipient and donor characteristics rather than just center volume affect pancreas transplant outcomes. Lower levels of adherence to an immunosuppression regimen after CRT have been hypothesized as a risk factor for foreshortened allograft survival. We prospectively studied 282 CRT recipients to examine risk factors for poor immunosuppressive drug adherence measured using electronic pill bottle cap monitors (Aardex, Inc.) over the 12 months following transplantation. Adherence was expressed as the mean daily proportion of medication doses taken. A single medication was monitored for each subject. Results: 70 (25%) of subjects were African-American(AA) and 175 (62 %) were female. The distribution of average adherence (Figure) illustrates that 41% of subjects had a 12-month average adherence >95%, 31% had 80-95% adherence, 15% had 50-80% adherence and 13% had less then 50% adherence. The only demographic or socioeconomic factor associated with lower levels of adherence was AA race (p=0.02). There was no association between depressive symptoms (0R=1.06, 95% C.I. 0.59-1.90, p=0.86) as measured by CES-D questionnaire, transplant related stress (OR=0.99, 95% C.I. 0.97-1.02, p=0.54), internal locus of control (i.e. belief that the subject is in-charge of their own health) (OR=1.01, 95% C.I. 0.95-1.07, p=0.72) chance locus of control (i.e. belief that no one can be in-charge of the subject's health) (OR=0.99, 95% C.I. 0.95-1.04, p=0.64) or other locus of control (someone else is in-charge of the subject's health) (OR=1.03, 95% C.I. 0.97-1.08, p=0.34) as measured by MHLC questionnaire. Conclusion: AA subjects were associated with lower levels of adherence, even after adjusting for other demographic and socio-economic factors. There was no detectably significant difference in depressive symptoms, transplant related stress or locus of control between subjects who had high levels of adherence compared to those with lower levels. 1 1 Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, University Hospitals Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium; 2 Laboratory of Radiopharmaceutical Chemistry, University Hospitals Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium. Diarrhea is a frequent adverse event in transplant patients and has been associated with an increase of trough levels of tacrolimus (FK506). In contrast, this has not been observed for cyclosporin A (CsA). The aim of this study was to evaluate whether intestinal CYP3A4 and PGP activities were differently affected by diarrhea in patients on FK506 versus CsA. Intestinal CYP3A4/PGP activity in vivo was assessed by the recently validated combined per oral and intravenous 14 C Erythromycin breath and urine test. Twenty-one renal transplant patients on immunosuppression with MMF + steroids + FK506 (n=15) or CsA (n=6) with afebrile and persistent diarrhea (faecal output > 200g/day, duration ≥ 2 weeks) were examined. Each group was compared with a corresponding group of stable controls taking FK506 (n=27) or CsA (n=9). In addition, all patient groups were compared to a group of 27 healthy controls (hc). Diarrhea did not alter CYP3A4 activity, but strongly impaired intestinal PGP activity in patients on FK506 compared to stable controls and hc. In contrast, all patients on CsA had a diminished PGP activity compared to hc, irrespective of the occurrence of diarrhea (figure). These data suggest that the impact of diarrhea on the oral bioavailability of FK506 is (at least partially) mediated by diminished intestinal PGP activity. The observed decreased intestinal PGP activity in patients on CsA is a plausible explanation for the lack of any additional impact of diarrhea on CsA trough levels. Maes, 1 Kristin Verbeke, 2 Yves Vanrenterghem. 1 1 Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, University Hospitals Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium; 2 Laboratory of Radiopharmaceutical Chemistry, University Hospitals Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium. Bioavailability of various immunosuppressants such as ciclosporin A, tacrolimus and sirolimus, is strongly determined by hepatic and intestinal CYP3A4 and PGP activity, hence a considerable risk for drug-interactions. In clinical practice, transplant recipients receive ulcer prophylaxis and often lipid-lowering drugs. This study assessed the in vivo activity of overall cytochrome P450 (CYP), CYP3A4 and PGP in healthy volunteers after a 5 days' course of 3 different anti-ulcer drugs (omeprazole: Omp; cimetidine: Cim; ranitidine: Ran) in a randomized cross-over design. Likewise, the effects of 4 statins (simvastatin: Simva; pravastatin: Prava; atorvastatin: Atva; fluvastatin: Fluva) were evaluated. CYP activity was measured with the aminopyrin breath test and CYP3A4/PGP activity by the combined per oral and intravenous 14 C-Erythromycin breath and urine test at base-line and completion of each treatment. ANOVA was used for statistical comparisons. The results are expressed as %change from baseline activity (table). Only Cim had a significantly negative effect on overall CYP (-28%). Intestinal CYP3A4 activity was significantly increased by Omp (+63%) and Simva (+52%). Except for a tendency (p=0.08) of Simva to inhibit intestinal PGP (-21%), no clear impact on hepatic CYP3A4 or PGP activity was retained. This preliminary study confirms earlier reports on the inhibition of cytochrome P450 activity by cimetidine. In contrast, cimetidine did not specifically influence CYP3A4, as opposed to omeprazole and simvastatin, which induced intestinal CYP3A4 activity. Ranitidine and pravastatin overall had the smallest difference with baseline, implicating they are least likely to provoke drug interactions with other CYP3A4/PGP metabolized drugs like calcineurin inhibitors or sirolimus. Overall CYP Hepatic CYP3A4 Intestinal CYP3A4 Hepatic PGP Intestinal PGP Cim The recurrence rate of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) in kidney transplantation (KTX) ranges from 20%-40%, with graft failure resulting in 40%-50% of these cases. Multiple risk factors for recurrent FSGS have been established. However, recurrence rates in pts undergoing early corticosteroid withdrawal (ECSW) (≤7 days) has not been determined. We present results of 49 pts that underwent KTX b/t 1999-2003 for FSGS, and compared pts that were enrolled into ECSW regimens to those that received long-term steroids. Demograpics: Pts include 51% male, 65% Caucasian, 35% African American, 57% CAD KTX, and 16% repeat KTX at mean age of 40 ± 12.5 yo at time of KTX. Of the 8 pts that had repeat KTX, 35% lost 1st allograft from recurrent FSGS. Results: Median time from dx of FSGS to ESRD (dialysis or KTX) was 4.3 (0-24) yrs. 27% of pts had documented use of immunosuppressive medication (prednisone ± CSA) to treat FSGS prior to KTX. Mean pre-KTX proteinuria was 6.3 ± 4.9 gm/24 hrs. Permeability factor was measured in 27% of pts with 2 pts having a value ≥ to control. Immunosuppression (IS) consisted of 74% Thymoglobulin induction, 49% CSA, 51% FK, 100% MMF, and 43% Rapa. 2 pts were lost to f/u and 4 pts received blinded study drug (prednisone or placebo) and were excluded from analysis. The remaining results are for 43/49 pts with a median f/u of 569 (18-1737) days. Results from the two groups are presented below. When comparing pts with recurrence vs. those without recurrence there was no statistical difference found with respect to gender, race, age, time from dx to ESRD, permeability factor, # of KTX, and IS. Conclusion: ECSW does not increase risk for recurrence of FSGS. These observations indicate that ECSW can be achieved in FSGS pts, thereby affording these pts the benifits of steroid elimination. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection has been implicated as a direct cause of acute rejection in kidney transplant patients. Patients treated prophylactically with ganciclovir (GCV) have lower rates of CMV infection and acute rejection. Valganciclovir (VGCV) is becoming the standard for prevention of CMV disease. In vitro studies of mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and GCV show suppression of lymphocyte proliferation and production of monocytes. In vivo effects of the combination of these two drugs has not been studied. Cylex® Inc. is an ex vivo test for measuring overall immune system function. 20 primary kidney recipients underwent an IRB approved, prospective, non-randomized protocol. Subjects were immunosuppresed with MMF, prednisone and a calcineurin or mTor inhibitor. Per standard of care, patients were placed on VGCV postoperatively and dose adjusted for renal function. Each subject was tested on postoperative weeks 10, 12, 14, and 16. VCGV was stopped on the 12 th week, immunosuppressive drugs doses were not changed. Testing included CBC, MMF and GCV drug levels, Cylex immunosuppressive activity, and flow cytometry for expression of CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20, IL2R, HLA-DR, CD69. Data analyses was performed by averaging data on and off drug and comparisons were done with paired Students t-Test. Twenty subjects mean age 51y (range 31 to 68), 11M 9F, completed the protocol. WBC was significantly increased from 4.96±2.04 K/cumm to 5.77±2.13 (p<0.01) after discontinuation of VCG. Total granulocytes, lymphocytes and NK cells were not significantly altered during the study. Total monocytes counts significantly increased from 0.236±0.175 K/cumm to 0.702±0.278 (p<0.001). Total ATP production by CD4+ mononuclear cells measured by the Cylex assay was not changed during the study. However, when adjusted for the change in ratio of CD4+ lymphocytes and CD4+ monocytes that occurred during the study the Cylex study showed an increase in ATP production from 9.47±7.62 pg/cell to 21.44±19.87 (p<0.001). Percentage of CD4+ cells expressing HLA-DR increased from 1.26±1.31% to 2.72±1.99% (p<0.001) and those expressing CD69 increased from 0.40±0.21% to 0.52±0.28% (p<0.05). Il2R expression did not change. Combining MMF and VCGV have an added immunosuppressive effect in transplanted patients similar to in vitro studies presented before. Close monitoring of patients blood counts are necessary when using these two drugs. Neutropenia may be reversed with discontinuation of VCGV rather than altering MMF as is often done. Maria Magott-Procelewska, 1 Agata Kosmaczewska, 2 Irena Frydecka, 2 Lidia Ciszak, 2 Dariusz Patrzalek, 3 Piotr Szyber, 3 Marian Klinger. 1 1 Department of Nephrology and Transplantation Medicine, Medical University, Wroclaw, Lower Silesia, Poland; 2 Laboratory of Immunopathology, Institute of Immunology and Experimental Therapy, Wroclaw, Lower Silesia, Poland; 3 Department of Vascular Surgery and Transplantation, Medical University, Wroclaw, Lower Silesia, Poland. Experimental data suggest that an increased CTLA4 expression on CD4+ T cells can contribute to peripheral transplantation tolerance whereas CD40L engagement provides a costimulatory signal for T cell activation and ongoing graft rejection. The aim of the present study is to clarify the expression of costimulatory molecules in different groups of kidney graft recipients. CTLA4 (cell surface and intracellular) and CD40L expression were measured on unstimulated and anti-CD3 MoAb+rIL-2 stimulated peripheral blood CD4+ lymphocytes by dual immunofluorescence method and expressed as a percentage of double positive cells. The study were performed in 72 kidney graft recipients and in healthy controls. In patients with acute rejection (AR) (group 1, n=15) and without AR (group 2, n=23) analysis was done during 30 days after transplantation (Tx). Patients with good graft function in long-term follow up (Scr<1,5mg/dl, group 3, n=23) and patients with biopsy proven chronic graft rejection (group 4, n=11) has undergone assessment 18± 5 months after engraftment. The percentage of cell surface and intracellular unstimulated CTLA4/ CD4+ cells and unstimulated CD40L/CD4+ cells were significantly higher in all groups of kidney recipients as compared to controls. The detailed analysis revealed significantly elevated percentage of surface unstimulated and intracellular stimulated CTLA4 /CD4+ T cells in kidney allograft recipients with good long-term graft function ( group 3) as compared to recipients with AR (group 1) during first month after kidney Tx (7.5±6.4vs 3.3±5.4 and 19±17 vs 6.4±6.8 respectively, p=0.01and p=0.02). After ex vivo stimulation the percentage of surface CTLA4/CD4+ T cells were significantly higher in kidney recipients with good graft function long-term after Tx than in patients without AR (group 2) tested during first month after Tx. Allograft recipients with good long-term kidney function also exhibited the significantly lower percentage of unstimulated CD40L/CD4+ cells in comparison to recipients with biopsy proven CR (group 4)(3.3±3.3vs6.9±4.7,p=0.01).We can conclude that CTLA4 expression on CD4+ T cells is modified during the follow up. Up-regulation of surface and intracellular CTLA4 can influence the favourable outcome of kidney transplantation while increased CD40L expression can sustain rejection. 2 1 Pharmacy Dept, CC, NIH, DHHS, Bethesda, MD; 2 Transplantation Branch, NIDDK, NIH, DHHS, Bethesda, MD. Metabolic bone loss is a common adverse event following kidney transplantation. Corticosteroids used in most immunosuppressive cocktails have long been associated with loss of bone density. With the recent utilization of steroid-free transplant strategies, we wished to determine the effect of steroid avoidance on bone mineral density. We evaluated changes in bone mineral density based on DEXA bone scans obtained prior to and at 6 to 24 months post transplant in recipients enrolled in kidney transplant protocols. We compared patients that had received lymphocyte depletional induction followed by sirolimus or tacrolimus monotherapy (steroid free; n=10) with those on standard triple immunosuppression with chronic steroids (steroid; n=8). The steroid free group only received methylprednisolone during induction therapy (mean = 790mg). Patient age was similar between groups (42y versus 38y, respectively). Parathyroid hormone levels were similar between groups pre-transplant (mean 425 versus 600). Both groups showed a progressive worsening in T-score in all areas. The magnitude of changes in T-scores was similar for total spine in both groups. There was a trend of worsening T-scores in radius (6 of 10 versus 3 of 8) , and femoral neck (7 of 10 versus 3 of 8) measurements in the steroid free group versus the steroid group. In contrast, the change in T-score for total hip was slightly worse in the steroid group (5 of 10 steroid free group versus 7 of 8 in steroid group). Thus, the absence of steroids did not appear to stop the decline in bone loss in our population. This decline may be a result of other immunosuppressants such as tacrolimus and sirolimus. Bone loss following transplantation should be carefully monitored. The impact of biphosphonates in this population is being explored. Introduction: Graft function and histology are predictive of renal transplant survival. We report renal function and protocol-mandated biopsy results from the Rapamune Maintenance Regimen trial. Methods: Patients receiving cyclosporine (CsA), sirolimus (SRL), and steroids were randomly assigned at 3 months to remain on triple therapy (SRL+CsA, n=215) or to have CsA withdrawn (SRL, n=215). Protocol-mandated biopsies were performed at engraftment and at 12 and 36 months. Chronic Allograft Damage Index (CADI) scores were determined by 2 pathologists, blinded to treatment and clinical outcome. Results: 484 biopsies were evaluated. The table shows mean CADI and component scores for patients with all 3 serial biopsies. These patients were representative of those remaining on assigned therapy through month 36. Calculated GFR was significantly higher in SRL patients (68.2 vs 54.8 mL/min, p=0.009). Conclusion: CADI scores are useful for evaluating treatment-related differences in the progression of histologic changes during a multicenter trial. Protocol biopsies showed significantly better renal histology in patients receiving SRL-based therapy after early CsA withdrawal. Dittrich, 1 Sabine Schmaldienst, 1 Afschin Soleiman, 2 Walter H. Hoerl, 1 Erich Pohanka. 1 1 Dept.of Medicine III, Div. of. Nephrology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 2 Dept. of Pathology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Background: Posttransplant glomerulonephritis (GN) is a common feature which may develop in renal grafts de novo or as recurrence of the original disease. It can be observed in all immunosuppressive drug combinations and is unlikely to respond to therapy modifications. Methods: Renal transplant recipients were investigated for possible complications or side effects after conversion from calcineurin-inhibitor (CNI) based immunosuppression to rapamycin/steroids. We report on 4 patients developing heavy proteinuria, edema and decline of graft function, respectively. Results: Proteinuria of 2.5-8 g/d occurred 2-9 months after converion to rapamycin. Renal biopsy revealed IgA nephropathy (2 cases), membranoproliferative GN type I and membranous GN (1 case each). Withdrawal of rapamycin and reintroduction of cyclosporine or tacrolimus was followed by compelete remission of proteinuria after 2-5 months in all patients. This effect was maintained for an observation period of up to 21 months. The complete remission of posttransplant GN was further confirmed by a second biopsy in 2 cases with disappearance of floride GN-associated lesions and by concomittant improval or stabilisation of renal graft function. Discussion: The occurrence of reversible posttransplant GN is a quite uncommon observation. At present it is unclear, if rapamycin itself may have triggered the process by possible induction of proinflammatory effects, which resolved after its withdrawal. Alternatively, the substance may have been unable to sufficiently suppress GN activity in the graft. Withdrawal of CNI could then have allowed immune activation, which was finally terminated by reintroduction of cyclosporine or tacrolimus. We therefore recommend careful monitoring of urinary protein excretion in renal allograft recipients with rapamycin/steroid dual therapy. Introduction. The desire to detect histologic changes that precede functional renal allograft decline has stimulated our group to perform protocol surveillance biopsies (bx) in all patients. The aim of this study was to evaluate the histologic abnormalities found on protocol surveillance bx in both living donor (LD) and deceased donor (DD) renal transplant recipients. Methods. We prospectively studied 516 renal transplants (401 LD and 115 DD) between Jan 2000 -Oct 2002. ABO incompatible and positive crossmatch renal transplants were excluded. Protocol bx were performed at 4, 12 and 24 mo after transplantation and were assessed for subclinical rejection (using Banff criteria), polyoma virus infection (using in-situ PCR) and for intragraft fibrosis (using the Banff ci score). A 30 min post-reperfusion (time 0) bx was performed in some patients to assess baseline histology. Results. 975 protocol bx were performed in 516 patients during the study period. For the percutaneous biopsies the overall complication rate was 1.5% (10/752) with 7 patients requiring admission for bleeding. No graft was lost from a bx. Of all the patients transplanted, 69% underwent 4 mo bx, 56% underwent 12 mo bx and 15% underwent 24 mo bx. The reasons for not biopsying were anticoagulation treatment, patient refusal, graft loss, or recent clinical biopsy. Histologic abnormalities were noted on 66.8% of bx, however 16.8% of bx had incomplete Banff data. The histologic findings are shown in Table 1 . The incidence of BKV nephropathy increased over time (4 vs. 24 mo, p=0.03), as did findings of interstitial fibrosis. Subclinical rejection rates were not statististically different among the time points.  Histologic abnormalities are not uncommon in biopsies of otherwise well-functioning kidneys. Our experiences with subclinical polyoma virus suggest that early intervention may be beneficial. The utility of treating subclinical histologic abnormalities is unclear, yet their presence is worrisome and suggest that protocol bx may provide a means to improve long-term graft survival. Background: Progressive renal insufficiency following liver transplantation is a growing concern. Renal transplantation is increasingly used to treat ESRD in liver recipients, but there is little data on the long-term efficacy of this therapy. Methods: Using SRTR/OPTN data, a retrospective cohort of all adult liver transplant recipients who received a first renal transplant between 1995 and 2001 (n=1,156) was grouped into three categories: cadaveric renal transplantation (CRT) following liver transplantation (n=290), living donor renal transplantation (LDRT) following liver transplantation (n=163), and simultaneous liver-kidney transplantation (n=703). The Kaplan-Meier method assessed differences in death-censored renal allograft failure and patient survival. Variables and outcomes associated with CRT and LDRT were compared; the simultaneous liver-kidney transplant data are provided for reference. Results: In the CRT and LDRT patients, the primary liver disease responsible for initial liver transplantation included hepatitis C (13.5 vs 11.7%, p=0.58), non-A, non-B hepatitis (4.8 vs 4.9%, p=0.97), cryptogenic cirrhosis (14.5 vs 7.4%, p=0.02), and alcohol (23.1 vs 15.3%, p=0.05). Primary renal disease in CRT and LDRT patients included cyclosporine nephrotoxicity (37.5 vs 38.7%, p=0.82), diabetes (9.0 vs 9.2%, p=0.02), and hypertension (5.2 vs 4.9%, p=0.90). Conclusions: Among prior liver recipients, patient survival following both CRT and LDRT is good at 1 year but relatively poor at 5 years. CRT recipients have significantly lower 5-year survival rates than LDRT recipients. Renal transplantation may present different risk-benefit ratios for liver recipients and ESRD patients with no prior history of liver transplantation. 1 1 Renal Unit, St Mary's NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom. Background: Impaired tubular concentrating capacity after renal transplantation may occur due to tubular injury, renal denervation and drugs, resulting in altered sodium and water homeostasis. This study assessed sodium and water intake and excretion, and responses to fluid restriction in stable renal allograft recipients on steroid-free immunosuppression. Method and Results: 35 patients (mean age 47.1 years, 17.8 months post-transplant, 8 diabetic) completed 3-day food diaries and 24-hour urine collection. Mean creatinine clearance (CrCl) was 59 ± 21.8 ml/min. Mean sodium intake was high (142.5 ± 92.3 mmol/day) with urinary sodium excretion of 167.5 ± 76 mmol/ day. Water intake ranged from 0.8-5.3 L/day and urine volume 1.2-5.2 L/day. Mean urine osmolality (UOsm) was 321 ± 117.9 mosmol/kg. 15 of 35 patients produced isotonic or hypotonic urine, with higher urine volume (3.4 L/day vs. 2.7 L/day, p=0.02) and lower CrCl (51 ml/min vs. 68.2 ml/min, p = 0.01) than patients producing concentrated urine. 19 of 35 patients (mean age 47.1 years, 18.6 months post-transplant, 5 diabetic, CrCl 65.8 ± 18.2 ml/min) underwent total fluid restriction for 8 hours, followed by subcutaneous injection of Desmopressin, with hourly blood and urine samples taken. Results are shown below. Plasma osmolality (POsm) and sodium concentration (P Na) rose significantly, indicating mild dehydration. UOsm plateaued in the last two hours of restriction. We expected UOsm to rise above 700 mosmol/kg after restriction based on studies in normal patients, but the majority of subjects did not achieve this concentration. Urine sodium excretion (U Na) increased, possibly in response to the rise in PNa. After Desmopressin a small rise in UOsm was observed (632.7 ± 146.8 mosmol / kg, p=0.02). Analysis of anti-diuretic hormone levels pre-and post-restriction is pending. Conclusions: Renal allograft recipients have high sodium intake and excretion, with a tendency to produce poorly concentrated urine, which may be dependent on renal function. Sub-maximal renal concentrating capacity is seen in response to mild dehydration. Tubular calcification can be found in some renal allografts. Aim of this study was to analyze calcification in serial protocol biopsies (bx) obtained 6 weeks (wk), 3 and 6 months (mo) after transplantation (tx) in relation to clinical and labaratory variables, and to graft outcome at one year after tx. Analyses included 320 patients, with a total number of 275 bx at 6 wk, 303 bx at 3 mo, and 260 bx at 6 mo post tx. Biopsies were evaluated according to the BANFF 1997 classification. Calcification was scored with grade 0=none, grade I=mild and focal, and grade II=severe and diffuse. The incidence of tubular calcification increased over time, with 5.5% in the 6 wk bx, 8.6% in the 3 mo bx, and 16.1% in the 6 mo bx (p<0.01). Grade II calcification was present in 1 patient 3 mo post tx and in 5 patients 6 mo post tx. Mean serum calcium levels were higher in patients with calcification ( Compared to the lowest serum creatinine observed within the first 6 wk after tx, patients with calcification had an increase at one year after tx (119 to 143 µmol/l; p<0.01), whereas patients without calcification showed no significant increase (125 to 136 µmol/l). Tubular calcification within the first 6 months after tx is associated with interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy resulting in an inferior outcome of graft function at one year. Because of the relation to hyperparathyreoidism and high serum calcium levels, bisphosphonate therapy or parathyreoidectomy should be considered earlier and more often in these patients. 1 1 Internal Medicine, Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Minas Gerais, Brazil; 2 Nephrology, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil; 3 Pathology, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. Oxalate accumulates as a consequence of its reduced excretion during end-stage renal disease. After kidney transplantation, it will be promptly excreted creating a risk of supersaturation and tubular deposition. Although it's well established the impact of primary hyperoxaluria on isolated kidney transplant, the influence of secondary oxalosis deposition on graft outcome remains to be determined. We quantified the presence of calcium oxalate (CaOxa) deposits in renal biopsy of kidney transplant recipients with acute graft dysfunction and analyzed its impact on graft survival. Ninety-seven patients were included and prospectively studied for 12 years. CaOxa deposits were present in 52.6%; 26.8% were mild and 25.8% moderate to severe. The deposits were more frequent in cadaveric grafts with longer ischemic time. Incidence of vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) in the transplanted kidney is about 26%. This may cause recurrent urinary tract infections (UTI) including transplant pyelonephritis, sometimes leading to earlier graft loss. We herein present an endoscopic subureteric injection technique using bovine collagen to treat transplant VUR. All our patients had Lich-Gregiore ureteroneocystostomy at the time of transplantation. All patients who had 3 or more culture proven post-transplant UTIs in <1 year, were studied by voiding cystourethrography (VCUG). 9 patients (8 with cadaver kidneys) were found to have VUR and underwent this procedure as an outpatient. All had negative Contigen skin test Of 7 female patients, 4 had grade 2 and 3 had grade 3 VUR. Both male patients had grade 2 VUR. Of these one had simultaneous Kidney-pancreas and another had double renal grafts placed in same fossa with VUR detected in only one kidney. Technique: First, cystoscopy is performed and an angled tip glide wireis passed through a double port bridge into the transplant ureteric orifice with the help of Torque Viceunder fluoroscopic control. This helps straighten and align the intramural ureter with the cystoscope. Sometimes it may be necessary to put pressure in the suprapubic area. Using syringe adapters set stabilizes the injection syringe and the long endoscopic injection needle is primed with Contigen to avoid injecting air. Using transurethral needle sheath for support, the needle is advanced through a point just next to the orifice, parallel to the guide wire into the intramural subureteric area. With steady slow pullout of the needle, approximately 2 to 3 ccs of collagen is injected in the subureteric space. After this an immediate on-table cystogram is performed. If reflux is still visible more Contigen is injected. If there is a concern about causing ureteral obstruction, a 7 X 16 double J ureteral stent is placed immediately as Contigen tends to mold around the stent and thus relieve obstruction. 2 male and 4 female patients required a single treatment and 3 female patients required 2 or more treatments. One of these eventually required ureteroneocystostomy. All patients have remained obstruction or recurrent UTI free after their last treatment with a median follow up of over 1 year. In conclusion, this is a simple outpatient procedure, which can help prevent further damage to the transplanted kidney, by preventing VUR related recurrent urinary tract infections and also may help avoid open surgery in majority of the patients. Background and Purpose: Prophylaxis with lamivudine (LAM) and hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) is critical to liver transplantation in patients with chronic hepatitis B (HBV). HBV-HIV co-infected patients present a particular challenge, because LAM is widely prescribed for HIV and LAM-resistant HBV develops in 70% of patients. The availability of tenofovir and adefovir as alternatives for LAM-resistant HBV provides an option for post-transplant HBV prophylaxis. We examined the posttransplant course of five HIV-HBV co-infected patients with specific focus on control of HIV and HBV infections. Methods: From 4/01 to 9/03, five HIV-HBV co-infected patients underwent liver transplantation Four patients presented for transplant with LAM-resistant HBV infection (defined by >1 log inc in HBV DNA on LAM therapy). A second nucleoside analogue was added pre-transplant in 4 patients and all but one had undetectable HBV DNA. All patients received HBIG 10,000 units IV interoperatively, then daily for 7days, then monthly. After 12 months post-transplantation, HBIG doses were reduced to 2500-5000 IU monthly to maintain anti-HBs titers >200 IU/L. All recipients concurrently received LAM and tenofovir/adefovir as part of their anti-HBV therapy. Immunosuppression consisted of neoral, cellcept, and prednisone in all patients. Results: With a mean follow up of 437 days, all pts are alive with functioning grafts and normal LFTs. There have been no episodes of acute rejection or graft losses. All pts were transplanted with HIV VL<1000meq/ml. No pts experienced HIV viremia and all have VL <75. CD4 counts have remained stable. All pts remain HbsAg negative and anti-HBs positive post-LT on prophylaxis with HBIG, LAM, and tenofovir or adefovir. One pt developed polymicrobial sinisutis resolved with antibiotics and surgical drainage. Conclusions: Patients with HIV-HBV coinfection may successfully undergo liver transplantation without progression of viral disease or opportunistic infections, even in the setting of lamuvidine resistance. Combination therapy using of nucleos/tide analogues and HBIG is highly effective in the prevention of HBV recurrence posttransplantation. There was no deterioration in HIV control or opportunistic infections. These results support liver transplantation as an effective treatment for HIV-HBV coinfected patients with end-stage liver disease. Valganciclovir provides ineffective prophylaxis against CMV infection in liver transplant recipients? Introduction: CMV infection is the commonest viral infection after solid organ transplant transplantation leading to significant morbidity and mortality. Ganciclovir has been proven to be effective to prevent and treat CMV infection. Recently Valganciclovir (Valgan; Gannciclovir Hydrochloride) has been found to have significantly better absorption compared to gannciclovir (450 mg valgan absorption is equivalent to 3 gm oral ganciclovir absorption and 900 mg valgan equivalent to 5mg/kg intravenous ganciclovir) and has been suggested as prophylaxis for prevention of CMV infection after solid organ transplantation. Aim of the present study is to examine the efficacy of valgan prophylaxis after primary liver transplantation. Introduction: Ischemic type biliary lesions (ITBL) are a major complication following orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). In many cases re-OLT is indicated. Multiple factors have been claimed to be reasonable for ITBL; here we present a new immunological risk factor: CC-Chemokines play a key role in the recruitment of leukocytes during ischemia-reperfusion damage and acute rejection. Therefore the CC-chemokine-receptor 5 (CCR5) and its functionless CCR5-delta-32-polymorphism (CCR5d32) Biliary complications are a serious cause of morbidity and graft dysfunction after orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). Ischemia and reperfusion play an important role in the occurrence of bile duct injury. Animal studies have indicated that administration of (hydrophobic) bile salts can seriously amplify preservation injury of the biliary tree. Bile salts have potent detergent properties and their cytotoxic effects are antagonized in normal bile by phospholipids. The role of endogenous bile salt secretion and changes in bile composition on the occurrence of bile duct injury, however, has not been studied before. We investigated changes in the secretion rate of bile salts and phospholipids after human OLT and correlated these with biochemical markers of bile duct injury. In addition, expression of bile salt uptake (NTCP, Na+ -dependent taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide) and secretion (BSEP, bile salt export pump) systems, as well as the phospholipid translocator (MDR3, multidrug resistance protein 3), was studied. Three sequential biopsies were taken from liver grafts in 28 patients: at the end of cold storage, 3 hours after reperfusion, and 1 week after OLT. Blood and bile samples were collected daily until 13 days after OLT. Serum concentrations of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and γ-glutamyltransferase (γ-GT), as well as the release of these enzymes into the bile, were used as markers of bile duct cell injury. After transplantation, bile salt secretion restored rapidly, whereas phospholipid secretion increased at a slower rate, resulting in a significantly higher bile salt / phospholipid ratio in bile formed on day 1 compared to day 13. In parallel with this, NTCP and BSEP mRNA levels increased significantly after OLT, whereas MDR3 mRNA levels remained unchanged, in comparison with gene expression before OLT or in normal control livers. Bile duct cell injury, as reflected by ALP and γ-GT release into the bile, correlated significantly with bile salt secretion. Conclusion: Bile salt secretion is rapidly restored after OLT and is disproportionately higher than the initial secretion of phospholipids. This results in the formation of bile with a relatively high bile salt concentration, which is cytotoxic and was found to correlate with bile duct cell injury. These findings suggest that endogenous bile salts have a role in pathogenesis of intrahepatic bile duct damage after OLT. Renal dysfunction in non-renal transplant recipients has gained major attention recently (NEJM 349:931, 2003) . We used data from MOST, a global, observational trial, to investigate the evolution of renal function and the risk factors for renal impairment after liver transplantation. Methods: MOST collects data from liver transplant (LT) recipients receiving a Neoralbased immunosuppressive regimen under conditions of normal clinical practice, using an internet-based data collection tool. Out of 2304 patients transplanted in 12 countries between 1985 and 2003 and enrolled into MOST (May 2001 -August 2003 , GFR at one year was available for 1061 and 1 or more subsequent GFR values for 917 patients. Subpopulations were defined by HCV status (pos 584, neg 1124), and by Neoral dose at year one (<3mg/kg/d, 434; 3-5mg/kg/d, 422; >5mg/kg/d, 96). Yearly GFR-loss was calculated as difference between the most recent available GFR-value and GFR at year one, divided by the number of years. A yearly loss exceeding 2.5ml/min was classified as rapid GFR-decline. Detailed data at 1, 3, 6 and 12 months post transplantation were collected in 711 patients. These were subdivided by GFR at month 1 (≥60, 30-59, or ≤29mL/min) to assess pretransplant renal function in each of these subgroups. Results are expressed as median with interquartile ranges (IQR). Results: A sharp decrease in GFR from 88(67-110) to 71(54-91) mL/min was observed within the first month after liver transplantation. Patients with a GFR ≥60mL/min at month 1 had a median pretransplant GFR of 97 mL/min, while those with a GFR of 30-59mL/min at one month showed 68 mL/min pretransplant. For all later timepoints up to 10 years post LT, median GFR was at 68 -73 mL/min and individual GFR-loss was 0.6 (IQR -2.3 -+3.9) ml/min/year. HCV-pos patients had significantly lower GFR than HCV-neg patients throughout year 1 (at month 12, 64 vs. 74 mL/min, p=0.002) and at year 3 (67 vs. 73, p=0.009) and 5 (67 vs. 73, p=0.005). A low Neoral dose <3mg/kg was given to 48% of the patients with subsequent rapid GFR-decline, and to 38% of the patients with stable GFR. Conclusions: A decline in renal function was mainly observed within 1 month post LT. Neoral doses below 3 mg/kg were not associated with more stable renal function. HCVpos patients had significantly lower GFR than HCV-neg patients. Optimal immunosuppressive strategies for this particularly vulnerable subgroup of LT recipients may be defined on the basis of accumulating prospective follow-up within MOST. Jun-ichiro Sageshima, 1 Background: Recurrence of hepatitis C (HCV) infection after liver transplantation (LT) is universal. Current treatment option has limited efficacy for this disease, and reduction of baseline immunosuppression (ISP) may increase a risk of rejection after LT. In view of possible T cell mediated graft injury after HCV infection, suppression of the activated cytotoxic T lymphocytes has a potential role of the recurrent HCV treatment. Aim: To study the efficacy and the safety of a combination regimen with ISP reduction, antiviral therapy, and IL2R-Ab for recurrent HCV hepatitis. Patients and Methods: Thirty-six recurrent HCV patients were treated with this regimen between June 2000 and October 2003. Median follow-up was 9.7 months. Diagnosis of recurrence was made by elevated liver enzymes, liver biopsy, and serum HCV-RNA titers. Maintenance steroid was discontinued and tacrolimus was decreased to the target trough level of 5-7 ng/mL. Interferon and ribavirin were used for antiviral therapy. IL2R-Ab was given for 14 weeks (median). Results: The treatment was initiated from 1.1 to 100.9 months (median 15.7 months) after LT. Twenty-one patients were cholestatic (bilirubin ≥ 8 mg/ dl) and 15 patients were non-cholestatic (bilirubin < 5 mg/dl). Eight cholestatic patients (38%) and 13 non-cholestatic patients (87%) are alive with biochemical improvement. Pre-treatment biopsy revealed superimposed acute rejection in 72% and chronic rejection in 14% of the patients. Histological changes and HCV-RNA levels were inconclusive. There was no flare-up of HCV infection after treatment. All 3 retransplanted patients, 2 for chronic rejections and 1 for recurrent hepatitis C, are alive at 12 to 22 months after retransplantation. Two patients died of infection at 2 and 3 months after treatment, and one patient died of cancer at 18 months after treatment. Conclusion: These results suggest that cholestatic recurrent HCV has poor prognosis. The majority of noncholestatic recurrent HCV patients responds to this regimen. This treatment does not trigger HCV flare-up. Retransplantation is a reasonable option in selected recurrent HCV patients. Background: The advent of living donor liver transplantation (LDLT), partial liver transplants (splits), domino liver transplantation, and the MELD upgrade for patients with HCC has resulted in the potential for "fast-tracking" of patients with HCC. We hypothesized that as a result, patients with more aggressive tumor biology, who would normally drop off the list due to tumor progression, might receive an accelerated transplant, thus increasing the recurrence rate. Aims: To analyze our experience with liver transplantation (OLT) in patients with HCC to determine whether accelerated transplantation has resulted in an increased in HCC recurrence. Methods: The 315 OLT which were performed from 1995-2003 were divided into two eras and compared on the basis of tumor stage. In era 1 (9/94 to 2/98) only full-sized OLT were done. In era 2 (2/98 to 6/03), LDLT, split, and domino transplants were performed in addition to full sized cadaveric OLT. In 2/02, the MELD system was adopted by UNOS, giving patients with HCC higher allocation priority for organs. We classified all transplants as either "accelerated" or "regular" using both the type and date of transplant. All patients have at least 6 months of follow-up. Results: 74 liver transplants were performed on patients with HCC. Among these patients, 59 had a pre-operative diagnosis of malignancy and 15 had incidental HCC. In era one, 13 patients were transplanted for HCC, 10 were ≤T2 and 3 were ≥ T3. There was one recurrence in a patient with a T3 lesion. In era two, there were 61 patients transplanted for HCC, 47 patients had ≤ T2 disease and 14 patients had ≥ T3. In this group, there were 9 recurrences (5 ≤ T2 and 4 ≥ T3). 41 of 61 patients in era 2 received accelerated transplant . There were 9 recurrences in the accelerated transplant group (LDLT-4, splits-2, MELD-2, domino-1). Interestingly, 5 of these recurrences occurred in patients with ≤ T2 tumors. There were no recurrences in the non-accelerated transplant patients during era 2. Experimentally it was proven that the brain death of the donor has a significant impact on graft quality. No data about the correlation between organ specific cytokine expression and the corresponding serum protein levels in human organ donors are available yet. Furthermore it is unknown, wether the upregulation of proinflammatory cytokines can be reduced by donor treatment and therfor the organ quality optimized. We investigated the expression pattern of cytokines comparing serum (n=53) and tissue expression (n=25) in human brain dead donors. As controls served living donors (n=25). Additionally 41 donors were treated with steroids before organ harvesting (250 mg initial, afterwards 100 mg/h until laparotomy). Hepatic tissue samples were taken immediately after laparotomy of the donor. Transcription rates of tissue cytokines were assessed by RT-PCR. (IL-6, IL-10, CD3, TGFb , TNFa , BAG, HO-1, Mip1a ). Serum samples were gathered after declaration of brain death and before laparotomy. The assessment of serum cytokines was performed by CBA-kits. The transcription of pro-inflammatory cytokines is increased significantly in brain dead donor livers compared to living donor grafts (p<0.005). Donor treatment with steroids lead to significantly decreased tissue and serum expression of proinflammatory cytokines (p<0.01) and revealed comparable levels to living donors. Tissue levels of cytokines (IL-6, IL-10) correlated strongly with serum levels of corresponding proteines. Serum protein levels of proinflammatory cytokines are a valuable and easy accessible marker for defining the immunological graft quality. Our data suggest a beneficial effect of antiinflammatory donor treatment in brain dead organ donors. Standardized donor treatment regimens should be established. Background: The number of liver transplants from non-heart-beating donors (NHBD) has recently increased in the United States, despite the fact that the patient and graft survival rates are inferior to those from heart-beating donors (HBD). The objectives of this study are to evaluate the transplant outcome from NHBD and the impact of this procedure on the donor pool. Methods: From Jan, 1994 to Sep, 2003, 355 hepatic allografts from NHBDs were reported to the UNOS. For comparison, we selected 39,094 heart-beating cadaveric and 2,124 living donor (LD) liver transplants during the same period. Partial or split-liver transplants from cadaveric donors were excluded from this study. The log-rank test was used for comparison of two survival curves. Results: Patient and graft survival of NHBD liver transplants were statistically significantly inferior to those of HBDs (P=0.01 for patient and P<0.001 graft survival) or LDs (P<0.001 for both patient and graft survival). Six percent (n=22) of hepatic grafts from NHBDs were lost due to primary graft failure compared with 4% of HBD (P=0.06) and 4% LD (P=0.06). Three percent (n=10) of grafts from NHBDs lost resulted from biliary tract complications compared with 1% of HBD (P<0.001) and 1% LD (P=0.03). Donor warm ischemia time (DWIT) longer than 30 minutes or cold ischemia time (CIT) longer than 10 hours had a deleterious effect on graft survival when compared with shorter DWIT (≤30 min, P=0.05) or CIT groups (≤10 hrs, P=0.03). We divided NHBD liver transplants into low-risk grafts with DWIT ≤ 30 min and CIT ≤ 10 hrs (n=190) and high-risk grafts, n=166. Significantly superior graft survival was noticed in the low-risk group (84% and 79% at 1-and 3-yr, respectively) compared with the high-risk group (60% and 52% at 1-and 3-yrs, respectively, P=0.03). Seven primary graft failures (4%) were observed among the low-risk NHBD group. One-and 3-year patient survival of the low-risk NHBD group were 84% and 79%, respectively, compared with 85% and 78% of HBD group (P=0.54). Graft survival of the low-risk NHBD group (75% at 1-and 65% 3-yr) was not statistically significantly inferior to LD group (78% at 1-and 71% 3-yr, P=0.06). Inevitable DWIT and subsequent cold ischemia-reperfusion injury may result in higher incidence of primary graft failures and biliary tract complications of NHBD liver transplants. However, transplant outcomes can be improved by shortening the DWIT and CIT of NHBDs. Conclusion: NHBD may be used to increase the cadaveric donor liver pool especially when those grafts can be performed in a setting that is low risk. Aim: To assess clinical outcomes using livers from controlled NHBD in the era of organ shortage with report on survival and complications on the largest single center experience with up to10 years of follow-up. Patients and Methods: 55 liver transplants performed in 54 patients from NHBD between 1994-2003. Donors ranged between 4-68 years old (mean 41±16), with arrest to crossclamp time of 6±4.7 minutes. Organs were flushed with Viaspan (41) or HTK (14) solutions using aortic cannulation. During this period 26 livers were discarded for documented anatomic and histologic reasons. The age of the recipients ranged from 27-69 years (51±10). Since mid-2002, we accepted NHBD livers recovered by other programs. 13 livers were imported (three transcontinental) and 9 transplanted. Results: Cold ischemia time was 358-862 (578±149) minutes. Primary Non-Function (PNF) occurred in 6 patients (11%). Four retransplanted and two survived, two other died of sepsis. Hepatic artery thrombosis (HAT) occurred in 6 (11%) patients; three retransplanted and one survived; two died without re-transplantation and one survived with reconstruction. Biliary strictures or leaks were seen in 10 (18%) patients which four were irreversible (two required retransplantation, one died before re-transplantation and one re-listed). Nine patients were re-transplantaed for HAT (3), PNF (4) or biliary complications (2) . Livers from NHBD were used to re-transplant 5 emergency patients and three survived. Of the 8 livers recovered from donors 60 years and older, only 2 were utilized -one died of PNF and the other experienced HAT. Overall mortality in the group was 13 patients with 1-, 5-, and 10-year patient and graft survival of 78%, 76%, 76%, and 69%, 67% and 67% respectively. Patient survival in the periods 93-97 and 98-2003 were 45% and 85% respectively. Organs procured by other programs did not show any difference in function or complications. Conclusion: The rate of PNF and major biliary complications was significantly higher than organs from heartbeating donors, leading to lower early graft survival, although long-term survival was not different. Better management of these potential donors have resulted a better outcome. Thus, controlled NHBD remain an acceptable source of organs in the era of organ shortage. Given the shortage of deceased donor livers for transplantation, new sources of livers must be sought. Livers from DCD donors have been used since 1993, but there is some reluctance to use them due to concerns about short and long term outcomes. Of 30,123 adult recipients of primary deceased donor liver only transplants in U.S. between 1/1/ 1998 -6/30/2002, 710 (2.4%) were from the DCD donors and 29,413 from donors after brain death (DBD). Patient and graft survival associated with use of DCD livers was compared to those of recipients of DBD donors. The Kaplan-Meier patient survival curve estimates are shown in the Figure. Patient survival did not differ significantly between DCD and DBD recipients (DCD: 93%, 84%, and 73% vs. DBD: 95%, 87%, and 76% at 30 days and 1 and 4 years respectively; p = 0.17). Graft survival was slightly but significantly less good with DCD donors (DCD: 90%, 76%, and 64% vs. DBD: 92%, 83%, and 69% at 30 days and 1 and 4 years respectively; p = 0.02). Cox proportional hazard models showed no significant difference in patient survival by deceased donor type after correction for recipient creatinine, bilirubin, age, and patient status at transplantation, and cold ischemia time (p = 0.08). The Cox analysis confirmed an increased hazard of graft loss (rel risk 1.5, p = 0.001) with use of DCD livers. Although cold ischemia time is an independent predictor of both patient and graft survival, there was no interaction between these two variables (p = 0.34 and 0.08 respectively). Similarly, there was no interaction between donor liver source and patient Status 1 at the time of transplant (p = 0.40 and 0.19, for patient and graft survival, respectively). There is no apparent need for an altered allocation method for livers from DCD donors. Thus our study demonstrates reasonably good short and long term outcomes associated with the use of livers from DCD donors and supports increased efforts to retrieve these livers. PURPOSE: Although 1 group reported short-term success with older controlled nonheart-beating donor (CNHBD) liver transplantation (LTX), several groups have published that they do not use livers from CNHBDs >45 yr old; there are concerns that older donor livers are prone to warm ischemic damage, especially excessive post-LTX biliary complications. METHODS: We reviewed the long-term experience with all CNHBD livers that we procured and transplanted, and compared results for older and younger CNHBDs (≥50 vs <50 yr old). NHBDs underwent withdrawal of support in the O.R. Organs were rapidly recovered without premortem cannulation techniques. RESULTS: CNHBDs provided 20/353 (6%) of our cadaver LTXs (8/96 -9/03). CNHBD recipients have f/u of 40±28 months (15 pts have >2 yr f/u). 7/20 CNHBDs (35%) were older donors (56±6 yr; r 50-66) and 13/20 were younger CNHBDs (23±8 yr; r 11-39). There were no other significant differences between the baseline characteristics of older and younger CNHBDs or the respective recipients: Recently, different programs have been using Non-Heart Beating Donors (NHBD) as an option to decrease the gap between organ demand and supply. Although excellent results have been reported in renal transplants using NHBD organs, the use of livers is still limited, due to warm ischemia (WI), biliary tree injury and inadequate organ assessment. Warm blood reperfusion using ECMO can be a suitable way to reduce WI in organs from NHBD, allowing to determinate hepatic flow characteristics and bile production, facilitating the assessment of organ viability. Methods: This work evaluates the use of warm blood veno-arterial ECMO reperfusion in NHBD swine. Systemic and hepatic hemodynamics, bile, urine, and mixed venous blood were measured. After baseline data collection, 10kU heparin was given intravenously followed by 1g KCl to elicit cardiac arrest (CA). ECMO was started after 30 or 60 minutes of CA and kept running for 120 min. Results: One-way RM ANOVA with Turkey test analysis was used within a group. Two-way ANOVA was used between groups. ECMO can restore venous SO 2 and pH in both groups; the values were close to baseline in the 30 minutes CA group. Also, in this group, bile production was >65% from baseline early during reperfusion and its value was lower in the longer CA group <55% (p<0.001). AST was doubled at the end of ECMO support in the 60 minutes CA group. (p<0.05) Conclusion: In this pre-heparinized NHBD swine model, ECMO support restores liver perfusion, oxygenation and bile production after 60 minutes of CA in an efficient fashion. Quantification and analysis of bile production could be a determinant of liver function during ECMO support, and it may be a predictor of graft viability before transplantation. Future studies that involve liver transplantation are required to determine the protective effect of warm-preconditioning using ECMO support in the NHBD. Everolimus is an investigational proliferation signal inhibitor shown to have potent immunosuppressive effects and excellent kidney allograft outcome in adults when combined with cyclosporine microemulsion (CsA-Me). Preliminary data in a de novo pediatric patient cohort were promising but information about longer-term outcome is necessary to evaluate the safety, tolerability and efficacy of everolimus in combination with CsA-Me and prednisone. The average starting dose of everolimus was 0.8mg/ m²bid (1.6mg/m²/ day). A total of 19 patients were enrolled and stratified by age into 2 groups: 10 patients < 10 years old [Group I] and 9 patients 10-16 years old [Group II]. The mean ages at the time of transplant in Group I and II were 5.7 and 13.2 years respectively. At 24M, 5 patients (50%) in Group I and 7 patients (78%) in Group II were continuing to receive everolimus. Only 3 patients, 2 in Group I, discontinued everolimus because of an adverse event: one due to a urine leak and a second, with an uncomplicated EBV infection, due to an investigator's decision to reduce immunosuppression. The third discontinuation occurred when a patient in Group II experienced a severe acute vascular rejection. There were no graft losses or deaths. Overall, 5 of the 19 patients (26.3%) experienced a biopsy-proven acute rejection episode (BPARE). One patient in Group I and 4 in Group II had BPAREs over the observation period. At 24M, the mean average daily doses of everolimus in Groups I and II were 1.45 and 1.55 mg/m²/day respectively; doses of CsA-Me were 4.7 and 2.3 mg/kg/day and doses of prednisone were 0.1 and 0.2 mg/kg respectively. Adverse events or infections included lymphoceles (1 in Group I and 2 in Group II), urinary tract infections/pyelonephritis (6 in Group I and 3 in Group II), hypercholesterolemia (2 in Group I and 1 in group II) and hypertriglyceridemia (1 in Group I and 2 in group II). As E interferes with testosterone synthesis in preclinical models, blood samples, to obtain additional information relative to endocrine issues, were collected from 9 patients. Testosterone (males only) and FSH and LH showed no abnormal trends when corrected for patients' pubertal development. We conclude that everolimus at a starting dose of 0.8-mg/m 2 bid is well tolerated in pediatric patients through 2 years post-transplant, with good patient and graft survival. Three months post transplant, she has a stable creatinine of 0.9 mg/dl but ongoing heavy proteinuria with random urinary protein:creatinine ratio of 3. Serial flow cytometry was performed on all 3 patients. The patient who recieved only Campath-1H has an absolute lymphocyte count that remain less than 50% of baseline at 7 months post transplant. In addition, CD3, CD4, CD8 and CD20 remain less than 50% of baseline. Conclusions: 1) Use of Campath-1H does not prevent recurrence of FSGS, 2) As seen in adults, lack of calcineurin inhibition when using Campath-1H may increase the risk of antibody-mediated rejection and 3) Prolonged lymphocyte depletion remains even after a single dose of Campath-1H. Recent improvements in IS protocols have resulted in decreased acute rejection (AR). The goals of P-minimization protocols have been to eliminate P-related side effects without increasing AR. However, the concern is that late steroid withdrawal has led to increased AR, chronic rejection (CR), and graft loss. We studied outcome of 412 recipients treated with P discontinuation on POD 6 (296 LD of which 112 were LURD, 116 CAD; 61% male; 91% Caucasian; mean age (±SD)=47±14 yrs; 379 primary, 33 retx). Of CAD, 34% had peak PRA >10, 21% >50; 16% had DGF. IS consisted of polyclonal Ab (Thymoglobulin) for 5 days (1st dose intraop); P (Solu-Medrol 500 mg in OR, 1 mg/kg on POD 1, 0.25 mg/kg on POD 2 & 3; 0.25 mg/kg on POD 4 & 5) calcineurin inhibitor; and either MMF or sirolimus. Actuarial 4-yr patient survival was 95%; graft survival, 92% (Table 1) ; at 4 yrs, 89% are free of biopsy-proven AR, 95% free of biopsy-proven CR. Serum creatinine level (±SD) at 1 yr was 1.5 (.4); 2 yrs, 1.7 (.8); 3 yrs, 1.6 (.5); 4 yrs, 1.7 (.8). There were no differences between LD and CAD. Of the 412, 27 (6.6%) have had AR ( % LD; % CAD) (19 mild, 6 mod, 1 severe, 1 C4d). The most common cause of graft loss (n=7) has been death with function; there have been 2 losses to CR, 0 to AR. Average weight, cholesterol, and triglycerides are unchanged from pretx (Table 2 ) but an increased number are taking lipid lowering meds.; 6.5% have developed CMV, 3% nonmelanotic skin cancer, 1.5% PTDM, 1% fractures, 0.5% cataracts, 0.25% PTLD, 0% osteonecrosis. Of the kidney recips, 80% remain P free. Common reasons for restarting P are rejection and side effects of other IS. We conclude that Prelated side effects can be minimized in a protocol without maintence P; AR and CR rates are low, and 4-year outcome is excellent. Renal function, measured via serum creatinine and creatinine clearance, was compared after 48 months. Patient and graft survival, acute rejection episodes, malignancies, blood pressure, and lipid profile were also recorded. All analyses were performed on an intention-to-treat (ITT) basis. RESULTS: At 5 years, patient survival was similar in both groups (93% for MMF and 95% for CsA-MMF). Graft survival was 88% in the MMF cohort and 92% for CsA-MMF. Seven MMF patients experienced acute rejection episodes compared to 1 CsA-MMF patient during the 4-year FU (p=0.0263). Nine grafts were lost to chronic rejection in the MMF group versus 3 in the CsA-MMF cohort. In the MMF arm, there were no differences between rejection-free patients (n=60) and patients with acute or chronic rejection episodes (n=14) with regards to MMF or steroid doses. Over the 5-year total study period, ANCOVA, using least-square mean values, found that the MMF group showed a trend towards improved serum creatinine (127.3 vs 135.5 µmol/L) and creatinine clearance (73.3 vs 65.7 mL/min). CsA withdrawal was associated with numerically but not significantly lower total cholesterol, lower systolic and diastolic blood pressure, and fewer malignancies. CONCLUSIONS: Withdrawal of CsA from an MMF-containing immunosuppressive regimen resulted in a sustained but modest increased risk of acute rejection episodes. However, 5-year graft and patient survival rates were similar, and CsA withdrawal had beneficial effects on renal function, lipid profile, blood pressure, and tumour rate. Introduction. Steroids have been included in most immunosuppressive regimens after renal transplantation, but are feared for their side effects. In a large prospective randomized multi-center study we investigated whether it is feasible to withdraw steroids at three days after transplantation in renal transplant recipients treated with a monoclonal interleukin-2 receptor antagonist containing immunosuppressive regimen. In the control group prednisone was tapered to zero in four months after renal transplantation as the best available alternative to limit the side effects of corticosteroids. Methods. A total of 364 patients were randomized for two treatment regimens. All patients received tacrolimus and MMF. The daclizumab group received two doses of daclizumab (1 mg/kg) and for the first three days 100 mg prednisolone (daclizumab group n=186), with steroid-free treatment thereafter. In the control group patients were treated with prednisone for 16 weeks.(controls n=178). Results. The incidence of biopsy-confirmed acute rejection at twelve months was not different between the daclizumab group (15%) and the controls (14%) (95% confidence interval of difference: -6 to +8%, NS). Graft survival at twelve months was comparable in the two groups (daclizumab group: 91%; controls: 90 %). Mean arterial blood pressure and serum lipids were temporary lower in the daclizumab group compared with controls, but the differences were no longer statistically significant at 12 months. During the first 12 months new-onset diabetes mellitus, defined as the institution of treatment with glucose lowering medication, developed in 12 of 186 patients (7%) in the daclizumab group, and in 21 of 178 patients in the control group (NS). Diabetes persisted until the end of follow-up in 11 and 17 patients respectively. The immunosuppressive regimen of the daclizumab group was associated with increased costs. In conclusion, with the use of anti-IL-2Rα induction and daily therapy with tacrolimus and MMF it is feasible to withdraw steroids at three days after renal transplantation. CNI based immunosuppression with steroids and MMF or SLR has been the mainstay in kidney transplantation. We carried out a randomized prospective study to compare the efficacy of MMF and SLR in CNI based steroid free immunosuppression with regards to delayed graft function(DGF), acute rejection(AR), serum creatinine(SC), creatinine clearance(CCl), side effects and one year patient and graft survival. Protocol biopsies were completed at 1, 6 and 12 months to study the incidence of subclinical acute rejection(SCAR) and chronic allograft nephropathy(CAN). 84 recipients were treated with MMF and 71 with SLR. All recipients were given basiliximab induction. Intravenous steroid was given for 2 days, 250 mg on day 0 and 125 mg on day 1 and then totally discontinued. Tacrolimus or cyclosporine was used with equal frequency in both the groups. Recipient demography was comparable in both groups. Marginal donors were significantly higher in SLR group. Table1 shows marginal donors, DGF, AR, SCAR, CAN, SC and CCl at 1 year in the 2 groups. The incidence of complications due to SLR and MMF are shown in Table 2 This data shows that in CNI based steroid free immunosuppression, adjunct therapy with SLR results in a trend for lower incidence of AR, SCAR and CAN in protocol biopsies compared to MMF treated recipients. SLR treated patients tend to have lower hemoglobin levels and higher lipid levels at 1 year. Longer term follow up is required to assess the effect of lower AR, SCAR and CAN in SLR group on the outcome of 5 year patient and graft survival compared to MMF group. We studied outcome of a P minimization protocol (P stopped on POD 6) in 113 higher risk recips (retx, PRA>10, DGF, Afr Am, or Native Am). A 2nd analysis was done substituting PRA >50 (n = 89). All recips received polyclonal Ab (Thymoglobulin) for 5 days (1 st dose in OR), P until POD 5, CNI, and either MMF of sirolimus. Study 1 -Outcome for the 2 subgroups is shown (Table 1) and is similar to outcome of our total P-free group (n=413). Study 2 -We then did univariate analyses of AR risk in subgroups (recipient race; peak PRA (<10 vs 10-100; 0-50 vs >50); DGF (Y vs N); primary tx vs retx; LD vs CAD. For these subgroups thought to be at increased risk, 3 yr AR-free GS was: Afr Am, 92%; Native Am, 80%; peak PRA >10, 83%; peak PRA > 50, 73%; DGF, 92%; retx, 70%; CAD, 88%. Significant differences were primary vs retx (p< .0001), peak PRA<10 (vs ≥10) (p<. 03), and peak PRA≥50 (vs <50) (p< .0003). Multivariate analysis (Table 2) similarly showed retx and high peak PRA to be significant risk factors for AR. Study 3 -We then asked if we were harming the retx subgroup by minimizing P. We compared AR risk in these patients with a historical cohort (n = 152) transplanted from 1996-1999 and receiving polyclonal Ab, CNI, MMF, and long-term P. There was no increased risk of AR in the current cohort (vs historical controls) (AR-free@ 3 years, 71% vs 70%; p=. 6), and there was a trend toward increased GS (90% vs 81%; p=0.1) and PS (100% vs 89%; p=. 08) in the minimization group. Conclusion: For patients immunosuppressed with a P minimization protocol, retx and high PRA were risk factors for AR. However, AR was not increased compared to historical controls receiving Pbased immunosuppression and there was a trend toward increased graft and patient survival with P minimization. In this prospective, randomized clinical trial, we examined the clinical benefits of steroid avoidance following renal transplantation. In order to assess therapeutic efficacy and improve outcomes, we performed protocol biopsies at 1, 6 and 12 months to assess intra-allograft events and guide immunosuppressive therapy. Patients were randomized into two groups: early steroid withdrawal (SW, n=27) or steroid control (SC, n=26). Demographic characteristics were equivalent in both groups except that SC patients had fewer HLA mismatches (SC 2.7 vs. SW 3.9, p=0.02). Both groups received Thymoglobulin (Total dose: SW=3.4±1.2, SC=3.3±1.1 mg/kg), tacrolimus (TAC), mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and steroids (250 mg/iv day 0 and 125 mg/iv day 1). The SC group received prednisone starting at 30 mg/d on day 2, tapered to 5 mg/d by day 30 and continued indefinitely. The SW group received prednisone 30 mg/d on day 2 that was tapered by 5 mg/d and discontinued on day 7. Clinical rejections occurred in 3 SW patients (11%) (Grade 1A, 1B and Borderline) and 3 SC patients (12%) (3 Borderline) all of which responded to steroids (p=NS). At one year, renal function was well preserved in both groups (SC 75.1 ± 25.4 vs. SW 76.7 ± 30.7 ml/min p=NS). In the SC group, 7 of 45 protocol biopsies showed borderline rejection with the remaining being normal. One patient was treated with steroids. In the SW group, 4 of 46 protocol biopsies showed rejection (3 borderline, 1 Grade 2A) one of which required a change in therapy. Five biopsies revealed unsuspected tacrolimus toxicity and 1 showed cholesterol emboli necessitating a change in immunosuppression in 3 patients. At one year, 82%of SC and 86% of SW biopsies showed absent or minimal fibrosis (p=NS). Fewer patients in the SW arm had significant bone loss at 1 mo. (SC 61% vs. SW 14% p=0.007) or required lipid lowering therapy (SC 89% vs. SW 22%, p=0.004). Thus, a short course of Thymoglobulin induction combined with TAC and MMF prevented clinical and subclinical rejection allowing for safe steroid withdrawal without increasing the risk of graft fibrosis. SW patients enjoyed equivalent graft function with less bone loss and hyperlipidemia. Only 5% of protocol biopsies identified patients requiring a change in therapy. When conducting clinical trials of minimizing immunosuppression, protocol biopsies provide an additional assessment of safety and efficacy. Introduction: Polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs) are the principle cellular mediator of inflammation in cardiac allografts following reperfusion. Results from this laboratory have demonstrated a significant attenuation in PMN infiltration into allografts by antagonizing CXCR2, the receptor for KC and MIP-2. The goal of the current study was to test the role of early neutrophil mediated inflammation on the establishment of allograft acceptance via a co-stimulatory blockade strategy. Methods: C57BL/6 (H-2b) mice, BALB/c (H-2d), and BALB/c (H-2d) CXCR2-/-mice received heterotopic A/J (H-2a) cardiac allografts. C57BL/6 mice were treated with CXCR2 antiserum or a control goat serum on days 0, 2, 5, and 8 post-transplant. Wildtype animals were treated with anti-Ly6G (RB6-8C5) on days -1, 0, and 1 and anti-CD40L (MR1) on days 0, 1, and 3 post-transplant. Results: Treatment with CXCR2 antiserum significantly delayed cardiac allograft rejection to 15-22 days compared to 7-8 days in control treated animals. This result was also observed in CXCR2-/-recipients. T cell priming in CXCR2-/-animals, measured with IFN-g ELISPOT at days 4, 5 and 7, was identical in magnitude and tempo to wildtype animals. However, immunohistology at day 5 post-transplant demonstrated a significant delay in T cell infiltration. PMN infiltration peaks at 24 hours postreperfusion in control animals, however there was a near absence of PMN infiltration and graft parenchymal tissue architecture was preserved in both experimental groups. At this early time intra-graft cytokine and chemokine expression was significantly reduced in both experimental groups. Administration of anti-CD40L to cardiac allograft recipients delayed rejection to day 25-30. Short term attenuation of PMN mediated effects with anti-Ly6G treatment at the time of MR1 administration prolonged cardiac allograft survival beyond 100 days. Conclusions: The early inflammatory response to cardiac allografts recruits PMNs to the graft site within hours following reperfusion. Antagonism of early PMN mediated effects delays the infiltration of T cells and delays rejection. The establishment of a window period of attenuated inflammation prior to administration of co-stimulatory blockade prolonged allograft survival indefinitely. Such combination strategies may suggest novel methods for protecting transplanted organs and prolonging function. CD134 is a recently identified T cell costimulatory molecule, and like CD154, CD134 is a member of TNF receptor superfamily. Both CD134 and CD154 are not constitutively expressed on resting T cells but they are rapidly induced upon T cell activation. Although individual CD134/CD134L pathway and CD40/CD154 pathway have been shown to play an important role in T cell activation, littler is known about their potential interactions in regulating T cell activation, especially in islet allograft rejection. In the present study, we investigated the individual and collective role of CD134 and CD154 costimulatory pathways in allogeneic immune responses using a murine islet graft model. The expressions of CD154 and CD134 on T cells after stimulation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 showed different kinetics between two molecules. CD154 was expressed after 1 day of stimulation and was more dominant in CD4 T cells. Also, CD154 was down-regulated after 3 days of in-vitro stimulation. However, expression of CD134 persisted even after 5 days of stimulation and was comparable in both CD4 and CD8 T cells. Analysis of CFSE-labeled cells proliferating in the allogeneic hosts demonstrated that while blocking either CD40/CD154 or CD134/CD134L pathway had minimal effect in blocking T cell proliferation in-vivo, blocking the both costimulatory pathways markedly inhibited the in-vivo proliferation of allogeneic T cells. In pancreas islet transplantation model in which the DBA/2 islets were transplanted into C57BL/6 mice rendered diabetic by streptozotocin, islet allograft survival was only prolonged by blocking either the CD134/CD134L pathway (16, 17, 18, 21, 31, 116 days) or the CD40/CD154 pathway (16, 17, 18, 18, >120, >120 days) as compared to control group (MST=13.5 days, n=5). However, consistent with findings in the in-vivo T cell response model, combined blockade of CD40/CD154 and CD134/CD134L pathways produced indefinite islet allograft survival (MST>120 days, n=6). Indeed, C56BL/6 recipients accepted a second donor specific islet allograft but promptly rejected a third party one, demonstrating that a state of donor specific tolerance is induced. Our data demonstrate the CD134 costimulation is critically important in supporting the islet allograft rejection, and blocking CD134 along with CD154 blockade can induce donor-specific islet allograft tolerance. Current consensus is that regulatory allograft tolerance occurs primarily through MHC class II-restricted CD4 T cell reactivity. However, little is known about MHC class Irestricted reactivity in tolerance induction. Thus, the purpose of this study was to determine the role for CD8 T cells versus general MHC class I-restricted antigen presentation in islet allograft tolerance. Methods: Streptozotocin-induced diabetic C57Bl/6 (B6, H-2 b ) controls, C57Bl/6 CD8 deficient (CD8 KO), or MHC class I-deficient C57Bl/6 β2m deficient (β2m KO) recipients were grafted with 450 allogeneic BALB/c (H-2 d ) islets beneath kidney capsule. The efficacy of costimulation blockade (anti-CD154; MR-1 therapy) or adhesion molecule blockade (anti-LFA-1; KBA therapy) was assessed in these models. Some recipients also received anti-NK1.1(HB191) or anti-CD8 (2.43) antibody treatment. Results: Either anti-CD154 or anti-LFA-1 therapy prolonged allograft survival in wild-type B6 recipients, CD8KO recipients, or in anti-CD8 treated B6 recipients treated. However, in β2m KO mice there was a striking abrogation of allograft survival; all treated animals rejected allografts in a tempo similar to untreated controls. These results indicated a requirement for host MHC class I-dependent reactivity that was not due to a classical CD8 T cell. NK cells, NKT cells, or both would fulfill this role. Thus, wildtype B6 mice were depleted NK1.1+ cells with a single dose of anti-NK1.1 one day prior to islet transplantation. Depletion of NK1.1+ cells abrogated graft survival in both anti-CD154 and anti-LFA-1 groups (p<.05) Therapeutic hematopoietic chimerism has the potential to correct many genetic hematological diseases and to eliminate the need for chronic immunosuppressive therapy following organ transplantation. To date, protocols establishing hematopoietic chimerism have required either recipient conditioning or administration of large doses of non-T cell depleted donor bone marrow to facilitate reliable engraftment of donor cells. While encouraging, there are issues that may restrict or possibly prevent the clinical application of these strategies, such as concerns of over-immunosuppression, the increased risk of malignancies from whole body irradiation, or unfeasible donor bone marrow requirements. Our lab has devised an alternative strategy utilizing a single, non-myelosuppressive dose of busulfan (a stem cell selective conditioning agent), costimulation blockade (anti-CD40L and CTLA4-Ig), and readily attainable numbers of T-cell depleted donor bone marrow (as low as 2x10 6 cells), and thus promoting a high-level chimerism and tolerance of allogeneic skin grafts. However, CD40L is found on platelets, and the use of anti-CD40L in human and primate was significantly associated with thromboembolic events. Consequently, we compared the efficacy of inducing chimerism and allogeneic skin graft tolerance between anti-CD40 IgG 1 , anti-CD40 IgG 2b , and anti-CD40L. We found the chimerism and skin graft tolerance was equivalent between anti-CD40 IgG 2b and anti-CD40L (donor chimerism 46.6% and 35.5% at 60 days, respectively). However, the anti-CD40 IgG 1 isotype failed to produce chimerism (1.03% at 60 days) or skin graft tolerance. This was significant in comparison to both anti-CD40L and anti-CD40 IgG 2b , p<0.05. Furthermore, we found that the anti-CD40 IgG 2b isotype and anti-CD40L inhibited or depleted memory B cell colony proliferation at day 21 using a LCMV based memory B cell model (frequency of LCMV memory B cells are less than 1 per 500,000 B cells for each antibody), while anti-CD40 IgG 1 isotype did not deplete memory B cell colony proliferation (frequency of LCMV memory B cell 1 per 39,400 B cells, p<0.05). We conclude that anti-CD40 IgG 2b isotype is as effective as anti-CD40L, but may not have adverse effects associated with binding to platelets. (Tx), and demonstrated thymopoiesis and tolerance induction across fully MHC-mismatched barriers in miniature swine. In the latter study donor renal Tx was performed 3 months following the initial VTL Tx. In pursuit of a more clinically applicable allogeneic Tx protocol, and given the increased difficulty with achieving tolerance to cardiac allografts, the present study in fully MHC-mismatched miniature swine investigated cardiac allograft survival in recipients receiving sameday, co-transplanted, VTL allografts from a single donor. Methods: Recipient swine (n=12) underwent heterotopic cardiac allograft Tx across fully MHC-mismatched barriers using a 12-day course of FK506 (Day 0 starting dose of 0.15mg/kg/day). Animals in Group A were euthymic. All other animals were thymectomized 3 weeks prior to Tx. Group A and B recipients received a cardiac allograft alone; Group C animals received 5-10 billion donor thymocytes intravenously on the day of cardiac Tx; and Group D animals underwent simultaneous cardiac and VTL co-Tx from single donors. Cardiac allograft rejection was determined by a flat EKG, and confirmed as a non-beating graft. In vitro CML and MLR assays were performed. Results: Group A recipients (euthymic hosts) maintained cardiac allografts until PODs 55, 55, and 134. Group B recipients (thymectomized hosts) rejected their cardiac allografts on PODs 17, 23, and 35. Group C recipients (donor thymocyte infusion) rejected their cardiac allografts on PODs 28, 49 and 64. One Group D recipient rejected the cardiac allograft on POD69; however, the remaining recipients maintained the allografts for >125 days and >305 days. The >305 day survivor demonstrated donor-specific hyporesponsiveness posttransplantation, and histologically no rejection was noted. Conclusions: This is the first demonstration of tolerance induction to fully MHC-mismatched cardiac allografts in our miniature swine model. These results indicate that the presence of thymic stroma, especially donor-type, is essential for a long-term cardiac allograft survival. Current studies utilizing a 28 day-course of FK506 are underway, and may more uniformly induce tolerance in recipients of co-transplanted cardiac and VTL allografts. CD154 is critical for the initiation of naive allo-immune responses. Although activated T-cells have been presumed to be the relevant source of CD154, human platelets also express CD154 upon activation, and the role of platelet-derived CD154 in allograft rejection has not been evaluated. We hypothesized that activated platelets provide ample CD154 to initiate rejection. To investigate this, mixed lymphocyte reactions (MLRs) were performed using wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 or CD154 knock-out (KO; B6.129S2-tnfsf5) responder and Balb/c stimulator lymphocytes with or without human CD154 trimers and/or anti-human CD154 (5c8). Balb/c cardiac allografts were transplanted into C57BL/6 WT or CD154 KO mice with or without adoptively transfered human platelets, and/or 5 doses (200 µg/dose at day -1, 0, 3, 5, and 7) of 5c8 or antimurine CD154 (MR-1). CD154 KO lymphocytes proliferated poorly compared to WT lymphocytes. Proliferation was restored by the addition of human CD154 trimers, and trimer-induced proliferation was blocked by 5c8. Similarly, CD154 KO animals failed to reject cardiac allografts but rejected equal to WT animals when CD154 trimers were given. Human platelets verified to express CD154 upon activation also induced cardiac allograft rejection in CD154 KO animals that was also prevented by administration of 5c8. Histologically, rejection was acute T-cell mediated rejection. These data show that recombinant human CD154 can cross-react with murine CD40 and induce lymphocyte proliferation in vitro and cardiac allograft rejection in vivo. Furthermore, adoptive transfusion of human CD154-expressing platelets into CD154 KO mice precipiates allograft rejection, and this rejection can be prevented by anti-human CD154 blockade with 5c8. These data suggest that CD154 sufficient to induce allograft rejection can be derived from non-T-cells, and that human platelets can serve as the sole source of CD154 sufficient to induce allograft rejection. Thus, non-T-cell derived CD154 must be considered a relevant source of this critical costimulatory molecule, and inhibition of platelet-derived CD154 will be required for adequate therapeutic targeting of the CD40/CD154 pathway. Adaptive Transfusion CD154 Blockade Allograft Survival WT (n=10) 9, 7, 7, 8, 8, 7, 9, 9, 9 WT Backgound: IVIG reduces anti-HLA antibody (Ab) levels and increases rates of transplantation (Tx) in highly sensitized patients (HS pts). This IVIG action may be due to neutralization of anti-HLA Ab, non-specific suppression of Ig production, development of non-responsiveness and/or deletion of anti-HLA specific B cells. Here we examined the effect of IVIG on modulation of Ab production in HS pts treated with IVIG to determine if the IVIG effect is selective by measuring the levels of anti-HLA class I, class II, anti-endothelial cell Ab (AECA) known to be associated with humoral rejection, anti-CMV Ab, total IgG and IgM. Methods: 80 HS ESRD pts were treated with IVIG (42) or placebo (38) at 0, 1, 2, 3, 12 and 24 months (NIH IG02 Study). Sera collected before each Rx and additionally at 4, 6 and 18 months were used for quantitation of the Ab levels. Anti-class I, class II (One Lambda) and anti-CMV (BioCheck) ELISA kits, and a cell-based AECA and IgG/IgM ELISAs developed in our lab were used. The results were expressed as ratios of post-Rx to pre-Rx levels. Results: Anti-class I, II and anti-CMV levels were significantly reduced in the IVIG group by average of 20, 40 and 25%, respectively during the first 4 months. No reductions were seen in the placebo group. AECA and total IgG levels increased in the IVIG group by 40% during the Rx with no change in the placebo group. IgM levels did not change in either group. The increase in AECA is likely an artifact caused by non-specific binding of IVIG contained in sera in the AECA ELISA since IgG, but not IgM levels increased during the Rx. The levels of anti-class I, II and anti-CMV remained lower than the pre-Rx (by15, 30 and 25 %, respectively) for up to 30 months in 70 % of IVIG treatedpts. Concordance of suppressed Ab levels were observed in most pts. The levels of AECA, total IgG and IgM returned to the pre-Rx levels by 2 months after the IVIG-Rx in most pts. Conclusions: 1) IVIG showed non-specific inhibition of Ab production during Rx. 2) The reduced levels of anti-class I, class II and anti-CMV persisted after the IVIG-Rx while AECA and total IgG returned to the pre-Rx levels, suggesting that IVIG selectively, suppressed or deleted B-cells resulting in reducing Ab production. 3) In IVIG responsive HS pts, the persistence of low levels of anti-class I and II Abs contributes to improved chances of receiving a crossmatch (-) kidney transplant. Background: Genetic variability, infection, injury, or transplantation, may modify DC-mediated antigen trafficking to induce maladaptive immunity. The normal kidney is rich in DCs but the degree to which DC-mediated antigen trafficking occurs between the kidney and its draining lymph nodes during health and disease has not been closely studied. Methods: Experiments were carried out in healthy adult mice to examine antigen uptake, trafficking, and presentation by renal DCs (rDCs). DCs from kidney, spleen, renal lymph nodes (RLN), and subcutaneous lymph nodes (SLN) were identified, using antibodies against MHC II and/or CD11c, by flow cytometry of collagenase-digested kidneys, and by immunoperoxidase/immunofluorescence microscopy. Antigen uptake was determined using i.v. injection of filtered (Mr 40,000) and unfiltered (Mr 500,000) FITC-dextran. Staining of RLNs for the kidney-specific protein Tamm Horsfall Protein (THP) was used to detect DC-mediated antigen trafficking from the kidney. Antigen presentation was assayed using adoptive transfer of CFSE-labeled ovalbumin-specific T-cells (DO11.10) and injection of ovalbumin beneath the left renal capsule. Systemic inflammation was induced by i.v. injection of LPS. Results: MHC II+ve/CD11c+ve cells with dendritic morphology were observed as an extensive network throughout the cortical interstitium of the healthy adult kidney and within the T-cell zone of the RLNs. rDCs ingested both filtered and unfiltered FITC-dextran particles with higher capacity than splenic DCs. LPS injection resulted in clearance of DCs from the kidney between 24 and 48 hrs later and in a large increase in DC numbers within the RLNs. CD11c+ve cells with intracellular THP+ve material were detected within RLNs (but not SLNs) at 48 hrs and 7 days following LPS injection. These THP-containing DCs were not detected in the absence of LPS. Even in the absence of LPS, injection of ovalbumin beneath the left renal capsule resulted in proliferation of DO11.10 T-cells within the left RLN but not within the right RLN, spleen, or SLN. The extent of this localized antigen-specific T-cell proliferation was significantly augmented by concomitant LPS injection. Conclusions: Renal DCs ingest both filtered and unfiltered material in the interstitium. Following a proinflammatory stimulus, rDCs undergo a large-scale migration to RLNs which is associated with transport of kidney-specific proteins and enhancement of localized antigen presentation. Antigen trafficking by rDCs may be a modifiable contributing factor to progressive injury of native and transplanted kidneys. Purpose: To test the hypothesis that graft hematopoietic cells function as primary APCs in acute cardiac rejection, we determined the ability of CD4 T-cells to reject cardiac allografts expressing MHC class II exclusively on hematopoietic or somatic cells respectively. Methods: B6 MHC class II-deficient (C2D) mice were lethally irradiated followed by grafting with MHC class II+ B6 bone marrow tagged with a transgenic green fluorescent protein (GFP) marker. Conversely, B6 mice were lethally conditioned followed by rescue with C2D (MHC class II -) GFP tagged bone marrow. Complete donor chimerism (B6->C2D and C2D->B6) heterotopic cardiac allografts were transplanted into BALB/c Rag1-/-recipients. Purified BALB/c CD4 T-cells were then transferred into heart-grafted BALB/c Rag1-/-hosts and graft function was monitored by daily palpation. Results: FACS of peripheral blood demonstrated complete (>99%) donor chimerism in B6->C2D and C2D->B6 hosts with GFP+ CD45+ cells. FACS analysis of whole heart digests confirmed complete chimerism. CD4 T-cells triggered acute rejection in B6 control allografts (n=5) in <15 days and in B6->B6 chimeric control allografts in <16 days (n=3). In contrast, MHC class II-(C2D) allografts (n=3) survived >60 days after CD4 T-cell reconstitution. Chimeric (B6->C2D) hearts, in which MHC class II was expressed only on hematopoietic cells, did not vigorously restore acute allograft rejection with 5 of 6 allografts surviving >60 days post reconstitution. Chimeric (C2D->B6) hearts, in which MHC class II was expressed only on donor somatic cells survived >60 days post CD4 T-cell reconstitution (n=5). Immunization of C2D->B6 chimeric allografts on day #3 post CD4 reconstitution with B6Rag1-/-splenocytes (a source of MHC class II+ APCs) resulted in acute rejection (n=4) in <16 days. Results of these experiments demonstrated that both graft hematopoietic and graft somatic MHC class II expression were individually rate limiting for CD4mediated acute cardiac rejection. Importantly, MHC class II+ somatic cells were not acting as primary APCs, but in fact were targets of activated effector CD4 T-cells. These studies support a straightforward two-step model of CD4-mediated acute cardiac rejection in which the donor graft hematopoietic cells must directly stimulate host CD4 T-cells (step 1) which in turn activate graft destructive CD4 T-cells that must directly engage MHC class II on the parenchymal compartment of the graft to mediate acute rejection (step 2). The propensity of the immature dendritic cells (DC) to mature phenotype in an inflamed environment may limit the utility of DCs as a means to promote graft acceptance. We hypothesized that peritransplant administration of donor immature DCs may fail to optimally enhance engraftment because of the inability to maintain the immature phenotype of DCs. In order to lock DCs into a stable phenotype, we fixed immature and mature DCs with paraformaldehyde. In this study we have compared the ability of untreated and fixed donor DCs to promote graft acceptance. Cultured bone marrow derived DCs from CB6F1 mice (H-2 b,d ) were predominantly immature as defined by the expression of MHC and costimulatory molecules and could be fully maturated by stimulation with LPS. Both mature and immature untreated DCs were able to prime naïve allogeneic C3H (H-2 k ) T cells in mixed culture. These in-vitro allogeneic T cell responses were markedly attenuated when fixed-immature DCs were used as stimulating cells. In contrast, fixed-mature DCs stimulated allogeneic T cell proliferation. In a pancreas islet transplantation model in which the fully MHC mismatched CB6F1 islets were transplanted into C3H mice rendered diabetic by streptozotocin, mean survival time of islets was 14 days in control recipients (n=4). The administration of fresh immature DCs prior to transplantation did not lead to prolonged engraftment (MST; 12 days, n=4). However, consistent with findings in the in-vitro T cell response model, treatment with bone marrow derived fixed-immature CB6F1 DCs 2 weeks before operation, markedly prolonged islet survival (58, >70, >70, >70, >70 days). Interestingly, pretreatment with fixed-mature DCs did not prolong islet graft survival (MST; 16.5 days, n=4). Studies to determine whether true donor specific tolerance is present in the long term C3H recipients are undergoing. Furthermore, T cells from TCR transgenic mice whose TCR recognizes I-E d presented by I-A b , maintain naïve phenotype as CD62L high after mixed culture with fixed-immature CB6F1 DCs. These findings demonstrated the maintenance of immaturity of DCs is a key factor in modulating alloimmune responses, and suggest therapeutic implications for allograft transplantation. There is accumulating evidence that cell surface molecules may be transferred between cells during an encounter. The aim of these experiments was to determine whether this phenomenon could be relevant to human alloresponses. CD4+ cells were co-cultured with M1 cell (human fibroblasts) transfectants expressing HLA-DR1, CD80 and CD86 alone or in combination. Up to 95% of the allogeneic T cells became positive for HLA-DR and the appropriate costimulatory molecules after only 4 hours of co-culture. This was also observed if the CD4+ cells were pretreated with cyclohexamide implying acquisition rather than up-regulation. Acquisition was confirmed by demonstrating high expression of porcine-CD80 on human T cells after co-culture with M1 transfectants expressing HLA-DR and porcine CD80. The phenomenon required cell contact because transfer was abolished by paraformaldehyde pre-treatment of the M1s and by transwell separation. The presence of cyclosporin, RAD, basiliximab or CD4+CD25+ cells in the initial co-culture did not influence acquisition. Flow cytometric sorting of T cells after co-culture and subsequent mixed lymphocyte assays demonstrated that the T cells that had acquired both HLA-DR and costimulatory molecules could act as potent antigen presenting cells. APC function was demonstrated by enhanced autoproliferation, stimulation of resting autologous CD4+ cells and stimulation of resting allogeneic third party CD4+ cells; equivalent data were obtained for cell proliferation and IL2 secretion. Finally, matured human DCs were also shown to transfer HLA-DR and B7 molecules to CD4+ cells, which could then act as APCs, including stimulation of a CD4+ cell line specific for the acquired HLA-peptide complex. Taken together, these data suggest a novel pathway for the amplification of human alloresponses that is resistant to suppression. Abstract# 1554 Interactions between the cell surface receptor CD40 and its cognate ligand, CD40 ligand (CD40L), are functional in many inflammatory processes including atherosclerosis, autoimmunity and allograft rejection. The activation of CD40 on vascular endothelial cells results in the expression of adhesion molecules, chemokines and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) all of which are functional in cellmediated immune inflammation. Despite the central role of CD40 signaling in endothelial cells, little is known of the intracellular signaling mechanisms by which CD40-CD40L interactions exert their influence in EC. In previous studies performed in B cells, the signaling molecule Ras has been shown to be a key mediator of CD40 signaling. Here, we have examined the importance of Ras and Ras-associated signaling molecules in CD40-dependent activation of EC. We cotransfected EC with a full-length (2.6kb) VEGF promoter reporter construct and either an active mutant of Ras (12V) or a dominant negative mutant of Ras (DN). Ras 12V resulted in VEGF transcriptional activation similar to that found with ligation of CD40 (using sCD40L); and CD40-dependent overexpression of VEGF was reduced by Ras DN (up to 90%). This demonstrates that CD40 signaling in EC is mediated through Ras. By immunoprecipitation, we further identified that CD40 activation results in a time-dependent association between Ras and its downstream effector molecules, Raf, Rho and PI-3 Kinase. Because the cytoplasmic tail of CD40 lacks intrinsic kinase activity, we next wished to identify the adaptor protein(s) that link CD40 ligation with activation of Ras. Our initial results through immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated that CD40-CD40L interactions in EC promote the association of Ras with the adaptor molecules TRAF2, TRAF3 and TRAF6 in a time-dependent manner. Together, these studies are the first, to our knowledge, to identify the TRAF molecules as key mediators of CD40 signaling in EC. Because CD40 is expressed on human but not mouse EC, we suggest that this pathway may represent an important proinflammatory signaling cascade unique to humans. Thus, this pathway in humans may be an important consideration in designing novel therapies to prevent graft rejection and vasculopathy. Immature dendritic cells (DC) are induced to migrate to sites of inflammation by socalled "inducible" chemokines. Upon uptake of antigen (Ag) and maturation, DC are directed through endothelial cell (EC)-lined lymphatic or blood vessel walls by "constitutive" chemokines to draining secondary lymphoid tissues. Therein they present Ag to naïve and memory T cells, initiating the immune response. We have reported that mature (m) murine CD8α + DC are able to migrate, albeit poorly compared to CD8α -mDC, in response to CCL19 (macrophage inflammatory protein-3β) and CCL21 (secondary lymphoid chemokine) that are constitutively expressed in T cell areas and high endothelial venules, respectively, by quantifying their in vitro chemotaxis through unmodified Transwell® filters. We hypothesized that the inferior migratory ability of CD8α + mDC might be due to their low surface expression of the adhesion molecule CD11b, which may hamper their ability to adhere to filter pores in vitro and/or endothelial cells in vitro/in vivo. To test whether expression of this and/or other adhesion molecules plays a role in regulating CD8α + DC migration, we analyzed whether incubating CD8α -mDC with blocking mAbs against CD11b would reduce their migration to the level of CD8α + DC. We further tested whether blocking adhesion molecules expressed on both subsets of DC (e.g. CD31, CD54, CD62L) would affect their transendothelial migration. Resting or TNFα-activated mouse EC were layered on 5 µm, Transwell® filters, and overnight-matured splenic, magnetic bead-sorted DC were placed into the upper wells of Transwell® chambers for 4 h (for resting EC) or 2 h (for activated EC). Migrated DC then were removed from the lower chamber and enumerated using a Coulter counter. Both DC subsets migrated to CCL19 through resting EC (albeit less than in the absence of EC), and migration through TNFα-activated EC was enhanced. Contrary to reports for human monocyte-derived DC, transendothelial migration of the murine mDC was markedly impaired when CD54 was blocked by specific mAb, but migration was not impaired by blocking CD31 or CD11b. Interestingly, mDC showed decreased migration to CCL19 but not CCL21 when CD62L was blocked. This is the first report evaluating adhesion molecules involved in directing murine DC subset transendothelial migration in vitro, and the data implicate specific adhesion molecules in facilitating this migration in vivo. These molecules may serve as targets for interrupting trafficking of immunostimulatory DC to secondary lymphoid organs. Alloantigens are recognized through direct and indirect pathways, both of which are involved in allograft rejection. In contrast, tolerance may be a phenomenon exclusively dependent on indirectly-triggered immunoregulation. Hence, it has been postulated that CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells (Tregs), required for tolerance induction in multiple models, may also have indirectly-biased allospecificity. In the current study, we have sought to dissect the influence of direct and indirect allorecognition on Treg function by using an adoptive transfer model in a variety of different strain combinations. To assess how the loss of the direct pathway influences Treg suppressive function, we used 3 different skin allograft models: (1) Balb/c Rag -/-(H-2 d ) hosts grafted with MHC-II -/-B6 (H-2 b ) grafts, (2) Balb/c Rag -/mice transplanted with B10D2 minor histocompatibility mismatched grafts, and (3) B6 Rag -/-(H-2 b ) hosts grafted with DBA/ 2 (H-2 d ) chimeric skin bearing B6 antigen presenting cells only. Allograft recipients were then injected with titrated numbers of syngeneic CD4+CD25-and/or Tregs. As compared with the corresponding controls, performed using wild type MHC mismatched allografts, in the 3 experimental settings in which direct allopresentation was unavailable, CD4+CD25-T cells were less capable of inducing allograft rejection. In contrast, Tregs were more effective on a cell-per-cell basis in protecting the graft. This indicated that the absence of direct allorecognition favored regulatory over effector immune responses. We then tested whether indirect allorecognition was actually indispensable for Treg function, and repeated the transfer experiments after grafting DBA/2 skin allografts onto either B6 Rag -/-/MHC-II -/or B6 Rag -/-/MHC-II +/+ hosts. CD4 + CD25 -T cells alone rapidly rejected allografts placed onto MHC -/recipients. In contrast, Tregs transferred into MHC-II -/hosts exhibited a much weaker capacity to suppress CD4 + CD25 -T cells than when injeted into MHC-II +/+ recipients. Although Tregs could indeed prevent effector T cells from rejecting the grafts in the MHC-II -/hosts, this required administration of a very high Treg to CD4 + CD25 -T cell ratio (4:1). In short, CD4 + CD25 + T cells can suppress both directly and indirectly generated alloimmune responses in vivo. However, in the absence of indirect presentation, Tregs exert weak suppressive effects. This is consistent with the Treg repertoire being biased towards self-MHC recognition. T cell receptor (TCR) transgenic (tg) mice have revolutionized the study of T cell responses in vivo. Adoptive transfer of TCR-tg T cells facilitates precise tracking, as well as phenotypic and functional analysis of antigen-specific T cells in vivo under both stimulatory and tolerogenic conditions. The well-established 2C TCR-tg model has revealed important insights into the role of CD8+ alloreactive T cells in graft rejection. However, the lack of a complementary CD4+ allospecific TCR-tg model has limited detailed mechanistic studies of the role of CD4+ T cells in allograft rejection. We therefore sought to develop a CD4+ restricted TCR-tg mouse with direct specificity against donor MHCII and with a strain specificity identical to the 2C TCR-tg mouse (B6 → Balb/c). B6 mice were immunized with mature Balb/c dendritic cells (DCs). Sorted CD4+ T cells from immunized mice were restimulated with Balb/c DCs ex vivo and then fused with the BW5147a-b-murine thymoma cell line. The resulting hybridomas were screened by their ability to produce IL-2 in response to Balb/c DCs. From reactive clones, cDNA was produced and the TCR alpha and TCR beta subtypes were identified by sequencing PCR products obtained using consensus primers spanning the TCR variable (V) and constant (C) regions. V and C specific primers were then used to isolated full-length TCR chains, which were cloned into transgenic expression vectors with the TCR alpha (Va8) and TCR beta (Vb13) chain under the control of the human CD2 and the murine CD4 promoters, respectively. Both transgenes were injected together into DBA2/B6 embryos. A founder mouse (4C) expressing Vb13 on >99% of peripheral CD4+ T cells was identified and back-bred onto the B6/Ly5.1 background. RT-PCR was used to confirm Va8 expression. We find the 4C TCR-tg CD4+ T cells to be specific to H-2d antigen in vitro by MLR and in vivo by CFSE dilution assays of adoptively transferred 4C CD4+ T cells into Balb/c hosts. In addition, we find the 4C TCR-tg to be able to reject Balb/c skin transplants in 10-13d. We have thus developed a CD4+ TCR-tg mouse with direct alloreactivity to Balb/c. Adoptive transfer of TCR-tg T cells from the 4C mouse and the 2C mouse will provide a novel means of observing the cooperativity between the CD4+ and CD8+ T cell compartments during transplant rejection as well as the induction of allospecific tolerance. Correlation of BKV molecular parameters with PVN biopsy (bx) findings have not been defined. Purpose: Establish correlations between histologic injury patterns (acute or chronic), molecular parameters (BKV load monitoring, BKVantibody titer) and creatinine (SCr). Methods: 26 bx from 11 pts diagnosed w/ PVN and w/o concurrent rejection were reviewed. Bx were assigned an overall "acute injury" score based on: degree of in-situ hybridization for BKV, acute cytopathic changes, and presence of acute interstitial infiltrates. A "chronic injury" score was assigned based on: chronic interstitial fibrosis/ tubular atrophy and glomerulosclerosis. Acute and chronic pathology were graded on a semi-quantitative scale 0= no PVN, 1=mild, 2= moderate, 3= severe. Bx data was correlated with BKV urine and serum loads (Taqman PCR), BKV antibody titer (Hemagglutination assay), and SCr at time of bx. Acute and chronic bx scores were also divided into 2 groups: low (score 0-1) and high (score 2-3). Statistics: Point-biserial correlations were used for BKV serum and urine loads, BKV antibody titers, SCr and bx scores while t tests assuming unequal variance were used to compare low and high acute and chronic scores. Results: BKV urine loads correlated well with acute bx scores (p=0.004, r=0.57) but BKV serum loads, BKVantibody titers or SCr did not correlate with overall acute bx scores. BKV urine loads were significantly lower in pts with a lower acute score (1.52 x 10 7 vs 9.98 x 10 8 cop/mL, p = 0.02). SCr correlated well with overall chronic bx scores (p=0.001, r = 0.62), but BKV urine, serum loads or BKV antibody titers did not correlate with overall chronic bx scores. Conclusions: 1) BKV urine load, but not BKV serum load may provide a good marker of acute histologic injury in PVN. 2) In contrast, chronic injury score correlated well with renal function. 3) These results indicate that BKV urine may provide a reliable non-invasive marker of BKV induced injury and provide a useful therapeutic monitoring tool for PVN. The frequency of BK polyoma virus (BKV) infection before renal transplantation and its impact on graft function has not been studied. This prospective study was undertaken over an 18-month period with a view to 1. estimate the prevalence of BKV excretion in urine in CRF patients awaiting transplantation and their donors, and 2. assess the impact of BKV infection on graft function in living donor transplants. Urine was screened for the presence of "decoy cells" on Papanicoloau smear, immunohistochemistry using antibodies against SV-40 T antigen and electron microscopy before transplant, at the end of 3 months after transplantation and during episodes of graft dysfunction. BK virus infection was looked for in graft biopsies on liight microscopy and immunoperoxidase stains. All patients received cyclosporine-based immunosuppression. Immunosuppression was reduced in those with biopsy-proved BKV infection. A total of 68 patients (age 34.1+11.3 years, 59 males) were included in the study. Urinary decoy cell excretion were documented in 22 (32.4%) patients and 4 (5.9%) donors (p<0.0001). Post-transplant urine cytology was positive in 24 of 64 (37.5%) cases. Acute graft dysfunction developed in 25 patients, all of whom underwent a biopsy. BK viruria was significantly more frequent in those with acute graft dysfunction (63% v 28%, p=0.006). Anti-rejection therapy was given to 24 cases; 18 responded completely, 3 had a partial response, and 4 were non-responders. A total of 5 patients showed evidence of BKV infection on immunohistochemistry of renal biopsy. All 5 patients showed decoy cells on Pap smear. When compared to patients without BKV infection on biopsy, these patients had a higher follow-up serum creatinine (3.42+1.59 v 1.8+1.77 mg/dl; p=0.032). Also, the mean follow-up serum creatinine was higher in those with BK viruria compared to BKV-negative patients (1.42+0.55 v 2.01+1.39 mg/ dl; p=0.029). To conclude, 1. the prevalence of BKV infection is increased in CRF patients, 2. BK viruria is associated with increased incidence of acute graft dysfunction and poorer long-term graft function, 3. absence of decoy cells in the urine virtually rules out the possibility of BKV infection of the allograft, and 4. the outcome of patients with biopsy-documented BKV infection of the allograft is poor despite reduction of immunosuppressive therapy. Background and Aims: Use of highly potent immunosuppression has resulted in substantial reduction of acute rejection rates among kidney transplant (KTx) recipients. Counteracting this success has been the emergence, since 1999, of BK nephropathy (BKN) as a major cause of KTx injury. At our center, the occurrence of BKN (diagnosed by either surveillance "protocol" biopsy or by clinically-indicated biopsy) peaked among patients transplanted in 2001. We sought to determine the clinical factors associated with development of biopsy-proven BKN within this cohort. Methods: Clinical and laboratory data was reviewed for 238 patients receiving KTx between 1/ 1/01 and 12/31/01. Ten recipients with graft failure or death within 4 months of transplantation were excluded. Of the remaining 228, 24 have been diagnosed with BKN at a mean of 11.8± 6.3 months post-transplant. These 24 recipients were compared with the 204 who have not developed BKN. Results: See Conclusions: (a) Development of BKN in this cohort was associated with older recipient age but not with greater degree of MHC mismatching, higher rate of acute rejection, or early graft dysfunction. (b) There was a trend towards lower frequency of D-/R-serologic status for CMV among recipients who developed BKN. (c) Loss of GFR between 1 and 12 months post-transplant was predominantly accounted for by BKN among these 228 recipients. OBJECTIVE: Polyoma BK virus (BKV) is a significant cause of renal allograft loss and no specific treatment is known. Leflunomide (Arava, Aventis) is a potent immune suppressant and recent in vitro data showing BKV inhibition has prompted our evaluation of leflunomide as BKV therapy. METHODS: From Nov., 2001 to Aug., 2003, 21 patients with biopsy documented BKV nephropathy and 3 to 26 months of study, were treated with lef alone (n=11) or lef+Cidofovir (Cidof 4-14 doses) n=10. CellCept was stopped, Prograff and pred essentially unchanged, and the targeted lef blood level, measured by HPLC, was 50 ug/ ml to100 ug/ml. The patients were followed with frequent assessment of bone marrow and liver functions and graft biopsy was repeated as indicated. The % changes in viral load (PCR measured) and serum creatinine were analyzed for significance using the Wilcoxan test. RESULTS: There was a significant decrease in blood and urine viral loads in both groups (p<0.05 at 2 and 3 months compared to baseline), with falling titers in 20/21 patients. One patient (lef alone) did not initially experience a decrease in viral load or improvment on biopsy; however, he was sub-therapeutic for lef (lef level 30ug/ml) and responded with additional therapy. Repeat biopsy in 16 others showed resolution or substantial improvement of BK virus stainining (SV40). Although renal function remained stable, blood viral titers rose in two additional patients when blood levels of lef fell below 35 ug/ml. Another patient (lef + Cidof) with pre-existing advanced renal damage (Cr 4.5) required dialysis despite reduced viral load. The inclusion of Cidofovir did not significantly improve viral load or renal function compared to lef alone. (p>0.05) One patient died of unrelated causes. No significant changes in liver or bone marrow function have appeared in the 19, all of whom are still receiving leflunomide. CONCLUSION: Leflunomide blood levels above 35 ug/ml provide effective BKV therapy and adding Cidofovir does not appear to improve viral clearance nor renal function. Leflunomide may have the singular advantage of providing both effective viral treatment and immunosuppression. An understanding of the molecular basis for this activity could open a fresh approach to both anti viral and immune suppressant drug discovery. We have previously demonstrated the in-vitro effectiveness of a variety of quinolones, namely ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, levofloxacin and trovofloxacin against the BK related polyoma virus SV40. All four quinolones were shown to inhibit the formation of viral plaques in a viral plaque inhibition study. They also inhibited viral DNA replication. Mechanistic studies indicated that the quinolones were able to inhibit the ability of the SV40 large T antigen (T Ag) to function as a helicase (separating double stranded DNA in preparation for replication). In this study we tested the in vitro and in vivo effectiveness of Gatifloxacin against polyoma virus. In vitro in a T Ag assay, Gatifloxacin at a 0.5 mM concentration was shown to inhibit SV40 T Ag function by > 50%. We next studied the ability of Gatifloxacin to treat renal transplant patients with evidence of active BK viral replication. Ten patients who had evidence of active BK polyoma virus infection were treated with a 10 day course of Gatifloxacin, 500mg po qd. Evidence of BK viral replication was checked by testing blood for viral load of BK virus and urine for the presence of decoy cells immediately prior to treatment. Immunosuppression was not decreased at the time of treatment with the quinolone. Mean time prior to treatment that immunosuppression was decreased was 6 months (range 0.75-11 months). Blood and urine were checked again 2 months after completion of treatment. All patients tolerated the antibiotic with no reported serious side effects. Seven of the 10 patients responded with a significant reduction in viremia (> 80%) or disappearance/reduction of decoy cells in the urine. One further patient had a 50% decrease in viremia at a later time point. These data indicate that Gatifloxacin is effective against active BK viral infection in renal transplant recipients. IRI is a known risk factor for graft loss following kidney transplantation due to chronic allograft nephropathy (CAN). CTGF is a CCN protein and downstream effector of TGFβ. It is produced by a variety of cells, and mediates angiogenesis, cell proliferation and fibrosis. We have recently demonstrated that CTGF is upregulated in kidneys with CAN. We hypothesize that CTGF may be a link between ischemic injury and the development of CAN. To this end, we evaluated renal cell lines mIMCD-3 (inner medullary collecting duct), Mes-13 (SV40-transformed mesangial cells), and MCT (proximal tubule epithelial cells) for the expression of CTGF mRNA using real-time PCR. Cells were cultured at ambient conditions or subjected to 60 minutes of cold hypoxia, followed by rewarming. In the absence of hypoxia, CTGF mRNA was increased in all cell lines after 24h treatment with 10ng/mL TGFβ (2.1-4.6 fold), compared to cells cultured without TGFβ. While hypoxia had little effect on CTGF mRNA levels in Mes-13 and MCT cells, CTGF mRNA increased by 2.3±0.6-fold in mIMCD cells (p=0.02). Furthermore, CTGF mRNA levels in these cells remained substantially elevated at 60, 120, and 240 minutes of rewarming (18.7±7.5, 8.9±3.1, and 3.5±0.5-fold, respectively) and CTGF protein levels are also increased by 87%, 149% and 125%, respectively, compared to cells cultured in ambient conditions. We next evaluated CTGF mRNA responses in vivo following 30 min unilateral warm ischemia and reperfusion for 2h. CTGF mRNA was significantly elevated in the medulla and cortex of the ischemic kidney (13.5±4.5 and 4.2±3.0-fold, respectively; p<0.001) compared to normal kidney and contralateral, nonischemic kidney. Similarly, in human kidney grafts following implantation and 30min reperfusion, CTGF mRNA expression is elevated by 4.4±1.1fold compared to normal kidneys (p=0.01). When the donor origin and graft outcome are assessed, the highest levels of CTGF mRNA are in cadaveric grafts in recipients that went on to develop CAN (6.3±1.4-fold; p=0.03), compared to the levels in cadaveric grafts in recipients that have not developed CAN (1.7±0.5-fold) or in living donor grafts (0.6±0.2-fold). Thus, brief hypoxia and rewarming increase steady state levels of CTGF mRNA and protein production in a mouse medullary cell line. Moreover, CTGF mRNA is induced following IRI in the mouse, as well as post-reperfusion in man. These data suggest that CTGF may be a novel regulator of ischemic injury. Elucidating this mechanism may lead to new strategies to ameliorate ischemic injury and ultimately CAN in man. Kathryn M. Verbanac, 1 H. Keith Pittman, 1 Bill T. Storey, 1 Carl E. Haisch. 1 1 Surgery, East Carolina University, Greenville, NC. We have shown that exogenous endothelial cells (EC) have an affinity for vasculogenic and angiogenic sites in vivo. Bone marrow-derived EC precursors (ECp) also migrate to an injured organ and induce vasculogenesis and angiogenesis in certain models. These cells thus have the potential in transplantation to focus therapy to damaged endothelium and promote endothelialization, restore normal EC function and enhance graft acceptance. AIM: To investigate the in vivo localization of EC and ECp to sites of vessel damage. METHODS: We used transgenic mice expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) as cell donors to enable in vivo tracking. Microvascular EC were isolated from neonatal GFP mouse hearts by collagenase digestion, density gradient centrifugation and differential adherence. Bone marrow cells (BM) containing ECp were flushed from the long bones of adult GFP mice and injected immediately or after removal of lineage-committed cells. The left renal veins of haploidentical C57Bl/ 6 mice were compressed with microvascular clamps for 30 min. Mice were injected i.v. with 2 x 10 6 EC (n=3), 2 x 10 6 intact BM (n=4) or 5 x 10 5 lin -BM (n=2) 72 hrs after vessel damage and sacrificed 48 hrs after injection. To assess vessel damage, mice were injected i.v. 30 min before sacrifice with Evans Blue dye. Tissue damage (i.e. vessel permeability to dye) and GFP-cell biodistribution were determined by fluorescence microscopy of 10 micron frozen tissue sections (n=40/ tissue). RESULTS: Vessel clamping resulted in consistent and localized damage, as visualized by Evans Blue. GFP-cells were detected only in the damaged renal veins of all mice injected with exogenous cells (n=9). No fluorescent cells were detected in the contralateral undamaged control vessels (n=5; p<0.002) or in any other normal tissues. Localization was greatest in the luminal regions of damaged vessels and in the areas directly clamped. Mean cells per section were 106 GFP-VEC, 97 intact GFP-BM and 37 lin -GFP-BM. Studies are underway to test the ability of localized cells to survive and proliferate, to investigate the mechanism of homing and to define GFP-cell surface markers. CONCLUSIONS: Exogenous EC and BM containing ECp home to sites of damaged endothelium. Others have observed that migration of transplanted progenitor cells to damaged brain and heart tissue is associated with regenerative effects. These data support the hypothesis that native or genetically modified BM-derived EC may repair localized damage, improve graft function and modify anti-graft immune responses. Transplantation of liver with severe steatosis may result in primary nonfunction (PNF) of the graft. To date, protective strategy is still rare. As previously described by our group, human recombinant hepatocyte growth factor (hrHGF) has a cytoprotective effect on fatty liver during cold preservation in rats. Here we further examined the effects of hrHGF on survival and graft function in rat fatty liver transplantation. Methods Severe steatosis was induced by a 15-day choline-deficient diet in male Lewis rats. The fatty graft was orthotopically transplanted in normal male Lewis rat after 12 hr cold preservation in UW solution. In the HGF group, donor rats were pretreated with a single bolus of systemic injection of hrHGF (100µg/rat), and 30µg of hrHGF was also added to the perfusion/preservation solution. Animal survival, graft function and morphological changes were compared with those of the untreated group. Liver cell apoptosis was detected by TUNEL stain and liver regeneration was evaluated by BrdU stain at 2 hrs after reperfusion of the liver graft. Results One-week survival was significantly improved in the HGF group compared with the untreated group (83% vs. 33%, p<0.01, n=18/group). AST, ALT and LDH levels in the graft rinse effluents at the end of cold preservation and serum ALT and LDH at 2 hrs after reperfusion were significantly low in the HGF group. Although there was no significant difference in hyaluronic acid (HA) level in the rinse effluents at the end of preservation between the two groups, exogenous HA uptake rate (HAUR) at 2 hrs after reperfusion was improved in the HGF group (0.62±0.05 vs. 0.79±0.11, p<0.05). Morphologically, sinusoidal endothelial cells (SECs) and hepatocytes were well preserved as observed by transmission electron microscope in the HGF group compared with the control. hrHGF pretreatment also significantly reduced the (SEC) apoptotic index (1.65±0.60% vs. 4.90±1.25%, p<0.01) and increased BrdU incorporation index (2.07±0.62% vs. 0.06±0.04%, p<0.01) at 2 hrs after reperfusion. Conclusions hrHGF prevented the death of PNF in steatotic liver transplantation by attenuating preservation-reperfusion injury and facilitating recovery of the graft, probably through its antiapoptotic properties and acceleration of liver regeneration at early stage after transplantation. Sirolimus is a novel immunosuppressant with proven antirejection properties. Recent studies show antiangiogenic activities of sirolimus in tumors that were linked to a decrease in VEGF production. As VEGF acts as a survival factor for tubular and endothelial cells, antiangiogenic properties of sirolimus may be detrimental for regeneration after posttransplant reperfusion injury. We tested whether or not putative antiangiogenic properties of sirolimus may make renal allografts more susceptible to posttransplant preservation/reperfusion injury. We employed F344-to-Lew rat lowresponder model where renal grafts were 2-hours cold preserved in UW solution and transplanted with an average 30 min anastomosis time. Therapeutic trough level was achieved in recipients after 3 mg/kg loading and daily 1.5 mg/kg maintenance sirolimus dose administered by gavage. Grafts were harvested 2, 5, and 7 days after transplantation for functional, morphological and gene expression studies. Beginning at 2 d posstransplant, sirolimus treated animals showed significantly higher creatinin clearance and lower histological tubular damage score. Functional integrity of tubular cells was preserved in sirolimus group as demonstrated by diminished low-molecular weight proteinuria and improved urine concentrating capacity. Posttransplant reperfusion injury induced 2-fold decrease of VEGF mRNA in control animals compared to basal conditions. Sirolimus treatment up-regulated VEGF mRNA beyond the level observed in native kidneys. The expression of VEGFR-2 was influenced in the same Abstracts manner. The increased expression of VEGF was localized to tubular epithelial cells of the cortex and outer medulla in sirolimus group. Furthermore, sirolimus treatment resulted in reduced inflammatory response comprised as significantly decreased infiltration with effector cells: His-48+ granulocytes, ED-1+ monocytes, MHC class II positive cells and CD8+ lymphocytes. All sirolimus mediated protective effects persisted during the time course of the study. We obtained no significant differences in peritubular capillary density as measured by RECA, PECAM-1 and eNOS expression. Sirolimus does not act antiangiogenic during posttransplant reperfusion injury of the kidney. VEGF and VEGF-R2 upregulation observed in sirolimus treated animals may provide antiinflammatory signals and protect renal allografts from preservation/ reperfusion injury. Introduction: The elderly (≥60 years) comprise the fastest growing group of patients placed on the renal transplant waiting list (WL) and are at high risk of graft loss and death after transplantation. In the general population, reducing pretransplant dialysis exposure and emphasizing live donor renal transplantation (LDRT) over deceased donor renal transplantation (DDRT) improve outcomes. The purpose of the current study is to determine how these two factors affect renal transplantation in elderly recipients. Methods: Using data from the United States Renal Data System, 120,610 adults (≥18 years) who either remained on the WL or underwent first-time, solitary renal transplantation between 1991 and 2000 with no history of another solid organ transplant were studied. Results: LDRT and DDRT improved survival in both elderly and younger patients, independent of time on the WL. For younger adults with no dialysis exposure, the relative risks (RR) of death at 1 year were: 1.00 for remaining on the WL, 0.27 (95%CI: 0.23-0.33) after preemptive DDRT, and 0.10 (0.08-0.14) after preemptive LDRT. In elderly patients, preemptive LDRT (RR: 0.30) and DDRT (0.32) have similar improvements in survival. With any amount of dialysis exposure, the survival benefits of LDRT over DDRT in elderly patients became significant. For example, in elderly patients with >2 years of dialysis, the 1 year RR of death were: 1.00 for remaining on the WL, 0.61 (0.57-0.71) after DDRT, and 0.37 (0.24-0.52) after LDRT. Conclusions: The elderly are at higher risk of death regardless of WL time and transplant status. LDRT and DDRT improve survival in both elderly and younger adults regardless of time on the waiting list. For the elderly with any amount of dialysis exposure, LDRT should be emphasized over DDRT. Conclusion: The DRG302 reimbursement decreased by 7.5% over 5 years. Organ acquisition increased by 32% over 5 years. Organ acquisition for pre-txp services is cost-based reimbursement. Unless the txp center is capturing all allowable organ acquisition pre-txp costs, the txp center could be subsidizing Medicare txps and this has been problematic in many txp centers. The DRG portion of reimbursement is fixed to a large degree and this is the area where profitability would occur if the resource utilization in the txp operative and in-patient course of care is managed well. Kidney txp programs must have defined processes in place to assure that all allowable organ acquisition costs are being captured and reported since it can account for as much as 67% of Medicare reimbursement for kidney txp. It is imperative to be clinically and economically effective in the txp operative and in-patient course of care to ensure economic viability of performing Medicare txps. the recipients (70%), female (54%), and willing to participate in donor-swapping (78%). Sixty-one percent thought that it was ethical for the government to pay donors for donor-swapping. However, only 43% would accept money for donor-swapping if it was offered and only 10 donors (19%) said that money would increase their willingness to donate. Donors reported that $1000-$5000 would be enough compensation, possibly considering this amount sufficient to cover unreimbursed donation expenses and time off work (Table 1) . Of the 12 people not willing to consider donor-swapping, 3 individuals reported that money would increase their willingness. Conclusions: Greed and high levels of coercion were not found in ruled-out donors; Although compensation of $1000-$5000 for unreimbursed donation expenses was appreciated by some donors, most reported that they would not take money, nor would it influence their donor-swapping willingness. Further research must be done to determine if race or socioeconomic status impacts these attitudes. Nearly a decade has passed since the national report of successful unrelated live donor kidney transplantation. Current data to sustain the ethical propriety of this practice are needed. If HLA matching is not a requirement for successful unrelated transplants, does HLA matching influence the outcome of ideal deceased donor kidney transplants? Study Groups: The study cohorts consisted of living donor (LD)(n=32,316) or deceased donor (DD) kidney transplants (n=55,349) between March 6, 1995 and March 31, 2002. Recipients were followed until death, or onset of graft failure. Methods: Allograft failure was defined as initiation of maintenance dialysis, graft nephrectomy, or occurrence of repeat renal transplantation. Patients who died with a functioning allograft or without a documented graft failure event were censored from graft survival analysis. A Cox regression model was used to assess LD graft survival rates adjusted for the following covariates: donor age, sex, race ethnicity; recipient age, sex, race, ethnicity, cause of ESRD, PRA, and year of transplant; and the effect of donorrecipient relationship and level of haplotype matching. A Cox regression model assessed the risk of graft failure for DD kidney transplant recipients by the following additional covariates: donor history of hypertension, terminal creatinine level and cold ischemia time. A separate adjustment was made for DR mismatch among unrelated LD recipients (n=6,844) to specifically test DR matching effect on graft survival and upon ideal DD recipients (n= 1452). Ideal Donor = age between 18 and 34; cold ischemia time 20 hours or less; trauma victim. Results: Among LD recipients, there was no independent effect of DR matching on graft survival as indicated by a 5-year survival rate of 79%, 78% and 77% for 0-DR mm, 1-DR mm and 2-DR mm respectively (p=0.77 and 0.40 compared to 0-DR mm; thus, not significantly different). For DD recipients from ideal donors, a 5-year graft survival was 75% for 0-DR mm compared to 72% (p=0.30) for 1 DR mm and 71% for 2 DR mm. Therefore, DR matching had no effect upon allograft survival of LD unrelated or ideal DD kidney transplants. Conclusions: The propriety of an increasing practice of unrelated live donor kidney transplantation is affirmed by these current data. HLA typing of a live donor who is a spouse, friend, or unknown to the recipient, is no longer necessary to achieve a successful outcome. Declining a deceased donor kidney from an ideal donor because of the degree of HLA mismatch is not indicated. Living donor kidney transplantation (LDKT) is becoming increasingly common. Today, many candidates present with more than one potential donor (D) who differ in age, gender, size and relationship -characteristics which determine nephron mass and may therefore impact upon graft function and longevity. This study aims to develop a model to predict the risk posed by D demographic factors for suboptimal graft function (SubOpGF) for a given recipient (R). Methods: Of the 20,528 adult LDKTs performed between 1999 to 2002 within the SRTR database, our study cohort included the 8,603 LDKTs which had complete D and R demographics and 1-yr graft function information. Logistic regression analysis was used to identify D and R characteristics associated with SubOpGF, defined as a serum creatinine (Cr) >1.5 mg/dL. Results: 3,140 recipients (36.5%) had SubOpGF which has been strongly associated with graft loss. D and R age, D and R gender, D and R BSA, R black ethnicity, and D-R relatedness emerged as strong and independent predictors of SubOpGF (Table) . Multivariate analysis enabled the derivation of a model to predict the probability of SubOpGF (area under the ROC curve = 0.75). Using the model, for a 34yo Caucasian woman who is 5'4" 140 lb (BSA 1.68), her 60yo father [6'0" 190 lb (BSA 2.08)] would, compared to her 35yo female friend [5'4" 140 lb (BSA 1.68], present a comparable risk for SubOpGF (24% vs. 21%). Alternatively, for a 60yo black man who is 5'10" 170 lb (BSA 1.95), his 60yo wife [5'4" 140 lb (BSA 1.68)] would, compared to his 35yo son [5'10" 170 lb (BSA 1.95)], present a substantially higher risk of SubOpGF (76% vs. 42%). Conclusions: Simple D and R demographics are potent factors in determining 1-yr graft function after LDKT. In the setting of multiple potential living Ds for a single R, our study provides a model which facilitates quantitative assessment of the risk associated with each D profile for SubOpGF at one year. LONG TERM FOLLOW UP OF 800 LIVING RELATED KIDNEY DONORS. Adib Rizvi, 1 Anwar Naqvi, 1 Mirza Naqi Zafar. 1 1 Transplantation, Sindh Institute of Urology and Transplantation, Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan. Purpose: To study post nephrectomy biochemical and clinical follow up of living related donors. Methods: Eight hundred donors were closely followed in the last sixteen years 1986 -2002. There were 2 cross sectional recalls in 1994 and 1997 and thereafter all donors have been followed in a dedicated clinic, monthly for 6 months, thereafter 6 monthly for 1 year and then yearly. All kidney donors were subjected to a detailed physical examination, a complete biochemistry and haematology analysis along with urine metabolic studies and ultrasound scan of the remaining kidney. Donor demography, rehabilitation, post nephrectomy change in weight, development of Hypertension and Diabetes Mellitus, status of renal function, lipid levels, total caloric and protein intake and any serious illness in the intervening period were noted. All donors were also questioned about their emotional feelings on donating a kidney. Results: The mean age of donors was 37 ± 11 years with a mean follow-up 4.8 ± 3 years. The mean pre and post Nephrectomy parameters were creatinine 0.97 ± 0.1 vs 0.97 ± 0.12 mg / dl, albumin 4.2 ± 0.4 vs 4.4 ± 0.2 g/dl, creatinine clearance 92 ± 15 vs 86 ± 25 ml/min and urinary protein 102 ± 32 vs 110 ± 65 mg/24 hours. The pre-nephrectomy mean weight was 60.84 ± 12.27 kg and the mean weight on follow-up was 61.82 ± 12.87 kg. Hypertension was detected in 114 cases (14.3%) and diabetes mellitus in 26 (3.3%). The mean serum Cholesterol was 181.35 ± 40.52 and serum Triglycverides was 163.85±99.51. The mean daily caloric intake of males was 1997.131 kcals, proteins 63.03±19.76.2 gms and that of females was 1716.68 ± 354.23 kcals proteins 49.95±19.14 gms respectively. Proteinuria was found in 6% of the donors. Majority of these comprised donors older than 45 years at the time of donation. All 800 donors were rehabilitated within 40 days. Conclusion: All kidney donors had voluntarily donated their organs and for emotional reasons. Renal function was well preserved, majority were rehabilitated and had not encountered any serious health problems in the intervening period. The results of the donor follow up can prove to be a motivating factor for prospective donors giving informed consent in a live related transplantation programme. Introduction: Laparoscopic donor nephrectomy (LDN), the common minimally invasive procedure reduces morbidity associated with conventional open donor nephrectomy (ODN). Despite the donor appeal, it has low but significant (transperitoneal approach bleeding) morbidity and mortality. The 'mini nephrectomy' a minimally invasive, open, retroperitoneal, live donor nephrectomy; was devised to further reduce the mortality and morbidity. We describe our results with this procedure. Methods: 130 consecutive 'mini nephrectomies' performed between Feb, 2001 and Nov, 2003 were prospectively evaluated. Demographics, laboratory data, operative details, graft characteristics, post operative complications, length of stay, return to activity and pain medications are described. Quality of life (QOL) analysis was administered to 47 patients using SF-36 forms. Results: 'Mini nephrectomy'can be safely performed in all donors regardless of body weight, renal anatomy or side of retrieved organ with excellent QOL. The operative time, technique and warm ischemic time are similar to traditional ODN thereby providing excellent quality grafts. The length of the incision for this procedure is smaller than LDN incisions. The length of stay and time to resuming normal activity is similar to other minimally invasive nephrectomy procedures. The perioperative risks are minimal. With followup for >2 years, no long term complications have been encountered.  The 'mini nephrectomy' procedure combines the benefits of the open retroperitoneal approach and minimally invasive surgery. In contrast to LDN, this procedure does not need expensive instrumentation and is easy to learn. The data presented in this abstract establishes the safety and feasibility of this procedure for all live kidney donors. There have been no long term complications associated with this safe and attractive procedure for live kidney donors. Sirolimus is a powerful immunosuppressant widely used in renal transplantation to spare calcineurin inhibitor (CNI) therapy with the intention of improving renal function. We undertook a randomised controlled study of conversion of stable liver transplant recipients with impaired renal function. Liver recipients at least 6 months post transplant with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) less than 65mls/min were invited to participate. They were randomised to continue on CNI therapy or switch to sirolimus. Conversion involved abrupt cessation of CNI followed by commencement of 2mg/day sirolimus without an overlap period; target range was 5 to 15ng/ml. Concomitant immunosuppression and other medications were not altered. GFR was measured using radionuclide-labelled EDTA at baseline, 3 and 12 months after commencing the study. Results 18 patients were randomised into the study. One declined further follow up when he was randomised into the CNI group. One who was converted to sirolimus returned to tacrolimus at 3 months because she felt tired since conversion, and another returned at 6 months due to feeling non-specifically unwell. One of the CNI group patients died at 13 months from complications of pulmonary hypertension. GFR's at randomisation ranged from 15 to 63 mls/min. GFR increased significantly in the sirolimus treated patients by 3 months and was sustained to 12 months, see table. Change in mean GFR (mls/min) SIROLIMUS CNI Significance 3 months + 10.7 + 0.6 p = 0.004 12 months +9.3 -5.7 p = 0.039 There was one rejection occurring 2 months following conversion, and associated with a sirolimus level of 3.8ng/ml which resolved with pulsed steroid therapy. The principle adverse events associated with conversion were rashes (4), mouth ulcers (4), herpes simplex stomatitis (2) and epistaxis (2) . One patient in each group developed a de novo basal cell carcinoma during follow up. One patient each in the control group developed diabetes and gout. Abrupt conversion to sirolimus appears safe and is associated with superior renal function. Side effects appear to be dose related and may be managed by dose reduction. These preliminary results suggest that sirolimus may have an important role in the maintenance phase after liver transplantation. Objective: To evaluate the efficacy (proportion of patients experiencing a biopsy proven rejection) of a steroid-free regime (Daclizumab in combination with Mycophenolate Mofetil and Tacrolimus) versus standard treatment (Tacrolimus in combination with steroids) for the prevention of acute rejection episodes in recipients of primary hepatic allografts Methods: First liver allograft recipients are enrolled in a Phase III, comparative, openlabel study. Group A (n= 69) received: Daclizumab at a dose of 2 mg/kg 6 hours after surgery and then 1 mg/kg on the 7th day post-transplantation, MMF at 2 g/day. The aimed trough level of FK was 5 to 15 ng/ml during the first month after transplantation and 4 to 8 ng/ml from the first to the sixth month. Group B (n= 61) received: Steroids at 15-20 mg/day during the first week and decrease to withdrawal between Weeks 12 and 24. The aimed trough level of FK was 5 to 15 ng/ml. Treatment of rejection consisted of up to 3 full courses of high dose steroids (defined as up to 1g/day given over 3 days). Primary end point was acute rejection at 6 months. Results: A group of 154 patients has been included in the study. The six month analysis has been completed in 130 patients. Patients were mainly male and the most frequent primary indication for transplantation was alcoholic cirrhosis followed by Hepatitis C. Seven patients (10.1%) from group A and 14 (22.9%) from group B suffered from acute rejection (p= 0.047). There were no cases of severe acute rejection. Most of them were treated by steroids pulses with good response. No patient required anti-lymphocite treatment. There were no differences between groups regarding patient and graft survival and opportunistic infections. Both treatments were well tolerated. The steroid-free regime with Daclizumab, Mycophenolate Mofetil and Tacrolimus is more effective than the standard treatment (Tacrolimus and steroids). The combination of Daclizumab, Mycophenolate Mofetil and Tacrolimus was well tolerated without an increase neither in infection rate nor in adverse events. Increased prevalence of cardiosvascular risk-factors attributed to side-effects of immunosuppressive agents has been described in liver transplant populations. Longterm effects are controversial and the actual risk for cardiovascular events (CVE) in liver transplant recipients has not yet been established. Here we evaluate the development of cardiovascular risk-factors during a longitudinal follow-up of 10 years, report cardiovascular events during this period and compare numbers of coronary heart disease (CHD) events with numbers predicted from the PROCAM score (standard population). Methods: 302 consecutive adult patients, surviving more than 6 months after liver transplantation (LT), have been evaluated for their cardiovascular risk profile in 1993 (T1). In 2003 (T2), patients have been re-evaluated and cardiovascular events have been recorded. Results: 199 patients were eligible for re-evaluation at T2. During follow-up, 54 patients died (4 due to CVE), 13 underwent re-LT, 8 were "lost in follow-up", and 28 presented with incomplete sets of data. 20 non-fatal CVE occurred in 17 patients. Within 10 years, rate of steroid-free patients increased from 22% to 90%. Prevalence of overweight (17% vs 27%, p<0.001), hypertension (46% vs 63%, p<0.001), and diabetes (21% vs 25%, p<0.001) increased over time, while increased values of cholesterol (64% vs 37%, p<0.001) and triglycerids (40% vs 21%, p<0.001) were detected less frequent at T2. Gender did not affect those developments. In 2003, no significant differences were detected comparing patients under CsA or Tac treatment. In 75 middle-aged men, eligible for PROCAM score calculation at T1, the predicted risk of CHD events within 10 years was 7.4%. During follow-up, in 9 of those patients (12%) CHD events were observed. Discussion: Although more than 10 years post LT, patients presented with elevated cardiovascular risk profiles. In parallel with steroid withdrawal, prevalence of impaired lipid metabolism decreased, while figures of overweight, hypertension and diabetes increased over time. The choice of calcineurin-inhibitor did not influence the cardiovascular risk profile long-term. Although liver transplant recipients represent a well selected population, cardiovascular morbidity matches numbers predicted from findings in risk-adjusted standard populations at 10 years post LT. Longer follow-up may even exceed those numbers. New onset diabetes mellitus is a common problem after solid organ transplantation. Post-transplant diabetes mellitus (PTDM) has been associated with an increased risk of infections, adverse cardiovascular outcomes, mortality and decreased graft survival. Our experience and that of other centers has been that the vast majority of patients with PTDM will require chronic insulin therapy. Since increased insulin resistance is believed to play a significant role in the development of PTDM, we have treated these patients with the insulin sensitizer rosiglitazone (ROSI) after liver and kidney transplantation. METHODS: All patients with PTDM were initially stabilized with twice daily NPH/ REG insulin. As long as heart failure was not present, ROSI 4 mg po per day was added. Patients were followed for a mean of 26 weeks and insulin was adjusted using home blood glucose data. RESULTS: In 12 months time 30/107 liver (27%) and 8/205 kidney (4%) patients developed PTDM. In our center ∼ 2/3 of renal transplant patients are managed without chronic glucocorticoid Rx, and ∼1/3 without calcineurin inhibitors. Most liver transplant patients receive tacrolimus and prednisone. After a mean of 10 weeks of insulin and ROSI therapy, insulin was able to be discontinued in 32/38 (84%) patients with PTDM. 11/32 (34%) patients maintained normoglycemia (80-140 mg./dl.) with ROSI monotherapy; 21/32 (66%) required the addition of a sulfonylurea to meet this goal. 25/32 (78%) continued on 4 mg/day of ROSI ; 7/32 (22%) required an increase to 8 mg/day. There was no significant change in serum AST (43 U/L pre /48 U/L post) and ALT (79 U/L pre /51 U/L post) during the post transplant follow-up period. Mean serum creatinine was unchanged at 1.3 mg/dl after a mean of 26 weeks. 31/38 (81%) patients received tacrolimus and 7/38 (19%) received cyclosporine. As expected, there was a gradual decline in tacrolimus and cyclosporine doses over 26 weeks after transplant. Prednisone was able to be discontinued in 10/38 (26%) patients after 26 weeks. CONCLUSIONS: Rosiglitazone is the first highly effective oral agent for PTDM. The majority of patients with PTDM may be safely treated with ROSI +/-a sulfonylurea, whereas our past experience indicates that sulfonylurea monotherapy is usually ineffective. After the expected 3-6 week delay in the onset of ROSI action, most patients with PTDM will no longer require long term insulin therapy. patient. Based on the A692S mutation, the patient should have been resistant to foscarnet and in fact responded to foscarnet by sequential dropping of viral loads from <50,000 to 33,900 to < 200 copies/ml. Of the remaining samples, no further mutations were noted for nucleotides 897-2934 in the DNA polymerase gene. Embryonic stem cells (ESC) have been recently shown to offer a possible solution for low risk induction of hematopoietic multilineage chimerism. This may ultimately lead to tolerance induction after transplantation without or with minimal host preconditioning. Here, we examined whether the constitutively expressed FasL (CD95L) in ESC is a requirement for the induction of stable ESC engraftment using the Fasmutant MRL lpr/lpr mouse, which does not express functional Fas (CD95). Three mouse derived ESC lines, C57BL/6, 129SvJ R1 and the 129SvJ RW-4, were characterized and used for these studies. Characteristically, all cell lines expressed very low levels of MHC class I antigens, no class II antigens, high levels of stage-specific embryonic antigen-1 (SSEA-1) and FasL. One of the 3 cell lines, 129SvJ RW4 ESC (H-2K b ) showed high proliferation and virtually no class I expression. This cell line was further used for the induction of mixed chimerism. ESC were infused into the supra-orbital vein of allogeneic MRL (H-2K k ) lpr/lpr mice (n=7). The MRL wild type mice were used as controls (n=7). Chimerism was studied by flow cytometry of whole blood leukocytes on days 7, 14 and 28 post ESC infusion and defined as co-expression of H-2 b and any of the CD markers CD3, CD19, CD14, CD16&32 or NK1.1. At day 14, over 85 % of wild type mice showed mixed chimerism compared to less than 30 % in lpr/lpr mice. By day 28, still more than 70 % of wild type mice maintained chimerism, versus none in lpr/lpr mice. Mixed chimerism was generally between 5-10 % in peripheral blood. These results suggest that Fas-FasL interaction is a requirement for the induction of stable mixed chimerism in mice, presumably due to the induction of apoptosis to alloreactive T cells by ESC. Indeed, immunohistochemical staining of chimeric wild type mice showed massive induction of apoptosis in the thymus, spleen and liver, indicating the role of apoptosis in ESC engraftment. Thus, our studies provide a rationale for studying ESC as an alternative to bone marrow cells for the induction of mixed chimerism with minimal host pre-conditioning and underscore the role of Fas/FasL engagement in ESC engraftment. Background: Recently, pigs that lack the gene for α-1,3galactosyltransferase (GalT-KO pigs) have been bred using nuclear transfer technology on a MGH miniature swine background (SLA dd ). We studied whether GalT-KO pigs develop anti-Gal antibodies (Abs) (as do GalT-KO mice) and also their cellular response to wild-type (Gal +/+ ) MHCmatched (SLA dd ) pig cells. Methods: Tissues from GalT-KO pigs (n=5) were examined for their expression of Gal by the immunoperoxidase technique using the biotinylated lectin, Griffonia simplicifolia (IB4). The presence of anti-Gal Abs in the sera was determined by ELISA. Abs to MHC-matched (SLA dd ) Gal +/+ miniature swine cells were determined by flow cytometry (FACS). Cytotoxicity assays were performed to assess whether the Abs, if present, were cytotoxic to Gal +/+ SLA dd peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Cellular responses of GalT-KO miniature swine to Gal +/+ SLA dd miniature swine were examined by mixed lymphocyte reactivity (MLR) and cell-mediated lympholysis (CML) assays. Results: None of the GalT-KO pigs showed any Gal expression on histological staining of all major tissues. Their sera contained anti-Gal IgM Abs by ELISA. FACS demonstrated binding of GalT-KO sera to Gal +/+ SLA dd PBMC. IgM Abs were present in the sera of 2 pigs and both IgM and IgG Abs in 3 pigs. Sera with IgM Abs alone were weakly cytotoxic, while those with IgM+IgG were strongly cytotoxic to Gal +/+ PBMC, but treatment with dithiothreitol (DTT) rendered the sera non-cytotoxic, revealing that most of the cytotoxicity was due to IgM Abs. MLR and CML assays revealed no T cell response by GalT-KO pigs to their Gal +/+ MHC-matched counterparts. There was no correlation between the age of the pig and the Ab status. Conclusions: GalT-KO pigs develop cytotoxic anti-Gal Abs, primarily IgM, but have no increased T cell reactivity to MHC-matched Gal +/+ pigs. These data suggest that the transplantation of organs from Gal +/+ pigs into MHC-matched GalT-KO pigs may be a clinically-relevant large animal model in which to study mechanisms of accommodation or B cell tolerance. BK virus (BKV) is a significant factor in the failure of renal transplants. Polyomavirus establishes a persistent silent infection in most immunocompetent individuals. However, in the setting of immunosuppression, viral replication and pathology may ensue. To date no animal model has been described to investigate the pathogenesis of BKV associated nephropathy. Methods: Transplantation of either B6 or C3H kidneys into B6 recipients with or without native nephrectomy was performed with or without polyoma infection. Viral titers and virulence were measured by real time PCR and plaque assay. Renal allograft was assessed histologically and functionally (serum creatinine). Cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) assay and flow cytometry was used to quantitate antiviral and antidonor responses. Results: Mice with renal allografts develop chronic rejection but survive >60 days without immunosuppression. Polyoma virus precipitates accelerated destruction of allografts (MST 11±2) but not isografts (MST>60). Furthermore, we found >1000-fold higher levels of virus in allogeneic as compared to syngeneic kidney transplants. Tissue damage was markedly greater and creatinine significantly higher in polyoma infected renal allografts compared to uninfected allografts or infected isografts (n=5, 1.7 vs. 0.3, 0.5 mg/dL, P<0.0007, 0.0019). To show recipient restricted viral clearance, mice were acutely infected after orthotopic allogeneic kindey trasplantation. Allograft kidneys had markedly elevated levels of virus compared to the native kidney (1x10 8 vs. 1x10 4 copies/mg, P<0.02). Lastly, we observed that the anti-donor CD8+T cell response was greater in renal allograft recipients with infection compared to uninfected recipients. However, ICCS and CTL assay with donor specific stimulation showed that infection alone does not induce cross-reactivity. Conclusion: These data indicate that polyoma virus promotes rapid destruction of renal allografts. Nephropathy is associated with an inability to clear virus from an MHC disparate organ, but not a syngeneic transplant or native kidney. Polyoma infection significantly augments the anti-donor T cell responsive to a kidney allograft. However, infection without an allogeneic kidney transplant fails to induce virusspecific T cells that are cross-reactive against the donor. Using this novel model of polyoma associated nephropathy, we hope to discover insights into the pathogenesis and develop new therapies for this major clinical problem. We have developed a novel strategy to inhibit expression of B7 molecules (CD80/86) by transfecting with a gene construct encoding a modified CTLA4 molecule (CTLA4-KDEL). The KDEL sequence serves to retain this molecule in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where it binds to CD80/86 molecules, preventing them from moving out of the ER, through the Golgi and onto the cell surface. Human APCs, including B cells and dendritic cells, expressing this construct did not express CD80/86 on their surface. They showed normal expression of other cell surface molecules. They were unable to stimulate allogeneic and peptide-specific T cell responses and induced antigen specific anergy of the responding T cells. Cells expressing CTLA4-KDEL did not upregulate the indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase (IDO) enzyme, unlike the cells treated with soluble CTLA4-Ig. This gene-based strategy to inhibit expression of key surface receptors is an attractive alternative to the use of immature DCs (iDCs) for prevention of transplant rejection. Background: Various equations have been utilized to estimate renal function (fcn) among renal allograft recipients. Implications of equation choice to clinical studies are unknown. Three equations (MDRD(4-variable), Cockgroft-Gault (CG) and the Nankivell A (NankA) formulae are frequently used, and were compared in this study. Methods: From 1990-2000, there were 387 renal allograft recipients from a living donor transplanted at UPMC. Among these persons, 287 had data that allowed for the calculation of the 3 formulae understudy. Cross-sectional comparisons were made at 3 months and longitudinal changes were made over the first year. Potential relevance of the variances between equations was explored by using: 1) threshold of 70 ml/min for study entry; 2) proportion of subjects in strata (>90, <=90& >70, <=70 & >50, <=50 & >=30, <30 ml/min) that allow for stratified randomization, or for sampling strategies; 3) change of renal function as an outcome. Results: See Table. Means of the renal fcn at 3 months are different (P<0.0001, F test) with higher estimates by MDRD and CG compared to Nankivell (P<0.001, P<0.001), and by MDRD compared to CG (P<0.0001); proportions of subjects having >=70ml/ min are different (P<0.001, chi square); proportions of subjects within strata are different with Kappa statistics indicating only fair agreement across formulae considering chance; and change of renal fcn over one year is significantly different (P=0.04, F test). Conclusions: The choice of equation and the clinically relevant differences between them can have a significant impact in clinical trials or observational studies on: 1) eligibility rates; 2) efficiency of sampling or randomization strategies; 3) power; and 4) comparability of results between studies. 5) A measure(s) of cross-sectional and longitudinal renal fcn, across the distribution of GFR, which is confirmed to be a valid and reliable standard among recipients of renal allografts should be developed.  Demographic profile of high compliance group not significantly differerent from control group in all categories except mean CIT. In contrast, graft survival of the high compliance group (89% /1 yr, 73% /5 yrs) was significantly better than control group (88% /1 yr, 63% /5 yrs) (p=0.04). One and 5 yrs. patient survival in study group was 90%, 80% respectively vs. 95%, 78% in control (p=0.68). Since donor and recipient profile of each group was similar, difference in graft outcome can be attributed to a higher level of compliance by patients enrolled in post-transplant studies versus those that were not. As patient follow-up includes many factors in addition to immunosuppressive therapy, results suggest improved graft outcome may not be based exclusively on immunosuppressive therapy. Further studies should be performed to determine what aspects of compliance have a direct effect on graft survival. Furthermore, our study shows that close follow-up of patients following transplantation is a determining factor that can help prolong the survival of renal grafts by up to 10%. Donor age and six month graft function are important factors in long-term cadaveric renal graft and patient survival. To determine the independent effect of donor age on post-transplant renal function at six months, patients with a history of delay graft function, acute rejection in the first six months post-transplant or graft survival less than six months were excluded. Using OPTN data as of 8-27-03, six-month cadaveric renal allograft function was determine in 20,637 adult cadaveric kidney transplants between 1991-2000 using the abbreviated MDRD formula. Among patients who received solitary kidneys, the peak GFR was 62.8 ml/min/1.73m² at a donor age of 21 years old (figure 1). After the age of 21 there was a highly linear decline in GFR with a slope of -0.512 ml/min/1.73m²/year in donor age and R²=0.9735. When both solitary and en bloc or dual kidney transplants are included in the analysis the mean GFR by donor age showed a bimodal curve with a peak GFR of 66.5 ml/min/1.73m² at donor age of 1 and a second peak at donor age of 21 years of 62.8 ml/min/1.73m². For all pediatric donor ages in which more than 15 en bloc transplants were performed, the mean GFRs were substantially higher than solitary transplants, particularly donors under the age of 4 (  
